{"id": "20971", "revid": "31382403", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20971", "title": "Meritocracy", "text": "Political system in which capital is assigned on the basis of competence\nMeritocracy (\"merit\", from Latin , and \"-cracy\", from Ancient Greek 'strength, power') is the notion of a political system in which economic goods or political power are vested in individual people based on ability and talent, rather than wealth or social class. Advancement in such a system is based on performance, as measured through examination or demonstrated achievement. \nAlthough the concept of meritocracy has existed for centuries, the first known use of the term was by sociologist Alan Fox in the journal \"Socialist Commentary\" in 1956. It was then popularized by sociologist Michael Dunlop Young, who used the term in his dystopian political and satirical book \"The Rise of the Meritocracy\" in 1958. While the word was coined and popularized as a pejorative, its usage has ameliorated. Today, the term is often utilised to refer to social systems in which personal advancement and success primarily reflect an individual's capabilities and merits, frequently seen as equality of opportunity. It thus challenges forms of nepotism or hereditary aristocracy.\nConceptions.\nEarly conceptions.\nThe \"most common definition of meritocracy conceptualizes merit in terms of tested competency and ability, and most likely, as measured by IQ or standardized achievement tests\". In government and other administrative systems, \"meritocracy\" refers to a system under which advancement within the system turns on \"merits\", like performance, intelligence, credentials, and education. These are often determined through evaluations or examinations.\nIn a more general sense, meritocracy can refer to any form of evaluation based on achievement. Like \"utilitarian\" and \"pragmatic\", the word \"meritocratic\" has also developed a broader connotation, and is sometimes used to refer to any government run by \"a ruling or influential class of educated or able people\".\nThis is in contrast to the original, condemnatory use of the term in 1958 by Michael Dunlop Young in his work \"The Rise of the Meritocracy\", who was satirizing the ostensibly merit-based Tripartite System of education practiced in the United Kingdom at the time; he claimed that, in the Tripartite System, \"merit is equated with intelligence-plus-effort, its possessors are identified at an early age and selected for appropriate intensive education, and there is an obsession with quantification, test-scoring, and qualifications\".\nMeritocracy in its wider sense, may be any general act of judgment upon the basis of various demonstrated merits; such acts frequently are described in sociology and psychology.\nIn rhetoric, the demonstration of one's merit regarding mastery of a particular subject is an essential task most directly related to the Aristotelian term \"Ethos\". The equivalent Aristotelian conception of meritocracy is based upon aristocratic or oligarchic structures, rather than in the context of the modern state.\nMore recent conceptions.\nTo this day, the origin of the term meritocracy is widely attributed to the British sociologist Michael Young, who used it pejoratively in his book \"The Rise of the Meritocracy\". For Young, merit is defined as intelligence plus effort. As a result, he portrays a fictional meritocratic society as a dystopia, in which social stratification is based solely on intelligence and individual merit, which creates a highly competitive and unequal society.\nDespite this initial negative connotation, the term meritocracy has gained some positive recognition more recently. As such, it is nowadays applied to merit-based systems of status and reward allocation in distinction to aristocratic or class-based systems, in which inherited factors are the primary determinant for the position of an individual in society.\nYet, the concept of meritocracy as a social system has also attracted much criticism. In light of the rising social inequality in the 21st century, scholars have labelled meritocracy a political ideology and an illusion. As Thomas Piketty notes in his book \"Capital in the Twenty-First Century\" \"our democratic societies rest on a meritocratic worldview\". Accordingly, restricted mobility and the significance of inherited wealth co-exist with the belief in a meritocratic system. Consequently, \"the idea of meritocracy has become a key means of cultural legitimation for contemporary capitalist culture\", in which wealth and income inequalities are being perpetuated and reproduced. This is supported by recent research which shows that, the more unequal a society, the higher the tendency of members of that society to attribute success to meritocracy rather than non-meritocratic variables such as inherited wealth.\nThis illustrates that the contemporary conception of meritocracy is at least twofold. On the one hand, it describes a social system based on the notion that individuals are rewarded and advance in society as a result of their talent and effort. This conception presupposes social mobility and equality of opportunity. On the other hand, meritocracy can be understood as an ideological discourse grounded in different belief systems, that manifest themselves in different forms such as social democratic and neoliberal conceptions of meritocracy. Most Americans, across nearly all demographics, believe college admissions, hiring and promotions should be based on qualifications and performance, not social factors. This is according to a private opinion research survey conducted by think-tank, Populace. \nThe most common form of meritocratic screening found today is the college degree. Higher education is an imperfect meritocratic screening system for various reasons, such as lack of uniform standards worldwide, lack of scope (not all occupations and processes are included), and lack of access (some talented people never have an opportunity to participate because of the expenses, disasters or war, most especially in developing countries, health issues or disability).\nEtymology.\nAlthough the concept has existed for centuries, the term \"meritocracy\" is relatively new. It was first used pejoratively by sociologist Alan Fox in 1956, and then by British politician and sociologist Michael Dunlop Young in his 1958 satirical essay \"The Rise of the Meritocracy\". Young's essay pictured the United Kingdom under the rule of a government favouring intelligence and aptitude (merit) above all else, being the combination of the root of Latin origin \" (from \" meaning \"earn\") and the Ancient Greek suffix \"\" (meaning \"power\", \"rule\"). The \"purely\" Greek word is (), from (, worthy) + \"\" (, power). \nIn this book the term had distinctly negative connotations as Young questioned both the legitimacy of the selection process used to become a member of this elite and the outcomes of being ruled by such a narrowly defined group. The essay, written in the first person by a fictional historical narrator in 2034, interweaves history from the politics of pre- and post-war Britain with those of fictional future events in the short (1960 onward) and long term (2020 onward).\nThe essay was based upon the tendency of the then-current governments, in their striving toward intelligence, to ignore shortcomings and upon the failure of education systems to utilize correctly the gifted and talented members within their societies.\nYoung's fictional narrator explains that, on the one hand, the greatest contributor to society is not the \"stolid mass\" or majority, but the \"creative minority\" or members of the \"restless elite\". On the other hand, he claims that there are casualties of progress whose influence is underestimated and that, from such stolid adherence to natural science and intelligence, arises arrogance and complacency. This problem is encapsulated in the phrase \"Every selection of one is a rejection of many\".\nIt was also used by Hannah Arendt in her essay \"Crisis in Education\", which was written in 1958 and refers to the use of meritocracy in the English educational system. She too uses the term pejoratively. It was not until 1972 that Daniel Bell used the term positively.\nHistory.\nImperial China.\nSome of the earliest example of an administrative meritocracy, based on civil service examinations, dates back to Ancient China. The concept originates, at least by the sixth century BC, when it was advocated by the Chinese philosopher Confucius, who \"invented the notion that those who govern should do so because of merit, not of inherited status. This sets in motion the creation of the imperial examinations and bureaucracies open only to those who passed tests\".\nAs the Qin and Han dynasties developed a meritocratic system in order to maintain power over a large, sprawling empire, it became necessary for the government to maintain a complex network of officials. Prospective officials could come from a rural background and government positions were not restricted to the nobility. Rank was determined by merit, through the civil service examinations, and education became the key for social mobility. After the fall of the Han dynasty, the nine-rank system was established during the Three Kingdoms period.\nAccording to the \"Princeton Encyclopedia of American History\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;One of the oldest examples of a merit-based civil service system existed in the imperial bureaucracy of China. Tracing back to 200 B.C., the Han dynasty adopted Confucianism as the basis of its political philosophy and structure, which included the revolutionary idea of replacing nobility of blood with one of virtue and honesty, and thereby calling for administrative appointments to be based solely on merit. This system allowed anyone who passed an examination to become a government officer, a position that would bring wealth and honor to the whole family. In part due to Chinese influence, the first European civil service did not originate in Europe, but rather in India by the British-run East India Company... company managers hired and promoted employees based on competitive examinations in order to prevent corruption and favoritism.\nAncient Greece.\nBoth Plato and Aristotle advocated meritocracy, Plato in his \"The Republic\", arguing that the wisest should rule, and hence the rulers should be philosopher kings.\nIslamic World.\nThe Rashidun caliphate succession rule was based on meritocracy (Most renown people for their merit would gather in a Shura assembly and choose the caliph based on merit). As the first caliph of the Rashidun caliphate, Abu Bakr was not a monarch and never claimed such a title; nor did any of his three successors. Rather, their election and leadership were based upon merit.\nAfter the reforms of Mehmed II, the Ottoman standing army was recruited from the \"dev\u015firme\", a group that took Christian subjects at a young age (8\u201320 yrs): they were converted to Islam, then schooled for administration or the military Janissaries. This was a meritocracy which \"produced from among their alumni four out of five Grand Viziers from this time on\". Mehmed II's first grand vizier was Zaganos Pasha, who was of \"dev\u015firme\" background as opposed to an aristocrat, and Zaganos Pasha's successor, Mahmud Pasha Angelovi\u0107, was also of \"dev\u015firme\" background. It is reported by Madeline Zilfi that European visitors of the time commented \"In making appointments, Sultan pays no regard to any pretensions on the score of wealth or rank. It is by merits that man rise.. Among the Turks, honours, high posts and Judgeships are rewards of great ability and good service.\"\nSafavid Persian society was also a meritocracy where officials were appointed on the basis of worth and merit, and not on the basis of birth. It was certainly not an oligarchy, nor was it an aristocracy. Sons of nobles were considered for the succession of their fathers as a mark of respect, but they had to prove themselves worthy of the position. This system avoided an entrenched aristocracy or a caste society. There are numerous recorded accounts of laymen that rose to high official posts as a result of their merits. And since the Safavid society was meritocratic, government offices constantly felt the pressure of being under surveillance and had to make sure they governed in the best interest of their leader, and not merely their own.\n17th century.\nThe concept of meritocracy spread from China to British India during the seventeenth century.\nThe first European power to implement a successful meritocratic civil service was the British Empire, in their administration of India: \"company managers hired and promoted employees based on competitive examinations in order to prevent corruption and favoritism\". British colonial administrators advocated the spread of the system to the rest of the Commonwealth, the most \"persistent\" of which was Thomas Taylor Meadows, Britain's consul in Guangzhou, China. Meadows successfully argued in his \"Desultory Notes on the Government and People of China\", published in 1847, that \"the long duration of the Chinese empire is solely and altogether owing to the good government which consists in the advancement of men of talent and merit only\", and that the British must reform their civil service by making the institution meritocratic. This practice later was adopted in the late nineteenth century by the British mainland, inspired by the \"Chinese mandarin system\".\n18th century.\nThe Ashanti King Osei Kwadwo, who ruled from c. 1764 to 1777, began the meritocratic system of appointing central officials according to their ability, rather than their birth.\n19th century.\nIn 1813, U.S. Founding Father and President Thomas Jefferson declared that there exists a \"natural aristocracy of men\" whose right to rule comes from their talent and virtue (merit), rather than their wealth or inherited status. He believed a successful republic must establish educational institutions that identify these natural aristocrats and train them to rule.\nThe federal bureaucracy in the United States used the spoils system from 1828 until the assassination of United States President James A. Garfield by a disappointed office seeker in 1881 proved its dangers. Two years later in 1883, the system of appointments to the United States Federal Bureaucracy was revamped by the Pendleton Civil Service Reform Act, partially based on the British meritocratic civil service that had been established years earlier. The act stipulated that government jobs should be awarded on the basis of merit, through competitive exams, rather than ties to politicians or political affiliation. It also made it illegal to fire or demote government employees for political reasons.\nTo enforce the merit system and the judicial system, the law also created the United States Civil Service Commission. In the modern American meritocracy, the president may hand out only a certain number of jobs, which must be approved by the United States Senate.\nAustralia began establishing public universities in the 1850s with the goal of promoting meritocracy by providing advanced training and credentials. The educational system was set up to service urban males of middle-class background, but of diverse social and religious origins. It was increasingly extended to all graduates of the public school system, those of rural and regional background, and then to women and finally to ethnic minorities. Both the middle classes and the working classes have promoted the ideal of meritocracy within a strong commitment to \"mate-ship\" and political equality.\nThe British philosopher and polymath John Stuart Mill advocated meritocracy in his book \"Considerations on Representative Government\". His model was to give more votes to the more educated voter. His views are explained in Estlund (2003:57\u201358):\n&lt;poem&gt;Mill's proposal of plural voting has two motives. One is to prevent one group or class of people from being able to control the political process even without having to give reasons in order to gain sufficient support. He calls this the problem of class legislation. Since the most numerous class is also at a lower level of education and social rank, this could be partly remedied by giving those at the higher ranks plural votes. A second, and equally prominent motive for plural voting is to avoid giving equal influence to each person without regard to their merit, intelligence, etc. He thinks that it is fundamentally important that political institutions embody, in their spirit, the recognition that some opinions are worth more than others. He does not say that this is a route to producing better political decisions, but it is hard to understand his argument, based on this second motive, in any other way.\nSo, if Aristotle is right that the deliberation is best if participants are numerous (and assuming for simplicity that the voters are the deliberators) then this is a reason for giving all or many citizens a vote, but this does not yet show that the wiser subset should not have, say, two or three; in that way something would be given both to the value of the diverse perspectives, and to the value of the greater wisdom of the few. This combination of the Platonic and Aristotelian points is part of what I think is so formidable about Mill's proposal of plural voting. It is also an advantage of his view that he proposes to privilege not the wise, but the educated. Even if we agreed that the wise should rule, there is a serious problem about how to identify them. This becomes especially important if a successful political justification must be generally acceptable to the ruled. In that case, privileging the wise would require not only their being so wise as to be better rulers, but also, and more demandingly, that their wisdom be something that can be agreed to by all reasonable citizens. I turn to this conception of justification below.\nMill's position has great plausibility: good education promotes the ability of citizens to rule more wisely. So, how can we deny that the educated subset would rule more wisely than others? But then why shouldn't they have more votes?&lt;/poem&gt;\nEstlund goes on to criticize Mill's education-based meritocracy on various grounds.\n20th century to today.\nSingapore describes meritocracy as one of its official guiding principles for domestic public policy formulation, placing emphasis on academic credentials as objective measures of merit.\nThere is criticism that, under this system, Singaporean society is being increasingly stratified and that an elite class is being created from a narrow segment of the population. Singapore has a growing level of tutoring for children, and top tutors are often paid better than school teachers. Defenders of this system recall the ancient Chinese proverb \"Wealth never survives past three generations\" (), suggesting that the nepotism or cronyism of elitists eventually will be, and often are, limited by those lower down the hierarchy.\nSingaporean academics are continuously re-examining the application of meritocracy as an ideological tool and how it's stretched to encompass the ruling party's objectives. Professor Kenneth Paul Tan at the Lee Kuan Yew School of Public Policy asserts that \"meritocracy, in trying to 'isolate' merit by treating people with fundamentally unequal backgrounds as superficially the same, can be a practice that ignores and even conceals the real advantages and disadvantages that are unevenly distributed to different segments of an inherently unequal society, a practice that in fact perpetuates this fundamental inequality. In this way, those who are picked by meritocracy as having merit may already have enjoyed unfair advantages from the very beginning, ignored according to the principle of nondiscrimination\".\nHow meritocracy in the Singaporean context relates to the application of pragmatism as an ideological device, which combines strict adherence to market principles \"without\" any aversion to social engineering and little propensity for classical social welfarism, is further illustrated by Kenneth Paul Tan in subsequent articles:\nThere is a strong ideological quality in Singapore's pragmatism, and a strongly pragmatic quality in ideological negotiations within the dynamics of hegemony. In this complex relationship, the combination of ideological and pragmatic maneuvering over the decades has resulted in the historical dominance of government by the PAP in partnership with global capital whose interests have been advanced without much reservation.Within the Ecuadorian Ministry of Labor, the Ecuadorian Meritocracy Institute was created under the technical advice of the Singaporean government.\nWith similar objections, John Rawls rejects the ideal of meritocracy as well.\nConfucianism and meritocracy.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\u2014\u200aAlthough Confucius claimed that he never invented anything but was only transmitting ancient knowledge (), he did produce a number of new ideas. Many European and American admirers such as Voltaire and Herrlee G. Creel point to the revolutionary idea of replacing nobility of blood with nobility of virtue. \"J\u016bnz\u01d0\" (, lit. \"lord's son\"), which originally signified the younger, non-inheriting, offspring of a noble, became, in Confucius's work, an epithet having much the same meaning and evolution as the English \"gentleman\".\nA virtuous commoner who cultivates his qualities may be a \"gentleman\", while a shameless son of the king is only a \"petty person\". That Confucius admitted students of different classes as disciples is a clear demonstration that he fought against the feudal structures that defined pre-imperial Chinese society.\nAnother new idea, that of meritocracy, led to the introduction of the imperial examination system in China. This system allowed anyone who passed an examination to become a government officer, a position which would bring wealth and honour to the whole family. The Chinese imperial examination system started in the Sui dynasty. Over the following centuries the system grew until finally almost anyone who wished to become an official had to prove his worth by passing a set of written government examinations.\nConfucian political meritocracy is not merely a historical phenomenon. The practice of meritocracy still exists across China and East Asia today, and a wide range of contemporary intellectuals\u2014from Daniel Bell to Tongdong Bai, Joseph Chan, and Jiang Qing\u2014defend political meritocracy as a viable alternative to liberal democracy.\nIn \"Just Hierarchy\", Daniel Bell and Wang Pei argue that hierarchies are inevitable. Faced with ever-increasing complexity at scale, modern societies must build hierarchies to coordinate collective action and tackle long-term problems such as climate change. In this context, people need not\u2014and should not\u2014want to flatten hierarchies as much as possible. They ought to ask what makes political hierarchies just and use these criteria to decide the institutions that deserve preservation, those that require reform, and those that need radical transformation. They call this approach \"progressive conservatism\", a term that reflects the ambiguous place of the Confucian tradition within the Left-Right dichotomy.\nBell and Wang propose two justifications for political hierarchies that do \"not\" depend on a \"one person, one vote\" system. First is raw efficiency, which may require centralized rule in the hands of the competent few. Second, and most important, is serving the interests of the people (and the common good more broadly). In \"Against Political Equality\", Tongdong Bai complements this account by using a proto-Rawlsian \"political difference principle\". Just as Rawls claims that economic inequality is justified so long as it benefits those at the bottom of the socioeconomic ladder, so Bai argues that political inequality is justified so long as it benefits those materially worse off.\nBell, Wang, and Bai all criticize liberal democracy to argue that government \"by\" the people may not be government \"for\" the people in any meaningful sense of the term. They argue that voters tend to act in irrational, tribal, short-termist ways; they are vulnerable to populism and struggle to account for the interests of future generations. In other words, at a minimum, democracy needs Confucian meritocratic checks.\nIn \"The China Model\", Bell argues that Confucian political meritocracy provides\u2014and has provided\u2014a blueprint for China's development. For Bell, the ideal according to which China should reform itself (and has reformed itself) follows a simple structure: Aspiring rulers first pass hyper-selective examinations, then have to rule well at the local level to be promoted to positions as the provincial level, then have to excel at the provincial level to access positions at the national level, and so on. This system aligns with what Harvard historian James Hankins calls \"virtue politics\", or the idea that institutions should be built to select the most competent and virtuous rulers\u2014as opposed to institutions concerned first and foremost with limiting the power of rulers.\nWhile contemporary defenders of Confucian political meritocracy all accept this broad frame, they disagree with each other on three main questions: institutional design, the means by which meritocrats are promoted, and the compatibility of Confucian political meritocracy with liberalism.\nInstitutional design.\nBell and Wang favour a system in which officials at the local level are democratically elected and higher-level officials are promoted by peers. As Bell puts it, he defends \"democracy at the bottom, experimentation in the middle, and meritocracy at the top.\" Bell and Wang argue that this combination conserves the main advantages of democracy\u2014involving the people in public affairs at the local level, strengthening the legitimacy of the system, forcing some degree of direct accountability, etc.\u2014while preserving the broader meritocratic character of the regime.\nJiang Qing, by contrast, imagines a tricameral government with one chamber selected by the people (the House of the Commoners ), one chamber composed of Confucian meritocrats selected via examination and gradual promotion (the House of Confucian Tradition ), and one body made up of descendants of Confucius himself (The House of National Essence ). Jiang's aim is to construct a legitimacy that will go beyond what he sees as the atomistic, individualist, and utilitarian ethos of modern democracies and ground authority in something sacred and traditional. While Jiang's model is closer to an ideal theory than Bell's proposals, it represents a more traditionalist alternative.\nTongdong Bai presents an in-between solution by proposing a two-tiered bicameral system. At the local level, as with Bell, Bai advocates Deweyan participatory democracy. At the national level, Bai proposes two chambers: one of meritocrats (selected by examination, by examination and promotion, from leaders in certain professional fields, etc.), and one of representatives elected by the people. While the lower house does not have any legislative power per se, it acts as a popular accountability mechanism by championing the people and putting pressure on the upper house. More generally, Bai argues that his model marries the best of meritocracy and democracy. Following Dewey's account of democracy as a way of life, he points to the participatory features of his local model: citizens still get to have a democratic lifestyle, participate in political affairs, and be educated as \"democratic men\". Similarly, the lower house allows citizens to be represented, have a voice in public affairs (albeit a weak one), and ensure accountability. Meanwhile, the meritocratic house preserves competence, statesmanship, and Confucian virtues.\nPromotion system.\nDefenders of Confucian political meritocracy all champion a system in which rulers are selected on the basis of intellect, social skills, and virtue. Bell proposes a model wherein aspiring meritocrats take hyper-selective exams and prove themselves at the local levels of government before reaching the higher levels of government, where they hold more centralized power. In his account, the exams select for intellect and other virtues\u2014for instance, the ability to argue three different viewpoints on a contentious issue may indicate a certain degree of openness. Tongdong Bai's approach incorporates different ways to select members of the meritocratic house, from exams to performance in various fields\u2014business, science, administration, and so on. In every case, Confucian meritocrats draw on China's extensive history of meritocratic administration to outline the pros and cons of competing methods of selection.\nFor those who, like Bell, defend a model in which performance at the local levels of government determines future promotion, an important question is how the system judges who \"performs best\". In other words, while examinations may ensure that early-career officials are competent and educated, how is it thereafter ensured that \"only\" those who rule well get promoted? The literature opposes those who prefer evaluation by peers to evaluation by superiors, with some thinkers including quasi-democratic selection mechanisms along the way. Bell and Wang favour a system in which officials at the local level are democratically elected and higher-level officials are promoted by peers. Because they believe that promotion should depend upon peer evaluations only, Bell and Wang argue against transparency\u2014i.e. the public should not know how officials are selected, since ordinary people are in no position to judge officials beyond the local level. Others, like Jiang Qing, defend a model in which superiors decide who gets promoted; this method is in line with more traditionalist strands of Confucian political thought, which place a greater emphasis on strict hierarchies and epistemic paternalism\u2014that is, the idea that older and more experienced people know more.\nCompatibility with liberalism and democracy.\nAnother key question is whether Confucian political thought is compatible with liberalism. Tongdong Bai, for instance, argues that while Confucian political thought departs from the \"one person, one vote\" model, it can conserve many of the essential characteristics of liberalism, such as freedom of speech and individual rights. In fact, both Daniel Bell and Tongdong Bai hold that Confucian political meritocracy can tackle challenges that liberalism wants to tackle, but cannot by itself. At the cultural level, for instance, Confucianism, its institutions, and its rituals offer bulwarks against atomization and individualism. At the political level, the non-democratic side of political meritocracy is\u2014for Bell and Bai\u2014more efficient at addressing long-term questions such as climate change, in part because the meritocrats do not have to worry about the whims of public opinion.\nJoseph Chan defends the compatibility of Confucianism with both liberalism and democracy. In his book \"Confucian Perfectionism\", he argues that Confucians can embrace both democracy and liberalism on instrumental grounds; that is, while liberal democracy may not be valuable for its own sake, its institutions remains valuable\u2014particularly when combined with a broadly Confucian culture\u2014to serve Confucian ends and inculcate Confucian virtues.\nCritique of political meritocracy.\nOther Confucians have criticized Confucian meritocrats like Bell for their rejection of democracy. For them, Confucianism does not have to be premised on the assumption that meritorious, virtuous political leadership is inherently incompatible with popular sovereignty, political equality and the right to political participation. These thinkers accuse the meritocrats of overestimating the flaws of democracy, mistaking temporary flaws for permanent and inherent features, and underestimating the challenges that the construction of a true political meritocracy poses in practice\u2014including those faced by contemporary China and Singapore. Franz Mang claims that, when decoupled from democracy, meritocracy tends to deteriorate into an oppressive regime under putatively \"meritorious\" but actually \"authoritarian\" rulers; Mang accuses Bell's China model of being self-defeating, as\u2014Mang claims\u2014the Chinese Communist Party's authoritarian modes of engagement with the dissenting voices illustrate. He Baogang and Mark Warren add that \"meritocracy\" should be understood as a concept describing a regime's character rather than its type, which is determined by distribution of political power\u2014on their view, democratic institutions can be built which are meritocratic insofar as they favour competence.\nRoy Tseng, drawing on the New Confucians of the twentieth century, argues that Confucianism and liberal democracy can enter into a dialectical process, in which liberal rights and voting rights are rethought into resolutely modern, but nonetheless Confucian ways of life. This synthesis, blending Confucians rituals and institutions with a broader liberal democratic frame, is distinct from both Western-style liberalism\u2014which, for Tseng, suffers from excessive individualism and a lack of moral vision\u2014and from traditional Confucianism\u2014which, for Tseng, has historically suffered from rigid hierarchies and sclerotic elites. Against defenders of political meritocracy, Tseng claims that the fusion of Confucian and democratic institutions can conserve the best of both worlds, producing a more communal democracy which draws on a rich ethical tradition, addresses abuses of power, and combines popular accountability with a clear attention to the cultivation of virtue in elites.\nAnother illustration of the Meritocracy Gap can be seen in the ways that nations, like China, choose to promote many of its government officials. What is very troubling is the ways in which Princelings in the Chinese Government contradict the ideas \"equal social classes\" and \"inherent ability\" presented in the ideal operations of a meritocratic government. The reality is that four out of the seven Community Party Officials of the Chinese Elite Government are Princelings. It has been widely noted that large numbers of prominent party leaders and families have used their political power to convert state assets into their own private wealth. In reality, the high number of Princelings in Chinese government contradicts the idea of \"equal promotion of officials based on ability in a meritocracy government. The high presence of Princelings in Chinese government continues to illustrate that elite corruption still plays a significant role in the convergence and operation of state government.\nCriticism.\nBy individuals.\nMichael Young.\nMichael Young popularized the word \"meritocracy\" as a pejorative but it was adopted into the English language without the negative connotations that Young intended it to have. It was embraced by supporters of the philosophy. Young expressed his disappointment in the embrace of this word and philosophy by the Labour Party under Tony Blair in \"The Guardian\" in an article in 2001, where he states:\nIt is good sense to appoint individual people to jobs on their merit. It is the opposite when those who are judged to have merit of a particular kind harden into a new social class without room in it for others.\nThe Rise and Rise of the Meritocracy.\nGeoff Dench in \"The Rise and Rise of Meritocracy\" (2006) commented that the rise of the meritocracy &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;was intended to help turn Labour away from meritocracy, by reminding it of the importance of communitarian values. Curiously, though, half a century later we have a Labour government declaring the promotion of meritocracy as one its primary objectives.\nChris Hayes.\nIn his 2012 book \"Twilight of the Elites: America After Meritocracy\", Chris Hayes argues that the movement towards meritocracy has produced widespread inequality and corruption, which has led to a record decrease in the trust of American institutions.\nPope Francis.\nPope Francis referred to \"mistaken notions\" developed around the concept of meritocracy, warning that &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;a healthy approach to the value of hard work, the development of one's native abilities and a praiseworthy spirit of initiative is one thing, but if one does not seek a genuine equality of opportunity, 'meritocracy' can easily become a screen that further consolidates the privileges of a few with great power.\nBooks.\nThe Meritocracy Trap.\nIn his 2019 book \"The Meritocracy Trap\", Daniel Markovits poses that meritocracy is responsible for the exacerbation of social stratification, to the detriment of much of the general population. He introduces the idea of \"snowball inequality\", a perpetually widening gap between elite workers and members of the middle class. While the elite obtain exclusive positions thanks to their wealth of demonstrated merit, they occupy jobs and oust middle class workers from the core of economic events. The elites use their high earnings to secure the best education for their own children, so that they may enter the world of work with a competitive advantage over those who did not have the same opportunities. Thus, the cycle continues with each generation.\nIn this case, the middle class suffers decreased opportunities for individual prosperity and financial success. While it is impossible to quantify the exact effects of this social divide on the middle class, the opioid epidemic, dramatic rises in \"deaths of despair\" (suicides, mental health and alcoholism), and lowering life expectancy in these meritocratic societies are often listed as results of it. It is not only the middle class who suffer the negative effects of meritocracy, however. The societal elite have to pay a significant price for their hectic working life. Many admit suffering from physical and mental health issues, inability to sustain a good quality personal life and a lack of time spent with their families. Children of the social elite are often forced into a highly competitive educational environment from a young age, which continues throughout school, university, and into their work life. Through this argument, the author attacks the idea of a meritocracy as a fair means to evaluate and reward the most skilled and hard-working members of society.\nMarkovits proposes a different approach to meritocracy, one where socioeconomic life conveniences are freely distributed to the people who are sufficiently successful at the things they are doing rather than creating an environment of ongoing competition. He calls for reform of economic roles, organizations and institutions in order to include a wider population and hence narrow the increasing inequality gap by questioning the social hegemony of high-profile workers, and intervening with redistribution of earnings, working hours and social identity on behalf of middle class workers.\nThe Tyranny of Merit.\nIn his book \"The Tyranny of Merit: What's Become of the Common Good?\", the American political philosopher Michael Sandel argues that the meritocratic ideal has become a moral and political problem for contemporary Western societies. He contends that the meritocratic belief that personal success is solely based on individual merit and effort has led to a neglection of the common good, the erosion of solidarity, and the rise of inequality. Sandel's criticism concerns the widespread notion that those who achieve success deserve it because of their intelligence, talent and effort. Instead, he argues that this belief is flawed since it ignores the role of luck and external circumstances, such as social and external factors, which are beyond an individual's control.\nAs a consequence, Sandel attributes the increasing gap between economic \"winners and losers\", the decline of civic engagement and the rise of populism to the meritocratic ideal. In addition, he argues that the promise of meritocracy creates an elite that is disconnected from society and lacks empathy for those, who are left behind. Elite institutions including the Ivy League and Wall Street have corrupted the virtue, according to Sandel, and the sense of who deserves power.\nUltimately, the argument of Michael Sandel is that \"meritocracy today functions less as an alternative to inequality than as its primary justification\". Thus, he makes the case for a reconsideration of our understanding of success and the common good including public debates regarding the extent of the welfare state. According to Sandel, this entails a deliberation about what constitutes a contribution to the common good and how these ought to be rewarded. Hence, he appeals to move beyond distributive justice towards contributive justice, that is \"creating conditions to enable everyone to contribute to the common good and to receive honor and recognition for having done so\". To this end, he suggest public policies such as more progressive taxation to reduce economic inequalities.\nImagined Meritocracy.\nMost of the criticism against meritocracy, including Sandel's argument in \"The Tyranny of Merit\", treats \"meritocracy\" as a mechanism that allocates rewards in accordance with one's abilities, but violates substantive equality. Casting doubt on this fundamental assumption, the Japanese sociologist Satoshi Araki examined whether economic outcomes are linked to individuals' skills levels in the United States. He found that the economic return to educational qualifications per se was significantly larger than that to cognitive skills and that intergenerational inequality had been substantially formed via credentials rather than abilities - that is why the unfair situation like \"side doors\" may exist. Araki therefore argues that contemporary America is a typical credential society, where credentialism prevails over skills-based meritocracy, but people are navigated to misbelieve that their society is meritocratic. Calling this situation \"imagined meritocracy\", he underscores the importance of examining the credential/meritocratic nature of a society by distinguishing the function of educational credentials as such and that of actual abilities both conceptually and empirically lest we mislead scholarly/policy discussion and public debate based on the imagined discourse of meritocracy.\nPracticality.\nThe term \"meritocracy\" was originally intended as a negative concept. One of the primary concerns with meritocracy is the unclear definition of \"merit\". What is considered as meritorious can differ with opinions as on which qualities are considered the most worthy, raising the question of which \"merit\" is the highest\u2014or, in other words, which standard is the \"best\" standard. As the supposed effectiveness of a meritocracy is based on the supposed competence of its officials, this standard of merit cannot be arbitrary and has to also reflect the competencies required for their roles.\nThe reliability of the authority and system that assesses each individual's merit is another point of concern. As a meritocratic system relies on a standard of merit to measure and compare people against, the system by which this is done has to be reliable to ensure that their assessed merit accurately reflects their potential capabilities. Standardized testing, which reflects the meritocratic sorting process, has come under criticism for being rigid and unable to accurately assess many valuable qualities and potentials of students. Education theorist Bill Ayers, commenting on the limitations of standardized testing, writes that \"standardized tests can't measure initiative, creativity, imagination, conceptual thinking, curiosity, effort, irony, judgment, commitment, nuance, good will, ethical reflection, or a host of other valuable dispositions and attributes. What they can measure and count are isolated skills, specific facts and function, content knowledge, the least interesting and least significant aspects of learning\". Merit determined through the opinionated evaluations of teachers, while being able to assess the valuable qualities that cannot be assessed by standardized testing, are unreliable as the opinions, insights, biases, and standards of the teachers vary greatly. If the system of evaluation is corrupt, non-transparent, opinionated or misguided, decisions regarding who has the highest merit can be highly fallible.\nThe level of education required in order to become competitive in a meritocracy may also be costly, effectively limiting candidacy for a position of power to those with the means necessary to become educated. Eight of the nine Supreme Court of the United States Justices, for example, attended only Harvard or Yale and generally only consider clerkship candidates who attended a top-five university, while in the 1950s the two universities only accounted for around one fifth of the justices. \nAn example of this was Chinese student self-declared messiah, Hong Xiuquan, who despite ranking first in a preliminary, nationwide imperial examination, was unable to afford further education. As such, although he did try to study in private, Hong was ultimately noncompetitive in later examinations and unable to become a bureaucrat. This economic aspect of meritocracies has been said to continue nowadays in countries without free educations. Even if free education were provided, the resources that the parents of a student are able to provide outside of the curriculum, such as tutoring, exam preparation, and financial support for living costs during higher education will influence the education the student attains and the student's social position in a meritocratic society. This limits the fairness and justness of any meritocratic system. \nSimilarly, feminist critics have noted that many hierarchical organisations actually favour individuals who have received disproportionate support of an informal kind (e.g. mentorship, word-of-mouth opportunities, and so on), such that only those who benefit from such supports are likely to understand these organisations as meritocratic.\nCornell University economist Robert H. Frank rejects meritocracy in his book \"Success and Luck: Good Fortune and the Myth of Meritocracy\". He describes how chance plays a significant role in deciding who gets what that is not objectively based on merit. He does not discount the importance of talent and hard work, but, using psychological studies, mathematical formulae, and examples, demonstrates that among groups of people performing at a high level, chance (luck) plays an enormous role in an individual's success.\nUndesirable outcomes.\nAnother concern regards the principle of incompetence, or the \"Peter principle\". As people rise in a meritocratic society through the social hierarchy through their demonstrated merit, they eventually reach, and become stuck, at a level too difficult for them to perform effectively; they are promoted to incompetence. This reduces the effectiveness of a meritocratic system, the supposed main practical benefit of which is the competence of those who run the society.\nIn his book \"Meritocratic Education and Social Worthlessness\" (Palgrave, 2012), the philosopher Khen Lampert argued that educational meritocracy is nothing but a post-modern version of Social Darwinism. Its proponents argue that the theory justifies social inequality as being meritocratic. This social theory holds that Darwin's theory of evolution by natural selection is a model, not only for the development of biological traits in a population, but also as an application for human social institutions\u2014the existing social institutions being implicitly declared as normative. Social Darwinism shares its roots with early progressivism, and was most popular from the late nineteenth century to the end of World War II. Darwin only ventured to propound his theories in a biological sense, and it is other thinkers and theorists who have applied Darwin's model normatively to unequal endowments of human ambitions.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20972", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20972", "title": "Marxism\u2013Leninism", "text": "Communist ideology\nMarxism\u2013Leninism () is a communist ideology that became the largest faction of the communist movement in the world in the years following the October Revolution. It was the predominant ideology of most communist governments throughout the 20th century. It was developed in the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics by Joseph Stalin and drew on elements of Bolshevism, Leninism, and Marxism. It was the state ideology of the Soviet Union, Soviet satellite states in the Eastern Bloc, and various countries in the Non-Aligned Movement and Third World during the Cold War, as well as the Communist International after Bolshevization.\nToday, Marxism\u2013Leninism is the \"de jure\" ideology of the ruling parties of China, Cuba, Laos, and Vietnam, as well as many other communist parties. The state ideology of North Korea is derived from Marxism\u2013Leninism, although its evolution is disputed.\nMarxism\u2013Leninism was developed from Bolshevism by Joseph Stalin in the 1920s based on his understanding and synthesis of classical Marxism and Leninism. Marxism\u2013Leninism holds that a two-stage communist revolution is needed to replace capitalism. A vanguard party, organized through democratic centralism, would seize power on behalf of the proletariat and establish a one-party communist state. The state would control the means of production, suppress opposition, counter-revolution, and the bourgeoisie, and promote Soviet collectivism, to pave the way for an eventual communist society that would be classless and stateless.\nAfter the death of Vladimir Lenin in 1924, Marxism\u2013Leninism became a distinct movement in the Soviet Union when Stalin and his supporters gained control of the party. It rejected the common notion among Western Marxists of world revolution as a prerequisite for building socialism, in favour of the concept of socialism in one country. According to its supporters, the gradual transition from capitalism to socialism was signified by the introduction of the first five-year plan and the 1936 Soviet Constitution. By the late 1920s, Stalin established ideological orthodoxy in the Russian Communist Party (Bolsheviks), the Soviet Union, and the Communist International to establish universal Marxist\u2013Leninist praxis. The formulation of the Soviet version of dialectical and historical materialism in the 1930s by Stalin and his associates, such as in Stalin's text \"Dialectical and Historical Materialism\", became the official Soviet interpretation of Marxism, and was taken as example by Marxist\u2013Leninists in other countries; according to the \"Great Russian Encyclopedia\", this text became the foundation of the philosophy of Marxism\u2013Leninism. In 1938, Stalin's official textbook \"History of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union (Bolsheviks)\" popularised \"Marxism\u2013Leninism\".\nThe internationalism of Marxism\u2013Leninism was expressed in supporting revolutions in other countries, initially through the Communist International and then through the concepts of the national democratic states and states of socialist orientation after de-Stalinisation. The establishment of other communist states after World War II resulted in Sovietisation, and these states tended to follow the Soviet Marxist\u2013Leninist model of five-year plans and rapid industrialisation, political centralisation, and repression. During the Cold War, Marxist\u2013Leninist countries like the Soviet Union and its allies were one of the major forces in international relations. With the death of Stalin and the ensuing de-Stalinisation, Marxism\u2013Leninism underwent several revisions and adaptations such as Guevarism, Titoism, Ho Chi Minh Thought, Hoxhaism, and Maoism, with the latter two constituting anti-revisionist Marxism\u2013Leninism. These adaptations caused several splits between communist states, resulting in the Tito\u2013Stalin split, the Sino-Soviet split, and the Sino-Albanian split. As the Cold War waned and concluded with the demise of much of the socialist world, many of the surviving communist states reformed their economies and embraced market socialism. Complementing this economic shift, the Communist Party of China developed Maoism (also known as Mao Zedong Thought) into Deng Xiaoping Theory. Today this comprises part of the governing ideology of China, with the latest developments including Xi Jinping Thought. Meanwhile, the Communist Party of Peru developed Maoism into Marxism\u2013Leninism\u2013Maoism, a higher stage of anti-revisionist Maoism that rejects Dengism. The latest developments to Marxism\u2013Leninism\u2013Maoism include Gonzaloism, Maoism-Third Worldism, National Democracy, and Prachanda Path. Ongoing Marxist\u2013Leninist(\u2013Maoist) insurgencies include those being waged in the Philippines, India, and in Turkey. The Nepalese civil war, fought by Marxist\u2013Leninist\u2013Maoists, ended in their victory in 2006.\nCriticism of Marxism\u2013Leninism largely overlaps with criticism of communist party rule and mainly focuses on the actions and policies of Marxist\u2013Leninist leaders, most notably Stalin and Mao Zedong. Communist states have been marked by a high degree of centralised control by the state and the ruling communist party, political repression, state atheism, collectivisation and use of labour camps. Historians such as Silvio Pons and Robert Service stated that the repression and totalitarianism came from Marxist\u2013Leninist ideology. Historians such as Michael Geyer and Sheila Fitzpatrick have offered other explanations and criticise the focus on the upper levels of society and use of concepts such as totalitarianism which have obscured the reality of the system. While the emergence of the Soviet Union as the world's first nominally communist state led to communism's widespread association with Marxism\u2013Leninism and the Soviet model, several academics say that Marxism\u2013Leninism in practice was a form of state capitalism. The socio-economic nature of communist states, especially that of the Soviet Union during the Stalin era (1924\u20131953), has been much debated, varyingly being labelled a form of bureaucratic collectivism, state capitalism, state socialism, or a totally unique mode of production. The Eastern Bloc, including communist states in Central and Eastern Europe as well as the Third World socialist regimes, have been variously described as \"bureaucratic-authoritarian systems\", and China's socio-economic structure has been referred to as \"nationalistic state capitalism\".\nOverview.\nCommunist states.\nIn the establishment of the Soviet Union in the former Russian Empire, Bolshevism was the ideological basis. As the only legal vanguard party, it decided almost all policies, which the communist party represented as correct. Because Leninism was the revolutionary means to achieving socialism in the praxis of government, the relationship between ideology and decision-making inclined to pragmatism and most policy decisions were taken in light of the continual and permanent development of Marxism\u2013Leninism, with ideological adaptation to material conditions. The Bolshevik Party lost in the 1917 Russian Constituent Assembly election, obtaining 23.3% of the vote, to the Socialist Revolutionary Party, which obtained 37.6%. On 6 January 1918, the Draft Decree on the Dissolution of the Constituent Assembly was issued by the Central Executive Committee of the Congress of Soviets, a committee dominated by Vladimir Lenin, who had previously supported multi-party free elections. After the Bolshevik defeat, Lenin started referring to the assembly as a \"deceptive form of bourgeois-democratic parliamentarism\". This was criticised as being the development of vanguardism as a form of hierarchical party\u2013elite that controlled society.\nWithin five years of the death of Lenin, Joseph Stalin completed his rise to power and was the leader of the Soviet Union who theorised and applied the socialist theories of Lenin and Karl Marx as political expediencies used to realise his plans for the Soviet Union and for world socialism. \"Concerning Questions of Leninism\" (1926) represented Marxism\u2013Leninism as a separate communist ideology and featured a global hierarchy of communist parties and revolutionary vanguard parties in each country of the world. With that, Stalin's application of Marxism\u2013Leninism to the situation of the Soviet Union became Stalinism, the official state ideology until his death in 1953. In Marxist political discourse, Stalinism, denoting and connoting the theory and praxis of Stalin, has two usages, namely praise of Stalin by Marxist\u2013Leninists who believe Stalin successfully developed Lenin's legacy, and criticism of Stalin by Marxist\u2013Leninists and other Marxists who repudiate Stalin's political purges, social-class repressions and bureaucratic terrorism.\nAs the Left Opposition to Stalin within the Soviet party and government, Leon Trotsky and Trotskyists argued that Marxist\u2013Leninist ideology contradicted Marxism and Leninism in theory, therefore Stalin's ideology was not useful for the implementation of socialism in Russia. Moreover, Trotskyists within the party identified their anti-Stalinist communist ideology as Bolshevik\u2013Leninism and supported the permanent revolution to differentiate themselves from Stalin's justification and implementation of socialism in one country.\nAfter the Sino-Soviet split of the 1960s, the Chinese Communist Party and the Communist Party of the Soviet Union claimed to be the sole heir and successor to Stalin concerning the correct interpretation of Marxism\u2013Leninism and ideological leader of world communism. In that vein, Mao Zedong Thought, Mao Zedong's updating and adaptation of Marxism\u2013Leninism to Chinese conditions in which revolutionary praxis is primary and ideological orthodoxy is secondary, represents urban Marxism\u2013Leninism adapted to pre-industrial China. The claim that Mao had adapted Marxism\u2013Leninism to Chinese conditions evolved into the idea that he had updated it in a fundamental way applying to the world as a whole. Consequently, Mao Zedong Thought became the official state ideology of the People's Republic of China as well as the ideological basis of communist parties around the world which sympathised with China. In the late 1970s, the Peruvian communist party Shining Path developed and synthesised Mao Zedong Thought into Marxism\u2013Leninism\u2013Maoism, a contemporary variety of Marxism\u2013Leninism that is a supposed higher level of Marxism\u2013Leninism that can be applied universally.\nFollowing the Sino-Albanian split of the 1970s, a small portion of Marxist\u2013Leninists began to downplay or repudiate the role of Mao in the Marxist\u2013Leninist international movement in favour of the Albanian Labour Party and stricter adherence to Stalin. The Sino-Albanian split was caused by Albania's rejection of China's of Sino\u2013American rapprochement, specifically the 1972 Mao\u2013Nixon meeting which the anti-revisionist Albanian Labour Party perceived as an ideological betrayal of Mao's own Three Worlds Theory that excluded such political rapprochement with the West. To the Albanian Marxist\u2013Leninists, the Chinese dealings with the United States indicated Mao's lessened, practical commitments to ideological orthodoxy and proletarian internationalism. In response to Mao's apparently unorthodox deviations, Enver Hoxha, head of the Albanian Labour Party, theorised anti-revisionist Marxism\u2013Leninism, referred to as Hoxhaism, which retained orthodox Marxism\u2013Leninism when compared to the ideology of the post-Stalin Soviet Union.\nIn North Korea, Marxism\u2013Leninism was superseded by \"Juche\" in the 1970s. This was made official in 1992 and 2009, when constitutional references to Marxism\u2013Leninism were dropped and replaced with \"Juche\". In 2009, the constitution was quietly amended so that not only did it remove all Marxist\u2013Leninist references present in the first draft but also dropped all references to communism. \"Juche\" has been described by Michael Seth as a version of Korean ultranationalism, which eventually developed after losing its original Marxist\u2013Leninist elements. According to \"North Korea: A Country Study\" by Robert L. Worden, Marxism\u2013Leninism was abandoned immediately after the start of de-Stalinization in the Soviet Union and has been totally replaced by \"Juche\" since at least 1974. Daniel Schwekendiek wrote that what made North Korean Marxism\u2013Leninism distinct from that of China and the Soviet Union was that it incorporated national feelings and macro-historical elements in the socialist ideology, opting for its \"own style of socialism\". The major Korean elements are the emphasis on traditional Confucianism and the memory of the traumatic experience of Korea under Japanese rule as well as a focus on autobiographical features of Kim Il Sung as a guerrilla hero.\nThe People's Democratic Republic of Yemen, abbreviated as PDRY (aka South Yemen) and existed between 1967 and 1990, was the only openly communist (Marxist-Leninist) state in the Arab world. South Yemen pursued a corresponding policy and became an important ally for the Soviet Union and Eastern bloc, because of its access to the Gulf of Aden. The USSR provided it with comprehensive assistance \u2013 loans, specialists and weapons. Relations between this communist state and many other Arab countries remained poor, since many communist figures from all over the region were hiding in South Yemen, after unsuccessful tryings to organize coup d'etats in their home countries.\nThere were also communist states in Africa, such as Ethiopia. In 1974, the military overthrew Emperor Haile Selassie and installed a military junta known as the Derg. The Derg quickly aligned itself with the Soviet Union on the basis of communism, implementing Marxist-Leninist ideals that were radical for their country. The brutal imposition of their radical ideas led to a debilitating civil war. In 1977, after a series of political purges and executions, Mengistu Haile Mariam became the leader of the Derg. He continued this course and brought Ethiopia closer to the USSR, which became Ethiopia's main trading partner, supplying it with everything from weapons and equipment to military advisers and specialists. Mengistu ultimately built a highly militarized state with the largest army in sub-Saharan Africa. The Soviet Union pushed Mengistu to create a \"People's Democratic\" system, as was the case in the Eastern Bloc countries, but Mengistu did so very reluctantly: Ethiopia became the \"People's Democratic Republic of Ethiopia\" only in 1987. And although the Derg was formally dissolved, roughly the same people remained in power as before.\nIn the other four existing socialist and people's democratic states, namely China, Cuba, Laos, and Vietnam, the ruling parties hold Marxism\u2013Leninism as their official ideology, although they give it different interpretations in terms of practical policy. Marxism\u2013Leninism is also the ideology of anti-revisionist, Hoxhaist, Maoist, and neo-Stalinist communist parties worldwide. The anti-revisionists criticise some rule of the communist states by claiming that they were state capitalist countries ruled by \"revisionists\". Although the periods and countries vary among different ideologies and parties, they generally accept that the Soviet Union was socialist during Stalin's time, Maoists believe that China became state capitalist after Mao's death, and Hoxhaists believe that China was always state capitalist, and uphold the Albania as the only socialist state after the Soviet Union under Stalin.\nDefinition, theory, and terminology.\nCommunist ideologies and ideas have acquired a new meaning since the Russian Revolution, as they became equivalent to the ideas of Marxism\u2013Leninism, namely the interpretation of Marxism by Vladimir Lenin and his successors. Endorsing the final objective, namely the creation of a community-owning means of production and providing each of its participants with consumption \"according to their needs\", Marxism\u2013Leninism puts forward the recognition of the class struggle as a dominating principle of a social change and development. In addition, workers (the proletariat) were to carry out the mission of reconstruction of the society. Conducting a socialist revolution led by what its proponents termed the \"vanguard of the proletariat\", defined as the communist party organised hierarchically through democratic centralism, was hailed to be a historical necessity by Marxist\u2013Leninists. Moreover, the introduction of the proletarian dictatorship was advocated and classes deemed hostile were to be repressed. In the 1920s, it was first defined and formulated by Joseph Stalin based on his understanding of orthodox Marxism and Leninism.\nIn 1934, Karl Radek suggested the formulation \"Marxism\u2013Leninism\u2013Stalinism\" in an article in \"Pravda\" to stress the importance of Stalin's leadership to the Marxist\u2013Leninist ideology. Radek's suggestion failed to catch on, as Stalin as well as CPSU's ideologists preferred to continue the usage of \"Marxism\u2013Leninism\". \"Marxism\u2013Leninism\u2013Maoism\" became the name for the ideology of the Chinese Communist Party and of other Communist parties, which broke off from national Communist parties, after the Sino\u2013Soviet split, especially when the split was finalised by 1963. The Italian Communist Party was mainly influenced by Antonio Gramsci, who gave a more democratic implication than Lenin's for why workers remained passive. A key difference between Maoism and other forms of Marxism\u2013Leninism is that peasants should be the bulwark of the revolutionary energy, which is led by the working class. Three common Maoist values are revolutionary populism, pragmatism, and dialectics.\nAccording to Rachel Walker, \"Marxism\u2013Leninism\" is an empty term that depends on the approach and basis of ruling Communist parties, and is dynamic and open to redefinition, being both fixed and not fixed in meaning. As a term, \"Marxism\u2013Leninism\" is misleading because Marx and Lenin never sanctioned or supported the creation of an \"-ism\" after them, and is reveling because, being popularized after Lenin's death by Stalin, it contained three clear doctrinal and institutionalized principles that became a model for later Soviet-type regimes; its global influence, having at its height covered at least one-third of the world's population, has made Marxist\u2013Leninist a convenient label for the Communist bloc as a dynamic ideological order.\nHistoriography.\nHistoriography of communist states is polarised. According to John Earl Haynes and Harvey Klehr, historiography is characterised by a split between traditionalists and revisionists. \"Traditionalists\", who characterise themselves as objective reporters of an alleged totalitarian nature of communism and communist states, are criticised by their opponents as being anti-communist, even \"fascist\", in their eagerness on continuing to focus on the issues of the Cold War. Alternative characterisations for traditionalists include \"anti-communist\", \"conservative\", \"Draperite\" (after Theodore Draper), \"orthodox\", and \"right-wing\"; Norman Markowitz, a prominent \"revisionist\", referred to them as \"reactionaries\", \"right-wing romantics\", \"romantics\", and \"triumphalist\" who belong to the \"HUAC school of CPUSA scholarship\". According to Haynes and Klehr, \"revisionists\" are more numerous and dominate academic institutions and learned journals. A suggested alternative formulation is \"new historians of American communism\", but that has not caught on because these historians describe themselves as unbiased and scholarly and contrast their work to the work of anti-communist traditionalists whom they would term biased and unscholarly. Academic Sovietology after World War II and during the Cold War was dominated by the \"totalitarian model\" of the Soviet Union, stressing the absolute nature of Stalin's power. The \"revisionist school\" beginning in the 1960s focused on relatively autonomous institutions which might influence policy at the higher level. Matt Lenoe described the \"revisionist school\" as representing those who \"insisted that the old image of the Soviet Union as a totalitarian state bent on world domination was oversimplified or just plain wrong. They tended to be interested in social history and to argue that the Communist Party leadership had had to adjust to social forces.\" These \"revisionist school\" historians challenged the \"totalitarian model\", as outlined by political scientist Carl Joachim Friedrich, which stated that the Soviet Union and other communist states were totalitarian systems, with the personality cult, and almost unlimited powers of the \"great leader\", such as Stalin. It was considered to be outdated by the 1980s and for the post-Stalinist era.\nSome academics, such as St\u00e9phane Courtois (\"The Black Book of Communism\"), Steven Rosefielde (\"Red Holocaust\"), and Rudolph Rummel (\"Death by Government\"), wrote of mass, excess deaths under Marxist\u2013Leninist regimes. These authors defined the political repression by communists as a \"Communist democide\", \"Communist genocide\", \"Red Holocaust\", or followed the \"victims of Communism\" narrative. Some of them compared Communism to Nazism and described deaths under Marxist\u2013Leninist regimes (civil wars, deportations, famines, repressions, and wars) as being a direct consequence of Marxism\u2013Leninism. Some of these works, in particular \"The Black Book of Communism\" and its 93 or 100 millions figure, are cited by political groups and Members of the European Parliament. Without denying the tragedy of the events, other scholars criticise the interpretation that sees communism as the main culprit as presenting a biased or exaggerated anti-communist narrative. Several academics propose a more nuanced analysis of Marxist\u2013Leninist rule, stating that anti-communist narratives have exaggerated the extent of political repression and censorship in communist states and drawn comparisons with what they see as atrocities that were perpetrated by capitalist countries, particularly during the Cold War. These academics include Mark Aarons, Noam Chomsky, Jodi Dean, Kristen Ghodsee, Seumas Milne, and Michael Parenti. Ghodsee, Nathan J. Robinson, and Scott Sehon wrote about the merits of taking an anti anti-communist position that does not deny the atrocities but make a distinction between anti-authoritarian communist and other socialist currents, both of which have been victims of repression.\nHistory.\nBolsheviks, February Revolution, and Great War (1903\u20131917).\nAlthough Marxism\u2013Leninism was created after Vladimir Lenin's death by Joseph Stalin in the Soviet Union, continuing to be the official state ideology after de-Stalinisation and of other communist states, the basis for elements of Marxism\u2013Leninism predate this. The philosophy of Marxism\u2013Leninism originated as the pro-active, political praxis of the Bolshevik faction of the Russian Social Democratic Labour Party in realising political change in Tsarist Russia. Lenin's leadership transformed the Bolsheviks into the party's political vanguard which was composed of professional revolutionaries who practised democratic centralism to elect leaders and officers as well as to determine policy through free discussion, then decisively realised through united action. The vanguardism of proactive, pragmatic commitment to achieving revolution was the Bolsheviks' advantage in out-manoeuvring the liberal and conservative political parties who advocated social democracy without a practical plan of action for the Russian society they wished to govern. Leninism allowed the Bolshevik party to assume command of the October Revolution in 1917.\nTwelve years before the October Revolution in 1917, the Bolsheviks had failed to assume control of the February Revolution of 1905 (22 January 1905 \u2013 16 June 1907) because the centres of revolutionary action were too far apart for proper political coordination. To generate revolutionary momentum from the Tsarist army killings on Bloody Sunday (22 January 1905), the Bolsheviks encouraged workers to use political violence in order to compel the bourgeois social classes (the nobility, the gentry and the bourgeoisie) to join the proletarian revolution to overthrow the absolute monarchy of the Tsar of Russia. Most importantly, the experience of this revolution caused Lenin to conceive of the means of sponsoring socialist revolution through agitation, propaganda and a well-organised, disciplined and small political party.\nDespite secret-police persecution by the Okhrana (Department for Protecting the Public Security and Order), \u00e9migr\u00e9 Bolsheviks returned to Russia to agitate, organise and lead, but then they returned to exile when peoples' revolutionary fervour failed in 1907. The failure of the February Revolution exiled Bolsheviks, Mensheviks, Socialist Revolutionaries and anarchists such as the Black Guards from Russia. Membership in both the Bolshevik and Menshevik ranks diminished from 1907 to 1908 while the number of people taking part in strikes in 1907 was 26% of the figure during the year of the Revolution of 1905, dropping to 6% in 1908 and 2% in 1910. The 1908\u20131917 period was one of disillusionment in the Bolshevik party over Lenin's leadership, with members opposing him for scandals involving his expropriations and methods of raising money for the party. This political defeat was aggravated by Tsar Nicholas II's political reformations of Imperial Russian government. In practise, the formalities of political participation (the electoral plurality of a multi-party system with the State Duma and the Russian Constitution of 1906) were the Tsar's piecemeal and cosmetic concessions to social progress because public office remained available only to the aristocracy, the gentry and the bourgeoisie. These reforms resolved neither the illiteracy, the poverty, nor malnutrition of the peasant, underclass majority of Imperial Russia.\nIn Swiss exile, Lenin developed Marx's philosophy and extrapolated decolonisation by colonial revolt as a reinforcement of proletarian revolution in Europe. In 1912, Lenin resolved a factional challenge to his ideological leadership of the RSDLP by the Forward Group in the party, usurping the all-party congress to transform the RSDLP into the Bolshevik party. In the early 1910s, Lenin remained highly unpopular and was so unpopular amongst international socialist movement that by 1914 it considered censoring him. Unlike the European socialists who chose bellicose nationalism to anti-war internationalism, whose philosophical and political break was consequence of the internationalist\u2013defencist schism among socialists, the Bolsheviks opposed the Great War (1914\u20131918). That nationalist betrayal of socialism was denounced by a small group of socialist leaders who opposed the Great War, including Rosa Luxemburg, Karl Liebknecht and Lenin, who said that the European socialists had failed the working classes for preferring patriotic war to proletarian internationalism. To debunk patriotism and national chauvinism, Lenin explained in the essay \"Imperialism, the Highest Stage of Capitalism\" (1917) that capitalist economic expansion leads to colonial imperialism which is then regulated with nationalist wars such as the Great War among the empires of Europe. To relieve strategic pressures from the Western Front (4 August 1914 \u2013 11 November 1918), Imperial Germany impelled the withdrawal of Imperial Russia from the war's Eastern Front (17 August 1914 \u2013 3 March 1918) by sending Lenin and his Bolshevik cohort in a diplomatically sealed train, anticipating them partaking in revolutionary activity.\nOctober Revolution and Russian Civil War (1917\u20131922).\nIn March 1917, the abdication of Tsar Nicholas II led to the Russian Provisional Government (March\u2013July 1917), who then proclaimed the Russian Republic (September\u2013November 1917). Later in the October Revolution, the Bolshevik's seizure of power against the Provisional Government resulted in their establishment of the Russian Soviet Federative Socialist Republic (1917\u20131991), yet parts of Russia remained occupied by the counter-revolutionary White Movement of anti-communists who had united to form the White Army to fight the Russian Civil War (1917\u20131922) against the Bolshevik government. Moreover, despite the White\u2013Red civil war, Russia remained a combatant in the Great War that the Bolsheviks had quit with the Treaty of Brest-Litovsk which then provoked the Allied Intervention to the Russian Civil War by the armies of seventeen countries, featuring Great Britain, France, Italy, the United States and Imperial Japan.\nElsewhere, the successful October Revolution in Russia had facilitated the German Revolution of 1918\u20131919 and revolutions and interventions in Hungary (1918\u20131920) which produced the First Hungarian Republic and the Hungarian Soviet Republic. In Berlin, the German government aided by Freikorps units fought and defeated the Spartacist uprising which began as a general strike. In Munich, the local Freikorps fought and defeated the Bavarian Soviet Republic. In Hungary, the disorganised workers who had proclaimed the Hungarian Soviet Republic were fought and defeated by the royal armies of the Kingdom of Romania and the Kingdom of Yugoslavia as well as the army of the First Republic of Czechoslovakia. These communist forces were soon crushed by anti-communist forces and attempts to create an international communist revolution failed. However, a successful revolution occurred in Asia, when the Mongolian Revolution of 1921 established the Mongolian People's Republic (1924\u20131992). The percentage of Bolshevik delegates in the All-Russian Congress of Soviets increased from 13%, at the first congress in July 1917, to 66%, at the fifth congress in 1918.\nAs promised to the Russian peoples in October 1917, the Bolsheviks quit Russia's participation in the Great War on 3 March 1918. That same year, the Bolsheviks consolidated government power by expelling the Mensheviks, the Socialist Revolutionaries and the Left Socialist-Revolutionaries from the soviets. The Bolshevik government then established the Cheka (All-Russian Extraordinary Commission) secret police to eliminate anti\u2013Bolshevik opposition in the country. Initially, there was strong opposition to the Bolshevik r\u00e9gime because they had not resolved the food shortages and material poverty of the Russian peoples as promised in October 1917. From that social discontent, the Cheka reported 118 uprisings, including the Kronstadt rebellion (7\u201317 March 1921) against the economic austerity of the War Communism imposed by the Bolsheviks. The principal obstacles to Russian economic development and modernisation were great material poverty and the lack of modern technology which were conditions that orthodox Marxism considered unfavourable to communist revolution. Agricultural Russia was sufficiently developed for establishing capitalism, but it was insufficiently developed for establishing socialism. For Bolshevik Russia, the 1921\u20131924 period featured the simultaneous occurrence of economic recovery, famine (1921\u20131922) and a financial crisis (1924). By 1924, considerable economic progress had been achieved and by 1926 the Bolshevik government had achieved economic production levels equal to Russia's production levels in 1913.\nInitial Bolshevik economic policies from 1917 to 1918 were cautious, with limited nationalisations of the means of production which had been private property of the Russian aristocracy during the Tsarist monarchy. Lenin was immediately committed to avoid antagonising the peasantry by making efforts to coax them away from the Socialist Revolutionaries, allowing a peasant takeover of nobles' estates while no immediate nationalisations were enacted on peasants' property. The Decree on Land (8 November 1917) fulfilled Lenin's promised redistribution of Russia's arable land to the peasants, who reclaimed their farmlands from the aristocrats, ensuring the peasants' loyalty to the Bolshevik party. To overcome the civil war's economic interruptions, the policy of War Communism (1918\u20131921), a regulated market, state-controlled means of distribution and nationalisation of large-scale farms, was adopted to requisite and distribute grain in order to feed industrial workers in the cities whilst the Red Army was fighting the White Army's attempted restoration of the Romanov dynasty as absolute monarchs of Russia. Moreover, the politically unpopular forced grain-requisitions discouraged peasants from farming resulted in reduced harvests and food shortages that provoked labour strikes and food riots. In the event, the Russian peoples created an economy of barter and black market to counter the Bolshevik government's voiding of the monetary economy.\nIn 1921, the New Economic Policy restored some private enterprise to animate the Russian economy. As part of Lenin's pragmatic compromise with external financial interests in 1918, Bolshevik state capitalism temporarily returned 91% of industry to private ownership or trusts until the Soviet Russians learned the technology and the techniques required to operate and administrate industries. Importantly, Lenin declared that the development of socialism would not be able to be pursued in the manner originally thought by Marxists. A key aspect that affected the Bolshevik regime was the backward economic conditions in Russia that were considered unfavourable to orthodox Marxist theory of communist revolution. At the time, orthodox Marxists claimed that Russia was ripe for the development of capitalism, not yet for socialism. Lenin advocated the need of the development of a large corps of technical intelligentsia to assist the industrial development of Russia and advance the Marxist economic stages of development as it had too few technical experts at the time. In that vein, Lenin explained it as follows: \"Our poverty is so great that we cannot, at one stroke, restore full-scale factory, state, socialist production.\" He added that the development of socialism would proceed according to the actual material and socio-economic conditions in Russia and not as abstractly described by Marx for industrialised Europe in the 19th century. To overcome the lack of educated Russians who could operate and administrate industry, Lenin advocated the development of a technical intelligentsia who would propel the industrial development of Russia to self-sufficiency.\nStalin's rise to power (1922\u20131928).\nAs he neared death after suffering strokes, Lenin's Testament of December 1922 named Trotsky and Stalin as the most able men in the Central Committee, but he harshly criticised them. Lenin said that Stalin should be removed from being the General Secretary of the party and that he be replaced with \"some other person who is superior to Stalin only in one respect, namely, in being more tolerant, more loyal, more polite, and more attentive to comrades.\" Upon his death on 21 January 1924, Lenin's political testament was read aloud to the Central Committee, who chose to ignore Lenin's ordered removal of Stalin as General Secretary because enough members believed Stalin had been politically rehabilitated in 1923.\nConsequent to personally spiteful disputes about the praxis of Leninism, the October Revolution veterans Lev Kamenev and Grigory Zinoviev said that the true threat to the ideological integrity of the party was Trotsky, who was a personally charismatic political leader as well as the commanding officer of the Red Army in the Russian Civil War and revolutionary partner of Lenin. To thwart Trotsky's likely election to head the party, Stalin, Kamenev and Zinoviev formed a troika that featured Stalin as General Secretary, the \"de facto\" centre of power in the party and the country. The direction of the party was decided in confrontations of politics and personality between Stalin's troika and Trotsky over which Marxist policy to pursue, either Trotsky's policy of permanent revolution or Stalin's policy of socialism in one country. Trotsky's permanent revolution advocated rapid industrialisation, elimination of private farming and having the Soviet Union promote the spread of communist revolution abroad. Stalin's socialism in one country stressed moderation and development of positive relations between the Soviet Union and other countries to increase trade and foreign investment. To politically isolate and oust Trotsky from the party, Stalin expediently advocated socialism in one country, a policy to which he was indifferent. In 1925, the 14th Congress of the All-Union Communist Party (Bolsheviks) chose Stalin's policy, defeating Trotsky as a possible leader of the party and of the Soviet Union.\nIn the 1925\u20131927 period, Stalin dissolved the troika and disowned the centrist Kamenev and Zinoviev for an expedient alliance with the three most prominent leaders of the so-called Right Opposition, namely Alexei Rykov (Premier of Russia, 1924\u20131929; Premier of the Soviet Union, 1924\u20131930), Nikolai Bukharin (General Secretary of the Comintern, 1926\u20131929; Editor-in-Chief of \"Pravda\", 1918\u20131929), and Mikhail Tomsky (Chairman of the All-Russian Central Council of Trade Unions in the 1920s). In 1927, the party endorsed Stalin's policy of socialism in one country as the Soviet Union's national policy and expelled the leftist Trotsky and the centrists Kamenev and Zinoviev from the Politburo. In 1929, Stalin politically controlled the party and the Soviet Union by way of deception and administrative acumen. In that time, Stalin's centralised, socialism in one country r\u00e9gime had negatively associated Lenin's revolutionary Bolshevism with Stalinism, i.e. government by command-policy to realise projects such as the rapid industrialisation of cities and the collectivisation of agriculture. Such Stalinism also subordinated the interests (political, national and ideological) of Asian and European communist parties to the geopolitical interests of the Soviet Union.\nIn the 1928\u20131932 period of the first five-year plan, Stalin effected the dekulakisation of the farmlands of the Soviet Union, a politically radical dispossession of the kulak class of peasant-landlords from the Tsarist social order of monarchy. As Old Bolshevik revolutionaries, Bukharin, Rykov and Tomsky recommended amelioration of the dekulakisation to lessen the negative social impact in the relations between the Soviet peoples and the party, but Stalin took umbrage and then accused them of uncommunist philosophical deviations from Lenin and Marx. That implicit accusation of ideological deviationism licensed Stalin to accuse Bukharin, Rykov and Tomsky of plotting against the party and the appearance of impropriety then compelled the resignations of the Old Bolsheviks from government and from the Politburo. Stalin then completed his political purging of the party by exiling Trotsky from the Soviet Union in 1929. Afterwards, the political opposition to the practical r\u00e9gime of Stalinism was denounced as Trotskyism (Bolshevik\u2013Leninism), described as a deviation from Marxism\u2013Leninism, the state ideology of the Soviet Union.\nPolitical developments in the Soviet Union included Stalin dismantling the remaining elements of democracy from the party by extending his control over its institutions and eliminating any possible rivals. The party's ranks grew in numbers, with the party modifying its organisation to include more trade unions and factories. The ranks and files of the party were populated with members from the trade unions and the factories, whom Stalin controlled because there were no other Old Bolsheviks to contradict Marxism\u2013Leninism. In the late 1930s, the Soviet Union adopted the 1936 Soviet Constitution which ended weighted-voting preferences for workers, promulgated universal suffrage for every man and woman older than 18 years of age and organised the soviets (councils of workers) into two legislatures, namely the Soviet of the Union (representing electoral districts) and the Soviet of Nationalities (representing the ethnic groups of the country). By 1939, with the exception of Stalin himself, none of the original Bolsheviks of the October Revolution of 1917 remained in the party. Unquestioning loyalty to Stalin was expected by the regime of all citizens.\nStalin exercised extensive personal control over the party and unleashed an unprecedented level of violence to eliminate any potential threat to his regime. While Stalin exercised major control over political initiatives, their implementation was in the control of localities, often with local leaders interpreting the policies in a way that served themselves best. This abuse of power by local leaders exacerbated the violent purges and terror campaigns carried out by Stalin against members of the party deemed to be traitors. With the Great Purge (1936\u20131938), Stalin rid himself of internal enemies in the party and rid the Soviet Union of any alleged socially dangerous and counterrevolutionary person who might have offered legitimate political opposition to Marxism\u2013Leninism.\nStalin allowed the secret police NKVD (People's Commissariat for Internal Affairs) to rise above the law and the GPU (State Political Directorate) to use political violence to eliminate any person who might be a threat, whether real, potential, or imagined. As an administrator, Stalin governed the Soviet Union by controlling the formulation of national policy, but he delegated implementation to subordinate functionaries. Such freedom of action allowed local communist functionaries much discretion to interpret the intent of orders from Moscow, but this allowed their corruption. To Stalin, the correction of such abuses of authority and economic corruption were responsibility of the NKVD. In the 1937\u20131938 period, the NKVD arrested 1.5 million people, purged from every stratum of Soviet society and every rank and file of the party, of which 681,692 people were killed as enemies of the state. To provide manpower (manual, intellectual and technical) to realise the construction of socialism in one country, the NKVD established the Gulag system of forced-labour camps for regular criminals and political dissidents, for culturally insubordinate artists and politically incorrect intellectuals and for homosexual people and religious anti-communists.\nSocialism in one country (1928\u20131944).\nBeginning in 1928, Stalin's five-year plans for the national economy of the Soviet Union achieved the rapid industrialisation (coal, iron and steel, electricity and petroleum, among others) and the collectivisation of agriculture. It achieved 23.6% of collectivisation within two years (1930) and 98.0% of collectivisation within thirteen years (1941). As the revolutionary vanguard, the communist party organised Russian society to realise rapid industrialisation programs as defence against Western interference with socialism in Bolshevik Russia. The five-year plans were prepared in the 1920s whilst the Bolshevik government fought the internal Russian Civil War (1917\u20131922) and repelled the external Allied intervention to the Russian Civil War (1918\u20131925). Vast industrialisation was initiated mostly based with a focus on heavy industry. The Cultural revolution in the Soviet Union focused on restructuring culture and society.\nDuring the 1930s, the rapid industrialisation of the country accelerated the Soviet people's sociological transition from poverty to relative plenty when politically illiterate peasants passed from Tsarist serfdom to self-determination and became politically aware urban citizens. The Marxist\u2013Leninist economic r\u00e9gime modernised Russia from the illiterate, peasant society characteristic of monarchy to the literate, socialist society of educated farmers and industrial workers. Industrialisation led to a massive urbanisation in the country. Unemployment was virtually eliminated in the country during the 1930s. However, this rapid industrialisation also resulted in the Soviet famine of 1930\u20131933 that killed millions.\nSocial developments in the Soviet Union included the relinquishment of the relaxed social control and allowance of experimentation under Lenin to Stalin's promotion of a rigid and authoritarian society based upon discipline, mixing traditional Russian values with Stalin's interpretation of Marxism. Organised religion was repressed, especially minority religious groups. Education was transformed. Under Lenin, the education system allowed relaxed discipline in schools that became based upon Marxist theory, but Stalin reversed this in 1934 with a conservative approach taken with the reintroduction of formal learning, the use of examinations and grades, the assertion of full authority of the teacher and the introduction of school uniforms. Art and culture became strictly regulated under the principles of socialist realism and Russian traditions that Stalin admired were allowed to continue.\nForeign policy in the Soviet Union from 1929 to 1941 resulted in substantial changes in the Soviet Union's approach to its foreign policy. In 1933, the Marxist\u2013Leninist geopolitical perspective was that the Soviet Union was surrounded by capitalist and anti-communist enemies. As a result, the election of Adolf Hitler and his Nazi Party government in Germany initially caused the Soviet Union to sever diplomatic relations that had been established in the 1920s. In 1938, Stalin accommodated the Nazis and the anti-communist West by not defending Czechoslovakia, allowing Hitler's threat of pre-emptive war for the Sudetenland to annex the land and \"rescue the oppressed German peoples\" living in Czecho.\nTo challenge Nazi Germany's bid for European empire and hegemony, Stalin promoted anti-fascist front organisations to encourage European socialists and democrats to join the Soviet communists to fight throughout Nazi-occupied Europe, creating agreements with France to challenge Germany. After Germany and Britain signed the Munich Agreement (29 September 1938) which allowed the German occupation of Czechoslovakia (1938\u20131945), Stalin adopted pro-German policies for the Soviet Union's dealings with Nazi Germany. In 1939, the Soviet Union and Nazi Germany agreed to the Treaty of Non-aggression between Germany and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics (Molotov\u2013Ribbentrop Pact, 23 August 1939) and to jointly invade and partition Poland, by way of which Nazi Germany started the Second World War (1 September 1939).\nIn the 1941\u20131942 period of the Great Patriotic War, the German invasion of the Soviet Union (Operation Barbarossa, 22 June 1941) was ineffectively opposed by the Red Army, who were poorly led, ill-trained and under-equipped. As a result, they fought poorly and suffered great losses of soldiers (killed, wounded and captured). The weakness of the Red Army was partly consequence of the Great Purge (1936\u20131938) of senior officers and career soldiers whom Stalin considered politically unreliable. Strategically, the Wehrmacht's extensive and effective attack threatened the territorial integrity of the Soviet Union and the political integrity of Stalin's model of a communist state, when the Nazis were initially welcomed as liberators by the anti-communist and nationalist populations in the Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic, the Georgian Soviet Socialist Republic and the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic.\nThe anti-Soviet nationalists' collaboration with the Nazi's lasted until the and the began their killings of the Jewish populations, the local communists, the civil and community leaders\u2014the Holocaust meant to realise the Nazi German colonisation of Bolshevik Russia. In response, Stalin ordered the Red Army to fight a total war against the Germanic invaders who would exterminate Slavic Russia. Hitler's attack against the Soviet Union (Nazi Germany's erstwhile ally) realigned Stalin's political priorities, from the repression of internal enemies to the existential defence against external attack. The pragmatic Stalin then entered the Soviet Union to the Grand Alliance, a common front against the Axis powers (Nazi Germany, Fascist Italy and the Empire of Japan).\nIn the continental European countries occupied by the Axis powers, the native communist party usually led the armed resistance (guerrilla warfare and urban guerrilla warfare) against fascist military occupation. In Mediterranean Europe, the communist Yugoslav Partisans led by Josip Broz Tito effectively resisted the German Nazi and Italian Fascist occupation. In the 1943\u20131944 period, the Yugoslav Partisans liberated territories with Red Army assistance and established the communist political authority that became the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. To end the Japanese occupation of China in continental Asia, Stalin ordered Mao Zedong and the Chinese Communist Party to temporarily cease the Chinese Civil War (1927\u20131949) against Chiang Kai-shek and the anti-communist Kuomintang as the Second United Front in the Second Sino-Japanese War (1937\u20131945).\nIn 1943, the Red Army began to repel the Nazi invasion of the Soviet Union, especially at the Battle of Stalingrad (23 August 1942 \u2013 2 February 1943) and at the Battle of Kursk (5 July \u2013 23 August 1943). The Red Army then repelled the Nazi and Fascist occupation armies from Eastern Europe until the Red Army decisively defeated Nazi Germany in the Berlin Strategic Offensive Operation (16 April\u20132 May 1945). On concluding the Great Patriotic War (1941\u20131945), the Soviet Union was a military superpower with a say in determining the geopolitical order of the world. Apart from the failed Third Period policy in the early 1930s, Marxist\u2013Leninists played an important role in anti-fascist resistance movements, with the Soviet Union contributing to the Allied victory in World War II. In accordance with the three-power Yalta Agreement (4\u201311 February 1945), the Soviet Union purged native fascist collaborators and these in collaboration with the Axis Powers from the Eastern European countries occupied by the Axis Powers and installed native Marxist\u2013Leninist governments.\nCold War, de-Stalinisation and Maoism (1944\u20131953).\nUpon Allied victory concluding the Second World War (1939\u20131945), the members of the Grand Alliance resumed their pre-war geopolitical rivalries and ideological tensions which disunity broke their anti-fascist wartime alliance through the concept of totalitarianism into the anti-communist Western Bloc and the Marxist\u2013Leninist Eastern Bloc. The renewed competition for geopolitical hegemony resulted in the bi-polar Cold War (1947\u20131991), a protracted state of tension (military and diplomatic) between the United States and the Soviet Union which often threatened a Soviet\u2013American nuclear war, but it usually featured proxy wars in the Third World. With the end of the Grand Alliance and the start of the Cold War, anti-fascism became part of both the official ideology and language of communist states, especially in East Germany. \"Fascist\" and \"anti-fascism\", with the latter used to mean a general anti-capitalist struggle against the Western world and NATO, became epithets widely used by Marxist\u2013Leninists to smear their opponents, including democratic socialists, libertarian socialists, social democrats and other anti-Stalinist leftists.\nThe events that precipitated the Cold War in Europe were the Soviet and Yugoslav, Bulgarian and Albanian military interventions to the Greek Civil War (1944\u20131949) on behalf of the Communist Party of Greece; and the Berlin Blockade (1948\u20131949) by the Soviet Union. The event that precipitated the Cold War in continental Asia was the resumption of the Chinese Civil War (1927\u20131949) fought between the anti-communist Kuomintang and the Chinese Communist Party. After military defeat exiled Generalissimo Chiang Kai-shek and his Kuomintang nationalist government to Formosa island (Taiwan), Mao Zedong established the People's Republic of China on 1 October 1949.\nIn the late 1940s, the geopolitics of the Eastern Bloc countries under Soviet predominance featured an official-and-personal style of socialist diplomacy that failed Stalin and Tito when Tito refused to subordinating Yugoslavia to the Soviet Union. In 1948, circumstance and cultural personality aggravated the matter into the Yugoslav\u2013Soviet split (1948\u20131955) that resulted from Tito's rejection of Stalin's demand to subordinate the Federal People's Republic of Yugoslavia to the geopolitical agenda (economic and military) of the Soviet Union, i.e. Tito at Stalin's disposal. Stalin punished Tito's refusal by denouncing him as an ideological revisionist of Marxism\u2013Leninism; by denouncing Yugoslavia's practice of Titoism as socialism deviated from the cause of world communism; and by expelling the Communist Party of Yugoslavia from the Communist Information Bureau (Cominform). The break from the Eastern Bloc allowed the development of a socialism with Yugoslav characteristics which allowed doing business with the capitalist West to develop the socialist economy and the establishment of Yugoslavia's diplomatic and commercial relations with countries of the Eastern Bloc and the Western Bloc. Yugoslavia's international relations matured into the Non-Aligned Movement (1961) of countries without political allegiance to any power bloc.\nAt the death of Stalin in 1953, Nikita Khrushchev became leader of the Soviet Union and of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union and then consolidated an anti-Stalinist government. In a secret meeting at the 20th Congress of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, Khrushchev denounced Stalin and Stalinism in the speech \"On the Cult of Personality and Its Consequences\" (25 February 1956) in which he specified and condemned Stalin's dictatorial excesses and abuses of power such as the Great purge (1936\u20131938) and the cult of personality. Khrushchev introduced the de-Stalinisation of the party and of the Soviet Union. He realised this with the dismantling of the Gulag archipelago of forced-labour camps and freeing the prisoners as well as allowing Soviet civil society greater political freedom of expression, especially for public intellectuals of the intelligentsia such as the novelist Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn, whose literature obliquely criticised Stalin and the Stalinist police state. De-Stalinisation also ended Stalin's national-purpose policy of socialism in one country and was replaced with proletarian internationalism, by way of which Khrushchev re-committed the Soviet Union to permanent revolution to realise world communism. In that geopolitical vein, Khrushchev presented de-Stalinisation as the restoration of Leninism as the state ideology of the Soviet Union.\nIn the 1950s, the de-Stalinisation of the Soviet Union was ideological bad news for the People's Republic of China because Soviet and Russian interpretations and applications of Leninism and orthodox Marxism contradicted the Sinified Marxism\u2013Leninism of Mao Zedong\u2014his Chinese adaptations of Stalinist interpretation and praxis for establishing socialism in China. To realise that leap of Marxist faith in the development of Chinese socialism, the Chinese Communist Party developed Maoism as the official state ideology. As the specifically Chinese development of Marxism\u2013Leninism, Maoism illuminated the cultural differences between the European-Russian and the Asian-Chinese interpretations and practical applications of Marxism\u2013Leninism in each country. The political differences then provoked geopolitical, ideological and nationalist tensions, which derived from the different stages of development, between the urban society of the industrialised Soviet Union and the agricultural society of the pre-industrial China. The theory versus praxis arguments escalated to theoretic disputes about Marxist\u2013Leninist revisionism and provoked the Sino-Soviet split (1956\u20131966) and the two countries broke their international relations (diplomatic, political, cultural and economic). China's Great Leap Forward, an idealistic massive reform project, resulted in an estimated 15 to 55 million deaths between 1959 and 1961, mostly from starvation.\nIn Eastern Asia, the Cold War produced the Korean War (1950\u20131953), the first proxy war between the Eastern Bloc and the Western Bloc, resulted from dual origins, namely the nationalist Koreans' post-war resumption of their Korean Civil War and the imperial war for regional hegemony sponsored by the United States and the Soviet Union. The international response to the North Korean invasion of South Korea was realised by the United Nations Security Council, who voted for war despite the absent Soviet Union and authorised an international military expedition to intervene, expel the northern invaders from the south of Korea and restore the geopolitical \"status quo ante\" of the Soviet and American division of Korea at the 38th Parallel of global latitude. Consequent to Chinese military intervention in behalf of North Korea, the magnitude of the infantry warfare reached operational and geographic stalemate (July 1951 \u2013 July 1953). Afterwards, the shooting war was ended with the Korean Armistice Agreement (27 July 1953); and the superpower Cold War in Asia then resumed as the Korean Demilitarised Zone.\nConsequent to the Sino-Soviet split, the pragmatic China established politics of d\u00e9tente with the United States in an effort to publicly challenge the Soviet Union for leadership of the international Marxist\u2013Leninist movement. Mao Zedong's pragmatism permitted geopolitical rapprochement and eventually facilitated President Richard Nixon's 1972 visit to China which subsequently ended the policy of the existence to Two Chinas when the United States sponsored the People's Republic of China to replace the Republic of China (Taiwan) as the representative of the Chinese people at the United Nations. In the due course of Sino-American rapprochement, China also assumed membership in the Security Council of the United Nations. In the post-Mao period of Sino-American d\u00e9tente, the Deng Xiaoping government (1982\u20131987) affected policies of economic liberalisation that allowed continual growth for the Chinese economy. The ideological justification is socialism with Chinese characteristics, the Chinese adaptation of Marxism\u2013Leninism.\nThird World conflicts (1954\u20131979).\nCommunist revolution erupted in the Americas in this period, including revolutions in Bolivia, Cuba, El Salvador, Grenada, Nicaragua, Peru and Uruguay. The Cuban Revolution (1953\u20131959) led by Fidel Castro and Che Guevara deposed the military dictatorship (1952\u20131959) of Fulgencio Batista and established the Republic of Cuba, a state formally recognised by the Soviet Union. In response, the United States launched a coup against the Castro government in 1961. However, the CIA's unsuccessful Bay of Pigs invasion (17 April 1961) by anti-communist Cuban exiles impelled the Republic of Cuba to side with the Soviet Union in the geopolitics of the bipolar Cold War. The Cuban Missile Crisis (22\u201328 October 1962) occurred when the United States opposed Cuba being armed with nuclear missiles by the Soviet Union. After a stalemate confrontation, the United States and the Soviet Union jointly resolved the nuclear-missile crisis by respectively removing United States missiles from Turkey and Italy and Soviet missiles from Cuba.\nBoth Bolivia, Canada and Uruguay faced Marxist\u2013Leninist revolution in the 1960s and 1970s. In Bolivia, this included Che Guevara as a leader until being killed there by government forces. In 1970, the October Crisis (5 October \u2013 28 December 1970) occurred in Canada, a brief revolution in the province of Quebec, where the actions of the Marxist\u2013Leninist and separatist Quebec Liberation Front (FLQ) featured the kidnap of James Cross, the British Trade Commissioner in Canada; and the killing of Pierre Laporte, the Quebec government minister. The political manifesto of the FLQ condemned English-Canadian imperialism in French Quebec and called for an independent, socialist Quebec. The Canadian government's response included the suspension of civil liberties in Quebec and compelled the FLQ leaders' flight to Cuba. Uruguay faced Marxist\u2013Leninist revolution from the Tupamaros movement from the 1960s to the 1970s.\nIn 1979, the Sandinista National Liberation Front (FSLN) led by Daniel Ortega won the Nicaraguan Revolution (1961\u20131990) against the government of Anastasio Somoza Debayle (1 December 1974 \u2013 17 July 1979) to establish a socialist Nicaragua. Within months, the government of Ronald Reagan sponsored the counter-revolutionary Contras in the secret Contra War (1979\u20131990) against the Sandinista government. In 1989, the Contra War concluded with the signing of the Tela Accord at the port of Tela, Honduras. The Tela Accord required the subsequent, voluntary demobilisation of the Contra guerrilla armies and the FSLN army. In 1990, a second national election installed to government a majority of non-Sandinista political parties, to whom the FSLN handed political power. Since 2006, the FSLN has returned to government, winning every legislative and presidential election in the process (2006, 2011 and 2016).\nThe Salvadoran Civil War (1979\u20131992) featured the popularly supported Farabundo Mart\u00ed National Liberation Front, an organisation of left-wing parties fighting against the right-wing military government of El Salvador. In 1983, the United States invasion of Grenada (25\u201329 October 1983) thwarted the assumption of power by the elected government of the New Jewel Movement (1973\u20131983), a Marxist\u2013Leninist vanguard party led by Maurice Bishop.\nIn Asia, the Vietnam War (1955\u20131975) was the second East\u2013West war fought during the Cold War (1947\u20131991). In the First Indochina War (1946\u20131954), the communist Vi\u1ec7t Minh led by Ho Chi Minh defeated the French colonial re-establishment and its native associated state in Vietnam. To fill the geopolitical power vacuum caused by French defeat in southeast Asia, Vietnam was divided into South Vietnam and North Vietnam in 1954, communists took power in the North and pro-French government took power in the South, and the United States then became the Western power supporting the Republic of Vietnam (1955\u20131975) in the South headed by president Ngo Dinh Diem, an anti-communist politician. China and the Soviet Union helped the North. Despite possessing military superiority, the United States failed to safeguard South Vietnam from the guerrilla warfare of the Viet Cong sponsored by North Vietnam. On 30 January 1968, North Vietnam launched the Tet Offensive (the General Offensive and Uprising of Tet Mau Than, 1968). Although a military failure for the guerrillas and the army, it was a successful psychological warfare operation that decisively turned international public opinion against the United States intervention to the Vietnamese civil war, with the military withdrawal of the United States from Vietnam in 1973 and the subsequent and consequent Fall of Saigon to the North Vietnamese army on 30 April 1975.\nWith the end of the Vietnam War, Vietnam was reunited under Marxist\u2013Leninist government in 1976. Marxist\u2013Leninist regimes were also established in Vietnam's neighbour states. This included Kampuchea and Laos. Consequent to the Cambodian Civil War (1968\u20131975), a coalition composed of Prince Norodom Sihanouk (1941\u20131955), the native Cambodian Marxist\u2013Leninists and the Maoist Khmer Rouge (1951\u20131999) led by Pol Pot established Democratic Kampuchea (1975\u20131982), a communist state led by Angkar that featured class warfare to restructure the society of old Cambodia and to be effected and realised with the abolishment of money and private property, the outlawing of religion, the killing of the intelligentsia and compulsory manual labour for the middle classes by way of death-squad state terrorism. To eliminate Western cultural influence, Kampuchea expelled all foreigners and effected the destruction of the urban bourgeoisie of old Cambodia, first by displacing the population of the capital city, Phnom Penh; and then by displacing the national populace to work farmlands to increase food supplies. Meanwhile, the Khmer Rouge purged Kampuchea of internal enemies (social class and political, cultural and ethnic) at the Killing Fields, the scope of which became crimes against humanity for the deaths of 2,700,000 people by mass murder and genocide. That social restructuring of Cambodia into Kampuchea included attacks against the Vietnamese ethnic minority of the country which aggravated the historical, ethnic rivalries between the Viet and the Khmer peoples. Beginning in September 1977, Kampuchea and the Socialist Republic of Vietnam continually engaged in border clashes. In 1978, Vietnam invaded Kampuchea and captured Phnom Penh in January 1979, deposed the Maoist Khmer Rouge from government by the proclamation of the People's Republic of Kampuchea and established the Cambodia Liberation Front for National Renewal as the government of Cambodia, the Kampuchean People's Revolutionary Party (KPRP) also came to power in January 1979.\nA new front of Marxist\u2013Leninist revolution erupted in Africa between 1961 and 1987. Angola, Benin, Congo, Ethiopia, Mozambique and Somalia became communist states governed by their respective native peoples during the 1968\u20131980 period. Marxist\u2013Leninist guerrillas fought the Portuguese Colonial War (1961\u20131974) in three countries, namely Angola, Guinea-Bissau and Mozambique. In Ethiopia, a Marxist\u2013Leninist revolution deposed the monarchy of Emperor Haile Selassie (1930\u20131974) and established the Derg government (1974\u20131987) of the Provisional Military Government of Socialist Ethiopia. In Rhodesia (1965\u20131979), Robert Mugabe led the Zimbabwe War of Liberation (1964\u20131979) that deposed white-minority rule and then established the Republic of Zimbabwe. In the Seychelles, France-Albert Ren\u00e9 ruled over a Marxist\u2013Leninist one party system from 1977 to 1991. In the Gambia, Kukoi Samba Sanyang initiated a Marxist\u2013Leninist coup in 1981 (the initiative failed and he turned to mercenary activity abroad). In 1983, in Upper Volta, Thomas Sankara established a military and peasant based version of auto-centered Marxism\u2013Leninism. Sankara refused aid and also refused to pay the country's foreign debts. He renamed Upper Volta 'Burkina Faso' (the land of upright people). His former friend and second in command, Blaise Compaor\u00e9, ordered Sankara's murder in 1987, ending the Burkinabe social experiment.\nIn 1986, Yoweri Museveni's NRM force established \"the Movement system,\" a political system where elections are held but no political parties are allowed to exist. \nIn Apartheid South Africa (1948\u20131994), the Afrikaner government of the Nationalist Party caused much geopolitical tension between the United States and the Soviet Union because of the Afrikaners' violent social control and political repression of the black and coloured populations of South Africa exercised under the guise of anti-communism and national security. The Soviet Union officially supported the overthrow of apartheid while the West and the United States in particular maintained official neutrality on the matter. In the 1976\u20131977 period of the Cold War, the United States and other Western countries found it morally untenable to politically support Apartheid South Africa, especially when the Afrikaner government killed 176 people (students and adults) in the police suppression of the Soweto uprising (June 1976), a political protest against Afrikaner cultural imperialism upon the non-white peoples of South Africa, specifically the imposition of the Germanic language of Afrikaans as the standard language for education which black South Africans were required to speak when addressing white people and Afrikaners; and the police assassination of Stephen Biko (September 1977), a politically moderate leader of the internal resistance to apartheid in South Africa.\nUnder President Jimmy Carter, the West joined the Soviet Union and others in enacting sanctions against weapons trade and weapons-grade material to South Africa. However, forceful actions by the United States against Apartheid South Africa were diminished under President Reagan as the Reagan administration feared the rise of revolution in South Africa as had happened in Zimbabwe against white minority rule. In 1979, the Soviet Union intervened in Afghanistan to establish a communist state (existed until 1992), although the act was seen as an invasion by the West which responded to the Soviet military actions by boycotting the Moscow Olympics of 1980 and providing clandestine support to the Mujahideen, including Osama bin Laden, as a means to challenge the Soviet Union. The war became a Soviet equivalent of the Vietnam War to the United States and it remained a stalemate throughout the 1980s.\nReform and collapse of Marxism-Leninism in Eastern Eurasia and elsewhere (1979\u20131991).\nSocial resistance to the policies of Marxist\u2013Leninist regimes in Eastern Europe accelerated in strength with the rise of the Solidarity, the first non-Marxist\u2013Leninist controlled trade union in the Warsaw Pact that was formed in the People's Republic of Poland in 1980.\nIn 1985, Mikhail Gorbachev rose to power in the Soviet Union and began policies of radical political reform involving political liberalisation, called perestroika and glasnost. Gorbachev's policies were designed at dismantling authoritarian elements of the state that were developed by Stalin, aiming for a return to a supposed ideal communist state that retained one-party structure while allowing the democratic election of competing candidates within the party for political office. Gorbachev also aimed to seek d\u00e9tente with the West and end the Cold War that was no longer economically sustainable to be pursued by the Soviet Union. The Soviet Union and the United States under President George H. W. Bush joined in pushing for the dismantlement of apartheid and oversaw the dismantlement of South African colonial rule over Namibia.\nMeanwhile, the Central and Eastern European communist states politically deteriorated in response to the success of the Polish Solidarity movement and the possibility of Gorbachev-style political liberalisation. In 1989, revolts began across Central and Eastern Europe and China against Marxist\u2013Leninist regimes. In China, the government refused to negotiate with student protestors, resulting in the 1989 Tiananmen Square massacre that stopped the revolts by force. The Pan-European Picnic, which was based on an idea by Otto von Habsburg to test the reaction of the Soviet Union, then triggered a peaceful chain reaction in August 1989, at the end of which there was no longer East Germany and the Iron Curtain and the Marxist\u2013Leninist Eastern Bloc had collapsed. On the one hand, as a result of the Pan-European Picnic, the Marxist\u2013Leninist rulers of the Eastern Bloc did not act decisively, but cracks appeared between them and on the other hand the media-informed Central and Eastern European population now noticed a steady loss of power in their governments.\nThe revolts culminated with the revolt in East Germany against the Marxist\u2013Leninist regime of Erich Honecker and demands for the Berlin Wall to be torn down. The event in East Germany developed into a popular mass revolt with sections of the Berlin Wall being torn down and East and West Berliners uniting. Gorbachev's refusal to use Soviet forces based in East Germany to suppress the revolt was seen as a sign that the Cold War had ended. Honecker was pressured to resign from office and the new government committed itself to reunification with West Germany. The Marxist\u2013Leninist regime of Nicolae Ceau\u0219escu in Romania was forcefully overthrown in 1989 and Ceau\u0219escu was executed. Almost Eastern Bloc regimes also fell during the Revolutions of 1989 (1988\u20131993).\nUnrest and eventual collapse of Marxism\u2013Leninism also occurred in Yugoslavia, although for different reasons than those of the Warsaw Pact. The death of Josip Broz Tito in 1980 and the subsequent vacuum of strong leadership amidst an economic crisis allowed the rise of rival ethnic nationalism in the multinational country. The first leader to exploit such nationalism for political purposes was Slobodan Milo\u0161evi\u0107, who used it to seize power as president of Serbia and demanded concessions to Serbia and Serbs by the other republics in the Yugoslav federation. This resulted in a surge of both Croatian nationalism and Slovene nationalism in response and the collapse of the League of Communists of Yugoslavia in 1990, the victory of nationalists in multi-party elections in most of Yugoslavia's constituent republics and eventually civil war between the various nationalities beginning in 1991. Yugoslavia was dissolved in 1992.\nThe Soviet Union itself collapsed between 1990 and 1991, with a rise of secessionist nationalism and a political power dispute between Gorbachev and Boris Yeltsin, the new leader of the Russian Federation. With the Soviet Union collapsing, Gorbachev prepared the country to become a loose federation of independent states called the Commonwealth of Independent States. Hardline Marxist\u2013Leninist leaders in the military reacted to Gorbachev's policies with the August Coup of 1991 in which hardline Marxist\u2013Leninist military leaders overthrew Gorbachev and seized control of the government. This regime only lasted briefly as widespread popular opposition erupted in street protests and refused to submit. Gorbachev was restored to power, but the various Soviet republics were now set for independence. On 25 December 1991, Gorbachev officially announced the dissolution of the Soviet Union, ending the existence of the world's first Marxist\u2013Leninist-led state.\nPost-Cold War era (1991\u2013present).\nSince the fall of the Eastern European Marxist\u2013Leninist regimes, the Soviet Union and a variety of African Marxist\u2013Leninist regimes in 1991, only a few Marxist\u2013Leninist parties remained in power. This include China, Cuba, Laos, and Vietnam. Most Marxist\u2013Leninist communist parties outside of these nations have fared relatively poorly in elections, although other parties have remained or became a relative strong force. In Russia, the Communist Party of the Russian Federation has remained a significant political force, winning the 1995 Russian legislative election, almost winning the 1996 Russian presidential election, amid allegations of United States foreign electoral intervention, and generally remaining the second most popular party. In Ukraine, the Communist Party of Ukraine has also exerted influence and governed the country after the 1994 Ukrainian parliamentary election and again after the 2006 Ukrainian parliamentary election. The 2014 Ukrainian parliamentary election following the Russo-Ukrainian War and the annexation of Crimea by the Russian Federation resulted in the loss of its 32 members and no parliamentary representation.\nIn Europe, several Marxist\u2013Leninist parties remain strong. In Cyprus, Dimitris Christofias of AKEL won the 2008 Cypriot presidential election. AKEL has consistently been the first and third most popular party, winning the 1970, 1981, 2001, and 2006 legislative elections. In the Czech Republic and Portugal, the Communist Party of Bohemia and Moravia and the Portuguese Communist Party have been the second and fourth most popular parties until the 2017 and 2009 legislative elections, respectively. From 2017 to 2021, the Communist Party of Bohemia and Moravia supported the ANO 2011\u2013\u010cSSD minority government while the Portuguese Communist Party has provided confidence and supply along with the Ecologist Party \"The Greens\" and Left Bloc to the Socialist minority government from 2015 to 2019. In Greece, the Communist Party of Greece has led an interim and later national unity government between 1989 and 1990, constantly remaining the third or fourth most popular party. In Moldova, the Party of Communists of the Republic of Moldova won the 2001, 2005, and April 2009 parliamentary elections. The April 2009 Moldovan elections results were protested and the July 2009 Moldovan parliamentary election resulted in the formation of the Alliance for European Integration. Failing to elect the president, the 2020 Moldovan parliamentary election resulted in roughly the same representation in the parliament. According to Ion Marandici, a Moldovan political scientist, the Party of Communists differs from those in other countries because it managed to appeal to the ethnic minorities and the anti-Romanian Moldovans. After tracing the adaptation strategy of the party, he found confirming evidence for five of the factors contributing to its electoral success, already mentioned in the theoretical literature on former Marxist\u2013Leninist parties, namely the economic situation, the weakness of the opponents, the electoral laws, the fragmentation of the political spectrum and the legacy of the old regime. However, Marandici identified seven additional explanatory factors at work in the Moldovan case, namely the foreign support for certain political parties, separatism, the appeal to the ethnic minorities, the alliance-building capacity, the reliance on the Soviet notion of the Moldovan identity, the state-building process and the control over a significant portion of the media. It is due to these seven additional factors that the party managed to consolidate and expand its constituency. In the post-Soviet states, the Party of Communists are the only ones who have been in power for so long and did not change the name of the party.\nIn Asia, a number of Marxist\u2013Leninist regimes and movements continue to exist. The People's Republic of China has continued the agenda of Deng Xiaoping's 1980s reforms by initiating significant privatisation of the national economy. At the same time, no corresponding political liberalisation has occurred as happened in previous years to Eastern European countries. In the early 2010s, the Manmohan Singh-led Indian government depended on the parliamentary support of the Communist Party of India (Marxist) which has led state governments in Kerala, Tripura and West Bengal. However, with the rise of Hindu nationalism, the communists continued to shrink in India and are currently only take power in the state of Kerala. The armed wing of the Communist Party of India (Maoist) has been fighting in the ongoing Naxalite\u2013Maoist insurgency against the government of India since 1967 and is still active in East India. Sri Lanka has had Marxist\u2013Leninist ministers in their national governments such as Janatha Vimukthi Peramuna and National People's Power with its Marxist leader Anura Kumara Dissanayake came to power in 2024. Maoist rebels in Nepal engaged in a civil war from 1996 to 2006 that managed to topple the monarchy there and create a republic. Communist Party of Nepal (Unified Marxist\u2013Leninist) leader Man Mohan Adhikari briefly became prime minister and national leader from 1994 to 1995 and the Maoist guerrilla leader Prachanda was elected prime minister by the Constituent Assembly of Nepal in 2008. Prachanda has since been deposed as prime minister, leading the Maoists, who consider Prachanda's removal to be unjust, to abandon their legalistic approach and return to their street actions and militancy and to lead sporadic general strikes using their substantial influence on the Nepalese labour movement. These actions have oscillated between mild and intense. In the Philippines, the Maoist-oriented Communist Party of the Philippines, through its armed wing the New People's Army, has since 1968 sought to overthrow oligarchic state structures in the Philippines; under the administration, however, of an otherwise-sympathetic Rodrigo Duterte, its armed attacks were greatly diminished. By contrast, the original Marxist\u2013Leninist party founded in 1930 has preferred nonviolent parliamentary struggle through participation in general elections.\nIn Africa, several communist states reformed themselves and maintained power. In South Africa, the South African Communist Party is a member of the Tripartite alliance alongside the African National Congress and the Congress of South African Trade Unions. The Economic Freedom Fighters is a pan-African, Marxist\u2013Leninist party founded in 2013 by expelled former president of the African National Congress Youth League Julius Malema and his allies. In Zimbabwe, former President Robert Mugabe of the ZANU\u2013PF, the country's long standing leader, was a professed Marxist\u2013Leninist.\nIn the Americas, there have been several insurgencies and Marxist\u2013Leninist movements. In the United States, there are several Marxist\u2013Leninist parties, such as the Communist Party USA and the Party for Socialism and Liberation. In South America, Colombia has been in the midst of a civil war which has been waged since 1964 between the Colombian government and aligned right-wing paramilitaries against two Marxist\u2013Leninist guerrilla groups, namely the National Liberation Army and Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia. In Peru, there has been an internal conflict between the Peruvian government and Marxist\u2013Leninist\u2013Maoist militants including the Shining Path. The 2021 Peruvian general election was won by presidential candidate Pedro Castillo on the Marxist\u2013Leninist program put forward by Free Peru.\nIdeology.\nPolitical system.\nMarxism\u2013Leninism involves the creation of a one-party state led by a communist party, as a means to develop socialism and then communism. The communist party is the supreme political institution of the state. Marxism\u2013Leninism asserts that the people's interests are fully represented through the communist party and other state institutions. In the words of historians Silvio Pons and Robert Service, elections are \"generally not competitive, with voters having no choice or only a strictly limited choice\". Generally, when alternative candidates have been allowed to stand for election, they have not been allowed to promote very different political views. In communist states, elections are generally held for all positions at all levels of government. In most states, this has taken the form of directly electing representatives, although in some states such as People's Republic of China, the Republic of Cuba and the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, this also included indirect elections, such as deputies being elected by deputies as the next lower level of government.\nCollectivism and egalitarianism.\nSoviet collectivism and egalitarianism were an important part of Marxist\u2013Leninist ideology in the Soviet Union, where it played a key part in forming the New Soviet man, willingly sacrificing their life for the good of the collective. Terms such as \"collective\" and \"the masses\" were frequently used in the official language and praised in agitprop literature by Vladimir Mayakovsky (\"Who needs a \"1\"\") and Bertolt Brecht (\"The Decision\" and \"Man Equals Man\").\nThe fact that Marxist\u2013Leninist governments confiscated private businesses and landholdings radically increased income and property equality in practice. Income inequality dropped in Russia under the rule of the Soviet Union, then rebounded after its demise in 1991. It also dropped rapidly in the Eastern Bloc after the Soviet takeover of Eastern Europe at the end of World War II. Similarly, inequality went back up after the collapse of the Soviet system. According to Paul Hollander, this was one of the features of Communist states that was so attractive to egalitarian Western intellectuals that they quietly justified the killing of millions of capitalists, landowners and supposedly wealthy kulaks in order to achieve this equality. According to Walter Scheidel, they were correct to the extent that historically only violent shocks have resulted in major reductions in economic inequality.\nMarxist\u2013Leninists respond to this type of criticism by highlighting the ideological differences in the concept of freedom and liberty. It was stated that \"Marxist\u2013Leninist norms disparaged \"laissez-faire\" individualism (as when housing is determined by one's ability to pay)\", and condemned \"wide variations in personal wealth as the West has not\" whilst emphasizing equality, by which they mean \"free education and medical care, little disparity in housing or salaries, and so forth.\" When asked to comment on the claim that former citizens of communist states now enjoy increased freedoms, Heinz Kessler, former East German Minister of National Defence, replied: \"Millions of people in Eastern Europe are now free from employment, free from safe streets, free from health care, free from social security.\"\nEconomy.\nThe goal of Marxist\u2013Leninist political economy is the emancipation of people from the dehumanisation caused by mechanistic work that is psychologically alienating, without work\u2013life balance, which is performed in exchange for wages that give limited financial-access to the material necessities of life, such as food and shelter. That personal and societal emancipation from poverty (material necessity) would maximise individual liberty by enabling men and women to pursue their interests and innate talents (artistic, industrial and intellectual) whilst working by choice, without the economic coercion of poverty. In the communist society of upper-stage economic development, the elimination of alienating labour (mechanistic work) depends upon the developments of high technology that improve the means of production and the means of distribution. To meet the material needs of a socialist society, the state uses a planned economy to co-ordinate the means of production and of distribution to supply and deliver the goods and services required throughout society and the national economy. The state serves as a safeguard for the ownership and as the coordinator of production through a universal economic plan.\nFor the purpose of reducing waste and increasing efficiency, scientific planning replaces market mechanisms and price mechanisms as the guiding principle of the economy. The state's huge purchasing power replaces the role of market forces, with macroeconomic equilibrium not being achieved through market forces but by economic planning based on scientific assessment. The wages of the worker are determined according to the type of skills and the type of work he or she can perform within the national economy. Moreover, the economic value of the goods and services produced is based upon their use value (as material objects) and not upon the cost of production (value) or the exchange value (marginal utility). The profit motive as a driving force for production is replaced by social obligation to fulfil the economic plan. Wages are set and differentiated according to skill and intensity of work. While socially utilised means of production are under public control, personal belongings or property of a personal nature that does not involve mass production of goods remains unaffected by the state.\nBecause Marxism\u2013Leninism has historically been the state ideology of countries who were economically undeveloped prior to socialist revolution, or whose economies were nearly obliterated by war such as the German Democratic Republic and the Socialist Republic of Vietnam, the primary goal before achieving communism was the development of socialism in itself. Such was the case in the Soviet Union, where the economy was largely agrarian and urban industry was in a primitive stage. To develop socialism, the Soviet Union underwent rapid industrialisation with pragmatic programs of social engineering that transplanted peasant populations to the cities, where they were educated and trained as industrial workers and then became the workforce of the new factories and industries. Similarly, the farmer populations worked the system of collective farms to grow food to feed the industrial workers in the industrialised cities. Since the mid-1930s, Marxism\u2013Leninism has advocated an austere social-equality based upon asceticism, egalitarianism, and self-sacrifice. In the 1920s, the Bolshevik party semi-officially allowed some limited, small-scale wage inequality to boost labour productivity in the economy of the Soviet Union. These reforms were promoted to encourage materialism and acquisitiveness in order to stimulate economic growth. This pro-consumerist policy has been advanced on the lines of industrial pragmatism as it advances economic progress through bolstering industrialisation.\nIn the economic praxis of Bolshevik Russia, there was a defining difference of political economy between socialism and communism. Lenin explained their conceptual similarity to Marx's descriptions of the lower-stage and the upper-stage of economic development, namely that immediately after a proletarian revolution in the socialist lower-stage society the practical economy must be based upon the individual labour contributed by men and women, and paid labour would be the basis of the communist upper-stage society that has realised the social precept of the slogan \"From each according to his ability, to each according to his needs.\"\nSociety.\nMarxism\u2013Leninism supports universal social welfare. The communist state provides for the national welfare with universal healthcare, free public education (academic, technical and professional) and the social benefits (childcare and continuing education) necessary to increase the productivity of the workers and the socialist economy to develop a communist society. As part of the planned economy, the communist state is meant to develop the proletariat's universal education (academic and technical) and their class consciousness (political education) to facilitate their contextual understanding of the historical development of communism as presented in Marx's theory of history.\nMarxism\u2013Leninism supports women's liberation and ending the exploitation of women. Marxist\u2013Leninist policy on family law has typically involved the elimination of the political power of the bourgeoisie, the abolition of private property and an education that teaches citizens to abide by a disciplined and self-fulfilling lifestyle dictated by the social norms of communism as a means to establish a new social order. The judicial reformation of family law eliminates patriarchy from the legal system. This facilitates the political emancipation of women from traditional social inferiority and economic exploitation. The reformation of civil law made marriage secular into a \"free and voluntary union\" between persons who are social-and-legal equals, facilitated divorce, legalised abortion, eliminated bastardy (\"illegitimate children\"), and voided the political power of the bourgeoisie and the private property-status of the means of production. The educational system imparts the social norms for a self-disciplined and self-fulfilling way of life, by which the socialist citizens establish the social order necessary for realising a communist society. With the advent of a classless society and the abolition of private property, society collectively assume many of the roles traditionally assigned to mothers and wives, with women becoming integrated into industrial work. This has been promoted by Marxism\u2013Leninism as the means to achieve women's emancipation.\nMarxist\u2013Leninist cultural policy modernises social relations among citizens by eliminating the capitalist value system of traditionalist conservatism, by which Tsarism classified, divided and controlled people with stratified social classes without any socio-economic mobility. It focuses upon modernisation and distancing society from the past, the bourgeoisie and the old intelligentsia. The socio-cultural changes required for establishing a communist society are realised with education and agitprop (agitation and propaganda) which reinforce communal and communist values. The modernisation of educational and cultural policies eliminates the societal atomisation, including anomie and social alienation, caused by cultural backwardness. Marxism\u2013Leninism develops the New Soviet man, an educated and cultured citizen possessed of a proletarian class consciousness who is oriented towards the social cohesion necessary for developing a communist society as opposed to the antithetic bourgeois individualist associated with social atomisation.\nInternational relations.\nMarxism\u2013Leninism aims to create an international communist society. It opposes colonialism and imperialism and advocates decolonisation and anti-colonial forces. It supports anti-fascist international alliances and has advocated the creation of popular fronts between communist and non-communist anti-fascists against strong fascist movements. This Marxist\u2013Leninist approach to international relations derives from the analyses (political, economic, sociological and geopolitical) that Lenin presented in the essay \"Imperialism, the Highest Stage of Capitalism\" (1917). Extrapolating from five philosophical bases of Marxism, namely that human history is the history of class struggle between a ruling class and an exploited class; that capitalism creates antagonistic social classes, i.e. the bourgeois exploiters and the exploited proletariat; that capitalism employs nationalist war to further private economic expansion; that socialism is an economic system that voids social classes through public ownership of the means of production and so will eliminate the economic causes of war; and that once the state (socialist or communist) withers away, so shall international relations wither away because they are projections of national economic forces, Lenin said that the capitalists' exhaustion of domestic sources of investment profit by way of price-fixing trusts and cartels, then prompts the same capitalists to export investment capital to undeveloped countries to finance the exploitation of natural resources and the native populations and to create new markets. That the capitalists' control of national politics ensures the government's military safeguarding of colonial investments and the consequent imperial competition for economic supremacy provokes international wars to protect their national interests.\nIn the vertical perspective (social-class relations) of Marxism\u2013Leninism, the internal and international affairs of a country are a political continuum, not separate realms of human activity. This is the philosophic opposite of the horizontal perspectives (country-to-country) of the liberal and the realist approaches to international relations. Colonial imperialism is the inevitable consequence in the course of economic relations among countries when the domestic price-fixing of monopoly capitalism has voided profitable competition in the capitalist homeland. The ideology of New Imperialism, rationalised as a civilising mission, allowed the exportation of high-profit investment capital to undeveloped countries with uneducated, native populations (sources of cheap labour), plentiful raw materials for exploitation (factors for manufacture) and a colonial market to consume the surplus production which the capitalist homeland cannot consume. The example is the European Scramble for Africa (1881\u20131914) in which imperialism was safeguarded by the national military.\nTo secure the economic and settler colonies, foreign sources of new capital-investment-profit, the imperialist state seeks either political or military control of the limited resources (natural and human). The First World War (1914\u20131918) resulted from such geopolitical conflicts among the empires of Europe over colonial spheres of influence. For the colonised working classes who create the wealth (goods and services), the elimination of war for natural resources (access, control, and exploitation) is resolved by overthrowing the militaristic capitalist state and establishing a socialist state because a peaceful world economy is feasible only by proletarian revolutions that overthrow systems of political economy based upon the exploitation of labour.\nTheology.\nThe Marxist\u2013Leninist worldview is atheist, wherein all human activity results from human volition and not the will of supernatural beings (gods, goddesses and demons) who have direct agency in the public and private affairs of human society. The tenets of the Soviet Union's national policy of Marxist\u2013Leninist atheism originated from the philosophies of Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel (1770\u20131831) and Ludwig Feuerbach (1804\u20131872) as well as that of Karl Marx (1818\u20131883) and Vladimir Lenin (1870\u20131924).\nAs a basis of Marxism\u2013Leninism, the philosophy of materialism (the physical universe exists independently of human consciousness) is applied as dialectical materialism (considered by its proponents a philosophy of science, history and nature) to examine the socio-economic relations among people and things as parts of a dynamic, material world that is unlike the immaterial world of metaphysics. Soviet astrophysicist Vitaly Ginzburg said that ideologically the \"Bolshevik communists were not merely atheists, but, according to Lenin's terminology, militant atheists\" in excluding religion from the social mainstream, from education and from government.\nCriticism.\nGeneral.\nMarxism\u2013Leninism has been broadly criticized, particularly in its Stalinist and Maoist variants, across the political spectrum. Most communist states have been regarded as authoritarian, and some of them have been accused of being totalitarian, especially the Soviet Union under Joseph Stalin, China under Mao Zedong, North Korea under Kim Il Sung, and Romania under Nicolae Ceau\u0219escu. Rival ideologies were persecuted, including dissident leftists, and most elections had only one candidate. According to Daniel Gray, Silvio Pons, and David Martin Walker, Marxist\u2013Leninist regimes have carried out killings and political repression of dissidents and social classes (\"enemies of the people\"), such as the Red Terror and Great Purge in the Soviet Union and the Campaign to Suppress Counterrevolutionaries in China, partly as a result of Marxist\u2013Leninist ideology. According to Gray, they were justified as a means of maintaining \"proletarian power\". According to Gray and Walker, political dissidents were deemed to be \"distorting the true path to communism\". According to Pons, repression of social groups was deemed a necessary part of class struggle against the \"exploiting classes\". In addition, Robert Service stated that mass religious persecution, such as in the Soviet Union and in China, was motivated by Marxist\u2013Leninist atheism.\nAccording to Pons, communist states carried out ethnic cleansing, most notably the forced population transfer in the Soviet Union and the Cambodian genocide, as part of an effort to extend state control by homogenising their populations and removing ethnic groups that maintained their \"cultural, political and economic distinctiveness\". Such states have been accused of genocidal acts in China, Poland, and Ukraine; there is still a debate among scholars whether ideology played a role, to what extent, and whether they meet the legal definition of genocide. For Robert Service, the Soviet Union and China enforced collectivisation, and their widespread use of forced labour in labour camps, such as the Gulag and \"Laogai\", was inherited by Nazi Germany. Although some non-communist states used forced labour, according to Service what was different was \"the dispatch of people to the camps for no reason other than the misfortune of belonging to a suspect social class.\" According to Pons, this was justified by Marxist\u2013Leninist ideology and seen as a means of \"redemption\". According to Service, their economic policies are blamed for causing major famines such as the Holodomor and Great Chinese Famine; however, scholars disagree on the Holodomor genocide question, and Nobel laureate Amartya Sen put the Great Chinese Famine in a global context, stating that lack of democracy was the major culprit and comparing it to other famines in capitalist countries.\nPhilosopher Eric Voegelin stated that Marxism\u2013Leninism is inherently oppressive, writing that the \"Marxian vision dictated the Stalinist outcome not because the communist utopia was inevitable but because it was impossible.\" Criticism like this has itself been criticised for philosophical determinism, i.e. that the negative events in the movement's history were predetermined by their convictions, with historian Robert Vincent Daniels stating that Marxism was used to \"justify Stalinism, but it was no longer allowed to serve either as a policy directive or an explanation of reality\" during Stalin's rule. In contrast, E. Van Ree wrote that Stalin considered himself to be in \"general agreement\" with the classical works of Marxism until his death. Graeme Gill stated that Stalinism was \"not a natural flow-on of earlier developments; [it was a] sharp break resulting from conscious decisions by leading political actors.\" Gill added that \"difficulties with the use of the term reflect problems with the concept of Stalinism itself. The major difficulty is a lack of agreement about what should constitute Stalinism.\" Historians such as Michael Geyer and Sheila Fitzpatrick criticised the focus upon the upper levels of society and the use of Cold War concepts, such as totalitarianism, which have obscured the reality of Marxist\u2013Leninist systems, such as that of the Soviet Union.\nMervyn Matthews criticized Marxism\u2013Leninism for failing to solve poverty, noting that a large number of people in the Soviet Union were still in poverty despite its planned economy.\nThe principle in Marxism\u2013Leninism of one-party state with unitary power and democratic centralism has been argued as leading to authoritarianism.\nLeft-wing criticism.\nMarxism\u2013Leninism has been criticized by other socialists, such as anarchists, communists, democratic socialists, libertarian socialists, Marxists, and social democrats. Anti-Stalinist left and other left-wing critics see it as an example of state capitalism, and have referred to it as a \"red fascism\" contrary to left-wing politics. Anarcho-communists, classical, libertarian, and orthodox Marxists, as well as council and left communists, are critical of Marxism\u2013Leninism, particularly for what they see as its authoritarianism. Polish Marxist Rosa Luxemburg dismissed the Marxist\u2013Leninist idea of a \"vanguard\", stating that a revolution could not be brought about by command. She predicted that once the Bolsheviks had banned multi-party democracy and internal dissent, the \"dictatorship of the proletariat\" would become the dictatorship of a faction, and then of an individual. Trotskyists believe Marxism\u2013Leninism leads to the establishment of a degenerated or deformed workers' state, where the capitalist elite have been replaced by an unaccountable bureaucratic elite and there is no true democracy or workers' control of industry.\nAmerican Marxist Raya Dunayevskaya dismissed Marxism\u2013Leninism as a type of state capitalism because of state ownership of the means of production, and dismissed one-party rule as undemocratic. She further stated that it is neither Marxism nor Leninism but rather a composite ideology that Stalin used to expediently determine what is communism and what is not communism for the countries of the Eastern Bloc. Italian left communist Amadeo Bordiga dismissed Marxism\u2013Leninism as political opportunism that preserved capitalism because of the claim that the exchange of commodities would occur under socialism. He believed that the use of popular front organisations by the Communist International and a political vanguard organised by organic centralism were more effective than a vanguard organised by democratic centralism. Anarcho-communist Peter Kropotkin criticised Marxism\u2013Leninism as centralising and authoritarian.\nOther leftists, including Marxist\u2013Leninists, criticise it for its repressive state actions, while recognising certain advancements, such as egalitarian achievements and modernisation under those states. While Michael Parenti disagrees with blanket condemnations of former Marxist\u2013Leninist countries, he condemned \"Stalin and his autocratic system of rule and believed there were things seriously wrong with existing Soviet society.\", including \"serious problems of labor productivity, industrialization, urbanization, bureaucracy, corruption, and alcoholism. There are production and distribution bottlenecks, plan failures, consumer scarcities, criminal abuses of power, suppression of dissidents, and expressions of alienation among some of the population.\" Parenti further argued that the economies of Eastern European countries and the Soviet Union suffered from \"fatal distortions in their development\" because of \"embargo[s], invasion, devastating wars, and costly arms buildup; excessive bureaucratization and poor incentive systems; lack of administrative initiative and technological innovation; and a repressive political rule that allowed little critical expression and feedback while fostering stagnation and elitism.\"\nIn Western Europe, communist parties, which were still committed to Marxism\u2013Leninism through more democratic means, were part of the initial post-war governments, and even when the Cold War forced many of those countries to remove them from government, such as in Italy, they remained part of the liberal-democratic process. By the 1960s and 1970s, many Western Marxist\u2013Leninists had criticised many of the actions of Communist states, distanced from them, and developed a democratic road to socialism, which became known as Eurocommunism. This development was criticised by both non-Marxist\u2013Leninists and other Marxist\u2013Leninists in the East as amounting to social democracy. With the dissolution of the Soviet Union and the Fall of Communism, there was a split among Marxist\u2013Leninists between those hardline Marxist\u2013Leninists, sometimes referred to in the media as \"neo-Stalinists\", which remained committed to orthodox Marxism\u2013Leninism, and those democratic Marxist\u2013Leninists which continued to work within the liberal-democratic process for a democratic road to socialism, while many other ruling Marxist\u2013Leninist parties became closer to democratic socialist and social democratic parties. Outside Communist states, reformed Marxist\u2013Leninist communist parties have led or been part of left-leaning coalitions, including in the former Eastern Bloc. In Nepal, Marxist\u2013Leninists (CPN UML and Nepal Communist Party) were part of the 1st Nepalese Constituent Assembly, which abolished the monarchy in 2008 and turned the country into a federal liberal-democratic republic, and have democratically shared power with Maoists (CPN Maoist), social democrats (Nepali Congress), and others as part of their People's Multiparty Democracy.\nResponses to criticism.\nMarxist\u2013Leninists respond that there was generally no unemployment in communist states and all citizens were guaranteed housing, schooling, healthcare and public transport at little or no cost. In his critical analysis of communist states, Ellman stated that they compared favorably with Western states in some health indicators such as infant mortality and life expectancy. Philipp Ther wrote that there was a rise in living standards throughout Eastern Bloc countries as the result of modernisation programs under Marxist\u2013Leninist governments. Sen found that several communist states made significant gains in life expectancy and commented \"one thought that is bound to occur is that communism is good for poverty removal.\" Olivia Ball and Paul Gready reported that communist states pressed Western governments to include economic rights in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.\nOthers such as Parenti stated that communist states experienced greater economic development than they would have otherwise, or that their leaders were forced to take harsh measures to defend their countries against the Western Bloc during the Cold War. Parenti wrote that accounts of political repression are exaggerated by anti-communists and that communist party rule provided some human rights such as economic, social, and cultural rights not found under capitalist states, including the rights that everyone is treated equal regardless of education or financial stability; that any citizen can keep a job; or that there is a more efficient and equal distribution of resources. David L. Hoffmann stated that many forms of state interventionism used by Marxist\u2013Leninist governments, including social cataloging, surveillance and internment camps, pre-dated the Soviet regime and originated outside Russia. Hoffman further stated that technologies of social intervention developed together with the work of 19th-century European reformers and were greatly expanded during World War I, when state actors in all the combatant countries dramatically increased efforts to mobilise and control their populations. As the Soviet state was born at this moment of total war, it institutionalised state intervention as permanent features of governance.\nWriting for \"The Guardian\", Seumas Milne stated the result of the post\u2013Cold War narrative that Stalin and Hitler were twin evils, therefore communism is as monstrous as Nazism, \"has been to relativise the unique crimes of Nazism, bury those of colonialism and feed the idea that any attempt at radical social change will always lead to suffering, killing and failure.\" Other leftists, including some Marxist\u2013Leninists, apply self-criticism, and have at times criticised Marxist\u2013Leninist praxis and some actions by Marxist\u2013Leninist governments, while acknowledging its advancements, emancipatory acts such as their support of labour rights, women's rights, anti-imperialism, democratic efforts, egalitarian achievements, modernisation, and the creation of mass social programs for education, health, housing, and jobs as well as the increase of living standards. According to Parenti, these revolutionary governments \"extended a number of popular freedoms without destroying those freedoms that never existed in the previous regimes\", such as democracy and individual rights, citing the examples of the \"feudal regime\" of Chiang Kai-shek in China, the \"U.S.-sponsored police state\" of Fulgencio Batista in Cuba, the \"U.S.-supported puppet governments\" of B\u1ea3o \u0110\u1ea1i and others in Vietnam as well as French colonialism in Algeria; nonetheless, they \"fostered conditions necessary for national self-determination, economic betterment, the preservation of health and human life, and the end of many of the worst forms of ethnic, patriarchal, and class oppression.\"\nWriting about the Stalinist era of Marxism\u2013Leninism and its repressions, historian Michael Ellman stated that mass deaths from famines are not a \"uniquely Stalinist evil\", and compared the behavior of the Stalinist regime vis-\u00e0-vis the Holodomor to that of the British Empire (towards Ireland and India), and even the G8 in contemporary times, writing that the latter \"are guilty of mass manslaughter or mass deaths from criminal negligence because of their not taking obvious measures to reduce mass deaths\", and a possible defense of Joseph Stalin and his associates is that \"their behaviour was no worse than that of many rulers in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries.\"\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20973", "revid": "88809", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20973", "title": "Modulo (disambiguation)", "text": "Modulo is the remainder operation, which carries out a division operation with a remainder as result.\nModulo may also refer to:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "20977", "revid": "5839411", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20977", "title": "Meritorious Service Medal", "text": "A Meritorious Service Medal is an award presented to denote acts of meritorious service, and sometimes gallantry, that are worthy of recognition. Notable medals with similar names include:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nOther countries.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\nIndex of articles associated with the same name\nThis includes a list of related items that share the same name (or similar names). &lt;br&gt; If an [ internal link] incorrectly led you here, you may wish to change the link to point directly to the intended article."}
{"id": "20979", "revid": "51068328", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20979", "title": "Mikhail Gorbachev", "text": "Leader of the Soviet Union from 1985 to 1991\nMikhail Sergeyevich Gorbachev (2 March 1931 \u2013 30 August 2022) was a Soviet and Russian politician who was the last leader of the Soviet Union from 1985 until the country's dissolution in 1991. He served as General Secretary of the Communist Party from 1985, and additionally as head of state from 1988. Ideologically, he initially adhered to Marxism\u2013Leninism, but moved towards social democracy by the early 1990s.\nBorn in Privolnoye, North Caucasus Krai, into a peasant family of Russian and Ukrainian heritage, Gorbachev grew up under the rule of Joseph Stalin. In his youth, Gorbachev operated combine harvesters on a collective farm, before joining the Communist Party, which then governed the Soviet Union as a one-party state. Studying at Moscow State University, he married fellow student Raisa Titarenko in 1953 and received his law degree in 1955. Moving to Stavropol, he worked for the Komsomol youth organization and, after Stalin's death, became a keen proponent of the de-Stalinization reforms of Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev. \nGorbachev was appointed the first party secretary of the Stavropol Regional Committee in 1970, overseeing the construction of the Great Stavropol Canal. In 1978, Gorbachev returned to Moscow to become a secretary of the party's Central Committee. He joined the governing Politburo (25th term) as a non-voting member the following year and as a voting member in 1980. Three years after the death of Soviet leader Leonid Brezhnev\u2014following the brief tenures of Yuri Andropov and Konstantin Chernenko\u2014in 1985, the Politburo elected Gorbachev as general secretary.\nAlthough committed to preserving the Soviet state and its Marxist\u2013Leninist principles, Gorbachev believed significant reform was necessary for its survival. He withdrew troops from the Soviet\u2013Afghan War, and embarked on summits with United States president Ronald Reagan to limit nuclear weapons and end the Cold War. Domestically, Gorbachev's policy of \"glasnost\" (\"openness\") and \"demokratizatsiya\" (\"democratization\") allowed for enhanced freedom of speech and the press, while his \"perestroika\" (\"restructuring\") sought to decentralize economic decision-making to improve its efficiency. Ultimately, his democratization measures and formation of the elected Congress of People's Deputies undermined the one-party state. When various Warsaw Pact countries abandoned Marxist\u2013Leninist governance in 1989, he declined to intervene militarily. Growing nationalist sentiment within constituent republics threatened to break up the Soviet Union, leading hardliners within the party to launch an unsuccessful coup against him in August 1991. In the coup's wake, the Soviet Union dissolved against Gorbachev's wishes. After resigning from the presidency, he launched the Gorbachev Foundation, became a vocal critic of Russian presidents Boris Yeltsin and Vladimir Putin, and campaigned for Russia's social-democratic movement.\nConsidered one of the most significant figures of the second half of the 20th century, Gorbachev remains controversial. The recipient of a wide range of awards, including the Nobel Peace Prize, he was praised for his role in ending the Cold War, introducing new political and economic freedoms in the Soviet Union, and tolerating both the fall of Marxist\u2013Leninist administrations in eastern and central Europe and the German reunification. Critics see him as weakening Russia's global influence and precipitating an economic collapse in the country, while people from former Soviet-occupied states view him negatively as someone who sanctioned the violent suppression of protests within their own countries.\nEarly life and education.\n1931\u20131950: Childhood and adolescence.\nGorbachev was born on 2 March 1931 in the village of Privolnoye, then in the North Caucasus Krai of the Russian Soviet Federative Socialist Republic, Soviet Union. At the time, Privolnoye was divided between ethnic Russians and Ukrainians. Gorbachev's paternal family were Russians and had moved from Voronezh several generations before; his maternal family were of ethnic Ukrainian heritage and had migrated from Chernihiv. His parents named him Viktor at birth, but at his mother's insistence he had a secret baptism, where his grandfather christened him Mikhail. His relationship with his father, Sergey Andreyevich Gorbachev, was close; his mother, Maria Panteleyevna Gorbacheva (n\u00e9e Gopkalo), was colder and punitive. His parents were poor, and lived as peasants. They had married as teenagers in 1928, and in keeping with local tradition had initially resided in Sergey's father's house, an adobe-walled hut, before a hut of their own could be built.\nThe Soviet Union was a one-party state governed by the Communist Party, led by Joseph Stalin. Stalin had initiated a project of mass rural collectivization meant to help convert the country into a socialist society. Gorbachev's maternal grandfather joined the Communist Party and helped form the village's first kolkhoz (collective farm) in 1929, becoming its chair. It was outside Privolnoye, and when he was three years old, Gorbachev left his parental home and moved into the kolkhoz with his maternal grandparents.\nThe country was experiencing the famine of 1930\u20131933, in which two of Gorbachev's paternal uncles and an aunt died. This was followed by the Great Purge, in which individuals accused of being \"enemies of the people\" were interned in labor camps or executed. Both of Gorbachev's grandfathers served time in labor camps. After his December 1938 release, Gorbachev's maternal grandfather discussed having been tortured by the secret police, an account that influenced the young boy.\nDuring the Second World War, in June 1941 the German Army invaded the Soviet Union. German forces occupied Privolnoye for four and a half months in 1942. Gorbachev's father fought on the frontlines; he was wrongly declared dead during the conflict and fought in the Battle of Kursk before returning to his family, injured. After Germany was defeated, Gorbachev's parents had their second son, Aleksandr, in 1947; he and Mikhail were their only children.\nThe village school was closed during much of the war, re-opening in autumn 1944. Gorbachev did not want to return but excelled academically when he did. He read voraciously, moving from the Western novels of Thomas Mayne Reid to the works of Vissarion Belinsky, Alexander Pushkin, Nikolai Gogol, and Mikhail Lermontov. In 1946, he joined the Komsomol, the Soviet political youth organization, becoming leader of his local group, and was then elected to the Komsomol committee for the district. From primary school he moved to the high school in Molotovskoye; he stayed there during the week and walked the home during weekends. As well as being a member of the school's drama society, he organized sporting and social activities and led the school's morning exercise class. Over the course of five consecutive summers starting with 1946, he returned home to assist his father in operating a combine harvester; during those summers, they sometimes worked 20-hour days. In 1948, they harvested over 8,000 centners of grain, a feat for which Sergey was awarded the Order of Lenin and his son the Order of the Red Banner of Labour.\n1950\u20131955: University.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nI would consider it a high honour to be a member of the highly advanced, genuinely revolutionary Communist Party of Bolsheviks. I promise to be faithful to the great cause of Lenin and Stalin, to devote my entire life to the party's struggle for Communism.\n\u2014\u2009Gorbachev's letter requesting membership of the Communist Party, 1950\nIn June 1950, Gorbachev became a candidate member of the Communist Party. He applied to study at the law school of Moscow State University (MSU), then the most prestigious university in the country. They accepted him without asking for an exam, likely because of his worker-peasant origins and his possession of the Order of the Red Banner of Labour. His choice of law was unusual; it was not a well-regarded subject in Soviet society at that time. At age 19, he traveled by train to Moscow, the first time he had left his home region.\nIn Moscow, Gorbachev resided with fellow MSU students at a dormitory in the Sokolniki District. He felt at odds with his urban counterparts, but soon came to fit in. Fellow students recall his working especially hard, often late into the night. He gained a reputation as a mediator during disputes and was outspoken in class, but was private about his views; for instance, he confided in some students his opposition to the Soviet jurisprudential norm that a confession proved guilt, noting that confessions could have been forced. During his studies, an antisemitic campaign spread through the Soviet Union, culminating in the Doctors' plot; Gorbachev publicly defended Volodya Liberman, a Jewish student accused of disloyalty.\nAt MSU, Gorbachev became the Komsomol head of his entering class, and then Komsomol's deputy secretary for agitation and propaganda at the law school. One of his first Komsomol assignments in Moscow was to monitor the election polling in Presnensky District to ensure near-total turnout; Gorbachev found that most people voted \"out of fear\". In 1952, he was appointed a full member of the Communist Party. He was tasked with monitoring fellow students for subversion; some of his fellow students said he did so only minimally and that they trusted him to keep confidential information secret from the authorities. Gorbachev became close friends with Zden\u011bk Mlyn\u00e1\u0159, a Czechoslovak student who later became a primary ideologist of the 1968 Prague Spring. Mlyn\u00e1\u0159 recalled that the duo remained committed Marxist\u2013Leninists despite their growing concerns about the Stalinist system. After Stalin died in March 1953, Gorbachev and Mlyn\u00e1\u0159 joined the crowds massing to see Stalin's body lying in state.\nAt MSU, Gorbachev met Raisa Titarenko, who was studying in the university's philosophy department. She was engaged to another man, but after that engagement fell apart, she began a relationship with Gorbachev; together they went to bookstores, museums, and art exhibits. In early 1953, he took an internship at the procurator's office in Molotovskoye district, but he was angered by the incompetence and arrogance of those working there. That summer, he returned to Privolnoye to work with his father on the harvest; the money earned allowed him to pay for his wedding. On 25 September 1953 he and Raisa registered their marriage at Sokolniki Registry Office and in October moved in together at the Lenin Hills dormitory. Raisa discovered that she was pregnant and although the couple wanted to keep the child she fell ill and required an abortion.\nIn June 1955, Gorbachev graduated with a distinction; his final paper had been on the advantages of \"socialist democracy\" over \"bourgeois democracy\" (liberal democracy). He was subsequently assigned to the Soviet Procurator's office, which was focusing on the rehabilitation of the innocent victims of Stalin's purges, but found that they had no work for him. He was then offered a place on an MSU graduate course specializing in kolkhoz law, but declined. He had wanted to remain in Moscow, where Raisa was enrolled in a PhD program, but instead gained employment in Stavropol; Raisa abandoned her studies to join him there.\nEarly CPSU career.\n1955\u20131969: Stavropol Komsomol.\nIn August 1955, Gorbachev started work at the Stavropol regional procurator's office, but disliked it and got a transfer to work for Komsomol, becoming deputy director of Komsomol's agitation and propaganda department for that region. In this position, he visited villages in the area and tried to improve the lives of their inhabitants; he established a discussion circle in Gorkaya Balka to help its peasant residents gain social contacts.\nGorbachev and his wife Raisa initially rented a small room in Stavropol, taking daily evening walks around the city and on weekends hiking in the countryside. In January 1957, Raisa gave birth to a daughter, Irina, and in 1958 they moved into two rooms in a communal apartment. In 1961, Gorbachev pursued a second degree, in agricultural production; he took a correspondence course from the local Stavropol Agricultural Institute, receiving his diploma in 1967. His wife had also pursued a second degree, attaining a PhD in sociology in 1967 from the Moscow State Pedagogical University; while in Stavropol she joined the Communist Party.\nStalin was succeeded as Soviet leader by Nikita Khrushchev, who denounced Stalin and his cult of personality in a speech given in February 1956, after which he launched a de-Stalinization process throughout Soviet society. Later biographer William Taubman suggested that Gorbachev \"embodied\" the \"reformist spirit\" of the Khrushchev era. Gorbachev was among those who saw themselves as \"genuine Marxists\" or \"genuine Leninists\". He helped spread Khrushchev's anti-Stalinist message in Stavropol, but encountered many who saw Stalin as a hero and praised his purges as just.\nGorbachev rose steadily through the ranks of the local administration. The authorities regarded him as politically reliable, and he would flatter his superiors, for instance gaining favor with prominent local politician Fyodor Kulakov. With an ability to outmanoeuvre rivals, some colleagues resented his success. In September 1956, he was promoted First Secretary of the Stavropol city's Komsomol, placing him in charge of it; in April 1958 he was made deputy head of the Komsomol for the entire region. He was given better accommodation: a two-room flat with its own private kitchen, toilet, and bathroom. In Stavropol, he formed a discussion club for youths, and helped mobilize local young people to take part in Khrushchev's agricultural and development campaigns.\nIn March 1961, Gorbachev became First Secretary of the regional Komsomol, in which position he went out of his way to appoint women as city and district leaders. In 1961, Gorbachev played host to the Italian delegation for the World Youth Festival in Moscow; that October, he attended the 22nd Congress of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union. In January 1963, Gorbachev was promoted to personnel chief for the regional party's agricultural committee, and in September 1966 became First Secretary of the Stavropol City Party Organization (\"Gorkom\"). By 1968 he was frustrated with his job\u2014in large part because Khrushchev's reforms were stalling or being reversed\u2014and he contemplated leaving politics to work in academia. However, in August 1968, he was named Second Secretary of the Stavropol Kraikom, making him the deputy of First Secretary Leonid Yefremov and the second most senior figure in Stavropol Krai. In 1969, he was elected as a deputy to the Supreme Soviet of the Soviet Union and made a member of its Standing Commission for the Protection of the Environment.\nCleared for travel to Eastern Bloc countries, in 1966 he was part of a delegation which visited East Germany, and in 1969 and 1974 visited Bulgaria. In August 1968 the Soviet Union led an invasion of Czechoslovakia to put an end to the Prague Spring. Although Gorbachev later stated that he had had private concerns about the invasion, he publicly supported it. In September 1969 he was part of a Soviet delegation sent to Czechoslovakia, where he found the people largely unwelcoming. That year, the Soviet authorities ordered him to punish Fagim B. Sadygov, a philosophy professor of the Stavropol agricultural institute whose ideas were regarded as critical of Soviet agricultural policy; Gorbachev ensured that Sadykov was fired from teaching but ignored calls for him to face tougher punishment. Gorbachev later related that he was \"deeply affected\" by the incident; \"my conscience tormented me\" for overseeing Sadykov's persecution.\n1970\u20131977: heading the Stavropol region.\nIn April 1970, Yefremov was promoted to a higher position in Moscow and Gorbachev succeeded him as the First Secretary of the Stavropol kraikom. This granted Gorbachev significant power over the Stavropol region. He had been vetted for the position by senior Kremlin leaders and was informed of their decision by the Soviet leader, Leonid Brezhnev. Aged 39, he was considerably younger than his predecessors. As head of the Stavropol region, he automatically became a member of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union (24th term) in 1971. According to biographer Zhores Medvedev, Gorbachev \"had now joined the Party's super-elite\". As regional leader, Gorbachev initially attributed economic and other failures to \"the inefficiency and incompetence of cadres, flaws in management structure or gaps in legislation\", but eventually concluded that they were caused by an excessive centralization of decision making in Moscow. He began reading translations of restricted texts by Western Marxist authors such as Antonio Gramsci, Louis Aragon, Roger Garaudy, and Giuseppe Boffa, and came under their influence.\nGorbachev's main task as regional leader was to raise agricultural production levels, a task hampered by severe droughts in 1975 and 1976. He oversaw the expansion of irrigation systems through construction of the Great Stavropol Canal. For overseeing a record grain harvest in Ipatovsky district, in March 1972 he was awarded the Order of the October Revolution by Brezhnev in a Moscow ceremony. Gorbachev sought to maintain Brezhnev's trust; as regional leader, he repeatedly praised Brezhnev in his speeches, for instance referring to him as \"the outstanding statesman of our time\". Gorbachev and his wife holidayed in Moscow, Leningrad, Uzbekistan, and resorts in the North Caucasus; he holidayed with the head of the KGB, Yuri Andropov, who was favorable towards him and who became an important patron. Gorbachev developed good relationships with senior figures including the Soviet prime minister, Alexei Kosygin, and the longstanding senior party member Mikhail Suslov.\nThe government considered Gorbachev sufficiently reliable to be sent in Soviet delegations to Western Europe; he made five trips there between 1970 and 1977. In September 1971 he was part of a delegation to Italy, where they met with representatives of the Italian Communist Party; Gorbachev loved Italian culture but was struck by the poverty and inequality he saw there. In 1972, he visited Belgium and the Netherlands, and in 1973 West Germany. Gorbachev and his wife visited France in 1976 and 1977, on the latter occasion touring the country with a guide from the French Communist Party. He was surprised by how openly West Europeans offered their opinions and criticized their political leaders, something absent from the Soviet Union, where most people did not feel safe speaking so openly. He later related that for him and his wife, these visits \"shook our a priori belief in the superiority of socialist over bourgeois democracy\".\nGorbachev had remained close to his parents; after his father became terminally ill in 1974, Gorbachev traveled to be with him in Privolnoe shortly before his death. His daughter, Irina, married fellow student Anatoly Virgansky in April 1978. In 1977, the Supreme Soviet appointed Gorbachev to chair the Standing Commission on Youth Affairs due to his experience with mobilizing young people in Komsomol.\nSecretary of the Central Committee of CPSU.\nIn November 1978, Gorbachev was appointed a secretary of the Central Committee. His appointment was approved unanimously by the Central Committee's members. To fill this position, Gorbachev and his wife moved to Moscow, where they were initially given an old dacha outside the city. They then moved to another, at Sosnovka, before being allocated a newly built brick house. He was given an apartment inside the city, but gave that to his daughter and son-in-law; Irina had begun work at Moscow's Second Medical Institute. As part of the Moscow political elite, Gorbachev and his wife now had access to better medical care and to specialized shops; they were given cooks, servants, bodyguards, and secretaries, many of these spies for the KGB. In his new position, Gorbachev often worked twelve to sixteen hour days. He and his wife socialized little, but liked to visit Moscow's theaters and museums.\nIn 1978, Gorbachev was appointed to the Central Committee's Secretariat for Agriculture (25th term), replacing his old patron Kulakov, who had died of a heart attack. Gorbachev concentrated his attentions on agriculture: the harvests of 1979, 1980, and 1981 were all poor, due largely to weather conditions, and the country had to import increasing quantities of grain. He had growing concerns about the country's agricultural management system, coming to regard it as overly centralized and requiring more bottom-up decision making; he raised these points at his first speech at a Central Committee Plenum, given in July 1978. He began to have concerns about other policies too. In December 1979, the Soviets sent the armed forces into neighbouring Afghanistan to support its Soviet-aligned government against Islamist insurgents; Gorbachev privately thought it a mistake. At times he openly supported the government position; in October 1980 he for instance endorsed Soviet calls for Poland's Marxist\u2013Leninist government to crack down on growing internal dissent in that country. That same month, he was promoted from a candidate member to a full member of the Politburo (25th term), becoming the youngest member of the highest decision-making authority in the Communist Party. After Brezhnev's death in November 1982, Andropov succeeded him as General Secretary of the Communist Party, the \"de facto\" leader in the Soviet Union. Gorbachev was enthusiastic about the appointment. However, although Gorbachev hoped that Andropov would introduce liberalizing reforms, the latter carried out only personnel shifts rather than structural change. Gorbachev became Andropov's closest ally in the Politburo; with Andropov's encouragement, Gorbachev sometimes chaired Politburo meetings. Andropov encouraged Gorbachev to expand into policy areas other than agriculture, preparing him for future higher office. In April 1983, in a sign of growing ascendancy, Gorbachev delivered the annual speech marking the birthday of the Soviet founder Vladimir Lenin; this required him re-reading many of Lenin's later writings, in which the latter had called for reform in the context of the New Economic Policy of the 1920s, and encouraged Gorbachev's own conviction that reform was needed. In May 1983, Gorbachev was sent to Canada, where he met Prime Minister Pierre Trudeau and spoke to the Canadian Parliament. There, he met and befriended the Soviet ambassador, Aleksandr Yakovlev, who later became a key political ally.\nIn February 1984, Andropov died; on his deathbed he indicated his desire that Gorbachev succeed him. Many in the Central Committee nevertheless thought the 53-year-old Gorbachev was too young and inexperienced. Instead, Konstantin Chernenko\u2014a longstanding Brezhnev ally\u2014was appointed general secretary, but he too was in very poor health. Chernenko was often too sick to chair Politburo meetings, with Gorbachev stepping in last minute. Gorbachev continued to cultivate allies both in the Kremlin and beyond, and gave the main speech at a conference on Soviet ideology, where he angered party hardliners by implying that the country required reform.\nIn April 1984, Gorbachev was appointed chair of the Foreign Affairs Committee of the highest organ of state authority in the Soviet Union, a largely honorific position. In June he traveled to Italy as a Soviet representative for the funeral of Italian Communist Party leader Enrico Berlinguer, and in September to Sofia, Bulgaria to attend celebrations of the fortieth anniversary of its liberation from the Nazis by the Red Army. In December, he visited Britain at the request of its prime minister Margaret Thatcher; she was aware that he was a potential reformer and wanted to meet him. At the end of the visit, Thatcher said: \"I like Mr. Gorbachev. We can do business together\". He felt that the visit helped to erode Andrei Gromyko's dominance of Soviet foreign policy and sent a signal to the United States government that he wanted to improve Soviet\u2013US relations.\nLeader of the Soviet Union (1985\u20131991).\nOn 11 March 1985, Mikhail Gorbachev was elected the eighth general secretary of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union by the Politburo of the CPSU after the death of Konstantin Chernenko. \nWhile Gorbachev wanted to preserve the Soviet Union and Marxist-Leninist ideals, he recognised the need for significant reforms. He decided to withdraw troops from the Soviet\u2013Afghan War and met with United States president Ronald Reagan at the Reykjavik Summit to discuss the limitation of nuclear weapons production and ending the Cold War. He also proposed a three-stage programme for abolishing the world's nuclear weapons by the end of the 20th century.\nDomestically, his policy of \"glasnost\" (\"openness\") allowed for the improvement of freedom of speech and free press, while his \"perestroika\" (\"restructuring\") sought to decentralize economic decision-making to improve its efficiency. Ultimately, Gorbachev's democratization efforts and formation of the elected Congress of People's Deputies undermined the supremacy the CPSU had in Soviet governance. When various Warsaw Pact countries abandoned Marxist\u2013Leninist governance in 1989, he declined to intervene militarily. Growing nationalist sentiment within constituent republics threatened to break up the Soviet Union, leading the hardliners within the Communist Party to launch an unsuccessful coup against Gorbachev in August 1991.\nUnraveling of the USSR.\nIn the Revolutions of 1989, most of the Marxist\u2013Leninist states of Central and Eastern Europe held multi-party elections resulting in regime change. In most countries, like Poland and Hungary, this was achieved peacefully, but in Romania, the revolution turned violent, and led to Ceau\u0219escu's overthrow and execution. Gorbachev was too preoccupied with domestic problems to pay much attention to these events. He believed that democratic elections would not lead Eastern European countries into abandoning their commitment to socialism. In 1989, he visited East Germany for the fortieth anniversary of its founding; shortly after, in November, the East German government allowed its citizens to cross the Berlin Wall, a decision Gorbachev praised. Over the following years, much of the wall was demolished. Neither Gorbachev nor Thatcher or Mitterrand wanted a swift reunification of Germany, aware that it would likely become the dominant European power. Gorbachev wanted a gradual process of German integration but Helmut Kohl began calling for rapid reunification. With German reunification in 1990, many observers declared the Cold War over.\n1990\u20131991: presidency of the Soviet Union.\nIn February 1990, both liberalisers and Marxist\u2013Leninist hardliners intensified their attacks on Gorbachev. A liberalizer march took place in Moscow criticizing Communist Party rule, while at a Central Committee meeting, the hardliner Vladimir Brovikov accused Gorbachev of reducing the country to \"anarchy\" and \"ruin\" and of pursuing Western approval at the expense of the Soviet Union and the Marxist\u2013Leninist cause. Gorbachev was aware that the Central Committee could still oust him as general secretary, and so decided to reformulate the role of head of government to a presidency from which he could not be removed. He decided that the presidential election should be held by the Congress of People's Deputies. He chose this over a public vote because he thought the latter would escalate tensions and feared that he might lose it; a spring 1990 poll nevertheless still showed him as the most popular politician in the country.\nIn March, the Congress of People's Deputies held the first (and only) Soviet presidential election, in which Gorbachev was the only candidate. He secured 1,329 in favor to 495 against; 313 votes were invalid or absent. He therefore became the first (and only) executive president of the Soviet Union. A new 18-member Presidential Council \"de facto\" replaced the Politburo. At the same Congress meeting, he presented the idea of repealing Article 6 of the Soviet constitution, which had ratified the Communist Party as the \"ruling party\" of the Soviet Union. The Congress passed the reform, undermining the \"de jure\" nature of the one-party state.\nIn the 1990 elections for the Russian Supreme Soviet, the Communist Party faced challengers from an alliance of liberalisers known as \"Democratic Russia\"; the latter did particularly well in urban centers. Yeltsin was elected the parliament's chair, something Gorbachev was unhappy about. That year, opinion polls showed Yeltsin overtaking Gorbachev as the most popular politician in the Soviet Union. Gorbachev struggled to understand Yeltsin's growing popularity, commenting: \"he drinks like a fish\u00a0... he's inarticulate, he comes up with the devil knows what, he's like a worn-out record\". The Russian Supreme Soviet was now out of Gorbachev's control; in June 1990, it declared that in the Russian Republic, its laws took precedence over those of the Soviet central government. Amid a growth in Russian nationalist sentiment, Gorbachev had reluctantly allowed the formation of a Communist Party of the Russian Soviet Federative Socialist Republic as a branch of the larger Soviet Communist Party. Gorbachev attended its first congress in June, but soon found it dominated by hardliners who opposed his reformist stance.\nGerman reunification and the Gulf War.\nIn January 1990, Gorbachev privately agreed to permit East German reunification with West Germany, but rejected the idea that a unified Germany could retain West Germany's NATO membership. His compromise that Germany might retain both NATO and Warsaw Pact memberships did not attract support. On 9 February 1990 in a phone conversation with James Baker, then the US secretary of state, he said that \"a broadening of the NATO zone is not acceptable\" to which Baker agreed. Scholars are puzzled why Gorbachev never pursued a written pledge. In May 1990, he visited the US for talks with President Bush; there, he agreed that an independent Germany would have the right to choose its international alliances. Ultimately he acquiesced to the reunification on the condition that NATO troops not be posted to the territory of Eastern Germany. There remains some confusion over whether US secretary of state James Baker led Gorbachev to believe that NATO would not expand into other countries in Eastern Europe. There was no oral or written US promise that explicitly said so. Gorbachev stated that he was only made such a promise regarding East Germany and that it was kept. In July, Kohl visited Moscow and Gorbachev informed him that the Soviets would not oppose a reunified Germany's being part of NATO. Domestically, Gorbachev's critics accused him of betraying the national interest; more broadly, they were angry that Gorbachev had allowed the Eastern Bloc to move away from direct Soviet influence.\nIn August 1990, Saddam Hussein's Iraqi government invaded Kuwait; Gorbachev endorsed President Bush's condemnation of it. This brought criticism from many in the Soviet state apparatus, who saw Hussein as a key ally in the Persian Gulf and feared for the safety of the 9,000 Soviet citizens in Iraq, although Gorbachev argued that the Iraqis were the clear aggressors. In November the Soviets endorsed a UN Resolution permitting force to be used in expelling the Iraqi Army from Kuwait. Gorbachev later called it a \"watershed\" in world politics, \"the first time the superpowers acted together in a regional crisis\". However, when the US announced plans for a ground invasion, Gorbachev opposed it, urging instead a peaceful solution. In October 1990, Gorbachev was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize; he was flattered but acknowledged \"mixed feelings\" about the accolade. Polls indicated that 90% of Soviet citizens disapproved of the award, widely seen as an anti-Soviet accolade.\nWith the Soviet budget deficit climbing and no domestic money markets to provide the state with loans, Gorbachev looked elsewhere. Throughout 1991, Gorbachev requested sizable loans from Western countries and Japan, hoping to keep the Soviet economy afloat and ensure the success of perestroika. Although the Soviet Union had been excluded from the G7, Gorbachev secured an invitation to its London summit in July 1991. There, he continued to call for financial assistance; Mitterrand and Kohl backed him, while Thatcher\u2014no longer in office\u2014urged Western leaders to agree. Most G7 members were reluctant, instead offering technical assistance and proposing the Soviets receive \"special associate\" status\u2014rather than full membership\u2014of the World Bank and International Monetary Fund. Gorbachev was frustrated that the US would spend $100\u00a0billion on the Gulf War but would not offer his country loans. Other countries were more forthcoming; West Germany had given the Soviets DM60\u00a0billion by mid-1991. Bush visited Moscow in late July, when he and Gorbachev concluded ten years of negotiations by signing the START I treaty, a bilateral agreement on the reduction and limitation of strategic offensive arms.\nAugust coup and government crises.\nAt the 28th Communist Party Congress in July 1990, hardliners criticized the reformists, but Gorbachev was re-elected party leader. Seeking compromise with the liberalizers, Gorbachev assembled a team of his own and Yeltsin's advisers to come up with an economic reform package: the result was the \"500 Days\" programme. This called for further decentralization and some privatization. In September, Yeltsin presented the plan to the Russian Supreme Soviet, which backed it. Many in the Communist Party and state apparatus warned against it, and it was abandoned.\nBy mid-November 1990, much of the press was calling for Gorbachev to resign and predicting civil war. In November, he announced an eight-point program with governmental reforms, among them the abolition of the presidential council. By this point, Gorbachev was isolated from many of his former close allies and aides. Yakovlev had moved out of his inner circle and Eduard Shevardnadze had resigned.\nAmid growing dissent in the Baltics, in January 1991 Gorbachev demanded that the Lithuanian Supreme Council rescind its pro-independence reforms. Soviet troops occupied buildings in Vilnius and attacked protesters, 15 of whom were killed. A referendum on the issue brought 76.4% in favor of continued federation; the six rebellious republics had not taken part. Negotiations took place to decide what form the new constitution would take; it was planned to be signed in August.\nIn August, Gorbachev holidayed at his dacha in Foros, Crimea. Two weeks into his holiday, a group of senior Communist Party figures\u2014the \"Gang of Eight\" launched a coup d'\u00e9tat. The coup leaders demanded that Gorbachev declare a state of emergency, but he refused. He was kept under house arrest in the dacha. The coup plotters publicly announced that Gorbachev was ill and thus Vice President Yanayev would take charge of the country.\nYeltsin entered the Moscow White House. Protesters prevented troops storming the building to arrest him. In front of the White House, Yeltsin, atop a tank, gave a memorable speech condemning the coup. The coup's leaders realized that they lacked sufficient support and ended their efforts. Gorbachev returned to Moscow and thanked Yeltsin. Two days later, he resigned as general secretary.\nFinal days and collapse.\nAfter the coup, the Supreme Soviet indefinitely suspended all Communist Party activity, effectively ending communist rule in the Soviet Union.\nOn 30 October, Gorbachev attended a conference in Madrid trying to revive the Israeli\u2013Palestinian peace process. The event was co-sponsored by the US and Soviet Union. There, he again met with Bush. En route home, he traveled to France where he stayed with Mitterrand at the latter's home near Bayonne.\nTo maintain unity, Gorbachev continued to plan for a union treaty, but met opposition to the continuation of a federal state as the leaders of several Soviet republics bowed to nationalist pressure. Yeltsin stated that he would veto any idea of a unified state, instead favoring a confederation with little central authority. Only the leaders of Kazakhstan and Kirghizia supported Gorbachev's approach. The referendum in Ukraine on 1 December with a 90% turnout for secession from the Union was a fatal blow; Gorbachev had expected Ukrainians to reject independence.\nWithout Gorbachev's knowledge, Yeltsin met with Ukrainian president Leonid Kravchuk and Belarusian president Stanislav Shushkevich in Belovezha Forest, near Brest, Belarus, on 8 December and signed the Belavezha Accords, which declared the Soviet Union had ceased to exist and formed the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) as its successor. Gorbachev only learned of this development when Shushkevich phoned him; Gorbachev was furious. He desperately looked for an opportunity to preserve the Soviet Union, hoping that the media and intelligentsia would rally against its dissolution. Ukrainian, Belarusian, and Russian Supreme Soviets then ratified the establishment of the CIS. On 9 December, Gorbachev issued a statement calling the CIS agreement \"illegal and dangerous\". On 20 December, the leaders of 11 of the 12 remaining republics\u2014all except Georgia\u2014met in Kazakhstan and signed the Alma-Ata Protocol, agreeing to dismantle the Soviet Union and formally establish the CIS. They provisionally accepted Gorbachev's resignation as president of what remained of the Soviet Union. Accepting the \"fait accompli\", Gorbachev said he would resign as soon as he saw that the CIS was a reality.\nGorbachev reached a deal with Yeltsin that called for Gorbachev to announce his resignation as Soviet president and Commander-in-Chief on 25 December, vacating the Kremlin by 29 December. Yakovlev, Chernyaev and Shevardnadze joined Gorbachev to help him write a resignation speech. Gorbachev gave his speech in the Kremlin in front of television cameras, for international broadcast. In it, he announced, \"I hereby discontinue my activities at the post of President of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics.\" He expressed regret for the breakup of the Soviet Union but cited what he saw as the achievements of his administration: political and religious freedom, the end of totalitarianism, the introduction of democracy and a market economy, and an end to the arms race and Cold War. Gorbachev was the third out of eight Soviet leaders, after Malenkov and Khrushchev, not to die in office. The following day, 26 December, the Soviet of the Republics, the upper house of the Supreme Soviet of the Soviet Union, voted the country out of existence. As of 31 December 1991, all Soviet institutions that had not been taken over by Russia ceased to function.\nPost-USSR life.\n1991\u20131999: Initial years.\nOut of office, he and Raisa initially lived in their dilapidated dacha on Rublevskoe Shosse, and were allowed to privatize their smaller apartment on Kosygin Street. He focused on establishing his foundation, launched in March 1992; Yakovlev and Revenko were its first vice presidents. Its initial tasks were analyzing and publishing material on the history of perestroika, and defending the policy. The foundation tasked itself with monitoring and critiquing life in post-Soviet Russia, presenting alternative development forms to Yeltsin's.\nTo finance his foundation, Gorbachev began lecturing internationally, charging large fees. On a visit to Japan, he was given multiple honorary degrees. In 1992, he toured the US in a Forbes private jet to raise money for his foundation, meeting the Reagans for a social visit. From there he went to Spain, where he met with his friend Prime Minister Felipe Gonz\u00e1lez. He further visited Israel and Germany, where he was received warmly for his role in facilitating German reunification. To supplement his lecture fees and book sales, Gorbachev appeared in television commercials and photograph advertisements, enabling him to keep the foundation afloat. With his wife's assistance, he worked on his memoirs, which were published in Russian in 1995 and in English the following year. He began writing a monthly syndicated column for \"The New York Times\".\nIn 1993, Gorbachev launched Green Cross International, which focused on encouraging sustainable futures, and then the World Political Forum. In 1995, he initiated the World Summit of Nobel Peace Laureates.\nGorbachev and Yeltsin soon resumed their criticism of each other, for example when Yeltsin lifted price caps and plunged many Russians into poverty. In 1995, his foundation held a conference on \"The Intelligentsia and Perestroika\", proposing to the Duma a law that would reduce many of the presidential powers established by Yeltsin's 1993 constitution.\nIn contrast to her husband's political activities, Raisa focused on campaigning for children's charities. In 1997, she founded a sub-division of the Gorbachev Foundation known as Raisa Maksimovna's Club to improve women's welfare in Russia. The Foundation had initially been housed in the former Social Science Institute building, but Yeltsin introduced limits to the number of rooms it could use there; the American philanthropist Ted Turner donated over $1 million to enable the foundation to build new premises on the Leningradsky Prospekt. In 1999, Gorbachev visited Australia, giving a speech to the country's parliament. Shortly after, in July, Raisa was diagnosed with leukemia. With the assistance of German chancellor Gerhard Schr\u00f6der, she was transferred to a cancer center in M\u00fcnster, Germany, and underwent chemotherapy. She died in September, and Gorbachev's daughter Irina and his two granddaughters moved into his Moscow home to live with him.\n1996 presidential campaign.\nThe Russian presidential elections were scheduled for June 1996, and although he was urged not to run, Gorbachev decided to do so. He never expected to win outright, but thought a centrist bloc could be formed around either himself or one of the other candidates with similar views, such as Grigory Yavlinsky, Svyatoslav Fyodorov, or Alexander Lebed. After securing the necessary one million signatures of nomination, he announced his candidacy in March. Launching his campaign, he traveled across Russia giving rallies in twenty cities. He repeatedly faced anti-Gorbachev protesters, while some pro-Yeltsin local officials tried to hamper his campaign by banning local media from covering it or by refusing him access to venues. In the election, Gorbachev came seventh with approximately 386,000 votes, or around 0.5% of the total. Yeltsin and Zyuganov went through to the second round, where the former was victorious.\n1999\u20132008: Promoting social democracy in Putin's Russia.\nIn December 1999, Yeltsin resigned and was succeeded by his deputy, Vladimir Putin, who won the March 2000 presidential election. Gorbachev initially welcomed Putin's rise, seeing him as an anti-Yeltsin figure. Although he spoke out against some of the Putin government's actions, Gorbachev praised the new government in 2002. At the time, he believed Putin to be a committed democrat who nevertheless had to use \"a certain dose of authoritarianism\" to stabilize the economy and rebuild the state after the Yeltsin era. At Putin's request, Gorbachev became co-chair of the \"Petersburg Dialogue\" project between high-ranking Russians and Germans.\nIn 2000, Gorbachev helped form the Russian United Social Democratic Party. In June 2002, he participated in a meeting with Putin, who praised the venture. In 2003, Gorbachev's party merged with the Social Democratic Party to form the Social Democratic Party of Russia, but it failed to gain traction with voters. Gorbachev resigned as party leader in May 2004 after the 2003 election campaign. The party was banned in 2007 by the Supreme Court of the Russian Federation due to its failure to establish local offices with at least 500 members in the majority of Russian regions. Later that year, Gorbachev founded a new movement, the Union of Social Democrats, stating that it would not contest the forthcoming elections.\nGorbachev was critical of US hostility to Putin, arguing that the US government \"doesn't want Russia to rise\" again as a global power, but wanted to be \"the sole superpower\". Gorbachev was critical of US policy following the Cold War, arguing that the West had attempted to \"turn [Russia] into some kind of backwater\". He rejected Bush's claim that the US had \"won\" the Cold War, arguing that both sides had cooperated to end the conflict. He was critical of how the US had broken its word and expanded NATO right up to Russia's borders. He spoke out against the 1999 NATO bombing of Yugoslavia because it lacked UN backing, and the 2003 invasion of Iraq led by the US.\n2008\u20132022: Growing criticism of Vladimir Putin.\nIn September 2008, Gorbachev and business oligarch Alexander Lebedev announced they would form the Independent Democratic Party of Russia. After the outbreak of the Russo-Georgian War, Gorbachev spoke out against US support for Georgian president Mikheil Saakashvili. Gorbachev nevertheless remained critical of Russia's government.\nIn 2009, he met with US president Barack Obama to \"reset\" strained US\u2013Russian relations. In 2011, Medvedev awarded him the Order of St Andrew the Apostle the First-Called.\nGorbachev opposed Putin's decision to run for president in the 2012 election.\nIn 2014, he defended the Crimean status referendum and Russia's annexation of Crimea that began the Russo-Ukrainian War. He spoke out against the sanctions placed on Russia as a result of the annexation.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nRussia can succeed only through democracy. Russia is ready for political competition, a real multiparty system, fair elections and regular rotation of government. This should define the role and responsibility of the president.\n\u2013 Gorbachev, 2017\nAt a 2014 event marking 25 years since the fall of the Berlin Wall, Gorbachev warned that the ongoing war in Donbas had brought the world to the brink of a new Cold War, and he accused the US of adopting an attitude of \"triumphalism\" towards Russia. In 2016, he said that \"Politicians who think that problems and disputes can be solved by using military force... should be rejected by society, they should clear the political stage.\" In June 2018, he welcomed the Russia\u2013United States summit in Helsinki between Putin and US president Donald Trump. After the January 6 United States Capitol attack, Gorbachev declared, \"The storming of the capitol was clearly planned in advance, and it's obvious by whom.\"\nIn July 2022, Gorbachev's close friend, journalist Alexei Venediktov, said that Gorbachev was very upset when he found out that Putin had launched an invasion of Ukraine. According to Venediktov, Gorbachev believed that Putin \"destroyed his life's work\", and was calling for \"an early cessation of hostilities and immediate start of peace negotiations\".\nPolitical ideology.\nIn the early 1950s, Gorbachev was conventionally Stalinist. By the mid-1980s, when he took power, Gorbachev argued that the Communist Party had to adapt and engage in creative thinking much as Lenin had earlier creatively interpreted and adapted the writings of Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels to the situation of early 20th-century Russia. However, the changes that Gorbachev proposed fitted completely within Marxist-Leninist ideology. Gorbachev's political outlook was shaped by the 23 years he served as a party official in Stavropol. Perestroika was harder to define, and its meaning shifted with time. It originally meant \"radical reform of the economic and political system\". Later, Gorbachev began to consider market mechanisms and co-operatives. Gorbachev however remained a believer in socialism, if not in the actual Soviet system. During the 1980s, his thought radically shifted, to the extent that by 1989 or 1990, he was effectively a social democrat.\nPersonal life.\nGorbachev spoke in a southern Russian accent, and sang both folk and pop songs. Throughout his life, he tried to dress fashionably. Having an aversion to hard liquor, he drank sparingly and did not smoke. He was protective of his private life and cherished his wife and family. He sent his daughter, his only child, to a local school in Stavropol rather than to one for the children of party elites. Unlike many of his contemporaries in the Soviet administration, he treated women respectfully.\nGorbachev was baptized Russian Orthodox; his grandparents had been practicing Christians. In 2008, after he visited the tomb of St Francis of Assisi, he clarified that he was an atheist. Gorbachev considered himself an intellectual; Doder and Branson thought that \"his intellectualism was slightly self-conscious\", noting that unlike most Russian intelligentsia, Gorbachev was not closely connected \"to the world of science, culture, the arts, or education\". When living in Stavropol, he and his wife collected hundreds of books. Among his favorite authors were Arthur Miller, Dostoevsky, and Chinghiz Aitmatov, while he also enjoyed reading detective fiction. He enjoyed going for walks, having a love of natural environments, and was also a fan of association football. He favored small gatherings where the assembled discussed topics like art and philosophy rather than the large, alcohol-fueled parties common among Soviet officials.\nDeath.\nGorbachev died at the Central Clinical Hospital in Moscow on 30 August 2022, at the age of 91. He died after a \"severe and prolonged illness\". He had suffered from severe diabetes and underwent several surgeries and hospital stays.\nHis funeral was held on 3 September 2022 in the Column Hall of the House of Unions. The ceremony included an honor guard, but was not a state funeral. The service included rites administered by a Russian Orthodox priest. He is buried at Moscow's Novodevichy Cemetery, in the same grave as his wife Raisa, as requested by his will.\nReception and legacy.\nOpinions on Gorbachev are deeply divided. According to a 2017 survey carried out by the independent institute Levada Center, 46% of Russian citizens have a negative opinion towards Gorbachev, 30% are indifferent, while only 15% have a positive opinion. Many, particularly in Western countries, see him as the greatest statesman of the second half of the 20th century. US press referred to the presence of \"Gorbymania\" in Western countries during the late 1980s and early 1990s, as represented by large crowds that turned out to greet his visits, with \"Time\" naming him its \"Man of the Decade\" in the 1980s. In the Soviet Union itself, opinion polls indicated that Gorbachev was the most popular politician from 1985 through to late 1989. His domestic supporters saw him as a reformer trying to modernise the Soviet Union, and to build democratic socialism. Taubman characterized Gorbachev as \"a visionary who changed his country and the world\u2014though neither as much as he wished\". Taubman regarded Gorbachev as being \"exceptional ... as a Russian ruler and a world statesman\", highlighting that he avoided the \"traditional, authoritarian, anti-Western norm\" of both predecessors like Brezhnev and successors like Putin. McCauley thought that in allowing the Soviet Union to move away from Marxism\u2013Leninism, Gorbachev gave the Soviet people \"something precious, the right to think and manage their lives for themselves\", with inevitable uncertainty and risk. The Baltic states, Georgia, and Kazakhstan remember him less fondly after the violent and deadly suppression of protests in their countries, which Gorbachev seemingly sanctioned. Lithuanian foreign minister Gabrielius Landsbergis said that Lithuanians would not glorify Gorbachev or forget about the 1991 January Events.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nGorbachev succeeded in destroying what was left of totalitarianism in the Soviet Union; he brought freedom of speech, of assembly, and of conscience to people who had never known it, except perhaps for a few chaotic months in 1917. By introducing free elections and creating parliamentary institutions, he laid the groundwork for democracy. It is more the fault of the raw material he worked with than of his own real shortcomings and mistakes that Russian democracy will take much longer to build than he thought.\n\u2014\u2009Gorbachev biographer William Taubman, 2017\nKazakhs blame him for Zheltoqsan. \u201cArchival documents show that [Gorbachev] knew, and he and the party took extreme measures to suppress the rallies with special forces riot police that flew directly from Moscow,\u201d according to political sociologist Diana T. Kudaibergenova. Georgians blame him for the April 9 Tragedy, in which 21 people died.\nGorbachev's negotiations with the US helped bring an end to the Cold War and reduced the threat of nuclear conflict. His decision to allow the Eastern Bloc to break apart prevented significant bloodshed in Central and Eastern Europe; as Taubman noted, this meant that the \"Soviet Empire\" ended in a far more peaceful manner than the British Empire several decades before. Similarly, under Gorbachev, the Soviet Union broke apart without falling into civil war, as happened during the breakup of Yugoslavia at the same time. McCauley noted that in facilitating the merger of East and West Germany, Gorbachev was \"a co-father of German unification\", assuring him long-term popularity among the German people.\nHe faced domestic criticism during his rule. He attracted the admiration of some colleagues, but others came to hate him. Across society, his inability to reverse the decline in the Soviet economy brought discontent. Liberals thought he lacked the radicalism to break from Marxism\u2013Leninism and establish a free market liberal democracy. Conversely, many of his Communist Party critics thought his reforms were reckless and threatened the survival of Soviet socialism; some believed he should have followed the example of China's Communist Party and restricted himself to economic rather than governmental reforms. Many Russians saw his emphasis on persuasion rather than force as a sign of weakness.\nThe Communist Party nomenklatura saw the Soviet Union's dissolution as disastrous, as it resulted in their loss of power. In Russia, he is widely despised for his role in the collapse of the Soviet Union and the ensuing economic collapse in the 1990s. General Varennikov, one of those who orchestrated the 1991 coup attempt against Gorbachev, for instance called him \"a renegade and traitor to your own people\". His critics attacked him for allowing the Marxist\u2013Leninist governments across Eastern Europe to fall, and for allowing a reunited Germany to join NATO, something they deem contrary to Russia's national interest. The leader of the Communist Party, Gennady Zyuganov, stated that Gorbachev was a leader whose rule brought \"absolute sadness, misfortune and problems\" for \"all the peoples of our country\".\nThe historian Mark Galeotti stressed the connection between Gorbachev and his predecessor, Andropov. In Galeotti's view, Andropov was \"the godfather of the Gorbachev revolution\", because\u2014as a former head of the KGB\u2014he was able to put forward the case for reform without having his loyalty to the Soviet cause questioned. According to McCauley, Gorbachev \"set reforms in motion without understanding where they could lead. Never in his worst nightmare could he have imagined that perestroika would lead to the destruction of the Soviet Union\".\nAccording to \"The New York Times\", \"Few leaders in the 20th century, indeed in any century, have had such a profound effect on their time. In little more than six tumultuous years, Mr. Gorbachev lifted the Iron Curtain, decisively altering the political climate of the world.\"\nAwards and honors.\nIn 1988, India awarded Gorbachev the Indira Gandhi Prize for Peace, Disarmament and Development; in 1990, he was given the Nobel Peace Prize for \"his leading role in the peace process which today characterizes important parts of the international community\". Out of office he continued to receive honors. In 1992, he was the first recipient of the Ronald Reagan Freedom Award, and in 1994 was given the Grawemeyer Award by the University of Louisville, Kentucky. In 1995, he was awarded the Grand-Cross of the Order of Liberty by Portuguese president M\u00e1rio Soares, and in 1998 the Freedom Award from the National Civil Rights Museum in Memphis, Tennessee. In 2000, he was presented with the Golden Plate Award of the American Academy of Achievement at an awards ceremony at Hampton Court Palace near London. In 2002, Gorbachev received the Freedom of the City of Dublin from Dublin City Council.\nIn 2002, Gorbachev was awarded the Charles V Prize by the European Academy of Yuste Foundation. Gorbachev, together with Bill Clinton and Sophia Loren, were awarded the 2004 Grammy Award for Best Spoken Word Album for Children for their recording of Sergei Prokofiev's 1936 \"Peter and the Wolf\" for Pentatone. In 2005, Gorbachev was awarded the Point Alpha Prize for his role in supporting German reunification.\nIn popular culture.\nIn 2020 and 2021, the Theatre of Nations in Moscow, in collaboration with Latvian director Alvis Hermanis, staged a production called \"Gorbachev\". Yevgeny Mironov and Chulpan Khamatova played the roles of Gorbachev and his wife Raisa respectively.\nGorbachev was portrayed by David Dencik in the 2019 miniseries \"Chernobyl\", by Matthew Marsh in the 2023 film \"Tetris\" and by Aleksander Krupa in the 2024 biographical drama \"Reagan\".\nGorbachev appears in the videogame \"\" during a mission where the playable character infiltrates the KGB headquarter. Gorbachev is portrayed by David Agranov.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20981", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20981", "title": "Maximum condition", "text": ""}
{"id": "20982", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20982", "title": "Minimum condition", "text": ""}
{"id": "20985", "revid": "41260977", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20985", "title": "Masada", "text": "Ancient hilltop fortification in Israel\nMasada ( ', 'fortress'; ) is a mountain-top fortress complex in the Judaean Desert, overlooking the western shore of the Dead Sea in southeastern Israel. The fort, built in the first century BC, was constructed atop a natural plateau rising over above the surrounding terrain, east of modern Arad.\nThe most significant remains at the site date to the reign of Herod the Great, King of Judaea c.\u200937\u20134 BC, who transformed Masada into a fortified desert refuge early in his rule. He enclosed the summit with a and towers, and constructed storerooms, an advanced water system, and bathhouses, along with two elaborate palaces: one on the western side and another built across three terraces on the northern cliff. These palaces remain among the finest examples of Herodian architecture.\nMasada is most renowned for its role during the First Jewish\u2013Roman War (66\u201373 AD), when it became the final holdout of Jewish rebels following the destruction of Jerusalem. A group known as the Sicarii, a radical faction led by Eleazar ben Ya'ir, defended the site against the Roman Tenth Legion under Lucius Flavius Silva. The Romans laid siege by building a circumvallation wall and a massive ramp. According to Josephus, when the walls were breached in 73/74 AD, the Romans found nearly 1,000 inhabitants had died by mass suicide\u2014a claim that remains debated among historians. In modern times, the story of Masada was interpreted as a symbol of heroism that became influential in early Israeli national identity.\nExcavations led by archaeologist Yigael Yadin in the 1960s uncovered remarkably preserved remains, including Herod's palaces, storerooms with food remnants, ritual baths, a synagogue, Jewish scrolls, columbaria, and pottery shards bearing names, one inscribed \"ben Ya'ir,\" possibly linked to the final days of the defenders, and a small Byzantine church. The surrounding Roman siege works and bases remain visible and are among the most intact examples of Roman military engineering. Today, Masada is a UNESCO World Heritage Site due to those siege works, and one of Israel's most popular tourist attractions, drawing around 750,000 visitors a year.\nGeography.\nThe cliff of Masada is, geologically speaking, a horst. As the plateau abruptly ends in cliffs steeply falling about to the east and about to the west, the natural approaches to the fortress are very difficult to navigate. The top of the mesa-like plateau is flat and rhomboid-shaped, about by . Herod built a high casemate wall around the plateau totaling in length, reinforced by many towers. The fortress contained storehouses, barracks, an armory, a palace, and a series of cisterns (capacity around ) that were refilled by rainwater \u2013 with the runoff collected from a single day's rain allegedly able to sustain over 1,000 people for 2 to 3 years. Three narrow, winding paths led from below up to fortified gates.\nHistory.\nAlmost all historical information about Masada comes from the first-century Jewish Roman historian Josephus. Masada is also mentioned in the Judean Desert Documents. \nHasmonean fortress.\nJosephus writes that the site was first fortified by Hasmonean ruler Alexander Jannaeus in the first century BC. However, so far no Hasmonean-period building remains could be identified during archaeological excavations.\nJosephus further writes that Herod the Great captured it in the power struggle that followed the death of his father Antipater in 43 BC. It survived the siege of the last Hasmonean king Antigonus II Mattathias, who ruled with Parthian support.\nHerodian palace-fortress.\nAccording to Josephus, between 37 and 31 BC, Herod the Great built a large fortress on the plateau as a refuge for himself in the event of a revolt and erected two palaces with an endless food supply.\nFirst Jewish\u2013Roman War.\nIn 66 CE, a group of Jewish rebels, the Sicarii, overcame the Roman garrison of Masada with the aid of a ruse. According to Josephus, the Sicarii were an extremist Jewish splinter group antagonistic to a larger grouping of Jews referred to as the Zealots, who carried the main burden of the rebellion. Josephus said that the Sicarii raided nearby Jewish villages including Ein Gedi, where they massacred 700 women and children.\nIn 73 AD, the Roman governor of Iudaea, Lucius Flavius Silva, headed the Roman legion X \"Fretensis\" and laid siege to Masada. Another source gives the year of the siege of Masada as 73 or 74 CE. The Roman legion surrounded Masada, building a circumvallation wall and then a siege ramp against the western face of the plateau. According to Dan Gill, geological investigations in the early 1990s confirmed earlier observations that the 114\u00a0m (375\u00a0ft) high assault ramp consisted mostly of a natural spur of bedrock.\nThe ramp was complete in the spring of 73, after probably two to three months of siege, allowing the Romans to breach the wall of the fortress with a battering ram on April 16. The Romans employed the X Legion and a number of auxiliary units and Jewish prisoners of war, totaling some 15,000, of whom an estimated 8,000 to 9,000 were fighting men, in crushing Jewish resistance at Masada.\nA giant siege tower with a battering ram was constructed and moved laboriously up the completed ramp. According to Josephus, when Roman troops entered the fortress, they discovered that its defenders had set all the buildings but the food storerooms ablaze and committed mass suicide or killed each other, 960 men, women, and children in total. Josephus wrote of two stirring speeches that the Sicari leader had made to convince his men to kill themselves. Only two women and five children were found alive.\nJosephus presumably based his narration upon the field commentaries of the Roman commanders that were accessible to him.\nThere are discrepancies between archaeological findings and Josephus' writings. Josephus mentions only one of the two palaces that have been excavated, refers only to one fire, though many buildings show fire damage, and claims that 960 people were killed, though the remains of at most 28 bodies have been found. Some of the other details that Josephus gives were correct \u2013 for instance, he describes the baths that were built there, the fact that the floors in some of the buildings 'were paved with stones of several colours', and that many pits were cut into the living rock to serve as cisterns. Yadin found some partially intact mosaic floors which meet that description.\nByzantine monastery of Marda.\nMasada was last occupied during the Byzantine period, when a small church was established at the site. The church was part of a monastic settlement identified with the monastery of Marda known from hagiographical literature. This identification is generally accepted by researchers. The Aramaic common noun \"marda\", \"fortress\", corresponds in meaning to the Greek name of another desert monastery of the time, Kastellion, and is used to describe that site in the \"vita\" (biography) of St Sabbas, but it is used as a proper name only for the monastery at Masada, as can be seen from the \"vita\" of St Euthymius.\nArchaeology.\nChalcolithic period.\nAn almost inaccessible cave, dubbed Yoram Cave, located on the sheer southern cliff face 100 m below the plateau, has been found to contain numerous plant remains, of which 6,000-year-old barley seeds were in such good state of preservation that their genome could be sequenced. This is the first time that this succeeded with a Chalcolithic plant genome, which is also the oldest one sequenced so far. The result helped determine that the earliest domestication of barley, dated elsewhere in the Fertile Crescent to 10,000 years ago, happened further north up the Jordan Rift Valley, namely in the Upper Jordan Valley in northern Israel. \nThe Yoram Cave seeds were found to be fairly different from the wild variety, proof for an already advanced process of domestication, but very similar to the types of barley still cultivated in the region\u2014an indication for remarkable constancy. Considering the difficulty in reaching the cave, whose mouth opens some 4 m above the exposed access path, the researchers have speculated that it was a place of short-term refuge for Chalcolithic people fleeing an unknown catastrophe.\nIdentification and initial digs.\nThe site of Masada was identified in 1838 by Americans Edward Robinson and Eli Smith, and in 1842, American missionary Samuel W. Wolcott and the English painter W. Tipping were the first moderns to climb it. After visiting the site several times in the 1930s and 1940s, Shmarya Guttman conducted an initial probe excavation of the site in 1959.\nYigael Yadin expedition.\nMasada was extensively excavated between 1963 and 1965 by an expedition led by Israeli archaeologist and former military Chief-of-Staff Yigael Yadin.\nDue to the remoteness from human habitation and its arid environment, the site remained largely untouched by humans or nature for two millennia.\nMany of the ancient buildings have been restored from their remains, as have the wall paintings of Herod's two main palaces, and the Roman-style bathhouses that he built. The synagogue, storehouses, and houses of the Jewish rebels have also been identified and restored.\nWater cisterns two-thirds of the way up the cliff drain the nearby wadis by an elaborate system of channels, which explains how the rebels managed to conserve enough water for such a long time.\nThe Roman attack ramp still stands on the western side and can be climbed on foot. The meter-high circumvallation wall that the Romans built around Masada can be seen, together with eight Roman siege camps just outside this wall. The Roman siege installations as a whole, especially the attack ramp, are the best preserved of their kind, and the reason for declaring Masada a UNESCO World Heritage site.\nDue to the great interest shown by the public, Yadin published a book in 1966 for the general public, \"\u05de\u05e6\u05d3\u05d4\" (\"Masada\").\nEpigraphic findings.\nInside the synagogue, an ostracon bearing the inscription \"ma'aser cohen\" (&lt;templatestyles src=\"Script/styles_hebrew.css\" /&gt;\u05de\u05e2\u05e9\u05e8 \u05db\u05d5\u05d4\u05df\u200e, tithe for the priest) was found, as were fragments of two scrolls: parts of Deuteronomy and of the Book of Ezekiel including the vision of the \"dry bones\" ( and ), found hidden in pits dug under the floor of a small room built inside the synagogue. In other loci, fragments were found of the books of Genesis, Leviticus, Psalms, and Sirach, as well as of the Songs of the Sabbath Sacrifice.\nIn the area in front of the Northern Palace, 11 small ostraca were recovered, each bearing a single name. One reads \"ben Ya'ir\" (&lt;templatestyles src=\"Script/styles_hebrew.css\" /&gt;\u05d1\u05df\u05d9\u05d0\u05d9\u05e8\u200e) and could be short for Eleazar ben Ya'ir, the commander of the fortress. The other 10 names may be those of the men chosen by lot to kill the others and then themselves, as recounted by Josephus.\nHuman remains.\nThe remains of a maximum of 28 people were unearthed at Masada, possibly 29 including a foetus. The skeletal remains of 25 individuals were found in a cave outside and below the southern wall. The remains of another two males and a female were found in the bathhouse of the Northern Palace.\nOf the bathhouse remains, the males were variously estimated to have been of an age of either 40 and 20\u201322, or 22 and 11\u201312, or based on dental remains, between 16\u201318 of age. One estimate for the female's age was 17\u201318 years. The skeletal remains of the males were incomplete. Only the hair, a full head of hair with braids, but no bones of the female were found. \nForensic analysis showed the hair had been shaved from the woman's head with a sharp instrument while she was still alive, a practice prescribed for captured women in the Bible () and the 2nd-century BC Temple Scroll. The braids indicate that she was married. Based on the evidence, anthropologist Joe Zias and forensic scientist Azriel Gorski believe the remains may have been Romans whom the rebels captured when they seized the garrison.\nAs to the sparse remains of 24 people found in the southern cave at the base of the cliff, excavator Yigael Yadin was unsure of their ethnicity. The rabbinical establishment concluded that they were remains of the Jewish defenders, and in July 1969, they were reburied as Jews in a state ceremony. Carbon dating of textiles found with the remains in the cave indicate they are contemporaneous with the period of the revolt, and pig bones were present, occasionally occurring for Roman burials due to pig sacrifices. This indicates that the remains may belong to non-Jewish Roman soldiers or civilians who occupied the site before or after the siege. Zias questioned whether as many as 24 individuals were present, since only 4% of that number of bones was recovered.\nRoman-period palm seed.\nA 2,000-year-old Judean date palm seed discovered during archaeological excavations in the early 1960s was successfully germinated into a date plant, popularly known as \"Methuselah\" after the longest-living figure in the Hebrew Bible. At the time, it was the oldest known germination, remaining so until a new record was set in 2012. As of February 2024, it remains the oldest germination from a seed.\nByzantine monastery.\nThe remnants of a Byzantine church dating from the fifth and sixth centuries have been excavated on the plateau.\nArchaeology vs. Josephus.\nNo Hasmonean buildings found.\nYadin's team could detect no architectural remains of the Hasmonean period, the only findings firmly dated to this period being the numerous coins of Alexander Jannaeus. Researchers have speculated that the southwestern block of the Western Palace and the auxiliary buildings east and south of it could be Hasmonean, relying on similarities to the Twin Palaces at Jericho. However, their excavators could make no archaeological discovery able to support this presumption.\nInaccurate description.\nAccording to Shaye Cohen, archaeology shows that Josephus' account is \"incomplete and inaccurate\". Josephus writes of only one palace; archaeology reveals two. His description of the northern palace contains several inaccuracies, and he gives exaggerated figures for the height of the walls and towers. Josephus' account is contradicted by the \"skeletons in the cave, and the numerous separate fires\".\nHistoricity of mass suicide.\nAccording to Josephus, the siege of Masada by Roman troops from 73 to 74 CE, at the end of the First Jewish\u2013Roman War, ended in the mass suicide of the 960 Sicarii rebels who were hiding there. However, the archaeological evidence relevant to this event is ambiguous and rejected entirely by some scholars. Eric Cline also believes that Josephus is retelling a similar event that happened to him during the Siege of Yodfat. There he and another soldier, the last survivors, decided to surrender rather than have one kill the other.\nPhases and layout.\nAn example of Herodian architecture, Masada was the first site Herod the Great fortified after he gained control of his kingdom.\nPhase I: Western Palace etc..\nThe first of three building phases completed by Herod began in 35 BC. During the first phase the Western Palace was built, along with three smaller palaces, a storeroom, and army barracks. Three columbarium towers and a swimming pool at the south end of the site were also completed during this building phase.\nThe original center of the Western Palace was square and was accessed through an open courtyard on the northwest corner of the building. The courtyard was the central room of the Western Palace and directed visitors into a portico, used as a reception area for visitors. Visitors were then led to a throne room. Off the throne room was a corridor used by the king, with a private dressing room, which also had another entrance way that connected to the courtyard through the mosaic room. The mosaic room contained steps that led to a second floor with separate bedrooms for the king and queen.\nPhase II: Northern Palace etc..\nThe second building phase in 25 BC included an addition to the Western Palace, a large storage complex for food, and the Northern Palace. The Northern Palace is one of Herod's more lavish palace-fortresses, and was built on the hilltop on the north side of Masada and continues two levels down, over the end of the cliffs. The upper terrace of the Northern Palace included living quarters for the king and a semicircular portico to provide a view of the area. A stairway on the west side led down to the middle terrace that was a decorative circular reception hall. The lower terrace was also for receptions and banquets. It was enclosed on all four sides with porticos and included a Roman bathhouse.\nPhase III: casemate wall etc..\nIn 15 BC, during the third and final building phase, the entire site of Masada\u2014except for the Northern Palace\u2014was enclosed by a casemate wall, which consisted of a double wall with a space between that was divided into rooms by perpendicular walls; these were used as living chambers for the soldiers and as extra storage space. The Western Palace was also extended for a third time to include more rooms for the servants and their duties.\nModern tourism.\nMasada was declared a UNESCO World Heritage Site in 2001.\nIn 2007, the Masada Museum in Memory of Yigael Yadin opened at the site, in which archeological findings are displayed in a theatrical setting. Many of the artifacts exhibited were unearthed by Yadin and his archaeological team from the Hebrew University of Jerusalem during the 1960s.\nThe archaeological site is situated in the Masada National Park, and the park requires an entrance fee (even if by hiking). There are two hiking paths, both very steep:\nHikers frequently start an hour before sunrise, when the park opens, to avoid the mid-day heat, which can exceed in the summer. In fact, the hiking paths are often closed during the day in the summer because of the heat. Visitors are encouraged to bring drinking water for the hike up, as water is available only at the top.\nAlternatively, for a higher fee, visitors can take a cable car (the Masada cableway, opens at 8 am) to the top of the mesa.\nA visitors' center and the museum are at the base of the cable car.\nA light-and-sound show is presented on some summer nights on the western side of the mountain (access by car from the Arad road or by foot, down the mountain via the Roman Ramp path).\nMasada myth.\nThe Masada myth is the early Zionist retelling of the Siege of Masada, a selectively constructed narrative based on Josephus's account, with the Sicarii instead depicted as national heroes, and in which the Sicarii were described splinter group of the Zealots.\nThe siege of Masada and the resulting Masada myth is often revered in modern Israel as \"a symbol of Jewish heroism\". According to Klara Palotai, \"Masada became a symbol for a heroic 'last stand' for the State of Israel and played a major role for Israel in forging national identity.\" \nTo Israel, it symbolized the courage of the warriors of Masada, the strength they showed when they were able to keep hold of Masada for almost three years, and their choice of death over slavery in their struggle against an aggressive empire. Masada had become \"the performance space of national heritage\", the site of military ceremonies. Palotai states how Masada \"developed a special 'love affair' with archeology\" because the site had drawn people from all around the world to help locate the remnants of the fortress and the battle that occurred there.\nWorld War II.\nThe Masada story was the inspiration for the \"Masada plan\" devised by the British during the Mandate era. The plan was to man defensive positions on Mount Carmel with Palmach fighters, to stop Erwin Rommel's expected drive through the region in 1942. The plan was abandoned following Rommel's defeat at El Alamein.\nIsraeli army.\nThe chief of staff of the Israel Defense Forces (IDF), Moshe Dayan, initiated the practice of holding the swearing-in ceremony of Israeli Armoured Corps soldiers who had completed their \"tironut\" (IDF basic training) on top of Masada. The ceremony ended with the declaration: \"Masada shall not fall again.\" The soldiers climbed the Snake Path at night and were sworn in with torches lighting the background. These ceremonies are now also held at various other memorable locations, including the Armoured Corps Memorial at Latrun, the Western Wall and Ammunition Hill in Jerusalem, Akko Prison, and training bases.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20986", "revid": "6326132", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20986", "title": "Marvel Universe", "text": "American comic book shared universe\nThe Marvel Universe is a fictional shared universe where the stories in most American comic book titles and other media published by Marvel Comics take place. Superhero teams such as the Avengers, the X-Men, the Fantastic Four, the Guardians of the Galaxy, and many Marvel superheroes live in this universe, including characters such as Spider-Man, Wolverine, Iron Man, Captain America, and Hulk. It also contains well-known supervillains such as Doctor Doom, Magneto, Green Goblin, Loki, and Thanos. It also contains antiheroes such as Deadpool, Ghost Rider, Punisher, Elektra, and Black Cat.\nThe Marvel Universe is further depicted as existing within a \"multiverse\" consisting of thousands of separate universes, all of which are the creations of Marvel Comics and all of which are, in a sense, \"Marvel universes\". In this context, \"Marvel Universe\" is taken to refer to the mainstream Marvel continuity, which is known as Earth-616 or \"Prime Earth\".\nHistory.\nSome of the characters in Timely Comics (the 1930s and '40s predecessor to Marvel Comics) coexisted in the same world, as first established in \"Marvel Mystery Comics\" #7 (1940) where Namor was mentioned in Human Torch's story, and vice versa. Later several superheroes (who starred in separate stories in the series up to that point) met each other in a group dubbed the All-Winners Squad.\nThough the concept of a shared universe was not new or unique to comic books in 1961, writer/editor Stan Lee, together with several artists including Jack Kirby and Steve Ditko, created a series of titles where events in one book would have repercussions in another title and serialized stories would show characters' growth and change. Headline characters in one title would make cameos or guest appearances in other books. \"Fantastic Four #12\" is the first crossover comic book in modern Marvel continuity (first meeting of Fantastic Four and the Hulk). Eventually, many of the leading heroes (Ant-Man, Wasp, Iron Man, Thor and the Hulk) assembled into a team known as the Avengers, which debuted in September 1963. This was not the first time that Marvel's characters had interacted with one another\u2014Namor and the original Human Torch had been rivals when Marvel was Timely Comics (Marvel Vault), under editor Martin Goodman \u2014 but it was the first time that the comic book publisher's characters seemed to share a world. The Marvel Universe was also notable for setting its central titles in New York City; by contrast, many DC heroes live in fictional cities. Care was taken to portray the city and the world as realistically as possible, with the presence of superhumans affecting the common citizens in various ways.\nOver time, a few Marvel Comics writers lobbied Marvel editors to incorporate the idea of a Multiverse resembling DC's parallel worlds; this plot device allows one to create several fictional universes which normally do not overlap. What happens on Earth in the main Marvel Universe would normally not affect what happens on a parallel Earth in another Marvel-created universe. However, writers would have the creative ability to write stories in which people from one such universe would visit this alternative universe.\nIn 1982, Marvel published the miniseries \"Contest of Champions\", in which all of the major heroes in existence at the time were gathered together to deal with one threat. This was Marvel's first miniseries. Each issue contained biographical information on many major costumed characters; these biographies were a precursor to Marvel's series of reference material, \"The Official Handbook of the Marvel Universe\", which followed shortly on the heels of \"Contest of Champions\".\nConcepts.\nThe Marvel Universe is strongly based on the real world. Earth in the Marvel Universe has all the features of the real one: same countries, same personalities (politicians, movie stars, etc.), same historical events (such as World War II), and so on; however, it also contains many other fictional elements: countries such as Wakanda and Latveria and organizations like the espionage agency S.H.I.E.L.D. and its enemies, Hydra and A.I.M. In 2009, Marvel officially described its world's geography in a two-part miniseries, the \"Marvel Atlas\".\nMost importantly, the Marvel Universe also incorporates examples of almost all major science fiction and fantasy concepts, with writers adding more continuously. Aliens, gods, magic, cosmic powers and extremely advanced human-developed technology all exist prominently in the Marvel Universe. Monsters also play a more prominent role with east Asian origins of magical incantation, outlandish sorcery and manifesting principle in the Marvel Universe. One such case is Fin Fang Foom arising from the ashes of tantric magic. Thanks to these extra elements, Earth in the Marvel Universe is home to a large number of superheroes and supervillains, who have gained their powers by any of these means. The general public is so familiar with such concepts that Empire State University has a scholarship for \"aliens, dimensional travelers, clones, independent machine intelligences and other students outside the norm\", businesses and residences have superhero property insurance and bookmakers take bets on their battles' outcomes, and New York air traffic controllers handle starships landing at local airports.\nComparatively, little time passes in the Marvel Universe compared to the real world, owing to the serial nature of storytelling, with the stories of certain issues picking up mere seconds after the conclusion of the previous one, while a whole month has passed by in \"real-time\". Marvel's major heroes were created in the 1960s, but the amount of time that has passed between then and now within the universe itself has (after a prolonged period of being identified as about 10 years in the mid-to-late 1990s) most recently been identified as 13 years. Consequently, the settings of some events which were contemporary when written have to be updated every few years to \"make sense\" in this floating timeline. Thus, the events of previous stories are considered to have happened within a certain number of years before the publishing date of the current issue. For example, Spider-Man's high school graduation was published in \"Amazing Spider-Man\" #28 (September 1965), his college graduation in \"Amazing Spider-Man\" #185 (October 1978), and his high school reunion in \"Marvel Knights Spider-Man\" #7 (December 2004). Because of the floating timeline, where stories refer to real-life historic events, these references are later ignored or rewritten to suit current sensibilities; for instance, the origin of Iron Man was changed in a 2004 storyline to refer to the war on terror in Afghanistan, whereas the original Iron Man stories had referred to the Vietnam War in Vietnam; similarly, the Punisher's backstory has also been changed as well.\nMarvel Comics itself exists as a company within the Marvel Universe, and versions of people such as Stan Lee and Jack Kirby have appeared in some of the stories, whereas characters like Steve Rogers, (Captain America's alter ego), have worked for Marvel. The Marvel of this reality publishes comics that adapt the actual adventures of the superheroes (except for details not known to the public, like their secret identities); many of these are licensed with the permission of the heroes themselves, who customarily donate their share of profits to charity. Additionally, the DC Comics Universe is also said to exist in the Marvel Universe as one of the many alternative universes. The reverse may also be said concerning the DC Universe. This is one method of explaining the various crossover stories co-published by the two companies.\nPop culture characters such as Sherlock Holmes, Dracula and the Frankenstein's Monster exist in the Marvel Universe. This is usually justified as a second-hand account of events as told to credited authors Arthur Conan Doyle, Bram Stoker, and Mary Shelley, although the general public continues to believe them to be fictional. Robert E. Howard's Conan the Barbarian, Red Sonja, Kull the Conqueror, and Solomon Kane also have real-life existences in the Marvel Universe. The Hyborian Era of Conan and Kull is considered part of Earth-616 pre-recorded history. However, they rarely encounter modern Marvel superhero characters. This is most likely possible due to the uncertain legal status of Howard's works before 2006 when they became public domain. As of 2019, Conan the Barbarian, as well as Kull the Conqueror and Solomon Kane, have been firmly integrated, thanks to Marvel regaining the publishing rights to the characters. Other licensed works that have been incorporated into the Marvel Universe include Godzilla, the Transformers, the film \"\" (in the character of Machine Man), Rom the Spaceknight, the Micronauts, and the Shogun Warriors. In most cases, such material is either restricted from use after the license expires or the characters redesigned or renamed to avoid copyright infringement.\nCostumed superheroes and supervillains.\nWithin the fictional history of the Marvel Universe, the tradition of using costumed secret identities to fight or commit evil had long existed, but it came into prominence during the days of the American \"Wild West\" with heroes such as Carter Slade/the Phantom Rider. During the 20th century, the tradition was reinvigorated by Steve Rogers/Captain America and the Invaders in the 1940s, who fought for the Allies of World War II.\nUnlike the DC Universe, few of Marvel's Golden Age characters have risen to prominence in modern publications; Captain America is one exception, and to a lesser extent, his contemporary, Namor, primarily because both of these characters were reintroduced to readers and the Marvel Universe during the 1960s.\nMarvel's most prominent heroes were created during the Silver Age of Comic Books in the 1960s to early 1970s, including Peter Parker/Spider-Man, Tony Stark/Iron Man, Thor, Bruce Banner/the Hulk, Stephen Strange/Doctor Strange, Matt Murdock/Daredevil, Ant-Man and the Wasp (Hank Pym and Janet van Dyne), Natasha Romanoff/the Black Widow, Clint Barton/Hawkeye, Pietro Maxmioff/Quicksilver, Wanda Maximoff/the Scarlet Witch, the Vision, Simon Williams/Wonder Man, Hercules, Kevin Plunder/Ka-Zar, Groot, Nick Fury, T'Challa/the Black Panther, Mar-Vell (the first Captain Marvel), Carol Danvers (also known as the first Ms. Marvel, Binary, Warbird, and the current Captain Marvel), Sam Wilson/the Falcon, Dane Whitman/the Black Knight, Norrin Radd/the Silver Surfer, Jane Foster (also known as the second Thor), Warren Worthington III/Angel, Hank McCoy/the Beast, Scott Summers/Cyclops, Robert \"Bobby\" Drake/the Iceman, Jean Grey (also known as Marvel Girl and Phoenix), Charles Xavier/Professor X, Lorna Dane/Polaris, Alex Summers/Havok, Sean Cassidy/Banshee, Reed Richards/Mister Fantastic, Susan Storm/the Invisible Woman, Johnny Storm/the Human Torch, Ben Grimm/the Thing, Brunnhilde/the Valkyrie, the Inhumans (composed of Black Bolt, Medusa, Crystal, Gorgon, Karnak, Triton and Lockjaw), and Alexi Shostakov/Red Guardian.\nOther notable heroes from the Bronze Age and Modern Age from the early-to-mid 1970s to the early 1990s include James \"Logan\" Howlett/Wolverine, Ororo Munroe/Storm, Piotr \"Peter\" Rasputin/Colossus, Kurt Wagner/Nightcrawler, Luke Cage (also known as Power-Man), Danny Rand/Iron Fist, Misty Knight, Colleen Wing, Barbara \"Bobbi\" Morse/Mockingbird, White Tiger (Hector Ayala), Shang-Chi, Greer Grant Nelson/Tigra, Jessica Drew (also known as Spider-Woman), Ghost Rider (Johnny Blaze), Daimon Hellstrom, Satana Hellstrom, Theodore \"Ted\" Sallis/the Man-Thing, Eric Brooks/Blade the Vampire-Slayer, Michael Morbius/Morbius the Living Vampire, Howard the Duck, Monica Rambeau (also known as Photon, Pulsar, Spectrum and the second Captain Marvel), Moondragon, Drax the Destroyer, Peter Quill/Star-Lord, Gamora, Rocket Raccoon, Frank Castle/the Punisher, Marc Spector/Moon Knight, the Eternals (composed of Ikaris, Thena, Ajak, Makkari, Kingo, Phastos, Gilgamesh and Sprite), War Machine, Nova (Richard Rider), Adam Warlock, Power Pack, Betsy Braddock, Scott Lang (the second Ant-Man), Felicia Hardy/the Black Cat, Silver Sable, Katherine \"Kitty\" Pryde (also known as Shadowcat, Ariel, Sprite, Star-Lord and the Red Queen), Emma Frost (also known as the White Queen), Jennifer Walters/the She-Hulk, Tyrone Johnson/Cloak and Tandy Bowen/Dagger, Brian Braddock/Captain Britain, Doreen Green/Squirrel Girl, Elektra Natchios, the New Mutants (composed of Illyana Rasputin/Magik, Xi'an Coy Minh/Karma, Danielle Moonstar/Mirage, Sam Guthrie/Cannonball, Rahne Sinclair/Wolfsbane, Doug Ramsey/Cypher, Warlock and others), the New Warriors, David Haller/Legion, John Proudstar/Warpath-Thunderbird, Anna Marie LeBeau/Rogue and Jubilation Lee/Jubilee.\nSome of Marvel's more recent creations from the mid-to-late 1990s, 2000s and 2010s, such as Wade Wilson/Deadpool, Remy LeBeau/Gambit, Nathan Summers/Cable, Neena Thurman/Domino, Clarice Ferguson/Blink, the Thunderbolts, Yelena Belova (also known as the second Black Widow), the Runaways, the modern Guardians of the Galaxy, the modern Defenders (based on the Netflix MCU version of the same name), Laura Kinney/X-23 (a.k.a. the second Wolverine), Shuri, the Dora Milaje, Daisy Johnson (also known as Quake), Phil Coulson, Melinda May, Bucky Barnes/the Winter Soldier, Maria Hill, Miles Morales (the second Spider-Man of the Ultimate Marvel Universe), Hope van Dyne (also known as the Red Queen and the second Wasp), Cassie Lang (also known as Stature, Stinger, Ant-Girl and Giant-Girl), the Stepford Cuckoos, Amadeus Cho (also known as the second Hulk), Kamala Khan (also known as the second Ms. Marvel), Kate Bishop (also known as the third Hawkeye), Lunella Lafayette/Moon Girl, America Chavez (also known as the second Miss America), Robbie Reyes (also known as the fourth Ghost Rider), Riri Williams/Ironheart and Spider-Gwen (Gwen Stacy of Earth-65) have become popular characters in their own right.\nProminent teams of superheroes include the Avengers, the X-Men, the Fantastic Four, the Defenders, the Inhumans, S.H.I.E.L.D., the Howling Commandos, the Guardians of the Galaxy, the Runaways, the Midnight Sons and the Thunderbolts. All these groups have varying lineups; the Avengers have included Marvel's major heroes as members at one time or another. The X-Men are a team of mutants led by Professor X and include many of Marvel's most popular characters, such as Wolverine and others. The Fantastic Four are viewed as \"Marvel's First Family\" of superheroes, usually consisting of Mister Fantastic, the Invisible Woman, the Human Torch and the Thing, as well as siblings Franklin and Valeria Richards. The Defenders were an ad hoc team usually brought together by Doctor Strange which has included the Hulk, Namor the Sub-Mariner and the Silver Surfer, while the most recent incarnation of the team consists of street-level New York City heroes Daredevil, Jessica Jones, Luke Cage and Iron Fist. The Guardians of the Galaxy include Marvel's cosmic characters such as Adam Warlock, Star-Lord, Gamora, Drax the Destroyer, Rocket Raccoon and Groot, but the team has also introduced other heroes into the roster such as Kitty Pryde, the Silver Surfer, the Thing and Nova. The Inhumans are a royal family consisting of Black Bolt, Medusa, Crystal, Gorgon, Triton, Karnak and Lockjaw, who rule the city of Attilan. The Runaways are a group of teenagers and a dinosaur consisting of Alex Wilder, Nico Minoru, Karolina Dean, Chase Stein, Molly Hayes, Gert Yorkes and Old Lace who rebel against their evil parents known as the Pride. The Midnight Sons consist of supernatural heroes such as Blade, Ghost Rider, Moon Knight, Elsa Bloodstone, Hellstrom, the Werewolf and the Man-Thing. The Thunderbolts' original incarnation were supervillains disguised as superheroes consisting of Citizen V (a.k.a. Helmut Zemo), MACH-IV (a.k.a. the Beetle), Songbird (a.k.a. Screaming Mimi), Moonstone (a.k.a. Meteorite), Techno (a.k.a. the Fixer) and Jolt, while the current incarnation of the team is made up of reformed supervillains/anti-heroes working for the government: Deadpool, the Punisher, the Red Hulk, the Winter Soldier and the Ghost. Although teams of supervillains are few and far between, notable examples include the Masters of Evil, the Emissaries of Evil, the Brotherhood of Mutants, the Sinister Six, the Frightful Four, the Lethal Legion, the Legion of the Unliving, the Black Order, the Annihilation Wave, and the Cabal.\nOrigin of superhuman powers.\nMost of the superhumans in Marvel's Earth owe their powers to the Celestials, cosmic entities who visited Earth millions of years ago and experimented on their prehistoric ancestors (a process they also carried out on several other planets). This resulted in the creation of two hidden races, the godlike Eternals and the genetically unstable Deviants, in addition to giving some humans an \"x-factor\" in their genes, which sometimes activates naturally, resulting in sometimes superpowered, sometimes disfigured individuals called mutants. Others require other factors (such as radiation) for their powers to come forth. Depending on the genetic profile, individuals who are exposed to different chemicals or radiation will often suffer death or injury, while in others it will cause superhuman abilities to manifest. Except for psionic abilities, these powers are usually random; rarely do two people have the same set of powers. It is not clear why the Celestials did this, although it is known that they continue to observe humanity's evolution. A Marvel series titled \"Earth X\" explored one possible reason for this: that superhumans are meant to protect a Celestial embryo that grows inside Earth against any planetary threats and have done so for eons. An X-Men villain that is known as Vargas claims to be a new direction in human evolution, as he is born with superpowers even though his genetic profile said he was an ordinary human being. The majority of the public is unaware of what may cause superhuman powers.\nOther possible origins for superhuman powers include magic, genetic manipulation, or bionic implants. Some heroes and villains have no powers at all but depend instead on hand-to-hand combat training or advanced technological equipment. In the Marvel Universe, technology is considerably more advanced than in the real world; this is due to unique individuals of genius-level intelligence, such as Reed Richards (Mister Fantastic) of the Fantastic Four. However, most of the advanced devices (such as powered armor and death rays) are too expensive for the common citizen, and are usually in the hands of government organizations like S.H.I.E.L.D., or powerful criminal organizations like A.I.M. One major company producing these devices is Stark Industries, owned by Tony Stark (Iron Man), but there are others. Advanced technology has also been given to humans by hidden races, aliens, or time travelers like Kang the Conqueror, who is known to have influenced the robotics industry in the past.\nIn superhumans, the energy required for their superpowers either comes from within using their own body as a source or, if the demand of energy exceeds what their body is capable to deliver, comes from another source.\nMarvel tries to explain most superpowers and their sources \"scientifically\", usually through the use of fictional science-like concepts, such as:\nNon-human.\nA degree of paranoid fear against mutants exists due to stories of mutants being a species or even a subspecies of humans (\"Homo superior\" or \"Homo sapiens superior\") that is evolving and is meant to replace normal humans. This has caused organizations to form to deal with the problem, who can be divided into three camps: those who seek peaceful coexistence between mutants and normal humans (the X-Men and their affiliated groups), those who seek to control or eliminate humans to give mutants safety or dominance (Magneto and his followers, as well as other mutants such as Apocalypse), and those who seek to regulate or eliminate mutants in favor of humans. The latter often use the robots known as the Sentinels as weapons. Certain species are regarded as subhuman, like the Morlocks, who lurk beneath New York City and have been discriminated against by the outside world because of their mutant deformities. The Morlocks have recently joined the terrorist organization Gene Nation.\nIn addition to mutants, Eternals, and Deviants, several other intelligent races have existed secretly on Earth. These include the Inhumans, another genetically unstable race (like the Deviants, but in their case, it is due to their use of a substance called the Terrigen Mist) that was created by a Kree experiment long ago; the Subterraneans, a race of humanoids adapted to living below the surface, created by the Deviants (some Subterraneans were transformed into the 'Lava Men' by a demon); and \"Homo mermanus\", a humanoid species of water-breathers that live in Earth's oceans. Most of these races have advanced technology but existed hidden from humanity until recent times. More variants of humanity can be found in the Savage Land (see Places below). Most of the Savage Land races have their origin from a group of primitive ape-men who seems to have escaped the Celestial experiments and whose influence is present in all modern \"Homo sapiens\". Other leftovers from the era when primitive humanoids walked on Earth still exist, such as the radiation-altered Neanderthal man known as the Missing Link, an enemy of the Hulk.\nAlien races.\nThe Marvel Universe also contains hundreds of intelligent alien races. Earth has interacted with many of them because a major \"hyperspace warp\" happens to exist in the Solar System.\nThe three major space empires are:\nThe three are often in direct or indirect conflict, which occasionally involves Earth humans; in particular, the Kree and Skrulls are ancient enemies, and the Kree-Skrull War has involved humans on several occasions.\nThe Skrulls have also been known to be in a long and consistent war against the Majesdanians, who live on a milky planet named Majesdane. The war between the two had started after two Majesdanians, Frank and Leslie Dean of the Pride had been kicked out for criminal activities; the two traveled to Earth, where Frank and Leslie stopped the war against Earth in exchange for giving the Skrulls the location of Majesdane, which was hidden behind the corona of a white dwarf. The war had gone on for 16 years minimum; it ended abruptly after the Skrulls shot a barrage of missiles at Majesdane, who retaliated.\nAnother prominent alien race is the Watchers, immortal and wise beings who watch over the Marvel Universe and have taken a sacred vow not to intervene in events, though the Watcher assigned to Earth, Uatu, has violated this oath on several occasions.\nThe Elders of the Universe are ancient aliens who have often had a great impact on many worlds for billions of years, acting alone or as a group. A power called the Power Primordial is channeled through them.\nMany other races exist and have formed an \"Intergalactic Council\" to have their say on matters that affect them all, such as interference from Earth humans in their affairs.\nSupernatural creatures.\nAlso abundant in the Marvel Universe are legendary creatures such as gods, demons and vampires. The 'gods' of most polytheistic pantheons are powerful, immortal human-like races residing in other dimensions who visited Earth in ancient times, and became the basis of many legends. However, all of these 'gods' share a common ancestry and connection to Earth due to Gaea, the primeval Elder Goddess that infused her life essence into all living things on Earth. Gaea is known by various names and appearances in other cultures and among the various pantheons, but she is the same being. As a result, she is a member of every polytheistic pantheon of 'gods' worshiped by humans. Besides mythological gods, many deities made up by Marvel writers exist as well, such as the Dark Gods, enemies of the Asgardians. The Dark Gods are a race of 'gods' that have been worshiped by extraterrestrial races. Well-known alien races like the Shi'ar and Skrulls also have beings they worship as 'gods', though little has been revealed about them.\nMany persons and beings have falsely pretended to be gods or demons during history; in particular, none of the ones claiming to be major figures from Judeo-Christian beliefs have turned out to be the real article, although several angels have appeared in recent years, as well as an apparent true rebellion and expulsion of angels from a higher realm known as Paradise, proving that some form of Heaven and Hell do exist in this Universe, seemingly like those in keeping with common real-world religious belief. Similarly, demons are evil magical beings who take affairs in the matters of the universe. Some of the most powerful are Blackheart, Mephisto, Nightmare, Satannish, Thog the Nether-Spawn and Zom. There are also powerful benevolent mystical entities such as the Vishanti; or amoral and malevolent entities who are not truly demonic, such as Dormammu and the Octessence, or ones heavily drawing upon the mythologies of H. P. Lovecraft and Robert E. Howard. Some supernatural beings, entities and human characters created by Lovecraft and Howard, who were friends and influenced each other's work, have been adapted by Marvel and include Abdul Alhazred, Conan the Barbarian Nyarlathotep and Set. Some deities or demonic beings that are original characters of Marvel have been heavily influenced by these mythologies, such as Shuma-Gorath.\nMost of the current generation of gods have been revealed to be the descendants of the Elder Goddess Gaea. The two most featured pantheons are the Asgardians (of whom Thor is a member) and the Olympians (of whom Hercules is a member). The lords of the various pantheons sometimes gather in groups known as either the Council of Godheads or the Council of Skyfathers. The gods were forced to stop meddling with humanity (at least openly) a thousand years ago by the Celestials, and most people today believe them to be fictional. Other pantheons have been depicted in the Marvel Universe that is still actively worshiped in the real world, including those worshiped by the Aboriginal inhabitants of Australia, the gods of Hinduism, the Shinto gods and the gods of Zoroastrianism. These deities are rarely depicted, however. One such appearance generated a good deal of controversy as the depiction involved a fight between Marvel's incarnation of Thor and the Hindu god Shiva, a battle which Shiva lost. As Shiva is one of the principal deities of Hindu religion, his defeat offended some followers of Hinduism. This battle was retconned later as having been the deity Indra, the Hindu god of thunder, who was posing as Shiva, that met defeat. To avoid offending the believers of still active religions, Marvel features such deities as characters in the background or who make very brief cameo appearances.\nMarvel's depiction of vampires has been heavily influenced by various interpretations of popular media, such as Bram Stoker's \"Dracula\". As with many other supernatural creatures, Marvel entwined the origin of vampires with aspects of the mythologies created by Lovecraft and Howard. They were created by magical rites performed by priests of Atlantis before the Great Cataclysm that destroyed much of the world, with Varnae becoming the first vampire. Marvel would depict vampires as frequent antagonists during the Hyborian Age to Howard characters such as Kull and Conan. In recent years, Marvel's depiction of vampires has altered greatly by creating various subspecies of vampires that exist in clans that greatly differ in appearance and belief. All vampires are depicted with varying degrees of superhuman strength, speed, stamina, agility, reflexes and accelerated healing. Many are capable of transforming into animals such as bats or wolves; some can transform into a mist-like substance; some of the most powerful are capable of controlling the weather to a somewhat limited degree. All vampires must ingest blood to maintain their survival and physical vitality. So long as they do so regularly, they cease to age and are immune to diseases. They retain the well-known vulnerabilities common to vampires in other media interpretations, including sunlight, garlic, religious icons and weapons made of silver. Vampires can be killed by a wooden stake driven through the heart, though they return to life if the stake is removed. Vampires are highly allergic to silver and can be killed with it. While they normally heal rapidly, injuries inflicted by silver weapons heal at a much slower rate if the injuries are not fatal. Vampires can also be killed by decapitation or being burned with fire, with burning them to ashes and then scattering the ashes being the most effective means of ensuring their demise (scattering the ashes is done so that the vampire cannot be mystically resurrected).\nCosmic entities.\nThe cosmic entities are beings of unbelievably great levels of power (the weakest of whom can destroy entire planets) who exist to perform duties that maintain the existence of the universe. Most do not care at all about \"lesser beings\" such as humans, and as a consequence, their acts are recurrently dangerous to mortals. When dire threats threaten the universe, it is not uncommon for these beings to gather together to discuss the threat and even act on it.\nMost conceptual entities are simply interested in furthering their essential function or to keep the balance with an opposing force. However, certain cosmic entities, such as Galactus, the In-Betweener, the Maelstrom, or the Stranger have demonstrated personality, motivations, or (except for the first one mentioned) even ambitions beyond their functions, but often maintain the perspective that morality is entirely relative, or that destroying civilizations of \"lesser\" beings is no eviler than if these beings destroyed an anthill. Others such as Uatu the Watcher, Eon, or the Celestials, Ashema and Tiamut are aberrations in the sense of sympathizing with, and occasionally coming to the defense of, humanity.\nThe Phoenix Force first received personification in Jean Grey. The Phoenix Force is composed of the psionic energy from all living beings' past, present, and future, and is an embodiment of rebirth and destructive transformation through \"burning away what doesn't work\", and helped to restart the universe before the Big Bang.\n'The \"Fulcrum\" is a comparatively recent addition to the hierarchy, that \"all\" cosmic entities allegedly serve, of a level of raw power stated to far surpass the might of the Watchers and the Celestials. Unlike most other entities, it is capable of conscience, compassion, and even a sense of humor, and has stated that it wants other cosmic beings to develop such as well. He is a possible manifestation/avatar of the One-Above-All.\nThe mentioned One-Above-All is believed to be the supreme, omnipotent being, who solely created the Marvel Multiverse, and possibly acted beyond. He also brought to life the Living Tribunal, an extremely powerful cosmic entity, who serves to maintain balance within the Multiverse.\nCosmology.\nMultiverse.\nThe Marvel Universe is part of a Multiverse, with various universes coexisting simultaneously, \"usually\" without affecting each other directly. Furthermore, each universe has various other dimensions associated with it, and one such group is collectively known as a Reality. Often what is referred to in the comics as a \"Universe\" is actually a \"Reality\". According to mythology, the Multiverse has been created by the omnipotent being One-Above-All.\nEven the Marvel Multiverse, however, is only a part of the Omniverse, which consists of all of fiction and reality combined, including all the works that are outside of Marvel's copyright restrictions.\nThe action of most of the Marvel Comics titles takes place in a continuity known as Earth-616. This continuity exists in a multiverse alongside trillions of alternative continuities. Alternative continuities in the Marvel Multiverse are generally defined in terms of their differences from Earth-616.\nContinuities besides Earth-616 include the following (for a complete listing see Multiverse (Marvel Comics)):\nTime.\nOne cannot normally alter the Marvel Universe's history; if a time-traveler should cause an alteration to the established flow of events at some point in the past, a divergent universe will simply \"branch out\" from the existing timeline, and the time-traveler will still return to their unaltered original universe. Those realities can also spawn realities of their own. There exist hundreds, probably thousands of such realities. It is unknown why this happens, though a warp known as the Nexus of All Realities exists in a swamp in the Florida Everglades of Earth-616. For the most part, this does not matter, as most beings are unaware that this occurs, or even that their universes were recently \"born\" from another. However, individuals and organizations exist that try to monitor or manipulate the various realities. These include Immortus, the Captain Britain Corps, the Time Variance Authority, the Timebreakers/Exiles, and Kang the Conqueror's forces. It is possible to travel through time without creating a new alternative universe, instead of altering events in the future, but this seems to have devastating and very far-reaching repercussions, as depicted in Marvel 1602 (it almost destroyed the whole multiverse, including the afterlife).\nAlso, time itself passes much differently within the confines of the Marvel Universe than it does in the real world. Despite various characters having appeared within company publications for decades, few, if any, have aged to any appreciable degree. For example, the patriotic hero Captain America was created in 1941 but stopped appearing in titles soon after the end of World War II. The character was revived more than 20 years later, explained as having been frozen in a block of ice though believed to be dead, to lead Marvel's latest team of superheroes the Avengers. This first Avengers team featured several characters that would go on to be some of the company's most famous and most popular. Although the characters would be portrayed in hundreds and even thousands of adventures over the decades, they have been portrayed as having aged little or not at all.\nThe passing of time was more discernible in the very early years, such as the graduation of Spider-Man; and what started as children or teenaged characters, such as Kitty Pryde, Franklin Richards, Valeria Richards, Power Pack, or the New Mutants are all allowed to age at wildly shifting rates (in the second case even backward at times), whereas surrounding characters somewhat dependent on a certain age limit do not change at all. This recurrently creates contradictory effects, as events are routinely described to have happened several years ago, even in cases when this would mean that some of the involved characters would have been toddlers. Different approaches also exist regarding allowing \"second-generation\" descendants of heroes or villains, full-grown over 18 years after an event (for example, Hulkling, other members of the Young Avengers, the Runaways, and the Secret Warriors), whereas other books, such as \"Young Allies\" use the contradiction to debunk similar claims. If a past storyline wherein a direct depiction of a then-current president or similar is referred to in a later era, it tends to become updated accordingly, sometimes with an \"in-joke\" acknowledgment.\nA more recent explanation was given by Galactus to the Ultimates, namely that some important events \u2013 for instance, the creation of the Fantastic Four or the Avengers \u2013 have a 'gravity' all their own and warp time around them, causing the timeline to subtly change to accommodate this.\nSpace.\nWhile the Marvel Universe is presumably as large as the non-fictional universe comic book readers inhabit, for all intents and purposes the Local Group is the universe; practically all action takes place in it. The Skrull Empire is located in the Andromeda Galaxy, the Kree Empire in the Greater Magellanic Cloud, which is a satellite of the Milky Way galaxy in which Earth is found, and the Shi\u00b4ar Empire is located somewhere between them in one of the smaller galaxies (perhaps the Triangulum Galaxy); frequently, these three empires are quoted as the main political powers \"in the universe\". Similarly, the Local Group seems to be the only affected area when the Annihilation Wave cut its bloody swath \"across the universe\".\nOther media.\nFour role-playing games have been set in the Marvel Universe:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20989", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20989", "title": "Munich massacre", "text": "1972 Summer Olympics terrorist attack\nThe Munich massacre was a terrorist attack during the 1972 Summer Olympics in Munich, West Germany, carried out by eight members of the Palestinian militant organisation Black September. The militants infiltrated the Olympic Village, killed two members of the Israeli Olympic team, and took nine other Israeli team members hostage. Those hostages were later also killed by the militants during a failed rescue attempt.\nBlack September commander and negotiator Luttif Afif named the operation \"Iqrit and Biram\", after two Palestinian Christian villages whose inhabitants were expelled by Israel during the 1948 Palestine war. Intelligence files suggest that some West German neo-Nazis may have assisted Black September in the 1972 Munich massacre, though the extent of their involvement remains debated. Shortly after the hostages were taken, Afif demanded the release of a significant number of Palestinians and non-Arab prisoners held in Israel, as well as one of the West German\u2013imprisoned founders of the Red Army Faction, Ulrike Meinhof. The list included 328 detainees.\nWest German police from the Bavarian Police ambushed the terrorists, killing five of the eight Black September members, but the rescue attempt failed, resulting in the deaths of all the hostages.\nA West German police officer was also killed in the crossfire. The West German government faced criticism for the rescue attempt and its handling of the incident. The three surviving perpetrators were arrested but were released the following month in a hostage exchange after the hijacking of Lufthansa Flight 615.\nBy then the Israeli government had launched an assassination campaign, which authorised Mossad to track down and kill anyone who had played a role in the attack.\nTwo days before the start of the 2016 Summer Olympics, Brazilian and Israeli officials led a ceremony where the International Olympic Committee (IOC) honoured the eleven Israelis and one German killed at Munich. During the 2020 Summer Olympics, a moment of silence was observed in the opening ceremony.\nBackground.\nAhead of the 1972 Olympics, the West German Olympic Organizing Committee aimed to discard Germany's military image, wary of the propaganda portrayed by the 1936 Summer Olympics under Nazi dictator Adolf Hitler. The IOC President at the time, Avery Brundage, had been involved in the 1936 Olympics and had lived through the experience of those games.\nSecurity personnel, known as OLYs, were inconspicuous and primarily prepared to handle ticket fraud and drunkenness. The documentary film \"One Day in September\" claims that security in the athletes' Village was inadequate for the Games. Athletes could bypass security and enter other countries' rooms by climbing over the -high chain-link fence surrounding the Olympic Village, rather than using the official entrances.\nThe absence of armed personnel worried Israeli delegation head Shmuel Lalkin even before his team arrived in Munich. In later interviews with journalists Serge Groussard and Aaron J. Klein, Lalkin said he had expressed concerns to the relevant authorities about his team's lodgings. The team was housed in a relatively isolated part of the Olympic Village, on the ground floor of a small building close to a gate, which Lalkin felt made them particularly vulnerable to an outside assault. The West German authorities assured Lalkin that extra security would be provided for the Israeli team, but Lalkin doubts that any additional measures were taken.\nOlympic organisers asked West German forensic psychologist Georg Sieber to present some threat scenarios to aid in planning security, and he presented 26 scenarios. His \"Situation 21\" scenario accurately predicted an incursion of Palestinian elements into the Olympic Village. However, the organizers did not forward the document to the West German authorities, as guarding the Games against such threats conflicted with their goal of hosting \"Carefree Games\" without heavy security. Despite having clear intelligence from multiple sources and technically considering the possibility of such an attack, the Bavarian State police were still taken by surprise.\nClaims of German awareness before the attack.\nThe German news magazine \"Der Spiegel\" reported in 2012 that West German authorities had received a tip-off from a Palestinian informant in Beirut three weeks before the massacre. The informant warned that Palestinians were planning an \"incident\" at the Olympic Games, and the Federal Foreign Office in Bonn took the tip-off seriously enough to pass it to the Bavarian State Secret Service in Munich, urging that \"all possible security measures\" be taken. According to \"Der Spiegel\", the authorities failed to act on the tip and never acknowledged it in the following 40 years. The magazine claimed this was part of a 40-year cover-up by German authorities regarding their mishandling of the response to the massacre.\nPlanning and German involvement.\nHistorical documents released to \"Der Spiegel\" by the German secret service show that Dortmund police had been aware of collaboration between Abu Daoud and neo-Nazi Willi Pohl ( E. W. Pless and, since 1979, officially named Willi Voss) seven weeks before the attack.\nThe historian Wolfgang Kraushaar has suggested that the left-wing militant Wilfried B\u00f6se may have also provided support for the attack.\nAttack and hostage taking.\nThe attackers were reported to be Palestinian terrorists from refugee camps in Lebanon, Syria, and Jordan. They were identified as Luttif Afif (code name Issa), the leader (three of Issa's brothers were also reportedly members of Black September, with two in Israeli jails), his deputy Yusuf Nazzal (\"Tony\"), and junior members Afif Ahmed Hamid (\"Paolo\"), Khalid Jawad (\"Salah\"), Ahmed Chic Thaa (\"Abu Halla\"), Mohammed Safady (\"Badran\"), Adnan Al-Gashey (\"Denawi\"), and Al-Gashey's cousin, Jamal Al-Gashey (\"Samir\").\nAccording to the author Simon Reeve, Afif, Nazzal, and one of their confidantes had all worked in various capacities in the Olympic Village and had spent a couple of weeks scouting for their potential target. A member of the Uruguay Olympic delegation, which shared housing with the Israelis, claimed that he found Nazzal inside 31 Connollystra\u00dfe less than 24 hours before the attack. However, since Nazzal was recognized as a worker in the Village, nothing was thought of it at the time. The other members of the group entered Munich via train and plane in the days leading up to the attack.\nOn Monday evening, 4 September, the Israeli athletes enjoyed a night out, watching a performance of \"Fiddler on the Roof\" and dining with the star of the play, Israeli actor Shmuel Rodensky, before returning to the Olympic Park in Munich. On the return trip in the team bus, Lalkin denied his 13-year-old son\u2014who had befriended weightlifter Yossef Romano and wrestler Eliezer Halfin\u2014permission to spend the night in their Olympic Village apartment at Connollystra\u00dfe 31, a decision that may have saved the boy's life.\nThe hostages were taken during the second week of the Games. At 4:10\u00a0am local time on 5 September, as the athletes slept, eight tracksuit-clad members of the Black September faction of the Palestine Liberation Organization, carrying duffel bags loaded with AKM assault rifles, Tokarev pistols, and hand grenades, scaled a chain-link fence with the assistance of unsuspecting athletes who were also sneaking into the Olympic Village. The athletes were originally identified as Americans but were later claimed to be Canadians.\nThey entered the two-story apartment building at Connollystra\u00dfe 31, which housed the Israeli, Hong Kong, and Uruguay Olympic delegations, through an unlocked front door. Yossef Gutfreund, a wrestling referee, was awakened by a faint scratching noise at the door of Apartment 1, which housed the Israeli coaches and officials. Investigating the noise, he saw the door begin to open and masked men with guns on the other side. Shouting a warning to his sleeping roommates, he threw his 135\u00a0kg (300\u00a0lb) weight against the door in an attempt to stop the intruders from forcing their way in. Gutfreund's actions gave his roommate, weightlifting coach Tuvia Sokolovsky, enough time to escape through a window. Meanwhile, wrestling coach Moshe Weinberg, known as \"Muni\", fought the intruders, who shot him through his cheek and then forced him to help them find more hostages.\nLeading the intruders past Apartment 2, Weinberg lied, telling them that the residents were not Israelis. Instead, he directed them to Apartment 3, where the gunmen corralled six wrestlers and weightlifters as additional hostages. Weinberg might have hoped that the stronger men would have a better chance of fighting off the attackers than those in Apartment 2, but they were all surprised in their sleep.\nAs the athletes from Apartment 3 were marched back to the coaches' apartment, the wounded Weinberg attacked the gunmen again, allowing one of his wrestlers, Gad Tsobari, to escape via the underground parking garage. Weinberg knocked one of the intruders unconscious and slashed at another with a fruit knife but failed to draw blood before being shot to death.\nWeightlifter Yossef Romano, a veteran of the 1967 Six-Day War, also attacked and wounded one of the intruders before being shot and later succumbed to his wounds. According to a report by \"The New York Times\" on 1 December 2015, Romano, after he was shot, was slowly left to bleed to death and, at some point over many hours, was castrated.\nThe gunmen were left with nine hostages: in addition to Gutfreund, they had shooting coach Kehat Shorr, track and field coach Amitzur Shapira, fencing master Andre Spitzer, weightlifting judge Yakov Springer, wrestlers Eliezer Halfin and Mark Slavin, and weightlifters David Berger and Ze'ev Friedman. Berger was an expatriate American with dual citizenship, while Slavin, the youngest of the hostages at 18, had only arrived in Israel from the Soviet Union four months before the Olympic Games began. Gutfreund, physically the largest of the hostages, was bound to a chair (Groussard describes him as being tied up like a mummy); the rest were lined up four apiece on the two beds in Springer and Shapira's room, and bound at the wrists and ankles, and then to each other. Romano's bullet-riddled corpse was left at his bound comrades' feet as a warning. Several of the hostages were beaten during the standoff, with some suffering broken bones as a result.\nOf the other members of the Israeli team in Apartment 2, racewalker Shaul Ladany was abruptly awakened by sports shooter Zelig Shtroch, who said something like, \"Arabs have shot Muni,\" referring to Moshe Weinberg. Ladany escaped by jumping from the rear second-story balcony. He then ran to the American dormitory, woke up US track coach Bill Bowerman, and informed him of the attack. Ladany, a survivor of the Bergen-Belsen concentration camp, was the first person to spread the alert. The remaining four residents of Apartment 2\u2014shooters Henry Hershkowitz and Zelig Shtroch, and fencers Dan Alon and Yehuda Weisenstein\u2014along with chef de mission Shmuel Lalkin and the two team doctors, were also able to flee the besieged building. The two female members of Israel's Olympic team, sprinter and hurdler Esther Shahamorov and swimmer Shlomit Nir, were housed in a separate part of the Olympic Village.\nUltimatum, negotiations and first rescue effort.\nThe hostage-takers demanded the release of a significant number of Palestinians and non-Arabs imprisoned in Israel, including K\u014dz\u014d Okamoto of the Japanese Red Army, along with one West German insurgent held by the West German penitentiary system, Ulrike Meinhof, who was one of the founders of the West German Red Army Faction. Evidence uncovered in later years from the Munich Public Prosecutor's Office, held in the Munich State Archives, revealed that the original typewritten English-language communiqu\u00e9s of Black September contained a list of 328 names.\nThe hostage-takers threw the body of Weinberg out of the front door of the apartment building to demonstrate their resolve. Israel's response was immediate and absolute: there would be no negotiation. Israel's official policy at the time was to refuse to negotiate with terrorists under any circumstances, as according to the Israeli government such negotiations would give an incentive to future attacks.\nUnder Chancellor Willy Brandt and Federal Interior Minister Hans-Dietrich Genscher, Zvi Zamir, the head of Israel's Mossad, later reported the German authorities had rejected his repeated offer to deploy the IDF's \"Sayeret Matkal\", insisting instead the Bavarian State Police would handle the crisis. The Bavarian interior minister, Bruno Merk, who headed the crisis centre jointly with Genscher and Munich's police chief Manfred Schreiber, denies that such an Israeli offer ever existed. Furthermore, such an offer of foreign military intervention could never be entertained due to the sovereignty of the Federal Republic of Germany.\nAccording to journalist John K. Cooley, the hostage situation presented an extremely difficult political situation for the Germans because the hostages were Jewish. Munich police chief Manfred Schreiber and Bruno Merk, the interior minister of Bavaria, negotiated directly with the kidnappers, repeatedly offering an unlimited ransom. According to Cooley, the reply was that \"money means nothing to us; our lives mean nothing to us.\" The Germans also offered the Palestinians the substitution of high-ranking German officials. The kidnappers refused both offers.\nMeanwhile, the Olympic committee's refusal to suspend the games amid the emerging crisis intensified the pressure on the West German authorities and police to find a resolution.\nMagdi Gohary and Mohammad Khadif, both Egyptian advisers to the Arab League, and Ahmed El Demerdash Touny, an Egyptian member of the International Olympic Committee (IOC), also helped try to win concessions from the kidnappers but to no avail. However, the German negotiators were able to convince the terrorists that their demands were being considered, as \"Issa\" granted several deadline extensions.\nElsewhere in the village, athletes carried on as normal, seemingly oblivious to the events unfolding nearby. The Games continued until mounting pressure on the IOC forced a suspension 12 hours after the first athlete had been murdered.\nUnited States marathon runner Frank Shorter, observing the unfolding events from the balcony of his nearby lodging, was quoted as saying, \"Imagine those poor guys over there. Every five minutes a psycho with a machine gun says, 'Let's kill 'em now,' and someone else says, 'No, let's wait a while.' How long could you stand that?\"\nUltimatum.\nShortly before 5:00\u00a0am, the Munich police, the organising committee, and paramedics were alerted. Ambulances arrived, and the blood-soaked body of Weinberg, who had been thrown in front of the apartment building entrance (Connollystra\u00dfe 31) by the terrorists and could not be saved, was recovered. The paramedics also tried in vain to negotiate with the attackers at the building entrance to attend to the injured person inside, Romano. Despite their efforts, the attackers would not allow them to enter the building, and he eventually succumbed to his gunshot injuries.\nThe terrorists demanded by 9\u00a0am, the release of Palestinians and non-Arabs held captive in Israel, as well as Meinhof, who was imprisoned in West Germany. They also requested safe passage for themselves and the hostages to an Arab capital, using a plane provided for this purpose, where the hostage exchange would take place. The terrorists warned that they would shoot the hostages immediately if their demands were not met.\nThere are different reports about the exact number of people to be released and whether non-Arab terrorists were included. For a long time, there was talk of two hundred Palestinians. In non-fiction books by Simon Reeve, Luis Palme, and Kay Schiller, it was stated from 2006 onwards, without further source evidence, that the hostage-takers had demanded the release of 234 Palestinians from Israeli custody, as well as the German Red Army Faction terrorists Meinhof and Andreas Baader. According to historians Anna Greithanner, Dominik Aufleger, and Robert Wolff, who found the original list of the hostage-takers in the \"Staatsarchiv M\u00fcnchen\" (Munich State Archives), it contains 328 names, including Meinhof and Okamoto of the Japanese Red Army, one of the perpetrators of the massacre at Lod Airport on 30 May 1972. Various news reports and television documentaries had also claimed that the Red Army Faction founder Baader was listed along with Meinhof, but the original communiqu\u00e9 held in the Munich State Archives issued by the Black September group to the West German government only listed Meinhof, not Baader. A copy of the initial communiqu\u00e9 shown in the movie \"One Day in September\" shows Meinhof, Baader and Okamoto listed.\nBetween 5:40\u00a0am and 9\u00a0am, the crisis team was set up on-site and met with Federal Minister of the Interior Hans-Dietrich Genscher, Bavarian Minister of the Interior Bruno Merk, Munich Police President Manfred Schreiber, State Secretary Erich Kiesl, German National Olympic Committee President Willi Daume, and IOC President Avery Brundage, while the cabinet met in Bonn. The crisis team was given full authorisation by Chancellor Willy Brandt and the German Federal Government to do whatever was needed to rescue the hostages. At 8:45\u00a0am, the Israeli Foreign Ministry received the initial news about the attack from the Israeli embassy in Bonn. This information was then forwarded to Prime Minister Golda Meir, Minister of Education and Culture Yigal Allon (who had responsibility for the Olympic team), and Minister of Defence Moshe Dayan.\nAs the ultimatum neared its expiry, the crisis team resumed negotiations with the German-speaking leader of the terrorists, \"Issa\", who hid his face under a mask and wore a white hat. With the assistance of an envoy from the Arab League and the head of the Egyptian IOC delegation, they managed to extend the ultimatum.\nThat evening at the press center, Mark Spitz's first post-competition press conference was held. Rather than ask about his performance, reporters questioned him about his reaction to the ongoing hostage situation. Spitz, himself of Jewish origin, was advised by officials to leave Munich the same day.\nMidday extension.\nA quarter of an hour before the noon ultimatum expired, an extension of three hours, until 3\u00a0pm, was negotiated with the terrorists. During the negotiations, the mayor of the Olympic Village, Walther Tr\u00f6ger, along with Willi Daume, Manfred Schreiber, the Munich Police President and the head of security for the Games of the XX Olympiad, Bavarian Minister of the Interior Bruno Merk, and Federal Minister of the Interior and Vice President of the German NOC, Hans-Dietrich Genscher, offered themselves to the terrorists as replacement hostages, but to no avail.\nThe Israeli ambassador to Germany, Eliashiv Ben-Horin, announced around midday that the Israeli cabinet had decided not to accept the demands of the hostage-takers. Meir rejected the demands in order not to risk the lives of its citizens abroad for all time. Ambassador Ben Horin underscored Israel's faith in the German authorities' ability to save the hostages and demanded that the sporting competitions be halted until the hostage-taking was concluded.\nAt one point during the crisis, the German negotiators demanded direct contact with the hostages to satisfy themselves the Israelis were still alive. Fencing coach Andre Spitzer, who spoke fluent German, and shooting coach Kehat Shorr, the senior member of the Israeli delegation, had a brief conversation with West German officials while standing at the second-floor window of the besieged building, with two kidnappers holding guns on them. When Spitzer attempted to answer a question, he was clubbed with the butt of an AK-47 in full view of international television cameras and pulled away from the window.\nAfternoon extension and suspension of the Olympic Games.\nAt 3:25\u00a0pm, the ultimatum was postponed to 5\u00a0pm. By 3:38\u00a0pm, the Olympic Games were suspended, after allowing ongoing competitions to be completed. The terrorists repeatedly changed their clothes and appeared on the balcony, with their number estimated at five.\nMeanwhile, the terrorists learned from radio and television broadcasts that the police were approaching and had planned a rescue operation. The authorities had failed to cut off the terrorists' electricity and remove the press from the Olympic Village.\nGerman police mission to liberate the hostages.\nIn the early 1970s, counter-terrorism and tactical policing were largely unheard-of methods for combating terrorism, and no military force worldwide had a unit specifically trained for managing hostage crises. In West Germany, the absence of specialised units in the modern sense meant that such responsibilities were reactive and improvised measures, falling under the remit of ordinary law enforcement agencies. Although special military combat units existed within the , their 'combatant' status under the post-World War II German constitution prohibited their deployment for internal operations during peacetime. As a result, these duties fell within the jurisdiction of the regional state and municipal police. The ensuing events in Munich would mark a critical juncture, compelling governments to recognise terrorism as a persistent security challenge and address it with diverse resources.\nBy 4:30\u00a0pm, a hastily improvised team of 13 West German police officers, who had signed a declaration to willingly participate in a bold and risky hostage rescue operation, could be seen scaling the building in the Olympic Village. Awkwardly disguised in Olympic training suits, wearing heavy bulletproof vests beneath, and carrying Walther MP submachine guns, they were thought to be members of the German Federal Border Guard; according to former Munich police officer Heinz Hohensinn, who was a lead officer (\"Einsatzleiter\") and part of the police assault operation on the ground, they were regular Munich police officers from the Bavarian State Police, with no experience in counter-terrorism or hostage rescue. Quoting Hohensinn, they realised from the onset that the bulletproof vests would not withstand the Russian ammunition the terrorists were using.\nThe police officers were also informed and had signed a declaration that they had to return the Olympic training suits the next day, washed and cleaned, despite not knowing if they would survive or what was about to confront them. They planned to crawl down from the ventilation shafts and overpower the terrorists. The police officers took up positions awaiting the codeword \"Sunshine\", which, upon hearing, they were to begin the assault.\nIn the meantime, camera crews filmed the actions of the police officers from nearby apartments in the Olympic Village and broadcast the images live on television. This allowed the terrorists to watch the police prepare for the attack and hear it on the radio. A press image shows one of the terrorists peering from the balcony door\u2014an image that became world-famous\u2014while an armed police officer stood on the roof less than away.\nAfter \"Issa\" threatened to kill some of the hostages and the police cover had been blown by the television coverage, the police were forced to suspend the rescue operation to avoid a bloodbath and retreated from the premises. The press were also removed from the Olympic Village.\nApparent change to demands in the evening.\nShortly before the 5\u00a0pm deadline, the terrorists demanded safe passage for themselves and the hostages on a plane to Cairo, where they intended to continue negotiations for the prisoners' release. To verify the hostages were still alive, Minister Genscher and Walter Tr\u00f6ger, the mayor of the Olympic Village, were briefly allowed into the apartments to speak with the hostages. Clearly in fear for their lives, they agreed to fly to the Egyptian capital with the terrorists.\nTr\u00f6ger noticed that several of the hostages, especially Gutfreund, showed signs of having suffered physical abuse at the hands of the terrorists and that David Berger had been shot in his left shoulder. Tr\u00f6ger spoke of being very moved by the dignity with which the Israelis held themselves, and that they seemed resigned to their fate.\nWhile being debriefed by the crisis team, Genscher and Tr\u00f6ger reported seeing \"five\" terrorists inside the apartment. Fatefully, this number, rather than \"eight\", was accepted as definitive.\nAs a sovereign state, the Federal Republic of Germany could not tolerate the hostage-takers forcibly transporting foreign guests to another territory at gunpoint. Moreover, none of the Arab states supported the diplomatic efforts of Brandt. Consequently, no agreement was reached, as they did not want to be involved in the situation.\nA feigned agreement had been reached. The terrorists from Black September and their nine Israeli hostages were to be flown out of the Munich Olympic Village by helicopter to an awaiting aircraft at F\u00fcrstenfeldbruck airbase. It was only through this manoeuvre that they were able to extend the ultimatum to 7\u00a0pm. From 6\u00a0pm, Schreiber's deputy Georg Wolf, and five police officers began preparing for a potential operation in F\u00fcrstenfeldbruck airbase, knowing it would be their last option for freeing the hostages.\nSecond rescue effort.\nThe West German plan was to deceptively offer to transport the terrorists and the hostages by plane to Cairo. Two Bell UH-1 helicopters from the Federal Border Guard were assigned to take them to nearby F\u00fcrstenfeldbruck, a West German Air Force NATO airbase. Initially, the perpetrators planned to go to Munich-Riem airport, which was the international airport near Munich at the time, but the German negotiators convinced them that F\u00fcrstenfeldbruck would be more practical.\nThe operation in F\u00fcrstenfeldbruck was designed as an alternative to one in the Olympic Village. Georg Wolf, Schreiber's deputy, who later led the police team in F\u00fcrstenfeldbruck, advocated to the crisis team for freeing the hostages at the F\u00fcrstenfeldbruck airbase. This location was advantageous because the West German police could arrive before the hostage-takers and set up the operation. Being a military airbase, it could be easily cleared, ensuring no external parties would be at risk during a shootout.\nA plan was devised to walk the Palestinians and Israelis through the basement garage of the Olympic Village to the helicopters. The West German police saw an opportunity to ambush the terrorists and positioned sharpshooters in the garage basement. However, at 8:30\u00a0pm, \"Issa\" insisted on checking the route first from Connollystra\u00dfe 31 to the helicopters. He became suspicious and demanded to travel the entire route from Munich to F\u00fcrstenfeldbruck by bus. The German negotiators did not agree to this, as the entire route could not be adequately secured. Eventually, the crisis team and the hostage-takers agreed to transport the group by bus to the helicopters. Thus, the plan to free the hostages in the basement garage of the Olympic Village had failed.\nThe terrorists wanted to first check the transport that would drive them the to the helicopters and requested it be brought to the basement garage. J\u00fcrgen Kuhr, a soldier and driver in a transport squadron with the Air Transport Wing 63 of the German Air Force, was assigned, along with five colleagues and four civilian drivers, to provide transport during the Games for athletes, visitors, officials, and security personnel using two Mercedes minibuses with a total of 22 seats between them. In the evening, they received a request for one of the minibuses to go to the basement garage. Kuhr volunteered because he was single, while his colleague on the other bus was married with children. At 9:03\u00a0pm, Kuhr made his way. He was instructed to drive the minibus to the underground garage with exterior lights off, and interior lights on, and wait.\nMoments later, he met \"Issa\", who was carrying a weapon. \"Issa\" didn't check Kuhr for weapons, and even reassured him by saying in German that he had nothing to fear and only wanted to inspect the bus. After \"Issa\" checked the bus with a torch, he found it too small and told Kuhr he could drive away. The encounter lasted two minutes. The hostage-takers and hostages later boarded a larger bus from the basement garage to the helicopters, an event that was filmed live and captured by news photographers.\nThe crisis team made a final attempt to buy time by announcing that no plane was available for the flight to Cairo, which extended the ultimatum to 9 pm. This deadline also passed. At 9:36 pm, the Lufthansa plane was ready at F\u00fcrstenfeldbruck, and Wolf then flew back to the airbase at 9:43 pm with five police officers.\nBy 10:06 pm, the heavily armed hostage-takers led the bound hostages onto the bus that transported them to the helicopters. After a brief inspection, \"Issa\" ordered the Israeli athletes to board them, with four hostage-takers sitting next to the hostages in each helicopter.\nPolice chief Schreiber discovered the exact number of hostage-takers when they boarded the helicopters, realising there were eight instead of the previously believed five. He did not relay this information to F\u00fcrstenfeldbruck airbase, assuming the operations team was already aware.\nThe first helicopter to arrive, carrying crisis team members, advisors, and two Israeli security experts, landed at F\u00fcrstenfeldbruck airbase. This helicopter was separate from the two others carrying the hostage-takers and hostages that would arrive shortly after.\nAmbush plan at F\u00fcrstenfeldbruck airbase.\nFive West German police officers were deployed around the airbase in sniper roles. From behind the cover provided by the balustrade of the control tower platform, Sniper No. 3, supported by an observer, was positioned with a field of fire to the east. Sniper No. 4 had a field of fire to the northeast, while Sniper No. 5 was at the northeast corner of the platform with a field of fire to the east, but could also fire north. Sniper No. 1, along with an observer, was positioned behind a fire engine, to the side of and at a distance from the switchyard, on the grass area beyond the runway northeast of the control tower, with a field of fire in all directions. Sniper No. 2 was positioned behind the low concrete square frame surrounding the switchyard, with a field of fire to the southeast. The field of fire was intensely illuminated with airbase mast lighting, designed to enhance the snipers' accuracy and blind the hostage-takers.\nHowever, none of them had any sniper training or special weapons, being equipped with the H&amp;K G3, the standard-issue battle rifle of the German Armed Forces, without telescopic sights or night vision devices. The officers were chosen due to their performance in shooting exercises. At that time, the Munich police had already acquired the relatively new Steyr SSG 69 sniper rifles in their inventory, but no precision shooters had been trained to use them.\nThe members of the crisis team\u2014Schreiber, Genscher, Merk, and Schreiber's deputy Georg Wolf\u2014supervised and observed the attempted rescue from the airbase control tower. Ulrich Wegener, a liaison officer from the German Federal Border Guard, Mossad chief Zamir, and Victor Cohen from the Israel Security Agency were also present, but the German authorities strictly limited the two Israelis to observing.\nA fully fuelled Lufthansa Boeing 727 aircraft was positioned on the tarmac east of the airbase control tower, with its engines running. The plan was to have the police officers involved in the earlier assault attempt disguised as flight crew inside. It was agreed that \"Issa\" and \"Tony\" would inspect the plane. The police officers would then overpower them as they boarded, giving the snipers a chance to eliminate the remaining terrorists at the helicopters.\nHowever, the police officers, arriving by car with blue lights flashing, were initially hampered by airbase security and informed they were not authorised to allow anyone onto the airfield. The officers took cover in a ditch and could see the aircraft, with engines running loudly, away.\nHeinz Hohensinn, one of the lead police officers, then received a radio message to proceed to the aircraft and was informed of the plan. In the complete helplessness of the situation, he learned they were to disguise themselves as flight crew, board the aircraft, and conduct the assault inside. However, he rejected the idea as a certain failure. He believed the terrorists would not board the aircraft like a \"goose march\", and if they realised that it was an ambush and that they would not be flown out, the outcome with a fully fuelled aircraft would be disastrous.\nFinal phase.\nDuring the final moments, as the two Federal Border Guard helicopters approached F\u00fcrstenfeldbruck airbase with the terrorists and hostages on board, the West German police officers assigned to board the awaiting 727 aircraft decided it was too dangerous due to inadequate security precautions. They were ill-equipped and poorly protected inside the aircraft, resolving to abandon their mission. This left only the five police sharpshooters to try to overpower a larger and more heavily armed group. Wolf could not adjust the operation plan as the two helicopters with the hostage-takers and hostages were already approaching F\u00fcrstenfeldbruck.\nAt that point, \"Oberleutnant\" Ulrich Wegener, Hans-Dietrich Genscher's Federal Border Guard liaison officer at the Federal Ministry of the Interior, remarked, \"I'm sure this will blow the whole affair!\". Wegener, who later founded and commanded the elite German counter-terrorism intervention unit GSG 9, had an incredulous exchange with Genscher only hours earlier regarding the actions of the Munich and Bavarian police preparing to ambush the terrorists in the Olympic Village apartment. At around 4:35 pm, Wegener had remarked in consternation to his boss Genscher, \"This contradicts all basic tactical rules\", to which Genscher replied, \"Many of the police know nothing about this\".\nThe helicopters landed next to each other just after 10:30 pm, and the four pilots got out first. As previously agreed with the operations team, they opened the doors to the passenger compartments where the hostage-takers and the hostages were. The operational plan called for the pilots to then head north to avoid coming under fire, but two of the hostage-takers had already exited and prevented them from doing so. Meanwhile, operations manager Wolf was lying on the roof of the airbase tower, still unaware of the exact number of hostage-takers. Additionally, the helicopters' rotor blades cast large shadows, providing cover for the hostage-takers. This crucial detail had not been considered during daylight planning.\nWhile two of the hostage-takers threatened the pilots at gunpoint, their leader \"Issa\" went to inspect the 727 aircraft immediately after landing, with \"Tony\", the second leader, following at a distance. Wolf decided to first free the four pilots from their dangerous situation. Two police snipers took positions on the northern balustrade of the tower and targeted the hostage-takers threatening the pilots. Only after they fired would the third sniper on the airbase tower open fire on \"Issa\" and \"Tony\". However, the order to fire was delayed because the pilots were in the line of fire. Meanwhile, \"Issa\" and \"Tony\" had arrived at the 727 aircraft. Realising there were no personnel on board, they recognised the trap and immediately sprinted back to the helicopters.\nOnly when \"Issa\" and \"Tony\" had almost reached the eastern helicopter did the police snipers simultaneously shoot at the two hostage-takers threatening the pilots. Both fell to the ground, unable to use their weapons. The pilots tried to get to safety, with one fleeing behind the low wall of the switchyard, where he encountered a police sniper. The third sniper on the airbase tower had already targeted \"Issa\" and \"Tony\" and was waiting for the first shot. However, when he opened fire, he could no longer hit them from his position. The two snipers on the tower, who had already shot at the hostage-takers near the helicopters, turned and aimed at \"Issa\" and \"Tony\". Although \"Issa\" was hit in the leg, he managed to hide with \"Tony\" in the shadow of the eastern helicopter's rotor blades, from where they kept the upper part of the airbase tower under constant fire. The two snipers positioned on the ground were barely able to intervene in the exchange of fire due to their positions to the east and north of the helicopters. After the first shots were fired, one of the hostage-takers lay behind the rear of the western helicopter, pretending to be dead until he was arrested.\nOver the next hour, shots were repeatedly fired as the tense standoff continued. Police Chief Schreiber had instructed Officer Anton Fliegerbauer and two colleagues to provide fire support for the snipers positioned on the airfield. Armed with standard police-issue 6-shot Walther PP sidearms, one spare magazine each, and one radio between them, they had taken up positions crouched behind a wall at the foot of the F\u00fcrstenfeldbruck airbase control tower, directly across from where the two helicopters landed. Amid the gunfire, Fliegerbauer's team leader (\"Zugf\u00fchrer\") Arved Semerak recalls standing away when Fliegerbauer was fatally hit by a stray bullet from the hostage-takers. In the chaos, Semerak did not notice what had happened until paramedics began attending to Fliegerbauer. The bullet struck the side of his head, killing him.\nDue to the danger to the police officers' lives, Wolf felt it was unjustifiable to risk freeing the hostages who might still be alive. He decided to wait for the police armoured personnel carriers requested from the Olympic Village before attempting another assault. However, these vehicles had only been ordered to F\u00fcrstenfeldbruck airbase ten minutes after the first shots were fired. Onlookers had flocked to the scene in droves, blocking traffic.\nMeanwhile, Israeli security expert Cohen grabbed a megaphone and addressed the members of Black September in Arabic: \"Surrender. Save your lives.\" The response was a hail of bullets.\nFailed liberation in the early morning of 6 September.\nAround 11:50 pm six Mowag MR 8 police armoured personnel carriers, which had been held up in traffic, arrived from Munich. They were tasked with rescuing the injured and providing protection for police officers approaching the helicopters. As Wolf drove towards the helicopters in an armoured personnel carrier, he was shot at. One of the hostage-takers threw a hand grenade into the eastern helicopter and attempted to flee towards the switchyard, but was shot by a police sniper. The grenade detonated, setting the helicopter ablaze. David Berger died in the helicopter from smoke inhalation. The other eight hostages had already been shot by the hostage-takers: Yossef Gutfreund, Kehat Shorr, Mark Slavin, Andre Spitzer, and Amitzur Shapira in the western helicopter, and Yakov Springer, Eliezer Halfin, Ze'ev Friedman, and David Berger in the eastern one.\nMore police armoured personnel carriers arrived on the airbase. The arriving police officers, confused by the situation, mistakenly shot at a police sniper and the helicopter pilot at the switchyard, thinking they were hostage-takers; both were injured. Five hostage-takers, including the leaders \"Issa\" and \"Tony\", had been shot dead by the West German police. Three hostage-takers survived the exchange of fire by pretending to be dead and were arrested; Jamal Al-Gashey had been shot through his right wrist, Mohammed Safady had sustained a flesh wound to his leg, and Adnan Al-Gashey had escaped injury completely. Almost 90 minutes had passed since the helicopters had landed. By around midnight on 6 September, the battle was over. The operation had failed; none of the hostages were rescued.\nA \"Time\" magazine reconstruction of the long-suppressed Bavarian prosecutor's report indicates that a third hostage-taker (Reeve identifies him as Adnan Al-Gashey) stood at the door of the western helicopter and raked the remaining five hostages with machine gun fire; Gutfreund, Shorr, Slavin, Spitzer, and Shapira were shot an average of four times each.\nOf the four hostages in the eastern helicopter, only Ze'ev Friedman's body was relatively intact; he had been blown clear of the helicopter by the explosion. In some cases, the exact cause of death for the hostages in the eastern helicopter was difficult to establish because the rest of the corpses were burned almost beyond recognition in the explosion and subsequent fire.\nNews wire reports.\nBetween 11:30\u00a0pm and midnight, Conrad Ahlers, spoke as a spokesperson for the German government, in several TV interviews. Despite the ongoing attempt to rescue the Israeli team, he described it, based on the information he had received, as a \"fortunate and successful operation.\" Initial news reports published all over the world indicated that all the hostages were alive and that all the attackers had been killed. Only later did a representative for the IOC suggest that \"initial reports were overly optimistic.\" At 2:55\u00a0am, Israel's ambassador in Bonn Ben-Horin reported that he had received information that all the hostages had been killed, and at 3:10\u00a0am, Mossad's chief Zamir confirmed this information. At 3:17\u00a0am, Reuters issued a corrected breaking news story: \"All Israeli hostages captured by Arab guerrillas are dead.\" Jim McKay, who was covering the Olympics that year for the American Broadcasting Company (ABC), had taken on the job of reporting the events as Roone Arledge fed them into his earpiece. At 3:24\u00a0am, McKay received the official confirmation:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;When I was a kid, my father used to say \"Our greatest hopes and our worst fears are seldom realized.\" Our worst fears have been realized tonight. They've now said that there were eleven hostages. Two were killed in their rooms yesterday morning, nine were killed at the airport tonight. They're all gone.\nSeveral sources listed Ladany as having been killed. Ladany recalled later:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCriticism.\nThe shootout with the well-trained Black September members underscored a significant lack of preparation by the German authorities. They were ill-equipped to handle such an unprecedented threat previously unknown in Germany. There was no single authority overseeing the situation. The Munich police, Bavarian authorities, West German authorities, and even the Olympic committee all intervened, which increased the confusion and difficulty in handling the crisis.\nGerman authorities faced several critical constraints. First, due to restrictions in the post-war West German constitution, the army could not participate in the attempted rescue, as the German armed forces were not allowed to operate inside Germany during peacetime. The responsibility fell entirely on the Munich police and the Bavarian authorities.\nThe Munich massacre was a critical juncture, prompting governments \"to think about terrorism as an enduring challenge to security, international and domestic, and to respond to it with a wide range of government resources\". This led directly to the founding of the German federal border guard's counter-terrorism intervention unit, GSG 9, less than two weeks later.\nIt was known half an hour before the hostages and kidnappers arrived at F\u00fcrstenfeldbruck airbase that the number of kidnappers was larger than initially believed. Despite this new information, Schreiber decided to proceed with the rescue operation as originally planned. The new information could not reach the police snipers because they had no radios.\nIt is a basic tenet of sniping operations that there are enough snipers (at least two for each known target, or in this case a minimum of ten) deployed to neutralise as many of the attackers as possible with the first volley of shots. The 2006 \"National Geographic\" Channel's \"Seconds from Disaster\" profile on the massacre stated that the helicopters were supposed to land sideways and to the west of the control tower, which would have allowed the snipers clear shots into them as the kidnappers threw open the helicopter doors. Instead, the helicopters landed facing the control tower and at the centre of the airstrip. This not only gave them a place to hide after the gunfight began, but put Snipers 1 and 2 in the line of fire of the other three snipers on the control tower.\nAccording to the same programme, the crisis committee responsible for making decisions on how to handle the incident consisted of Bruno Merk (the Bavarian interior minister), Hans-Dietrich Genscher (the West German interior minister), and Manfred Schreiber (Munich's Chief of Police). The program mentioned that a year before the Games, Schreiber had participated in another hostage crisis (a failed bank robbery) where he ordered a sharpshooter to shoot one of the perpetrators, but only managed to wound the robber. As a result, the robbers shot an innocent woman dead. Schreiber was consequently charged with involuntary manslaughter.\nThe five police snipers lacked radio contact with each other and the German authorities conducting the rescue operation, making it impossible to coordinate their fire. Their only contact with the operational leadership was through Georg Wolf, Schreiber's deputy, who was lying next to the three snipers on the control tower, giving them direct orders. The two snipers at ground level received vague instructions to shoot when the other snipers began firing and were left to fend for themselves.\nThe police snipers did not have the proper equipment for this hostage rescue operation. The G3 rifles used were considered by several experts to be inadequate for the distance at which the snipers were trying to shoot. The G3, the standard service rifle of the Bundeswehr at that time, had a barrel; at the distances the snipers were required to shoot, a barrel would have ensured far greater accuracy. None of the rifles were equipped with telescopic or night vision sights. Additionally, none of the snipers were equipped with a steel helmet or bulletproof vest. No armoured vehicles were at the scene at F\u00fcrstenfeldbruck airbase and were only called in after the gunfight was well underway.\nThere were also numerous tactical errors. \"Sniper 2\", who was stationed behind the switchyard, was directly in the line of fire of his fellow snipers on the control tower, without any protective gear and without any other police officer being aware of his location. Because of this, \"Sniper 2\" did not fire any shots until late in the gunfight, when hostage-taker Khalid Jawad attempted to escape on foot and ran at the exposed sniper. \"Sniper 2\" killed the fleeing perpetrator but was in turn badly wounded by a fellow police officer, who was unaware that he was shooting at one of his own men. One of the helicopter pilots, Gunnar Ebel, was lying near \"Sniper 2\" and was also wounded by friendly fire. Both Ebel and the sniper recovered from their injuries.\nMany of the errors made by the German authorities during the rescue attempt were detailed by leading police officer Heinz Hohensinn, who had participated in Operation Sunshine earlier that day. In \"One Day in September\", he stated that he had also been directed to pose as a flight crew member in the second assault plan involving the 727 aircraft. He and his fellow police officers, who had volunteered to undertake the hostage rescue operation during the first assault attempt in the Olympic Village, understood the second assault plan to be a suicide mission. Consequently, the group unanimously resolved to abandon the second assault plan in the 727. None of them were reprimanded.\nWest German report after the attack.\nOn 20 September, the West German report was published. It examined three key aspects: security measures in Munich and the Olympic Village, efforts to release the hostages without force, and the police operation at the Olympic Village and F\u00fcrstenfeldbruck airbase. The report noted warnings of potential terrorist attacks during the Olympics, though none specifically targeted Israelis. It described contacts with Israeli representatives about the security of the Israeli Olympic team, indicating no dissatisfaction with the arrangements. The authors concluded that, given the terrorists' intent, even significant security reinforcements would not have prevented the attack on the Israelis.\nThe second section reviewed the efforts to release the hostages, concluding that a rescue without force or flying them to Cairo was impossible, partly due to Israel's refusal to release Palestinian prisoners. The third section examined the airbase operation, raising operational questions but finding no fault with the police. The \"Bundestag\" Interior Committee adopted these conclusions, resulting in no disciplinary actions or removals.\nThe significant differences between the Israeli and German assessments of the operation led to a wave of claims and counter-claims following the release of reports by Mossad chief Zamir and the German authorities. The Israeli Foreign Ministry summarised these differences, highlighting major discrepancies between the West German report and the comments by Zamir and Ben-Horin. Director-General Mordechai Gazit sent this summary to Meir.\nOn 22 September, Zamir also reported to the Knesset Foreign Affairs and Defence Committee. He explained that while the West German authorities had a plan and were fully committed to rescuing the hostages, they struggled to improvise and adapt to the unfolding events. This inability to find solutions as the events were occurring partially contributed to the operation's failure.\nAftermath.\nThe bodies of the five Palestinian attackers\u2014Afif, Nazzal, Chic Thaa, Hamid, and Jawad were delivered to Libya, where they received heroes' funerals and were buried with full military honours. On 8 September, Israeli planes bombed ten PLO bases in Syria and Lebanon in response to the massacre, killing a reported 200 militants and 11 civilians.\nThe three surviving Black September gunmen had been arrested and were being held in a Munich prison for trial. On 29 October, Lufthansa Flight 615 was hijacked and threatened to be blown up if the Munich attackers were not released. Safady and the Al-Gasheys were immediately released by West Germany, receiving a tumultuous welcome when they touched down in Libya and (as seen in \"One Day in September\") giving their own firsthand account of their operation at a press conference broadcast worldwide.\nFurther international investigations into the Lufthansa Flight 615 incident have produced theories of a secret agreement between the German government and Black September on the release of the surviving terrorists in exchange for assurances of no further attacks on Germany.\nEffect on the Games.\nIn the wake of the hostage-taking, competition was suspended for 34 hours, for the first time in modern Olympic history, after public criticism of the IOC's decision to continue the games. On 6 September, a memorial service attended by 80,000 spectators and 3,000 athletes was held in the Olympic Stadium. IOC President Avery Brundage made little reference to the murdered athletes during a speech praising the strength of the Olympic movement and equating the attack on the Israeli sportsmen with the recent arguments about encroaching professionalism and disallowing Rhodesia's participation in the Games, which outraged many listeners. The victims' families were represented by Andre Spitzer's widow Ankie, Moshe Weinberg's mother, and a cousin of Weinberg, Carmel Eliash. During the memorial service, Eliash collapsed from a heart attack.\nMany of the 80,000 people who filled the Olympic Stadium for West Germany's football match with Hungary carried noisemakers and waved flags, but when several spectators unfurled a banner reading \"17 dead, already forgotten?\" security officers removed the sign and expelled those responsible from the grounds. During the memorial service, the Olympic Flag was flown at half-mast, along with the flags of most of the other competing nations at the request of Brandt. Ten Arab nations objected to their flags flying at half-mast and the mandate was rescinded.\nWilli Daume, president of the Munich organizing committee, initially sought to cancel the remainder of the Games, but in the afternoon Brundage and others who wished to continue the Games prevailed, stating that they could not let the incident halt the Games. Brundage stated \"The Games must go on, and we must\u00a0... and we must continue our efforts to keep them clean, pure and honest.\" The decision was endorsed by the Israeli government and Israeli Olympic team chef de mission Shmuel Lalkin.\nOn 6 September, after the memorial service, the remaining members of the Israeli team withdrew from the Games and left Munich. All Jewish sportsmen were placed under guard. Mark Spitz, the American swimming star who had already completed his competitions, left Munich during the hostage crisis (it was feared that as a prominent Jew, he might be a kidnapping target). The Egyptian team left the Games on 7 September, stating they feared reprisals. The Philippine and Algerian teams also left the Games, as did some members of the Dutch and Norwegian teams. American marathon runner Kenny Moore, who wrote about the incident for \"Sports Illustrated\", quoted Dutch distance runner Jos Hermens as saying \"It's quite simple. We were invited to a party, and if someone comes to the party and shoots people, how can you stay?\" Dutch sprinter Wilma van Gool had qualified for the semi-finals in the 200 m sprint; the time that she ran in the quarterfinals was faster than the time of the eventual gold medal winner, Renate Stecher of East Germany. She withdrew from the competition in sympathy with the Israeli victims. She said that she was leaving in protest of the \"obscene\" decision to continue with the Olympic Games.\nFour years later at the 1976 Summer Olympics in Montreal, the Israeli team commemorated the massacre: when they entered the stadium at the Opening Ceremony, their national flag was adorned with a black ribbon.\nThe families of some victims have asked the IOC to establish a permanent memorial to the athletes. The IOC has declined, saying that introducing a specific reference to the victims could \"alienate other members of the Olympic community,\" according to the BBC. Alex Gilady, an Israeli IOC official, told the BBC: \"We must consider what this could do to other members of the delegations that are hostile to Israel.\"\nThe IOC rejected an international campaign in support of a minute of silence at the Opening Ceremony of the 2012 London Olympics in honour of the Israeli victims on the 40th anniversary of the massacre. Jacques Rogge, the IOC President, said it would be \"inappropriate,\" although the opening ceremony included a memorial for the victims of the 7 July 2005 London bombings. Speaking of the decision, Olympian Shaul Ladany, who survived the attack, commented: \"I do not understand. I do not understand, and I do not accept it.\"\nIn 2014 the IOC agreed to contribute $250,000 towards a memorial to the murdered Israeli athletes. After 44 years, the IOC commemorated the victims of the Munich massacre for the first time in the Rio 2016 Olympic Village on 4 August 2016.\nThere is a memorial to those who died outside the Olympic stadium in Munich in the form of a stone tablet at the bridge linking the stadium to the former Olympic Village, and a memorial tablet outside the front door of their former lodging at 31 Connollystra\u00dfe. On 15 October 1999 (almost a year before the Sydney 2000 Games), a memorial plaque was unveiled in one of the large light towers (Tower 14) outside the Sydney Olympic Stadium.\nIn the 2020 Summer Olympics, a moment of silence was observed in the opening ceremony in 2021, a year before its 50th anniversary. This was the first time in history this happened in the opening ceremony.\nIn 2024, Adidas launched an ad campaign for retro sneakers inspired by a model from the 1972 Munich Olympics, featuring Bella Hadid, known for her pro-Palestinian activism. The campaign faced criticism from various groups due to Hadid's controversial remarks, prompting Adidas to issue an apology. The company acknowledged the unintended connection to tragic events and announced plans to revise the campaign.\nOn 5 September 2024, the 52nd anniversary of the massacre, shots were fired at the Israeli consulate in Munich.\nInternational reactions.\nKing Hussein of Jordan, the only leader of an Arab country to denounce the attack publicly, called it a \"savage crime against civilization\u00a0... perpetrated by sick minds.\"\nU.S. President Richard Nixon privately discussed several possible American responses, such as declaring a national day of mourning (favoured by Secretary of State William P. Rogers) or having Nixon fly to the athletes' funerals. Nixon and U.S. National Security Advisor Henry Kissinger decided instead to press the United Nations to take steps against international terrorism.\nIsraeli response.\nOn 5 September, Meir appealed to other countries to \"save our citizens and condemn the unspeakable criminal acts committed.\" She also stated, \"if we [Israel] should give in, then no Israeli anywhere in the world shall feel that his life is safe... it's blackmail of the worst kind.\"\nMeir and the Israeli Defence Committee secretly authorized Mossad to track down and kill those allegedly responsible for the Munich massacre. Zamir described the mission as \"putting an end to the type of terror that was perpetrated\" in Europe. Mossad set up several special teams to locate and kill these fedayeen, aided by the agency's stations in Europe.\nIn a February 2006 interview, Zamir answered direct questions:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"Was there no element of vengeance in the decision to take action against the terrorists?\"\nNo. We were not engaged in vengeance. We are accused of having been guided by a desire for vengeance. That is nonsense. What we did was to concretely prevent in the future. We acted against those who thought that they would continue to perpetrate acts of terror. I am not saying that those who were involved in Munich were not marked for death. They definitely deserved to die. But we were not dealing with the past; we concentrated on the future.\n\"Did you not receive a directive from Golda Meir along the lines of \"take revenge on those responsible for Munich?\"\"\nGolda Meir abhorred the necessity that was imposed on us to carry out the operations. Golda never told me to 'take revenge on those who were responsible for Munich.' No one told me that.\nThe Israeli mission later became known as \"Operation Wrath of God\" or \"Mivtza Za'am Ha'El\". Reeve quotes General Aharon Yariv\u2014who, he writes, was the general overseer of the operation\u2014as stating that after Munich the Israeli government felt it had no alternative but to exact justice.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;We had no choice. We had to make them stop, and there was no other way\u00a0... we are not very proud about it. But it was a question of sheer necessity. We went back to the old biblical rule of an eye for an eye\u00a0... I approach these problems not from a moral point of view, but, hard as it may sound, from a cost-benefit point of view. If I'm very hard-headed, I can say, what is the political benefit in killing this person? Will it bring us nearer to peace? Will it bring us nearer to an understanding with the Palestinians or not? In most cases I don't think it will. But in the case of Black September we had no other choice and it worked. Is it morally acceptable? One can debate that question. Is it politically vital? It was.\nBenny Morris writes that a target list was created using information from \"turned\" PLO personnel and friendly European intelligence services. Once completed, a wave of assassinations of suspected Black September operatives began across Europe. On 9 April 1973, Israel launched Operation \"Spring of Youth\", a joint Mossad\u2013IDF operation in Beirut. The targets were Mohammad Yusuf al-Najjar (Abu Yusuf), head of Fatah's intelligence arm, which ran Black September, according to Morris; Kamal Adwan, who headed the PLO's Western Sector, which controlled PLO action inside Israel; and Kamal Nassir, the PLO spokesman. A group of \"Sayeret Matkal\" commandos was taken in nine missile boats and a small fleet of patrol boats to a deserted Lebanese beach, before driving in two cars to downtown Beirut, where they killed Najjar, Adwan, and Nassir. Two further detachments of commandos blew up the PFLP's headquarters in Beirut and a Fatah explosives plant.\nOn 21 July 1973, in the Lillehammer affair, a team of Mossad agents mistakenly killed Ahmed Bouchiki, a Moroccan man unrelated to the Munich attack, in Lillehammer, Norway, after an informant mistakenly said Bouchiki was Ali Hassan Salameh, the head of Force 17 and a Black September operative. Five Mossad agents, including two women, were captured by the Norwegian authorities, while others managed to slip away. The five were convicted of the killing and imprisoned but were released and returned to Israel in 1975. Mossad later found Ali Hassan Salameh in Beirut and killed him on 22 January 1979, with a remote-controlled car bomb. The attack killed four passersby and injured 18 others. According to CIA officer Duane \"Dewey\" Claridge, chief of operations of the CIA Near East Division from 1975 to 1978, in mid-1976, Salameh offered Americans assistance and protection with Arafat's blessings during the American embassy pull-out from Beirut during the Lebanese Civil War. There was a general feeling that Americans could be trusted. However, the cooperation ended abruptly after the assassination of Salameh. Americans were generally blamed as Israel's principal benefactors.\nSimon Reeve writes that the Israeli operations continued for more than twenty years. He details the assassination in Paris in 1992 of Atef Bseiso, the PLO's head of intelligence, and says that an Israeli general confirmed there was a link back to Munich. Reeve also writes that while Israeli officials have stated \"Operation Wrath of God\" was intended to exact vengeance for the families of the athletes killed in Munich, \"few relatives wanted such a violent reckoning with the Palestinians.\" Reeve states the families were instead desperate to know the truth of the events surrounding the Munich massacre. Reeve outlines what he sees as a lengthy cover-up by German authorities to hide the truth. After a lengthy court fight, in 2004 the families of the Munich victims reached a settlement of \u20ac3\u00a0million with the German government.\nAlleged German cover-up.\nAn article in 2012 in a front-page story of the German news magazine \"Der Spiegel\" reported that much of the information on the mishandling of the massacre was covered up by the German authorities. For twenty years, Germany refused to release any information about the attack and did not accept responsibility for the results. The magazine reported that the government had been hiding 3,808 files, which contained tens of thousands of documents. \"Der Spiegel\" said it obtained secret reports by authorities, embassy cables, and minutes of cabinet meetings that demonstrate the lack of professionalism of the German officials in handling the massacre. The newspaper also wrote that the German authorities were told that Palestinians were planning an \"incident\" at the Olympics three weeks before the massacre, but failed to take the necessary security measures, and these facts are missing from the official documentation of the German government.\nIn August 2012, \"Der Spiegel\" reported that following the massacre, the West German government began secret meetings with Black September, due to the fear that they would carry out other terrorist attacks in Germany. The government proposed a clandestine meeting between German Foreign Minister Walter Scheel and a member of Black September to create a \"new basis of trust.\" In return for an exchange of the political status of the PLO, the PLO would stop terrorist attacks on German soil. When French police arrested Abu Daoud, one of the chief organizers of the Munich massacre, and inquired about extraditing him to Germany, Bavaria's justice secretary Alfred Seidl recommended that Germany should not take any action, causing the French to release Abu Daoud and the Assad regime to shelter him until he died at a Damascus hospital in 2010.\nSurviving Black September members.\nTwo of the three surviving gunmen, Mohammed Safady and Adnan Al-Gashey, were allegedly killed by Mossad as part of \"Operation Wrath of God\". Al-Gashey was allegedly located after making contact with a cousin in a Gulf State, and Safady was found by remaining in touch with family in Lebanon. This account was challenged in a book by Aaron J. Klein, who claims that Al-Gashey died of heart failure in the 1970s and that Safady was killed by Christian Phalangists in Lebanon in the early 1980s. In July 2005 PLO veteran Tawfiq Tirawi told Klein that Safady, whom Tirawi claimed as a close friend, was \"as alive as you are\". In 2022, a man claiming to be (and closely resembling) Safady was interviewed for a German documentary about the 50th anniversary of the massacre.\nThe third surviving gunman, Jamal Al-Gashey, was known to be alive as of 1999, hiding in North Africa or Syria, claiming to still fear retribution from Israel. He is the only one of the surviving terrorists to consent to interviews since 1972, having granted an interview in 1992 to a Palestinian newspaper, and having briefly emerged from hiding in 1999 to participate in an interview for the film \"One Day in September\", during which he was disguised and his face shown only in blurry shadow.\nAbu Daoud.\nOf those believed to have planned the massacre, only Abu Daoud, the man who claimed that the attack was his idea, is known to have died of natural causes. In January 1977, Abu Daoud was intercepted by French police in Paris while travelling from Beirut under an assumed name. Under protest from the PLO, Iraq, and Libya, who claimed that because Daoud was travelling to a PLO comrade's funeral he should receive diplomatic immunity, the French government refused a West German extradition request on grounds that forms had not been filled in properly, and put him on a plane to Algeria before Germany could submit another request.\nDaoud was allowed safe passage through Israel in 1996 so he could attend a PLO meeting in the Gaza Strip to rescind an article in its charter that called for Israel's eradication. In his autobiography, \"From Jerusalem to Munich\", first published in France in 1999, and later in a written interview with \"Sports Illustrated\", Daoud wrote that funds for Munich were provided by Mahmoud Abbas, Chairman of the PLO since 11 November 2004, and President of the Palestinian National Authority since 15 January 2005.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Though he claims he didn't know what the money was being spent for, longtime Fatah official Mahmoud Abbas, aka Abu Mazen, was responsible for the financing of the Munich attack.\nDaoud believed that if the Israelis knew that Mahmoud Abbas was the financier of the operation, the 1993 Oslo Accords would not have been achieved, during which Mahmoud Abbas was seen at the White House.\nAnkie Spitzer, the widow of fencing coach and Munich victim Andre, declined several offers to meet with Abu Daoud, saying that the only place she wants to meet him is in a courtroom. According to Spitzer, \"He [Abu Daoud] didn't pay the price for what he did.\" In 2006, during the release of Steven Spielberg's film \"Munich\", \"Der Spiegel\" interviewed Daoud regarding the Munich massacre. He was quoted as saying: \"I regret nothing. You can only dream that I would apologize.\"\nDaoud died of kidney failure on 3 July 2010, in Damascus, Syria.\n According to the order in which they were seated, from left to right:\n According to the order in which they were seated, from left to right:\nEarly life and memorial for Anton Fliegerbauer.\nFliegerbauer was born in Westerndorf, Lower Bavaria, and grew up on a farm with his two siblings. He initially attended agricultural school before taking up an apprenticeship with the Bavarian State Police in 1963. In 1964, he met his future wife, whom he married in 1966. Two years later, they had a son named Alfred. On 19 November 1970, Fliegerbauer was appointed to the rank of \"Polizeiobermeister\" (police sergeant) in the Munich Municipal Police, stationed in the \"Implerstra\u00dfe\" police district.\nDuring the Olympics, Fliegerbauer was temporarily assigned to a Bavarian Readiness (Riot) Police unit (\"Bayerische Bereitschaftspolizei\"). On 5 September, he was recalled to his police district and proceeded with a 30-officer support team in the direction of Munich-Riem Airport. Midway, they were informed that their destination was F\u00fcrstenfeldbruck Air Base, where the Munich police had planned to rescue the nine Israeli hostages held by eight Black September terrorists. Their initial task was to set up barriers at the airbase: no one was allowed in, no one was allowed out.\nAs the situation evolved, Fliegerbauer and two other colleagues were instructed to take up positions at the foot of the airbase control tower, crouched behind a wall, directly across from where the two Bell UH-1 helicopters transporting the hostages and terrorists would land. Armed with their standard police-issue 6-shot Walther PP sidearms, a spare magazine each, and one radio between them, they were to provide fire support for the snipers on the airfield. Amid the gunfire that ensued, Fliegerbauer's team leader (\"Zugf\u00fchrer\") Arved Semerak recalled standing away when Fliegerbauer was fatally hit by a stray bullet from the hostage-takers. In the chaos, Semerak did not notice what had happened until paramedics began attending to Fliegerbauer. According to Simon Reeve, author of \"One Day in September\", Fliegerbauer had fired less than half the rounds in his magazine when a stray bullet from the hostage-takers struck him in the side of the head, killing him.\nFliegerbauer was buried on 8 September after a civic funeral. The ceremony was attended by the Mayor of Munich, Georg Kronawitter, and Prime Minister of Bavaria, Alfons Goppel, with wreaths laid on behalf of Brandt and President Gustav Heinemann.\nAt a memorial service held at F\u00fcrstenfeldbruck Airbase in 2012, commemorating the 40th anniversary of the Munich massacre, Fliegerbauer was remembered alongside the eleven members of the Israeli delegation killed by the terrorists.\nIn 2016, Fliegerbauer was memorialised at the Olympic Village in Brazil.\nOn the memorial to the massacre erected at Olympiapark in Munich, Fliegerbauer is described in a sentence that reads, \"The police failed in this attempt, and the operation ended in disaster. All of the hostages and the German police officer Anton Fliegerbauer, as well as five of the terrorists, died.\"\nThe Munich massacre in popular culture.\nDepictions of the Munich massacre include:\nSee also.\nOther incidents of violence during the Olympic games:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20990", "revid": "13541347", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20990", "title": "Maremma", "text": "The Maremma (, ; from Latin , lit.\u2009'maritime [land]') is a geographical region in Lazio and Tuscany. The largest city is Grosseto.\nGeography.\nThe Maremma has an area of about 5000 km2. The central part corresponds with the province of Grosseto, and it extends northward to Cecina, and southwards into Lazio as far as Civitavecchia. The territory is mainly flat and hilly.\nAnimal breeds.\nThe Maremma has given rise to, or given its name to, several breeds of domestic animal. These include two breeds of working horse, the Maremmano and the Cavallo Romano della Maremma Laziale, formerly used by \"butteri\" and \"cavalcanti\"; the Maremmana breed of large grey cattle; the Maremmano breed of shepherd's guard-dog; and the Macchiaiola Maremmana breed of small pig, so named because it was kept extensively, left to roam in the woodland.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20991", "revid": "208500", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20991", "title": "Tonne of TNT", "text": ""}
{"id": "20993", "revid": "50412405", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20993", "title": "Michael Nesmith", "text": "American musician, songwriter, and actor (1942\u20132021)\nRobert Michael Nesmith (December 30, 1942 \u2013 December 10, 2021) was an American musician, songwriter, and actor. He was best known as a member of the Monkees and co-star of their TV series of the same name (1966\u20131968). His songwriting credits with the Monkees include \"Mary, Mary\", \"The Girl I Knew Somewhere\", \"Tapioca Tundra\", \"Circle Sky\" and \"Listen to the Band\". Additionally, his song \"Different Drum\" became a hit for the Stone Poneys featuring Linda Ronstadt.\nAfter leaving the Monkees in 1970, Nesmith continued his successful songwriting and performing career, first with the seminal country rock group the First National Band, with which he had a top-40 hit, \"Joanne\" (1970). As a solo artist, he scored an international hit with the song \"Rio\" (1977). He often played a custom-built Gretsch 12-string electric guitar both with the Monkees and afterward.\nIn 1974, Nesmith founded Pacific Arts, a multimedia production and distribution company, through which he helped pioneer the music video format, winning the first Grammy Award for Video of the Year for his hour-long comedy/variety program, \"Elephant Parts\" (1981). He created one of the first American television programs dedicated to music videos, \"PopClips\", which aired on Nickelodeon in 1980, and was soon afterward approached to help develop the MTV network, though he declined. Nesmith was also an executive producer of the film \"Repo Man\" (1984).\nEarly life.\nNesmith was born in Houston on December 30, 1942. He was an only child; his parents, Warren Nesmith and Bette Nesmith Graham (n\u00e9e McMurray), divorced in 1946. Following the divorce, Bette Graham raised Nesmith as a single mother. Graham took jobs involving clerical work to design work, eventually attaining the position of executive secretary at Texas Bank and Trust. Graham went on to invent the typewriter correction fluid known as Liquid Paper. Over the next 25 years, she built the Liquid Paper Corporation into an international company, which she sold to Gillette in 1979. She died in 1980 at the age of 56.\nNesmith attended Thomas Jefferson High School in Dallas, where he participated in choral and drama activities; he left high school without graduating and enlisted in the U.S. Air Force in 1960. He completed basic training at Lackland Air Force Base in San Antonio, was trained as an aircraft mechanic at Sheppard Air Force Base in Wichita Falls, Texas, and was permanently stationed at Clinton-Sherman Air Force Base near Burns Flat, Oklahoma. He obtained a General Educational Development certificate and was honorably discharged in 1962.\nMusic career.\nAfter Nesmith's tour of duty in the Air Force, his mother and stepfather gave him a guitar for Christmas. Learning as he went, he played solo and in a series of working bands, performing folk, country, and occasionally rock and roll. He enrolled in San Antonio College, where he met John London and began a musical collaboration. They won the first San Antonio College talent award, performing a mixture of standard folk songs and a few of Nesmith's original songs. Nesmith began to write more songs and poetry, then moved to Los Angeles and began singing in folk clubs around the city. He served as the \"Hootmaster\" for the Monday night hootenanny at The Troubadour, a West Hollywood nightclub that featured new artists.\nRandy Sparks from the New Christy Minstrels offered Nesmith a publishing deal for his songs. Nesmith began his recording career in 1963 by releasing a single on the Highness label. He followed this in 1965 with a one-off single released on Edan Records followed by two more recorded singles; one was titled \"The New Recruit\" under the name \"Michael Blessing\", released on Colpix Records\u2014coincidentally this was also the label of Davy Jones, though the two men did not meet until the Monkees were formed.\nBarry Freedman told him about upcoming auditions for a new TV series called \"The Monkees\". In October 1965, Nesmith's confident, carefree and laid-back manner impressed the producers and he landed the role as the wool-hat-wearing guitar player \"Mike\" in the show, which required real-life musical talent for writing, instrument playing, singing, and performing in live concerts as part of the Monkees band.\nNesmith's \"Mary, Mary\" was recorded by the Paul Butterfield Blues Band, then by the Monkees themselves on their second LP in 1967, and subsequently reworked by rap group Run DMC in the mid-1980s. His \"Different Drum\" and \"Some of Shelly's Blues\" were later recorded by Linda Ronstadt and the Stone Poneys, in 1967 and 1968 respectively. \"Pretty Little Princess\", written in 1965, was recorded by Frankie Laine and released as a single in 1968 on ABC Records. Later, \"Some of Shelly's Blues\" and \"Propinquity (I've Just Begun to Care)\" were made popular by the Nitty Gritty Dirt Band on their 1970 album \"Uncle Charlie &amp; His Dog Teddy\".\nThe Monkees.\nFrom 1965 to early 1970, Nesmith, along with Micky Dolenz, Peter Tork, and Davy Jones, was a member of the television pop-rock band the Monkees, created for the television situation comedy of the same name. Nesmith won his role largely by appearing nonchalant when he auditioned. He rode his motorcycle to the audition, and wore a bobble hat to keep his hair out of his eyes; producers Bob Rafelson and Bert Schneider remembered the \"wool hat guy\" and called Nesmith back.\nOnce he was cast, Screen Gems bought his songs so they could be used in the show. Many of the songs Nesmith wrote for the Monkees, such as \"The Girl I Knew Somewhere\", \"Mary, Mary\", and \"Listen to the Band\" became minor hits. One song he wrote, \"You Just May Be the One\", is in mixed meter, interspersing 5/4 bars into an otherwise 4/4 structure.\nEven before Colgems and Don Kirshner's surreptitious release of the second Monkees album, \"More of the Monkees\", without the knowledge or consent of the four musician-actors, they came to be frustrated by their studio-manufactured \"bubblegum\" image. Within weeks of the album's release, Nesmith successfully lobbied the group's creators, Bob Rafelson and Bert Schneider, that the Monkees be allowed to play their instruments on future records. During a group meeting with musical supervisor Kirshner and Colgems lawyer Herb Moelis, in a suite at the Beverly Hills Hotel, each actor received a $250,000 royalties check; yet Nesmith still threatened to quit. Moelis rebuked him: \"You'd better read your contract\". Nesmith defiantly punched a hole in the wall, declaring to Moelis, \"That could have been your face, motherfucker!\" Weeks later, due to a breach of (verbal) agreement over the next single release, which was promised to Nesmith by Rafelson and Schneider, Nesmith led the charge in ousting Kirshner, effectively giving the four youths complete artistic and production control of their output. The group finally worked as a true four-man rock group on 1967's \"Headquarters\"\u2014despite Jones and Dolenz having limited instrumental skills, studio time being expensive and retakes being costly.\nDuring the band's first independent press conference, Nesmith called \"More of the Monkees\" \"probably the worst record in the history of the world\", partly due to rushed, shoddy studio engineering. The band took a hit to its artistic credibility when fans learned the four had not played all the instruments on the first two albums. However, sales continued to be profitable. \"Headquarters\" sold 2 million copies, down 2 million units from its predecessor, but still reached the No. 1 spot on Billboard, falling only to \"Sgt. Pepper's Lonely Hearts Club Band\" a week later and remaining at No. 2 all through the entire 1967 Summer of Love.\nFor the remaining five Monkees LPs, ironically, the original Kirshner formula of hired studio musicians and songwriters again became the norm, although Nesmith, Tork, Dolenz and Jones contributed about 50 percent of the original compositions, Nesmith the majority of those. By the end of the Monkees run, Nesmith was withholding many of his original song ideas from Monkees albums, planning to release them in his post-Monkees solo career. \nNesmith's last contractual Monkees commitment was a commercial for Kool-Aid and Nerf balls in April 1970 (fittingly, the spot ends with Nesmith frowning and saying, \"Enerf's enerf!\"). As the band's sales declined, Nesmith asked to be released from his contract, despite it costing him: \"I had three years left ... at $150,000 [equivalent to $1.16 million in 2022] a year.\" He remained in a financial bind until 1980, when he received his inheritance from his mother's estate. In a 1980 interview with \"Playboy\", he said of that time: \"I had to start telling little tales to the tax man while they were putting tags on the furniture.\"\nReturn to the Monkees.\nNesmith did not participate in the Monkees' 20th anniversary reunion, due to contractual obligations with his production company, but he did appear during an encore with the three other Monkees at the Greek Theatre on September 7, 1986. In a 1987 interview for Nick Rocks, Nesmith stated, \"When Peter called up and said 'we're going to go out, do you want to go?' I was booked. But, if you get to L.A., I'll play.\"\nNesmith next joined his fellow Monkees for the 1986 \"Monkees Christmas Medley\" video for MTV appearing throughout dressed/disguised as Santa Claus until the finale, when he revealed his identity to all.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"The question I am most often asked is 'how does it feel to be up with the guys after all this time?' Well, it's a mixture of feelings and all of them are good. But the one that comes to mind is the feeling of profound gratitude.\"\n Michael Nesmith, speaking about being part of The Monkees at the Hollywood Walk of Fame Star award in 1989.\nIn 1989, Nesmith reunited with the other members of the Monkees: Micky Dolenz, Peter Tork, and Davy Jones. Prior to the official kickoff of The Monkees '89 tour (on July 1 in Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada) all four Monkees gathered in Los Angeles, California, making two live radio appearances (KLOS-FM: \"The Mark and Brian Show\" on June 28 and KIIS Radio on June 30) to promote their reunion concert at the Universal Amphitheatre on July 9, 1989. The following day, all four band members were in attendance as the Monkees received a Hollywood Walk of Fame star.\nIn 1995, Nesmith again reunited with the Monkees to record their studio album (and first to feature all four since \"Head\" in 1968), titled \"Justus\", released in 1996. He also wrote and directed a Monkees reunion television special, \"Hey, Hey, It's the Monkees\". To support the reunion, Nesmith, Jones, Dolenz, and Tork briefly toured the UK in 1997. The UK tour was the last time all four Monkees performed as a group.\nIn 2012\u20132014, after Jones's death, Nesmith reunited with Dolenz and Tork to perform concerts throughout the United States. Backed with a seven-piece band that included Nesmith's son, Christian, the trio performed 27 songs from The Monkees discography (\"Daydream Believer\" was sung by the audience). When asked why he had decided to return to the Monkees, Nesmith stated, \"I never really left. It is a part of my youth that is always active in my thoughts and part of my overall work as an artist. It stays in a special place.\"\nIn 2016, Nesmith contributed to the Monkees' 50th anniversary album \"Good Times!\". He additionally contributed a song, \"I Know What I Know\", and was reportedly \"thrilled\" at the outcome of the album. Despite not touring with Dolenz and Tork for the majority of the Monkees' 50th anniversary reunion in 2016, Nesmith did twice fill in for the ailing Peter Tork and appeared for the final show of the tour. It was the last time the three surviving Monkees performed as a group.\nIn 2018, Nesmith and Dolenz toured together as a duo for the first time under the banner \"The Monkees Present: The Mike and Micky Show\". The tour was cut short four dates out due to Nesmith having health issues. He was flown back home to undergo quadruple bypass surgery. He contributed two songs to the Monkees' 13th studio album, \"Christmas Party\" (the group's first Christmas album), released on October 12, 2018.\nIn 2019, Nesmith and Dolenz reunited again to make up the cancelled dates of the tour and adding several more dates, including a planned tour of Australia and New Zealand. Nesmith and Dolenz announced a follow-up tour, \"An Evening with the Monkees\", to begin in early 2020. The tour was delayed, however, due the COVID-19 pandemic. It was announced by Nesmith and Dolenz on May 4, 2021, that the Monkees would disband following a farewell tour. Dubbed \"The Monkees Farewell Tour\", the tour consisted of over 40 dates in the United States from September to November. However, because of restrictions due to the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic, they were not able to play shows in Canada, the UK or Australia. The final date of the tour was held on November 14, 2021, at the Greek Theatre in Los Angeles.\nSolo career.\nAs he prepared for his exit from The Monkees, Nesmith was approached by John Ware of The Corvettes, a band that featured Nesmith's Texas band mate and close friend John London. London played on some of the earliest pre-Monkees, Nesmith 45s, as well as numerous Monkees sessions, and had 45s produced by Nesmith for the Dot label in 1969. Ware wanted Nesmith to put together a band. Nesmith's interest hinged on noted pedal steel player Orville \"Red\" Rhodes; their musical partnership continued until Rhodes's death in 1995. The new band was christened Michael Nesmith and the First National Band and recorded three albums for RCA Records, the first two issued in 1970 and the third released in 1971.\nNesmith's First National Band is now considered a pioneer of country-rock music. Nesmith wrote most of the songs for the band and he is considered one of the trailblazers of country rock. He also had moderate commercial success with the First National Band. Their second single, \"Joanne\", hit number 21 on the \"Billboard\" chart, number 17 on Cashbox, and number four in Canada, with the follow-up \"Silver Moon\" making number 42 \"Billboard\", number 28 Cashbox, and number 13 in Canada. Two more singles charted (\"Nevada Fighter\" made number 70 \"Billboard\", number 73 Cashbox, and number 67 Canada, and \"Propinquity\" reached number 95 Cashbox), and the first two LPs charted in the lower regions of the\" Billboard\" album chart. No clear answer has ever been given for the band's breakup.\nNesmith followed up with The Second National Band, which consisted of Nesmith (vocals and guitar), Michael Cohen (keyboards and Moog), Johnny Meeks (of The Strangers) (bass), jazzer Jack Ranelli (drums), and Orville Rhodes (pedal steel), as well as an appearance by singer, musician, and songwriter Jos\u00e9 Feliciano on congas. The album, \"Tantamount to Treason Vol. 1\", was a commercial and critical disaster. Nesmith then recorded \"And the Hits Just Keep on Comin\"', featuring only him on guitar and Red Rhodes on pedal steel.\nNesmith then became more heavily involved in producing, working on Iain Matthews's album \"Valley Hi\" and Bert Jansch's \"L.A. Turnaround\". Nesmith was given a label of his own, Countryside, through Elektra Records, as Elektra Records's Jac Holzman was a fan of Nesmith's. It featured a number of artists produced by Nesmith, including Garland Frady and Red Rhodes. The staff band at Countryside also helped Nesmith on his next, and last, RCA Victor album, \"Pretty Much Your Standard Ranch Stash\".\nIn the mid-1970s, Nesmith briefly collaborated as a songwriter with Linda Hargrove, resulting in the tune \"I've Never Loved Anyone More\", a hit for Lynn Anderson and recorded by many others, as well as the songs \"Winonah\" and \"If You Will Walk With Me\", both of which were recorded by Hargrove. Of these songs, only \"Winonah\" was recorded by Nesmith himself. During this same period, Nesmith started his multimedia company Pacific Arts, which initially put out audio records, eight-track tapes, and cassettes, followed in 1981 with \"video records\". Nesmith recorded a number of LPs for his label, and had a moderate worldwide hit in 1977 with his song \"Rio\", the single taken from the album \"From a Radio Engine to the Photon Wing\". In 1979, Nesmith released the single Cruisin', also known as \"Lucy and Ramona and Sunset Sam\", which was popular on AOR rock stations and in New Zealand. In 1983, Nesmith produced the music video for the Lionel Richie single \"All Night Long\". In 1987, he produced the music video for the Michael Jackson single \"The Way You Make Me Feel\".\n\"PopClips\" and MTV, \"Elephant Parts\", and \"Television Parts\".\nDuring this time, Nesmith created a video clip for \"Rio\", which helped spur Nesmith's creation of a television program called \"PopClips\" for the Nickelodeon cable network. In 1980, \"PopClips\" was sold to the Time Warner/Amex consortium. Time Warner/Amex developed \"PopClips\" into the MTV network.\nNesmith won the first Grammy Award presented for (long-form) Music Video in 1982 for his hour-long \"Elephant Parts\". He also had a short-lived series (1984-5) on NBC inspired by the video called \"Michael Nesmith in Television Parts\". \"Television Parts\" included many other artists who were unknown at the time, but went on to become major stars in their own right: Jay Leno, Jerry Seinfeld, Garry Shandling, Whoopi Goldberg, and Arsenio Hall. The concept of the show was to have comics render their stand-up routines into short comedy films much like the ones in \"Elephant Parts\". Nesmith assembled writers Jack Handey, William Martin, John Levenstein, and Michael Kaplan, along with directors William Dear (who had directed \"Elephant Parts\") and Alan Myerson, as well as producer Ward Sylvester to create the show. The half-hour show ran for 5 episodes in the summer of 1985 on NBC Thursday nights in prime time.\nPacific Arts and legal dispute.\nNesmith formed the Pacific Arts Corporation, Inc. in 1974 to manage and develop media projects. Pacific Arts Video became a pioneer in the home video market, producing and distributing a wide variety of videotaped programs, although the company eventually ceased operations after an acrimonious contract dispute with PBS over home video licensing rights and payments for several series, including Ken Burns' \"The Civil War\". The dispute escalated into a lawsuit that went to jury trial in federal court in Los Angeles. On February 3, 1999, a jury awarded Nesmith and his company Pacific Arts $48.875\u00a0million in compensatory and punitive damages, prompting his widely quoted comment, \"It's like finding your grandmother stealing your stereo. You're happy to get your stereo back, but it's sad to find out your grandmother is a thief.\" Six months after the verdict, a settlement was reached with the amount paid to Pacific Arts and Nesmith kept confidential.\nNesmith's most recent Pacific Arts project was Videoranch 3D, a virtual environment on the internet that hosted live performances at various virtual venues inside the ranch. He performed live inside Videoranch 3D on May 25, 2009.\nMovies and books.\nNesmith was the executive producer for the films \"Repo Man\", \"Tapeheads\", and \"\", as well as his own solo recording and film projects.\nIn 1998, Nesmith published his first novel, \"The Long Sandy Hair of Neftoon Zamora\". It was developed originally as an online project and was later published as a hardcover book by St Martin's Press. Nesmith's second novel, \"The America Gene\", was released in July 2009 as an online download from Videoranch.com.\nRecent history.\nIn the early 1980s, Nesmith teamed with satirist P. J. O'Rourke to ride his vehicle \"Timerider\" in the annual Baja 1000 off-road race. This is chronicled in O'Rourke's 2009 book \"Driving Like Crazy\".\nDuring the 1990s, Nesmith, as trustee and president of the Gihon Foundation, hosted the Council on Ideas, a gathering of intellectuals from different fields who were asked to identify the most important issues of their day and publish the result. The foundation ceased the program in 2000 and started a new program for the performing arts. Nesmith also spent a decade as a board of trustees member, nominating member and vice-chair of the American Film Institute.\nIn 1992, Nesmith undertook a concert tour of North America to promote the first CD release of his RCA solo albums (although he included the song \"Rio\" from the album \"From a Radio Engine to the Photon Wing\"). The concert tour ended at the Britt Festival in Oregon. A video and CD, both entitled \"Live at the Britt Festival\", were released capturing the 1992 concert.\nNesmith continued to record and release his own music. His final album, \"Rays\", was released in 2006. In 2011, he returned to producing, working with blues singer and guitarist Carolyn Wonderland. Nesmith produced Wonderland's version of Robert Johnson's \"I Believe I'll Dust My Broom\" on her album \"Peace Meal\". Wonderland married writer-comedian A. Whitney Brown on March 4, 2011, in a ceremony officiated by Nesmith.\nIn 2012, Nesmith briefly toured Europe prior to rejoining the Monkees for their tours of the United States. Intermixing the Monkees concerts, Nesmith also launched solo tours of the U.S. Unlike his 1992 U.S. tour, which predominantly featured music from his RCA recordings, Nesmith stated that his 2013 tour would feature songs he considers \"thematic, chronological and most often requested by fans\". Chris Scruggs, grandson of Earl Scruggs, replaced the late Red Rhodes on the steel guitar. The tour was captured on a live album, \"Movies Of The Mind\".\nIn 2014, he guest-starred in season four, episode nine, of the IFC comedy series \"Portlandia\" in the fictitious role of the father of the mayor of Portland, Oregon.\nIn 2017, Nesmith released a memoir and companion \"soundtrack\" album titled \"Infinite Tuesday: An Autobiographical Riff\".\nIn 2018, he announced that he would be doing a five-date tour of California with a revamped version of The First National Band, including a date at The Troubadour, where he performed before The Monkees. On February 20, a tour was announced as \"The Monkees Present: The Mike and Micky Show\", their first tour as a duo. The pair would play Monkees music and promote the tour under the Monkees banner, but Nesmith stated, \"there's no pretense there about Micky and I [sic] being the Monkees. We're not.\" The tour was cut short in June 2018, with four shows remaining on the tour schedule due to Nesmith having a health issue. Dolenz and Nesmith rescheduled the unplayed concerts plus adding several other including an Australian and New Zealand tour in 2019.\nAfter recovering from his health scare, Michael Nesmith and the First National Band Redux went on a tour of the U.S., with mostly the same lineup and setlist as the southern California shows.\nIn 2019, Nesmith toured in a two-piece configuration with pedal steel player Pete Finney, focusing on his 1972 album, \"And the Hits Just Keep on Comin\"'. This was the first time Nesmith had performed in this format since 1974 with Red Rhodes. Nesmith was also joined by special guests Ben Gibbard and Scott McCaughey on opening night in Seattle.\nPersonal life.\nNesmith was married three times and had four children.\nHe met his first wife, Phyllis Ann Barbour, in 1964, while at San Antonio College. Together, they had three children: Christian, born in 1965; Jonathan, born in 1968; and Jessica, born in 1970. Nesmith and Barbour divorced in 1972.\nNesmith also had a son, Jason, born in August 1968 to Nurit Wilde, whom he met while working on \"The Monkees\".\nFrom 1976 to 1988, he was married to his second wife, Kathryn Bild, a screenwriter and television producer.\nIn 2000, he married his third wife, Victoria Kennedy. The marriage ended in divorce in 2011.\nWhen the Monkees' TV series ended in 1968, Nesmith enrolled part-time at the University of California, Los Angeles, where he studied American history and music history. In 1973, Nesmith founded the Countryside Records label with Jac Holzman, the founder of Elektra Records. In 1974, Nesmith started Pacific Arts Corporation and released what he called \"a book with a soundtrack\", titled \"The Prison\", as the company's first release.\nHealth and death.\nNesmith was forced to cancel the last four dates of his 2018 tour with Micky Dolenz due to a \"minor health scare\". In an interview with \"Rolling Stone\" published on July 26 of that year, Nesmith said he had undergone quadruple bypass heart surgery, and had been hospitalized for over a month.\nNesmith died from heart failure at his home in Carmel Valley, California on December 10, 2021 at the age of 78, less than a month after his final performance. His family said in a statement:\n\u201cWith infinite love we announce that Michael Nesmith has passed away this morning in his home, surrounded by family, peacefully and of natural causes.\u201d Dolenz memorialized Nesmith as \"a dear friend and partner.\"\nDiscography.\nSource:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\n(n.b. books proper \u2013 not including \"The Prison\" and \"The Garden\")\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20994", "revid": "2824367", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20994", "title": "McLaren", "text": "British auto racing team\nMcLaren Racing Limited ( ) is a British motor racing team based at the McLaren Technology Centre in Woking, Surrey, England. The team is a subsidiary of the McLaren Group, which owns a majority of the team. McLaren is best known as a Formula One chassis constructor, the second-oldest active team and the second-most successful Formula One team after Ferrari, having won races, 12 Drivers' Championships, and 10 Constructors' Championships. McLaren also has a history in American open wheel racing as both an entrant and a chassis constructor, and has won the Canadian-American Challenge Cup (Can-Am) sports car racing championship. McLaren is one of only three constructors, and the only team, to complete the Triple Crown of Motorsport (wins at the Indianapolis 500, 24 Hours of Le Mans, and Monaco Grand Prix).\nFounded in 1963 by Bruce McLaren, the team won its first Grand Prix at the 1968 Belgian Grand Prix, but their greatest initial success was in Can-Am, which they dominated from 1967 to 1971. Further American triumph followed, with Indianapolis 500 wins in McLaren cars for Mark Donohue in 1972 and Johnny Rutherford in 1974 and 1976. After Bruce McLaren died in a testing accident in 1970, Teddy Mayer took over and led the team to their first Formula One Constructors' Championship in , with Emerson Fittipaldi and James Hunt winning the Drivers' Championship in 1974 and respectively. The year 1974 also marked the start of a long-standing sponsorship by the Marlboro cigarette brand.\nIn 1981, McLaren merged with Ron Dennis' Project Four Racing; Dennis took over as team principal, and shortly afterwards organised a buyout of the original McLaren shareholders to take full control of the team. This began the team's most successful era; with Porsche and Honda engines, Niki Lauda, Alain Prost, and Ayrton Senna won seven Drivers' Championships between them and the team took six Constructors' Championships. The combination of Prost and Senna was particularly dominant\u2014together they won all but one race in \u2014but later their rivalry soured and Prost left for Ferrari. Fellow English team Williams offered the most consistent challenge during this period, the two winning every constructors' title between and . By the mid-1990s, Honda had withdrawn from Formula One, Senna had moved to Williams, and the team went three seasons without a win. With Mercedes-Benz engines, West sponsorship, and former Williams designer Adrian Newey, further championships came in and with driver Mika H\u00e4kkinen, and during the 2000s the team were consistent front-runners, with Lewis Hamilton taking their latest drivers' title in .\nRon Dennis retired as McLaren team principal in 2009, handing over to long-time McLaren employee Martin Whitmarsh. At the end of 2013, after the team's worst season since 2004, Whitmarsh was ousted. McLaren announced in 2013 that they would be using Honda engines from 2015 onwards, replacing Mercedes-Benz. The team raced as McLaren Honda for the first time since 1992 at the 2015 Australian Grand Prix. The second Honda partnership did not yield good results, and in September 2017, McLaren announced they had agreed on an engine supply with Renault from 2018 to 2020. McLaren returned to using Mercedes-Benz engines from the 2021 season, with a deal in place until at least 2030. The team's ninth Constructors' Championship, and first since 1998, was won in 2024, with their tenth coming in , making McLaren the second-most successful Formula One team of all time in terms of Constructors' Championships won.\nAfter initially returning to the Indianapolis 500 in 2017 as a backer of Andretti Autosport to run Fernando Alonso and then in 2019 as an independent entry, McLaren announced in August 2019 that they would run in conjunction with Arrow Schmidt Peterson Motorsports starting in 2020 to run the full IndyCar Series, the combined entry being named Arrow McLaren SP. Initially having no ownership interest in the team, McLaren would purchase 75% of the operation in 2021. McLaren entered the electric off-road racing series Extreme E from 2022 to 2024, and also entered Formula E from the 2022\u201323 season to the 2024\u201325 season. Track-modified McLaren road cars have also seen success in sports car and endurance racing, with a modified version of the McLaren F1 road car taking victory at the 1995 24 Hours of Le Mans; the team is set to join the FIA World Endurance Championship in 2027, with McLaren Racing CEO Zak Brown's team United Autosports running the team and Dallara developing McLaren's hypercar to fit with WEC's LMDh formula regulations.\nBackground.\nBruce McLaren Motor Racing was founded in 1963 by New Zealander Bruce McLaren. Bruce was a works driver for the British Formula One team Cooper with whom he had won three Grands Prix and come second in the World Championship. Wanting to compete in the Australasian Tasman Series, Bruce approached his employers, but when team owner Charles Cooper insisted on using 1.5-litre Formula One-specification engines instead of the 2.5-litre motors permitted by the Tasman rules, Bruce decided to set up his own team to run him and his prospective Formula One teammate Timmy Mayer with custom-built Cooper cars.\nBruce won the 1964 series, but Mayer was killed in practice for the final race at the Longford Circuit in Tasmania. When Bruce McLaren approached Teddy Mayer to help him with the purchase of the Zerex sports car from Roger Penske, Teddy Mayer and Bruce McLaren began discussing a business partnership resulting in Teddy Mayer buying in to Bruce McLaren Motor Racing Limited (BMMR) and ultimately becoming its largest shareholder.\nThe team, competing under a British racing licence, was based in Feltham, England from 1963 to 1964, and in Colnbrook, England from 1965 until 1981, and it has been based in Woking, England since 1981. Despite this, Bruce never used the traditional British racing green on his cars. Instead, he used colour schemes that were not based on national principles (e.g. his first Formula One car, the McLaren M2B car, raced at the 1966 Monaco Grand Prix, was painted white with a green stripe, to represent a fictional Yamura team in John Frankenheimer's film \"Grand Prix\").\nDuring this period, Bruce drove for his team in sports car races in the United Kingdom and North America and also entered the 1965 Tasman Series with Phil Hill, but did not win it. He continued to drive in Grands Prix for Cooper, but judging that team's form to be waning, decided to race his own cars in 1966.\nRacing history: Formula One.\nBruce McLaren made the team's Grand Prix debut at the 1966 Monaco race (of the current Formula One teams, only Ferrari is older). His race ended after nine laps due to a terminal oil leak. The car was the M2B designed by Robin Herd, but the programme was hampered by a poor choice of engines: a 3.0-litre version of Ford's Indianapolis 500 engine and a Serenissima V8 were used, the latter scoring the team's first point in Britain, but both were underpowered and unreliable. For Bruce decided to use a British Racing Motors (BRM) V12 engine, but due to delays with the engine, was forced initially to use a modified Formula Two car called the M4B powered by a 2.1-litre BRM V8, later building a similar but slightly larger car called the M5A for the V12. Neither car brought great success, the best result being a fourth at Monaco.\n1968\u20131982: Ford-Cosworth DFV engines.\nFor , after driving McLaren's sole entry for the previous two years, Bruce was joined by 1967 champion and fellow New Zealander Denny Hulme, who was already racing for McLaren in Can-Am. That year's new M7A car, Herd's final design for the team, was powered by Cosworth's new and soon to be ubiquitous DFV engine (the DFV would go on to be used by McLaren until 1983) and with it a major upturn in form proceeded. Bruce won the Race of Champions at the Brands Hatch circuit and Hulme won the International Trophy at Silverstone, both non-championship races, before Bruce took the team's first championship win at the Belgian Grand Prix. Hulme also won the Italian and Canadian Grands Prix later in the year, helping the team to second in the Constructors' Championship. Using an updated 'C' version on the M7, a further three podium finishes followed for Bruce in , but the team's fifth win had to wait until the last race of the 1969 championship when Hulme won the Mexican Grand Prix. That year, McLaren experimented with four-wheel drive in the M9A, but the car had only a single outing driven by Derek Bell at the British Grand Prix; Bruce described driving it as like \"trying to write your signature with somebody jogging your elbow\".\nThe year started with a second-place each for Hulme and Bruce in the first two Grands Prix, but in June, Bruce was killed in a crash at Goodwood while testing the new M8D Can-Am car. After his death, Teddy Mayer took over effective control of the team; Hulme continued with Dan Gurney and Peter Gethin partnering him. Gurney won the first two Can-Am events at Mosport and St. Jovite and placed ninth in the third, but left the team mid-season, and Gethin took over from there. While began promisingly when Hulme led the opening round in South Africa before retiring with broken suspension, ultimately Hulme, Gethin (who left for BRM mid-season,) and Jackie Oliver again failed to score a win. The 1972 season saw improvements though: Hulme won the team's first Grand Prix for &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;2+1\u20442 years in South Africa and he and Peter Revson scored ten other podiums, the team finishing third in the Constructors' Championship. McLaren gave Jody Scheckter his Formula One debut at the final race at Watkins Glen. All McLaren drivers used the Ford-Cosworth engines, except for Andrea de Adamich and Nanni Galli who used engines from Alfa Romeo in 1970.\n1973\u20131981: Hunt\u2013Lauda era and transition.\nThe McLaren M23, designed by Gordon Coppuck, was the team's new car for the season. Sharing parts of the design of both McLaren's Formula One M19 and Indianapolis M16 cars (itself inspired by Lotus's 72), it was a mainstay for four years. Hulme won with it in Sweden and Revson took the only Grand Prix wins of his career in Britain and Canada. In , Emerson Fittipaldi, world champion with Lotus two years earlier, joined McLaren. Hulme, in his final Formula One campaign, won the Argentinian season-opener; Fittipaldi, with wins in Brazil, Belgium and Canada, took the Drivers' Championship. It was a close fight for Fittipaldi, who secured the title with a fourth at the season-ending United States Grand Prix, putting him three points ahead of Ferrari's Clay Regazzoni. With Hulme and multiple motorcycle world champion Mike Hailwood, he also sealed McLaren's first Constructors' Championship. The year was less successful for the team: Fittipaldi was second in the championship behind Niki Lauda. Hulme's replacement Jochen Mass took his sole GP win in Spain.\nAt the end of 1975, Fittipaldi left to join his brother's Fittipaldi/Copersucar team. With the top drivers already signed to other teams, Mayer turned to James Hunt, a driver on whom biographer Gerald Donaldson reflected as having \"a dubious reputation\". In , Lauda was again strong in his Ferrari; at midseason, he led the championship with 56 points while Hunt had only 26 despite wins in Spain (a race from which he was initially disqualified) and France. At the German Grand Prix, though, Lauda crashed heavily, was nearly killed, and missed the next two races. Hunt capitalised by winning four more Grands Prix giving him a three-point deficit going into the finale in Japan. Here it rained torrentially, Lauda retired because of safety concerns, and Hunt sealed the Drivers' Championship by finishing third. McLaren, though, lost the Constructors' Championship to Ferrari.\nIn , the M23 was gradually replaced with the M26, the M23's final works outing being Gilles Villeneuve's Formula One debut with the team in a one-off appearance at the British Grand Prix. Hunt won on three occasions that year, but the Lauda and Ferrari combination proved too strong, Hunt and McLaren managing just fifth and third in the respective championships. From there, results continued to worsen. Lotus and Mario Andretti took the titles with their 78 and 79 ground-effect cars and neither Hunt nor Mass's replacement Patrick Tambay were able to seriously challenge with the nonground-effect M26. Hunt was dropped at the end of 1978 in favour of Lotus's Ronnie Peterson, but when Peterson was killed by a crash at the Italian Grand Prix, John Watson was signed, instead. No improvement occurred in ; Coppuck's M28 design was described by Mayer as \"ghastly, a disaster\" and \"quite diabolical\" and the M29 did little to change the situation. Tambay scored no points and Watson only 15 to place the team eighth at the end of the year.\nThe 1980s started much as the 1970s had ended: Alain Prost took over from Tambay but Watson and he rarely scored points. Under increasing pressure since the previous year from principal sponsor Philip Morris and their executive John Hogan, Mayer was coerced into merging McLaren with Ron Dennis's Project Four Formula Two team, also sponsored by Philip Morris. Dennis had designer John Barnard who, inspired by the carbon-fibre rear wings of the BMW M1 race cars that Project Four was preparing, had ideas for an innovative Formula One chassis constructed from carbon-fibre instead of conventional aluminium alloy. On their own, they lacked the money to build it, but with investment that came with the merger it became the McLaren MP4 (later called MP4/1) of , driven by Watson and Andrea de Cesaris. In the MP4, Watson won the British Grand Prix and had three other podium finishes. Soon after the merger, McLaren moved from Colnbrook to a new base in Woking and Dennis and Mayer initially shared the managing directorship of the company; by 1982, Mayer had departed and Tyler Alexander's and his shareholdings had been bought by the new owners.\n1983\u20131992: TAG-Porsche and Honda engines.\nIn the early 1980s, teams like Renault, Ferrari and Brabham were using 1.5-litre turbocharged engines in favour of the 3.0-litre naturally aspirated engines that had been standard since 1966. Having seen in 1982 the need for a turbo engine of their own, Dennis had convinced Williams backer Techniques d'Avant Garde (TAG) to fund Porsche-built, TAG-branded turbo engines made to Barnard's specifications; TAG's founder Mansour Ojjeh would later become a McLaren shareholder. In the meantime, they continued with Cosworth engines as old rival Lauda came out of retirement in 1982 to drive alongside Watson in that year's 1B development of the MP4. They each won two races, Watson notably from 17th place on the grid in Detroit, and at one stage of the season McLaren were second in the constructors' championship. As part of a dispute with FISA, they boycotted the San Marino Grand Prix. Although was not so fruitful, Watson did win again in the United States, this time from 22nd on the grid at Long Beach.\nHaving been fired by Renault, Prost returned to McLaren once again for . Now using the TAG engines, the team dominated, scoring 12 wins and &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;2+1\u20442 times as many constructors' points as nearest rival Ferrari. In the Drivers' Championship, Lauda prevailed over Prost by half a point, the narrowest margin ever. The McLaren-TAGs were again strong in ; a third Constructors' Championship came their way while this time Prost won the Drivers' Championship. In , the Williams team were resurgent with their Honda engine and drivers Nigel Mansell and Nelson Piquet, while at McLaren, Lauda's replacement, 1982 champion Keke Rosberg could not gel with the car. Williams took the Constructors' Championship, but for Prost, wins in San Marino, Monaco, and Austria combined with the fact that the Williams drivers were taking points from each other meant that he retained a chance going into the last race, the Australian Grand Prix. There, a puncture for Mansell and a precautionary pit stop for Piquet gave Prost the race win and his second title, making him the first driver to win back-to-back championships since Jack Brabham in and 1960. In Barnard departed for Ferrari to be replaced by Gordon Murray as Technical Director, with Steve Nichols (who himself joined Ferrari in 1989) remaining as Chief Designer. In the hands of Prost and Stefan Johansson, though, Nichols's MP4/3 and the TAG engine could not match the Williams-Honda.\n1988\u20131991: Domination with Honda.\nFor , Honda switched their factory supply to McLaren and, encouraged by Prost, Dennis signed Ayrton Senna to drive. Despite regulations reducing the boost pressure and fuel capacity (and therefore, power) of the turbo cars, Honda persisted with a turbocharged engine. In the MP4/4, Senna and Prost engaged in a season-long battle, winning 15 of the 16 races (at the other race at Monza, Senna had been leading comfortably, but collided with back-marker Jean-Louis Schlesser). At the Portuguese Grand Prix, their relationship soured when Senna squeezed Prost against the pit wall; Prost won, but afterwards said, \"It was dangerous. If he wants the world championship that badly he can have it.\" Prost scored more points that year, but because only the best 11 results counted, Senna took the title at the penultimate race in Japan.\nThe next year, with turbos banned, Honda supplied a new 3.5-L naturally aspirated V10 engine and McLaren again won both titles with the MP4/5. Their drivers' relationship continued to deteriorate, though, especially when, at the San Marino Grand Prix, Prost felt that Senna had reneged on an agreement not to pass each other at the first corner. Believing that Honda and Dennis were favouring Senna, Prost announced mid-season that he would leave to drive at Ferrari the following year. For the second year in succession, the Drivers' Championship was decided at the Japanese Grand Prix, this time in Prost's favour after Senna and he collided (Senna initially recovered and won the race, but was later disqualified).\nWith former McLaren men Nichols and Prost (Barnard had moved to the Benetton team), Ferrari pushed the British team more closely in . McLaren, in turn, brought in Ferrari's Gerhard Berger, but like the two seasons before, the Drivers' Championship was led by Prost and Senna and settled at the penultimate race in Japan. Here, Senna collided with Prost at the first corner, forcing both to retire, but this time Senna escaped punishment and took the title; McLaren also won the Constructors' Championship. The year was another for McLaren and Senna, with the ascendant Renault-powered Williams team their closest challengers. By , Williams, with their advanced FW14B car, had overtaken McLaren, breaking their four-year run as champions, despite the latter winning five races that year.\n1993\u20131994: Ford, Lamborghini and Peugeot engines.\nAs Honda withdrew from the sport at end of 1992 following the Japanese asset price bubble in Japan, McLaren sought a new engine supplier. A deal to secure Renault engines fell through due to being vetoed by Renault's fuel and lubricant supplier Elf Aquitaine, subsequently McLaren switched to customer Ford engines for the season. Senna\u2014who initially agreed only to a race-by-race contract before later signing for the whole year\u2014won five races, including a record-breaking sixth victory at Monaco and a win at the European Grand Prix, where he went from fifth to first on the opening lap. His teammate, 1991 CART champion Michael Andretti, fared much worse; he scored only seven points, and was replaced by test driver Mika H\u00e4kkinen for the final three rounds of the season. Williams ultimately won both titles and Senna\u2014who had flirted with moving there for 1993\u2014signed with them for the season. During the 1993 season McLaren took part in a seven part BBC Television documentary called \"A Season With McLaren\".\nMcLaren tested a Lamborghini V12 engine ahead of the season, as part of a potential deal with the then-Lamborghini owner Chrysler, before eventually deciding to use full-works Peugeot engines. With Peugeot power, the MP4/9 was driven by H\u00e4kkinen and Martin Brundle, despite achieving eight podiums over the season no wins were achieved. Peugeot was dropped after a single year due to multiple engine failures/unreliability which cost McLaren potential race victories and they switched to a Mercedes-Benz-branded, Ilmor-designed engine.\n1995\u20132009: Mercedes partnership.\nFor 1995 season onwards, McLaren ended their engine deal with Peugeot Sport and started an engine full-works partnership with Mercedes-Benz High Performance Engines for the first time, after the German manufacturer spent one year in partnership with the then-youngest Sauber team. The partnership included bespoke free engines from Mercedes-Benz that built, assembled and tuned by Ilmor Engineering in Brixworth, England, Mercedes-Benz official team vehicles, financial support, also earned full-factory support from Daimler AG and Mercedes-Benz and also Mercedes-Benz and Ilmor staffs would work with the team at their Woking base.\nMcLaren's Formula One car for the season, the MP4/10, was not a front-runner and Brundle's replacement, former champion Nigel Mansell, was unable to fit into the car at first and departed after just two races, with Mark Blundell taking his place.\nWhile Williams dominated in , McLaren, now with David Coulthard alongside H\u00e4kkinen, went a third successive season without a win. In , however, Coulthard broke this run by winning the season-opening Australian Grand Prix; H\u00e4kkinen and he would each win another race before the end of the season, and highly rated designer Adrian Newey joined the team from Williams in August that year. Despite the car's improved pace, unreliability proved costly throughout the season, with retirements at the British and Luxembourg Grands Prix occurring whilst H\u00e4kkinen was in the lead. It was also at the start of this season that saw long time sponsor, Marlboro, shift its support to long time rival Ferrari. For the first time since the 1974 season, McLaren would have a new identity, shifting to fellow tobacco sponsor West. This saw the traditional red and white replaced with silver, grey, white and red. McLaren would retain this colour scheme (or very similar) for twenty years until 2017.\nWith Newey able to take advantage of new technical regulations for , and with Williams losing their works Renault engines following Renault's temporary withdrawal from the sport, McLaren were once again able to challenge for the championship. H\u00e4kkinen and Coulthard won five of the first six races despite the banning of the team's \"brake steer\" system, which allowed the rear brakes to be operated individually to reduce understeer, after a protest by Ferrari at the second race in Brazil. Schumacher and Ferrari provided the greatest competition, the former levelled on points with H\u00e4kkinen with two races to go, but wins for H\u00e4kkinen at the Luxembourg and Japanese Grands Prix gave both him the Drivers' Championship and McLaren the Constructors' Championship. H\u00e4kkinen won his second Drivers' Championship the following season, but due to a combination of driver errors and mechanical failures, the team lost the constructors' title to Ferrari.\nIn McLaren won seven races in a close fight with Ferrari, but ultimately Ferrari and Schumacher prevailed in both competitions. This marked the start of a decline in form as Ferrari cemented their dominance of Formula One and also beryllium engine material banned in Formula One that affected Mercedes engine performance. In , H\u00e4kkinen was outscored by Coulthard for the first time since 1997 and retired (ending Formula One's longest ever driver partnership), his place taken by Kimi R\u00e4ikk\u00f6nen, then in , Coulthard took their solitary win at Monaco while Ferrari repeated McLaren's 1988 feat of 15 wins in a season.\nThe year started promisingly, with one win each for Coulthard and R\u00e4ikk\u00f6nen at the first two Grands Prix. However, they were hampered when the MP4-18 car designed for that year suffered crash test and reliability problems, forcing them to continue using a 'D' development of the year-old MP4-17 for longer than they had initially planned. Despite this, R\u00e4ikk\u00f6nen scored points consistently and challenged for the championship up to the final race, eventually losing by two points. The team began with the MP4-19, which technical director Adrian Newey described as \"a debugged version of [the MP4-18]\". It was not a success, though, and was replaced mid-season by the MP4-19B. With this, R\u00e4ikk\u00f6nen scored the team's and his only win of the year at the Belgian Grand Prix, as McLaren finished fifth in the Constructors' Championship, their worst ranking since 1983.\nCoulthard left for Red Bull Racing in to be replaced by former CART champion Juan Pablo Montoya for what was McLaren's most successful season in several years as he and R\u00e4ikk\u00f6nen won ten races. However, both the team not being able to work out why the car could not heat its tyres properly in the early stages of the season and the overall unreliability of the MP4-20 cost several race victories when R\u00e4ikk\u00f6nen had been leading or in contention to win and also costing him grid positions in some qualifying sessions, which allowed Renault and their driver Fernando Alonso to capitalise and win both titles.\nIn , the superior reliability and speed of the Ferraris and Renaults prevented the team from gaining any victories for the first time in a decade. Montoya parted company acrimoniously with the team to race in NASCAR after the United States Grand Prix, where he crashed into R\u00e4ikk\u00f6nen at the start; test driver Pedro de la Rosa deputised for the remainder of the season. The team also lost R\u00e4ikk\u00f6nen to Ferrari at the end of the year.\nSteve Matchett argued that the poor reliability of McLaren in 2006 and recent previous years was due to a lack of team continuity and stability. His cited examples of instability are logistical challenges related to the move to the McLaren Technology Centre, Adrian Newey's aborted move to Jaguar and later move to Red Bull, the subsequent move of Newey's deputy to Red Bull, and personnel changes at Ilmor.\nAfter scoring no victories in 2006, the team returned to competitive status in . That year saw Fernando Alonso race alongside Formula One debutant and long-time McLaren prot\u00e9g\u00e9 Lewis Hamilton. The pair scored four wins each and led the Drivers' Championship for much of the year, but tensions arose within the team, BBC Sport claimed that Alonso was unable to cope with Hamilton's competitiveness. At the Hungarian Grand Prix, Alonso was judged to have deliberately impeded his teammate during qualifying, so the team were not allowed to score Constructors' points at the event. An internal agreement within the McLaren team stated that drivers would alternatively have an extra lap for qualifying, however, Lewis Hamilton refused to accept for the Hungarian Grand Prix. Subsequently, the McLaren team was investigated by the FIA for having proprietary technical blueprints of Ferrari's car\u00a0\u2013 the so-called \"Spygate\" controversy. At the first hearing, McLaren management consistently denied all knowledge, blaming a single \"rogue engineer\". However, in the final hearing, McLaren was found guilty and the team was excluded from the Constructors' Championship and fined $100\u00a0million. The drivers were allowed to continue without penalty, and while Hamilton led the Drivers' Championship heading into the final race in Brazil, R\u00e4ikk\u00f6nen in the Ferrari won the race and the Drivers' Championship, a single point ahead of both McLaren drivers. In November, Alonso and McLaren agreed to terminate their contract by mutual consent, Heikki Kovalainen filling the vacant seat alongside Hamilton.\nIn , a close fight ensued between Hamilton and the Ferraris of Felipe Massa and R\u00e4ikk\u00f6nen; Hamilton won five times and despite also crossing the finish line first at the Belgian Grand Prix, he was deemed to have gained an illegal advantage by cutting a chicane during an overtake and was controversially demoted to third. Going into the final race in Brazil, Hamilton had a seven-point lead over Massa. Massa won there, but Hamilton dramatically clinched his first Drivers' Championship by moving into the necessary fifth position at the final corner of the final lap of the race. Despite winning his first Grand Prix in Hungary, Kovalainen finished the season only seventh in the overall standings, allowing Ferrari to take the constructors' title.\nBefore the start of the season, Dennis retired as team principal, handing responsibility to Martin Whitmarsh, but the year started badly: the MP4-24 car was off the pace and the team was given a three-race suspended ban for misleading stewards at the Australian and Malaysian Grands Prix. Despite these early problems, a late revival had Hamilton win at the Hungarian and Singapore Grands Prix.\n2010\u20132014: Customer Mercedes engines.\nFor the 2010 season, McLaren lost its status as the Mercedes works team; Mercedes decided to buy the Brackley-based Brawn team that had won the 2009 titles with its customer engines, Whitmarsh having chosen to abandon their exclusive rights to the Mercedes engines to help Brawn run. Mercedes still continued providing engines to McLaren, albeit under a supplier-customer relationship rather than the works partnership as before, while it sold its 40% shares of McLaren over two years but instead Mercedes remained supplying free engines for McLaren team until 2012. McLaren signed 2009 champion, Jenson Button, to replace Kovalainen alongside Hamilton in . Button won twice (in Australia and China) and Hamilton three times (in Turkey, Canada, and Belgium), but they and McLaren failed to win their respective championships, that year's MP4-25 largely outpaced by Red Bull's RB6.\nHamilton and Button remained with the team into , with Hamilton winning three races\u00a0\u2013 China, Germany, and Abu Dhabi and Button also winning three races\u00a0\u2013 Canada, Hungary, and Japan. Button finished the Drivers' Championship in second place with 270 points behind 2011 Drivers' Champion Sebastian Vettel of Red Bull Racing, ahead of Hamilton's 227 points. McLaren was second in the Constructors' Championship to Red Bull Racing. Throughout the season, Hamilton was involved in several incidents with other drivers including \u2013 most notably \u2013 multiple collisions with 2008 title rival Massa.\nIn , McLaren won the first race of the year in Australia with a dominant victory by Button and a 3rd place from pole for Hamilton, while Hamilton went on to win in Canada, but by the mid-way mark of the season at the team's home race at Silverstone, the McLaren cars managed only eighth place (Hamilton) and 10th place (Button), while the drivers' and Constructors' Championships were being dominated by Red Bull Racing and Ferrari, whose cars occupied the first four places of the British Grand Prix, this was partially due to pit stop problems and Button's temporary dip in form after not adapting as well as Hamilton to the new Pirelli tyres. The car also suffered reliability problems which cost the team and its drivers numerous potential points, most notably in Singapore and Abu Dhabi, where Hamilton had been leading from the front in both races and in Italy where the team lost a 1-2 finish when Button's car failed with fuel problems on lap 33.\nSergio P\u00e9rez replaced Hamilton for , after Hamilton decided to leave for Mercedes. However, from 2013 to 2014 seasons McLaren's Mercedes links were weaker due to Mercedes focused on its own works team. For eighteen seasons McLaren utilized bespoke free works engines, however from 2013, McLaren had to pay for Mercedes engines. The team's car for the season, the MP4-28, was launched on 31 January 2013. The car struggled to compete with the other top teams and the season had McLaren fail to produce a podium finish for the first time since .\nKevin Magnussen replaced P\u00e9rez for , and Ron Dennis, who had remained at arm's length since stepping down from the team principal role, returned as CEO of the operation. McLaren was the first team to officially launch their 2014 car, the MP4-29, which was revealed on 24 January 2014. They had a largely unsuccessful 2014; their best result was in Australia where\u00a0\u2013 after Daniel Ricciardo's disqualification from second place\u00a0\u2013 Magnussen finished second and Button third. Button subsequently finished fourth in Canada, Britain, and Russia. Their highest grid position was in Britain with Button's third place on the grid.\n2015\u20132017: Return to Honda engines.\nFor , McLaren ended their engine deal with Mercedes which included buying back the 40% stake that Mercedes held in the team and reforging their historical partnership with Honda. The Honda deal not only meant they would supply engines, but that Honda staff would work with the team at their Woking base as well as received full-factory support from Honda including official team vehicles and free engines. The team announced Fernando Alonso and Jenson Button as their race drivers, with Kevin Magnussen demoted to test driver. During pre-season testing at the Circuit de Barcelona-Catalunya in February, Alonso suffered a concussion and, as a result, Kevin Magnussen replaced him for the season-opening Australian Grand Prix in March. At that inaugural race of the season, Jenson Button finished 11th, but was lapped twice and finished last of the finishing cars. Following considerable unreliability and initial suggestions that the Honda engine was underpowered relative to its competitors, steady performance gains eventually resulted in Button managing to score the team's first (four) points of the season at the sixth round in Monaco. By contrast, Alonso scored his first point three races later at the British Grand Prix.\nThe Hungarian Grand Prix saw the team score their best result of the season with Alonso and Button finishing fifth and ninth, respectively. However, McLaren did not score points in the next four races until Button finished ninth at the Russian Grand Prix. At the following United States Grand Prix, Button scored his best result of the season with sixth place. The team finished ninth in the constructors' standings with 27 points, McLaren's worst performance since 1980.\nMcLaren retained the Alonso - Button pairing for the season. The second year of the Honda partnership was better than the first, with the team being able to challenge for top 10 positions on a more regular basis. However, the season started with a massive crash at the Australian Grand Prix in which Fernando Alonso sustained rib fractures and a collapsed lung after colliding with Esteban Guti\u00e9rrez and somersaulting into the crash barriers. Alonso, as a result of his injuries, was forced to miss the second round of the Championship, the Bahrain Grand Prix, and was replaced by reserve driver Stoffel Vandoorne. Vandoorne produced an impressive performance in his first race to score the team's first point of the season with 10th place. The next points for McLaren came at the Russian Grand Prix with Alonso and Button finishing sixth and 10th respectively. The rain-affected Monaco Grand Prix was one of best races of the season for the team. Alonso finished fifth, having kept Nico Rosberg's Mercedes behind him for 46 laps, while Button scored two points with ninth. At the Austrian Grand Prix, Button recorded his best result of the season with a sixth-place after qualifying third in a wet/dry session. After a disappointing display at their home race, the British Grand Prix at Silverstone, the team scored points at the next three rounds with six points in Hungary, four in Germany, and six points again thanks to an impressive seventh-place finish from Alonso at the Belgian Grand Prix. At the United States Grand Prix, McLaren matched their Monaco result with 12 points after an attacking race from Alonso saw him claim fifth position while Button once again finished ninth. After a season of significant progress compared to 2015, Alonso and Button finished the championship in 10th and 15th places respectively with the team ending the season in sixth place in the Constructors' Championship with 76 points. On 3 September 2016, Jenson Button announced he would take a sabbatical from Formula One for the 2017 season. He then confirmed on 25 November that he would retire from F1 altogether with Vandoorne being Alonso's new Teammate for 2017.\nIn February 2017, McLaren signed Lando Norris to their Young Driver Programme.\nAlonso did not take part in the 2017 Monaco Grand Prix as he was participating in the Indianapolis 500, being replaced by Jenson Button. Button retired from the race on lap 57 after suffering terminal damage, having hit the Sauber of Pascal Wehrlein. McLaren finished 2017 9th with 30 points in total.\n2018\u20132020: Renault engines.\nMcLaren announced during the 2017 Singapore Grand Prix weekend that they would split from engine supplier Honda at the end of the 2017 season and had agreed on a three-year customer deal to be supplied with Mecachrome-assembled Renault engines. Team boss \u00c9ric Boullier described their performance between 2015 and 2017 as a \"proper disaster\" for the team's credibility. was the first season in McLaren's history when their cars were powered by Renault engines. McLaren also announced that Fernando Alonso and Stoffel Vandoorne would remain with the team for the 2018 season. On 6 November 2017, the team announced that Lando Norris would be the team's test and reserve driver.\nAt the season-opening Australian Grand Prix, Fernando Alonso scored the team's best finish since the 2016 Monaco Grand Prix with fifth, Alonso said that the team's target would be Red Bull Racing. McLaren had a relatively good start to the season with points finishes in the next four races, but in the next 16 races after Spain, McLaren only scored 22 points, 8 points less than in the same period in 2017. On 14 August 2018, Fernando Alonso announced he would not compete in Formula One in 2019, ending his four-year spell at the team. Carlos Sainz Jr. was signed as his replacement on a multi-year deal. On 3 September 2018, it was announced that Stoffel Vandoorne would be leaving the team at the end of the season, with Lando Norris being promoted from reserve driver to replace him in 2019. McLaren struggled with performance throughout the season, with the McLaren drivers being knocked out 21 times in the first qualifying session, and McLaren having the second-worst average qualifying ranking of any team, only ahead of Williams. The team finished the disappointing season \u2013 after being helped by the exclusion of Force India's points from the first 12 races \u2013 in 6th place with 62 points, 357 points behind their target, Red Bull Racing, with the same engine.\nThe 2019 season was much more positive for McLaren, with the team securely establishing themselves as the best constructor behind Mercedes, Ferrari, and Red Bull. At the Brazilian Grand Prix, Sainz recorded the team's first podium since the 2014 Australian Grand Prix, finishing fourth on the road but later promoted to third after Lewis Hamilton received a post-race penalty, meaning that the team missed out on the official podium ceremony. McLaren ended the season in 4th place with 145 points, their best result since 2014 and 54 points ahead of their nearest competitor, Renault.\nMcLaren retained Norris and Sainz for the season. The season was significantly impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic. The season was shortened to 18 races, with the season opener to take place in Austria. At the Austrian Grand Prix, Norris achieved his first ever podium, finishing in third. Sainz achieved the team's second podium in 2020 at the Italian Grand Prix, where he finished second. The team finished the 2020 season third in the constructors' championship with 202 points. Sainz finished the drivers' championship in sixth with 105 points and Norris in ninth with 97 points.\n2021\u2013present: Return to Mercedes engines.\nMcLaren again used Mercedes engines in after their deal with Renault ended. McLaren had previously collaborated with Mercedes from 1995 through 2014 (1995 to 2009 as a works partner and later 2010 to 2014 as a customer partner) but this time a customer role system by pay-lease agreement. Daniel Ricciardo moved from Renault to partner Lando Norris for the 2021 Formula One World Championship on a multi-year deal. Ricciardo replaced Carlos Sainz, who moved to Ferrari. In the season's first nine races, the team scored three podiums with Mercedes power, in Italy, Monaco and Austria, all courtesy of Norris.\nAt the 2021 Italian Grand Prix, Ricciardo scored his first win since the 2018 Monaco Grand Prix, and McLaren's first win since the 2012 Brazilian Grand Prix. A second-place finish for Norris also meant that McLaren achieved their first one-two finish since the 2010 Canadian Grand Prix and the only one-two finish for the 2021 season. Norris secured the team's first pole position in the hybrid era at the 2021 Russian Grand Prix but was unable to convert it to a win, finishing in seventh place due to the sudden drastic change in weather conditions and team strategy in the last two laps of the race. A subsequent drop in form in the latter part of the season saw McLaren ending up fourth in the constructors' championship behind Ferrari.\nFor the season, McLaren retained both Norris and Ricciardo. Ricciardo tested positive for COVID-19 ahead of the pre-season tests in Bahrain, which meant Norris was required to do all the remaining running for the test although a brake problem limited the testing he was able to conduct. Both drivers struggled at the first race in Bahrain, with neither driver reaching Q3 \u2013 the first time since the 2020 Turkish Grand Prix \u2013 and finishing 14th and 15th in the race. Norris achieved third at the Emilia Romagna Grand Prix. After Norris missed the first day at the track during the S\u00e3o Paulo Grand Prix weekend, McLaren suffered their first double DNF finish since Monaco 2017 as Norris had an electrical fault and Ricciardo was involved in a collision with Haas' Kevin Magnussen. Compared to his teammate, Ricciardo struggled and many were critical of his performance, with some suggesting that McLaren would drop him. This forced Ricciardo into releasing a statement on Instagram, confirming he would stay through to 2023. In August 2022, Riccardo's contract for 2023 was terminated by mutual agreement. Oscar Piastri replaced Ricciardo for the 2023 season after a contract dispute with Alpine F1 Team was resolved in McLaren's favour by the FIA Contract Recognition Board. McLaren finished the season in fifth place in the constructors' championship behind Alpine.\nThe 2023 season celebrated the 60th anniversary of the team's founding, with the season's car named the MCL60 in commemoration. The season started with a myriad of issues for the team, causing them to release a public statement after the Saudi Arabian Grand Prix, announcing certain organisational changes. After not scoring points in the first two races, Norris and Piastri finished the chaotic Australian Grand Prix in sixth and eighth place respectively, with Piastri scoring his first points in Formula One and for McLaren. During the midpoint of the season, McLaren's trajectory began to increase with upgrades being introduced at the Austrian and Singapore Grands Prix. The upgrades were an immediate success, and McLaren attained its first podium with Norris since the 2021 Italian Grand Prix. Piastri achieved his first career podium at the Japanese Grand Prix and won the Qatar Grand Prix sprint race, marking McLaren's first sprint race victory in Formula One; the main race saw a record be broken for the fastest pit stop in Formula One, setting a pit stop time of 1.80 seconds, 0.02 quicker than the previous record set by Red Bull Racing in the 2019 Brazilian Grand Prix. During the Abu Dhabi Grand Prix weekend, McLaren signed an extension to use Mercedes engines until 2030. After a disastrous start to the season, McLaren took fourth place in the Constructors' Championship, with Norris taking sixth and Piastri taking ninth in the drivers' championship.\nThe success of the MCL60 provided McLaren, who finished the 2023 season in fourth, allowing for more testing time, numerous opportunities to capitalise in performance for the season. Retaining Norris and Piastri, the team hired David Sanchez from Scuderia Ferrari to lead development alongside Peter Prodromou and Neil Houldey (after a restructuring, Rob Marshall would lead development) for the 2024 car, titled the MCL38. At the start of the season, the MCL38 proved to be the third-fastest car overall behind Ferrari's SF-24. The SF-24 had superior tyre management, but the MCL38 excelled in qualifying. McLaren revealed a substantial upgrade package that would be utilised for the Miami Grand Prix. The upgrade's success would be confirmed after Norris took the lead from Verstappen and went on to win the race, marking his maiden Formula One career victory. McLaren expected the upgrades to improve the car's performance across all conditions; the upgrade was much more successful than expected, to the point the team needed to investigate it. By the British Grand Prix, the MCL38 had been established as the fastest car. One of these successes included a 1-2 finish at the Hungarian Grand Prix, McLaren's first since the 2021 Italian Grand Prix. A mid-season upgrade introduced for the Dutch Grand Prix further improved performance, with Norris winning by over 27 seconds ahead of second-placed Verstappen. Piastri's triumph at the Azerbaijan Grand Prix moved McLaren up to first in the World Constructors' Championship. This was the first time since that McLaren had led the WCC. In Abu Dhabi, Norris finished in first to win McLaren's first World Constructors' Championship since 1998.\nWith McLaren winning the WCC the previous season, they were allocated less testing time in , and were deemed the favourites to defend the Constructors' Championship. The MCL39 was the first McLaren car to be fully overseen by Rob Marshall, and it exhibited numerous technical improvements over its predecessor. The MCL39 showed an immediate advantage over the rest of the field; as of the 2025 Qatar Grand Prix, McLaren has won fourteen out of twenty-three races thus far in 2025, with Norris and Piastri both sharing seven wins each - including seven 1-2 finishes - and scored podiums in all possible races, bar three: the Canadian, Azerbaijan, and Las Vegas Grands Prix. Despite an uptick in pace from Red Bull, McLaren was able to secure their tenth championship at the Singapore Grand Prix, becoming the most-successful Formula One independent constructor of all time to date. Amidst the team's dominance in winning the Constructors' Championship, a battle for the Drivers' Championship between Norris and Piastri began: Norris led the early stages of the championship before Piastri took the lead after capitalising on Norris' mistake in qualifying for the Saudi Arabian Grand Prix. As the season drew to a close, Piastri experienced a downturn in form, which also coincided with two crashes at the Azerbaijan and S\u00e3o Paulo Grands Prix. Norris and Red Bull's Max Verstappen took advantage of this, with the former in particular recovering from a gap as high as 34 points after the Dutch Grand Prix to eventually retake the lead of the Drivers' Championship by one point by winning the Mexico City Grand Prix. Norris and Piastri were both disqualified from the Las Vegas Grand Prix due to a plank wear infringement, marking the first time both McLaren drivers were disqualified in one Grand Prix.\nRacing history: Other series.\nCan-Am.\nMcLaren's first racing car designed and built \"from the rubber up\" by Bruce McLaren Motor Racing was the M1. The car with a small block Oldsmobile had immediate success driven by Bruce McLaren. The car was raced in North America and Europe in 1964 in various A sports and United States Road Racing Championship events. In 1965 the team car was the M1A prototype from which the production Elva M1As were based. In late 1965, the M1B (also known as Mk2) was the team car for the North American races at the end of the year. For the Can-Am Series, which started in 1966, McLaren created the M3 which Bruce and Chris Amon drove\u00a0\u2013 customer cars also appeared in several races in the 1966 season. With the M3, they led two races but scored no wins, and the inaugural title was taken by John Surtees in a Lola T70. The following year, Robin Herd purpose-designed the Chevrolet V8-powered M6A, delays with the Formula One programme allowing the team to spend extra resources on developing the Can-Am car which was the first to be painted in McLaren orange. With Denny Hulme now partnering Bruce, they won five of six races and Bruce won the championship, setting the pattern for the next four years. In the 1968 season, they used a new car, the M8, to win four races; non-works McLarens took the other two, but this time Hulme was victorious overall. In the 1969 season, McLaren domination became total as they won all 11 races with the M8B; Hulme won five, and Bruce won six and the Drivers' Championship. From 1969 onwards, McLaren M12\u00a0\u2013 the customer \"variant\" of the M8\u00a0\u2013 was driven by several entrants, including a version modified by Jim Hall of Chaparral fame. McLaren's success in Can-Am brought with it financial rewards, both prize money and money from selling cars to other teams, that helped to support the team and fund the nascent and relatively poor-paying Formula One programme.\nWhen Bruce was killed testing the 1970 season's M8D, he was at first replaced by Dan Gurney, then later by Peter Gethin. They won two and one races, respectively, while Hulme won six on the way to the championship. Private teams competing in the 1970 Can-Am series included older M3Bs as well as the M12\u00a0\u2013 the customer version of the team's M8B. In the 1971 season, the team held off the challenge of 1969 world champion Jackie Stewart in the Lola T260, winning eight races, with Peter Revson taking the title. Hulme also won three Can-Am races in the 1972 season, but the McLaren M20 was defeated by the Porsche 917/10s of Mark Donohue and George Follmer. Faced by the greater resources of Porsche, McLaren decided to abandon Can-Am at the end of 1972 and focus solely on open-wheel racing. When the original Can-Am series ceased at the end of the 1974 season, McLaren was by far the most successful constructor with 43 wins.\nAmerican open-wheel racing.\nUSAC (1970\u20131979).\nMcLaren first contested the United States Auto Club's (USAC) Indianapolis 500 race in 1970, encouraged by their tyre supplier Goodyear, which wanted to break competitor Firestone's stranglehold on the event. With the M15 car, Bruce, Chris Amon, and Denny Hulme entered, but after Amon withdrew and Hulme was severely burned on the hands in an incident in practice, Peter Revson and Carl Williams took their places in the race to retire and finish seventh, respectively. The team also contested some of the more prestigious races in the USAC championship that year, as they would do in subsequent years. For 1971 they had a new car, the M16, which driver Mark Donohue said: \"...obsoleted every other car on track...\" At that year's Indianapolis 500, Revson qualified on pole and finished second, whilst in 1972, Donohue won in privateer Team Penske's M16B. The 1973 event had Johnny Rutherford join the team; he qualified on pole, but finished ninth, Revson crashed out. McLaren won their first Indianapolis 500 in 1974 with Rutherford. The McLaren and Rutherford combination was second in 1975 and won again in 1976. Developments of the M16 had been used throughout this period until the new M24 car was introduced in 1977. The team did not reproduce their recent success at Indianapolis in 1977, 1978, or 1979, and although they continued to win other USAC races, by the end of 1979, they decided to end their involvement in order to concentrate on their Formula One programme.\nIndyCar Series.\n2017 and 2019 Indianapolis 500.\nOn 12 April 2017, McLaren revealed they would participate in the 2017 Indianapolis 500 with their current Formula 1 driver Fernando Alonso at the wheel of a Honda-powered McLaren-branded Andretti Autosport IndyCar.\nIn qualifying, Alonso secured a second-row start from fifth. During the race Alonso led 27 laps in his first Indy 500 start. With 21 laps remaining Alonso was running seventh when his Honda engine failed. He was classified 24th. After his retirement he received a standing ovation from the grandstands. Alonso was praised for his strong debut.\nOn 10 November 2018, McLaren announced that they would participate in the 2019 Indianapolis 500 with Fernando Alonso and using Chevrolet engines. However, after mechanical difficulties and a severe crash in practice, the team failed to qualify for the race.\nFull season (2020\u2013).\nIn August 2019, it was announced McLaren would contest the championship full-time in 2020, collaborating with Arrow Schmidt Peterson Motorsports to form Arrow McLaren SP.\nZak Brown stated in an interview with Leigh Diffey that McLaren joining the IndyCar Series full time was spurred by two different objectives. The first was to market the McLaren brand and some of the McLaren Formula One team's prominent American based sponsors in a primarily North America centric racing series, as Formula One only had three races in North America in 2021 and only one of those races was in the United States. The second was to branch McLaren's engineering expertise into a racing series that the other Formula One teams were not involved in, as Brown thought McLaren would stand out more amongst its competitors in IndyCar than it would in other racing series. Brown also stated that McLaren chose to partner with Schmidt Peterson Motorsports because their previous efforts fielding their team with assistance from Andretti Autosport and Carlin exclusively for the Indianapolis 500 had not been successful and that the purchase of the IndyCar Series by Penske Entertainment gave McLaren more confidence in the long term viability and stability of the series compared to the previous ownership under Tony George.\nIn August 2021, it was announced that McLaren Racing will acquire a majority stake in the IndyCar Team. The transaction closed by the end of the year and saw McLaren Racing take a 75% share of the team. Financial terms of the deal were not disclosed.\nFor the 2022 IndyCar Series, the team's first under McLaren ownership, both O'Ward and Rosenqvist would return to the team as full time entries. The No. 6 car would again return on a part-time basis for the GMR Grand Prix and the 2022 Indianapolis 500 driven by Juan Pablo Montoya. O'Ward and Rosenqvist would finish second and fourth in the Indianapolis 500 respectively, the team's best finish at Indianapolis to date. The team announced they had signed Alexander Rossi to drive a third full time car from 2023 and beyond.\nFor 2023, the team announced they had signed Alexander Rossi to drive a third full time car. Additionally, team president Taylor Kiel left the team. His duties were parsed and redistributed between Brian Barnhart, who joins the team with Rossi from Andretti Autosport as General Manager, and Gavin Ward. In conjunction with McLaren's 60th-anniversary celebration, the team raced a special livery for the 2023 Indianapolis 500 to celebrate McLaren's Triple Crown achievement. The liveries of the Nos. 7, 6 and 5 were painted as the McLaren M16C/D that won the 1974 Indianapolis 500, the McLaren MP4/2 that won the 1984 Monaco Grand Prix, and the McLaren F1 GTR that won the 1995 24 Hours of Le Mans respectively to honour the three winning McLaren cars that forms the Triple Crown.\nFor 2024, Rosenqvist moved to Meyer Shank Racing and was replaced by David Malukas who moved from Dale Coyne Racing. However, after injuring his left wrist early in the year and missing out the start of the season, Malukas was released from the team and has been replaced by Th\u00e9o Pourchaire.\nElectric racing.\nNeom was McLaren's title partner into their endeavour to electric motorsport as NEOM McLaren Electric Racing.\nExtreme E (2022\u20132024).\nIn June 2021, McLaren announced it would enter Extreme E in the 2022 season using existing personnel from outside the Formula One program with Tanner Foust and Emma Gilmour (who becomes the first woman factory driver for McLaren) as drivers for the team. Entering as McLaren XE, the team was rebranded for their second race as NEOM McLaren Extreme E Team for sponsorship reasons. The team won its first podium by finishing second in the Energy X-Prix. In the process, Gilmour became the first woman podium winner for McLaren. The team finished in fifth place in the Team's Championship standings.\nMcLaren retained Foust and Gilmour for the 2023 season. The team won its second podium by finishing second in Round 4 at the Hydro X-Prix. In Round 7 at the Island X-Prix II, Gilmour suffered a fractured rib and a concussion following a crash during the first free practice session and was ruled out for the rest of the weekend. She was replaced by Extreme E's championship reserve driver Tamara Molinaro for Rounds 7 and 8. McLaren withdrew from Round 8 due to the spare car being too heavily damaged in Round 7's redemption race after Molinaro collided with JBXE's Hedda Hos\u00e5s on the run down to the first jump at the start of the race and rolled the car. This is the first instance of a team withdrawing from a race in Extreme E. For the final two rounds of the season, McLaren announced that Gilmour was still recovering from her injuries and was replaced by Hos\u00e5s. McLaren finished in eighth place in the Team's Championship standings. At the end of the season, McLaren announced that Foust and Gilmour will leave the team.\nFor the 2024 season, McLaren announced a new driver pairing of Cristina Guti\u00e9rrez and Mattias Ekstr\u00f6m, who moved from X44 and Sainz XE Team respectively. The team won its first podium of the season by finishing second in Round 1 at the Desert X-Prix. On 6 September, a week before the scheduled Island X-Prix, Extreme E announced that the rounds in Sardinia and Phoenix were cancelled as the series transition to Extreme H for 2025.\nFormula E (2023\u20132025).\nIn December 2020, Zak Brown announced McLaren's interest in entering Formula E once the company's battery supplier contract has expired. In January the following year, McLaren signed an option to enter the championship for 2022.\nIn May 2022, McLaren announced the acquisition of the Mercedes-EQ Formula E Team and debuted in the 2022\u201323 season as NEOM McLaren Formula E Team using Nissan's EV powertrain. Ren\u00e9 Rast, who last raced in the 2020\u201321 season with Audi Sport ABT Schaeffler, and Jake Hughes were signed as drivers for the team. McLaren made its ePrix debut at the 2023 Mexico City ePrix. Hughes qualified in third and finished the race in fifth place whereas Rast qualified in fifteenth but retired from the race on lap 40 after colliding with Mahindra's Oliver Rowland. McLaren achieved several milestones at the Diriyah ePrix. In the first round, Hughes qualified at second place (missing out on pole position by 0.060s) but finished in eighth whereas Rast qualified and finished in fifth place while scoring McLaren's first fastest lap in Formula E. In the second round, Hughes secured McLaren's maiden pole position in Formula E and Rast qualified in third place. Hughes finished the race in fifth and Rast finished in third place, giving McLaren their maiden podium finish in Formula E. Hughes qualified in second at the Monaco ePrix but was later promoted to pole position after Nissan's Sacha Fenestraz was stripped of his pole position for exceeding his power limit in his final run. Hughes finished the race in fifth place whereas Rast finished in seventeenth after suffering from multiple collisions. McLaren finished the season in eighth in the Teams' Championship.\nIn August 2023, McLaren announced that Hughes had re-signed with the team whereas Rast will leave the team and was replaced by Sam Bird for the 2023\u201324 season. Bird won McLaren's maiden electric race victory at the S\u00e3o Paulo ePrix. At the Monaco ePrix, Bird suffered a hand injury during the first free practice session and was replaced by reserve and development driver Taylor Barnard. Barnard qualified in 22nd and finished his debut race in 14th while becoming the youngest driver and the first teenager to start an ePrix at 19 years and 331 days. Barnard continued to deputise for Bird at the Berlin ePrix, where he finished Race 1 in tenth to become youngest point scorer. At the end of the season, Hughes left McLaren to join Maserati MSG Racing and was replaced by Barnard, who was promoted to compete full-time in the 2024\u201325 season.\nAt the season opening S\u00e3o Paulo ePrix, Barnard won his maiden podium by finishing in third while also becoming the youngest podium finisher at the age of 20 years and 189 days whereas Bird finished in fourth. Barnard followed up with another podium finish by coming in third at Race 1 of the Jeddah ePrix. At Race 2, he scored his first pole position, becoming the youngest polesitter at the age of 20 years 259 days but failed to convert it to a win, finishing the race in second. In April 2025, McLaren announced that they will exit Formula E at the end of the 2024\u201325 season to focus on development for the World Endurance Championship. It was later reported that the team will be closed down after McLaren failed to find a buyer and the team entry will be returned to Formula E. McLaren finished their final Formula E race at Race 2 of the London ePrix with a double DNF. McLaren ended the season in sixth in the Teams' Championship whereas Barnard ended his debut season in fourth in the Drivers' Championship, the highest for a McLaren driver.\nEndurance racing.\nIn 2021, McLaren reviewed the LMH/LMDh and GTP regulations for a possible entry into the FIA World Endurance Championship (WEC) Hypercar and IMSA WeatherTech SportsCar Championship GTP classes respectively in the future. On 19 June 2024, CEO Zak Brown announced that McLaren is planning a Hypercar class entry with the LMDh regulations by the 2027 season. On 10 April 2025, McLaren announced that they will enter WEC in the Hypercar class utilizing the LMDh formula regulations starting from the 2027 season onwards. McLaren will collaborate with Brown's United Autosports and enter the season as McLaren United AS with James Barclay as team principal. McLaren United will also partner with Dallara as the chassis partner.\nCustomer racing.\nBesides the cars raced by the works team, a variety of McLaren racing cars have also been used by customer teams. In their formative years, McLaren built Formula Two, hillclimbing, Formula 5000 and sports racing cars that were sold to customers. Lacking the capacity to build the desired numbers, Trojan was subcontracted to construct some of them. In Can-Am, Trojan built customer versions of the M6 and M8 cars and ex-works cars were sold to privateers when new models arrived; half of the field was McLarens at some races. Author Mark Hughes says, \"over 220\" McLarens were built by Trojan. In USAC competition and Formula One, too, many teams used McLarens during the late 1960s and 1970s. A 1972 M8F was rebuilt as the C8 for use in Group C racing in 1982, but had little success.\nIn the mid-1990s, McLaren Racing's sister company, McLaren Cars (now McLaren Automotive) built a racing version of their F1 road car, the F1 GTR which won the 1995 24 Hours of Le Mans and the 1995 and 1996 BPR Global GT Series. In 2011, a GT3 version of the MP4-12C road car was developed in partnership with CRS Racing, making its competitive debut at the VLN and ADAC GT Masters in 2012. The MP4-12C was succeeded by the McLaren 650S and then the McLaren 720S for GT3 racing, while a GT4 version of the McLaren 570S was also developed as well.\nIn 2022, McLaren Automotive announced a new GT4 model based on the McLaren Artura, along with an unrestricted version named the Artura Trophy, which is to be used in McLaren's planned one-make series.\nIn October 2023, McLaren Automotive announced its intent to participate in the 2024 24 Hours of Le Mans under the new LMGT3 category through CEO Zak Brown's United Autosports as its customer team. McLaren Automotive also announced that it will enter the 2024 IMSA SportsCar Championship under the GT Daytona Pro (GTD Pro) category through Pfaff Motorsports as its customer team. Both United Autosports and Pfaff Motorsports will be using the McLaren 720S GT3 Evo. In the following month, McLaren Automotive confirmed its participation in the 2024 FIA World Endurance Championship season in the LMGT3 category in collaboration with United Autosports.\nCharacteristics.\nMcLaren Racing is majority owned by the McLaren Group, having sold 15% of the team to American investors MSP Sports Capital in 2020, rising to a 33% stake in 2022. The team had previously been wholly owned by the Group since its inception.\nOwnership and management.\nAfter Bruce McLaren died in a testing accident in 1970, Teddy Mayer took over the team. In 1981, McLaren merged with Ron Dennis' Project Four Racing; Dennis took over as team principal and shortly after organised a buyout of the original McLaren shareholders to take full control of the team. Dennis offered Mansour Ojjeh the chance to purchase 50% of the team in 1983, with McLaren becoming a joint venture with Ojjeh's TAG Group. In 2000, after supplying engines to the team through its Mercedes subsidiary for 5 years, DaimlerChrysler (now Daimler AG) exercised an option to buy 40% of the TAG McLaren Group. Dennis and Ojjeh each retained a 30% share, and each sold half of their stake to the Mumtalakat Holding Company (the sovereign wealth fund of the Kingdom of Bahrain) in 2007. Although Daimler were reportedly considering acquiring the remaining 60% from Dennis and Ojjeh, they instead bought Brawn GP (renaming it Mercedes GP) in November 2009; their McLaren shares were sold back to Mumtalakat, Dennis, and Ojjeh in 2010.\nDennis stepped down as both CEO and team principal of McLaren in 2009, handing both roles over to Martin Whitmarsh. However, following the uncompetitive 2013 season, Dennis retook the role in January 2014; Whitmarsh formally left the team later that year. Dennis sought to take a controlling interest in the company, but his relationship with Ojjeh had deteriorated, perhaps as early as 2013. In 2016, Dennis was forced out of his role as CEO by Ojjeh. He sold his remaining shares in the company the next year.\nAfter Dennis' 2014 return, he had abolished the position of team principal at McLaren, saying it was an 'outdated' position. \u00c9ric Boullier was instead named racing director in January 2014, becoming responsible for the F1 team. After Dennis' exit, Zak Brown was chosen for the post of Group executive director, with the positions of Group CEO and Racing CEO both being left vacant. While his position was formally within the wider McLaren Group, it was understood that his role would focus only on the F1 team. The increasing awareness of the mediocrity of the car prompted a reshuffle in 2018: Brown was appointed McLaren Racing CEO in April, and when Boullier resigned in July, his position was divided between Gil de Ferran as sporting director and Andrea Stella as performance director. In May 2019, Andreas Seidl was appointed as the new team principal. In December 2022, Seidl left McLaren to join Sauber as CEO with Stella promoted to team principal.\nSince 2004 the team has been based at the McLaren Technology Centre in Woking, England. Facilities there include a wind tunnel and a driving simulator which is said to be the most sophisticated in the sport. The team also created the McLaren Driver Development Programme, which currently has eight drivers signed to it as of July 2024.\nPolitics.\nMcLaren has had an uneasy relationship with Formula One's governing body, the FIA, and its predecessor FISA, as well as with the commercial rights holders of the sport. McLaren was involved, along with the other teams of the Formula One Constructors Association (FOCA), in a dispute with FISA and Alfa Romeo, Renault, and Ferrari over control of the sport in the early 1980s. During this dispute, known as the FISA-FOCA war, a breakaway series was threatened, FISA refused to sanction one race, and FOCA boycotted another. It was eventually resolved by a revenue-sharing deal called the Concorde Agreement.\nSubsequent Concorde Agreements were signed in 1987 and 1992, but in 1996, McLaren was again one of the teams which disputed the terms of a new agreement, this time with former FOCA president Bernie Ecclestone's Formula One Promotions and Administration organisation; a new 10-year agreement was eventually signed in 1998. Similar arguments restarted in the mid-2000s, with McLaren and their part-owner Mercedes again threatening to start a rival series, before another Concorde Agreement was signed in 2009. In 2007, McLaren were involved in an espionage controversy after their chief designer Mike Coughlan obtained confidential technical information from Ferrari. McLaren was excluded from the Constructors' Championship for one year, and the team was fined US$100\u00a0million. Although the terms of the most recent agreements, in 2013 and 2021, have been extensively negotiated on, McLaren have not taken as openly hostile a stance as in the past.\nSponsorship, livery and naming.\nTitle sponsors.\nIn , the Royal Automobile Club and the FIA relaxed the rules regarding commercial sponsorship of Formula One cars. In , Yardley London, a cosmetics company, became McLaren's first title sponsor and the team raced as Yardley Team McLaren. As a result, the livery was changed to a predominantly white one to reflect the sponsor's colours. In , Philip Morris was signed as title sponsor through their Marlboro cigarette brand although one car continued to run-ostensibly by a separate team-with Yardley livery for the year. Marlboro's red-and-white branding lasted until , during which time the team went by the many variants of the Marlboro McLaren name. This partnership was the then longest-running Formula One sponsorship which has since been surpassed by Hugo Boss' sponsorship of the team, which ran from to . The McLaren\u2013Marlboro title sponsorship deal is still the longest-running in Formula One.\nIn , Philip Morris moved its Marlboro sponsorship to Ferrari and was replaced by Reemtsma's West cigarette brand, with the team racing as West McLaren Mercedes. As a result, McLaren adopted a silver and black livery. By mid-2005, a European Union directive banned tobacco advertising in sport, which forced McLaren to end its association with West. In , the team competed without a title sponsor, entering under the name Team McLaren Mercedes. McLaren altered their livery to introduce red into the design, and changed the silver to chrome. In , McLaren signed a seven-year contract with telecommunications company Vodafone and competed as Vodafone McLaren Mercedes. The arrangement was due to last until , although the team announced at the 2013 Australian Grand Prix that their partnership would conclude at the end of the 2013 season. Despite explaining the decision to conclude the sponsorship as being a result of Vodafone's desire to reconsider its commercial opportunities, it was later reported that the decision to run the 2012 Bahrain Grand Prix despite an ongoing civil uprising and protests against the race, and Vodafone's inability to remove their logos from the McLaren cars during the race as being a key factor in the decision to terminate the sponsorship. Diageo-owned whisky brand Johnnie Walker, an associate sponsor since 2005, offered to take over as title sponsor at the end of 2013, but their offer of \u00a343 million was turned down by Ron Dennis, who believed it to be \"too small.\"\nIn 2015, McLaren was still without a title sponsor and was set to lose a further \u00a320 million in sponsorship in 2016. Between and , the team competed as McLaren Honda due to their engine partnership with Honda. After splitting with Honda, the team competed as McLaren Formula 1 Team from onwards. CEO Zak Brown has said that he will not be selling the name of the team to a title sponsor to keep the team's name intact and will be looking for major sponsors instead, which will give brands increased branding position on the car. The major sponsors signed since are British American Tobacco through its A Better Tomorrow campaign (later extended to the IndyCar and Formula E teams); former long time sponsor Gulf Oil International (also includes Gulf Oil being the preferred lubricant supplier to McLaren Automotive); Google (also extended to the Extreme E team); OKX (later extended to the McLaren Shadow esports team); and Mastercard.\nMcLaren\u2019s title sponsor position shifted in August 2025 when the team announced a deal with Mastercard reportedly worth $100 million per season and running to the mid-2030s. The team will compete as McLaren Mastercard Formula 1 Team from the season onwards. Zak Brown added that the livery will \"stay recognisable\" despite the title sponsorship.\nLiveries.\nIn the team's debut race in 1966, it ran white-and-green coloured cars, which came about as a result of a deal with the makers of the film \"Grand Prix\". Between and , the team used an orange design, dubbed the papaya orange, which was also applied to cars competing in the Indianapolis 500 and Can-Am series, and was used as an interim testing livery in later years. Between 1972 to 2013, McLaren's livery colours reflected the colours of the title sponsors. Since 2017, McLaren returned to its traditional papaya orange colours, which was also used on their cars entered in other racing series such as Extreme E and Formula E.\nMcLaren have a team tradition where they would run the same design the season after a championship win. This was seen with the MCL39 in , which saw minimal changes from the previous year's car that won McLaren's first Constructors' Championship in 26 years. The team also would not change the livery substantially during a period of sustained success.\nIn , as part of McLaren's Gulf Oil sponsorship, the team rolled out a special one-off \"heritage\" Gulf livery for the Monaco Grand Prix, which then began a trend of one-off special liveries in Formula One. Vuse also partnered with McLaren to race bespoke liveries designed by emerging artists for the 2021 to 2023 Abu Dhabi Grands Prix. McLaren's other sponsors such as OKX, Google Chrome and Jack Daniel's later partnered with the team to race special liveries.\nAs part of McLaren's 60th-anniversary celebration during the season, the team revealed a special livery for the Monaco and Spanish Grands Prix to celebrate their Triple Crown achievement. The Triple Crown livery is the amalgamation of the liveries of the three winning McLaren cars that forms the Triple Crown \u2013 the papaya of the M16C/D that won the 1974 Indianapolis 500 at the rear, the white of the MP4/2 that won the 1984 Monaco Grand Prix at the middle, and the black of the F1 GTR that won the 1995 24 Hours of Le Mans at the front of the MCL60. McLaren's IndyCar Series sister team also raced their version of the Triple Crown livery for the Indianapolis 500, with the liveries of the Nos. 7, 6 and 5 painted as the M16C/D, MP4/2, and F1 GTR respectively.\nCar naming nomenclature.\nMcLaren's cars were originally named with the letter M followed by a number, sometimes also followed by a letter denoting the model. After the 1981 merger with Project Four, the cars were called \"MP4/x\", or since 2001 \"MP4-x\", where x is the generation of the chassis (e.g. MP4/1, MP4-22). \"MP4\" stood initially for \"Marlboro Project 4\", so that the full title of the cars (McLaren MP4/x) reflected not only the historical name of the team, but also the names of the team's major sponsor and its new component part. Since the change of title sponsor in 1997, \"MP4\" was said to stand for \"McLaren Project 4\". From 2017, following Ron Dennis' departure from the team, the naming scheme of the cars changed to \"MCL\" followed by a number. The only deviation to the numbering scheme was 2023's MCL60, which was named for the team's 60th anniversary.\nRace cars.\nAs a constructor, McLaren has entered numerous race cars designed in-house into racing events, most prominently Formula One. As of 2025, the only exceptions to this are the Arrow McLaren IndyCar team, who run Dallara-built chassis (initially the IR-12, which was supplemented by the IR-18), McLaren's Extreme E team, who ran the Spark Odyssey 21, and their Formula E operation, who ran Formula E Gen3 with Nissan's powertrain.\nCurrently, McLaren builds only Formula One cars; the most successful McLaren Formula One car is the McLaren MP4/4 of , also one of the most successful Formula One cars of all time. The MP4/4, driven by teammates Ayrton Senna and Alain Prost, took victories and pole positions in all but one race.\nRacing results.\nFormula One results.\nDrivers' champions.\nSeven drivers have won a total of twelve Drivers' Championships with McLaren:\nEsports.\nEsports Drivers' Champions.\nThe following drivers won the Formula One Esports Drivers' Championship for McLaren Shadows:\nAmerican open-wheel racing results.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20995", "revid": "32070918", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20995", "title": "Province of Massa-Carrara", "text": "Province of Italy\nThe province of Massa-Carrara () is a province in the Tuscany region of Italy. It is named after the provincial capital Massa, and Carrara, the other main town in the province.\nHistory.\nThe province of \"Massa e Carrara\" was born in 1859 from the separation of the Lunigiana and the Garfagnana from the Duchy of Modena. Originally it was composed of three \"circondari\": I\u00b0 \"Circondario of Massa and Carrara\" (a group of seven districts divided in 14 municipalities), II\u00b0 \"Circondario\" of Castelnuovo Garfagnana (four districts divided in 17 municipalities), III\u00b0 \"Circondario\" of Pontremoli (three districts divided into six municipalities).\nUntil the census of 1861, the province appears as part of \"Compartimento territorial Modena, Reggio and Massa\", but since the census of the population of 1871 it has been counted as part of Tuscany. Later, with the \"Regio Decreto n. 1913 of September 2, 1923\", the municipalities of Calice al Cornoviglio and Rocchetta Vara were detached from the province and added to the new province of La Spezia. In the same period (\"Regio Decreto n.2490 of November 9, 1923\") the 17 municipalities of the \"Circondario\" Castelnuovo Garfagnana were removed from Emilia and assigned to the province of Lucca, in order to compensate for the passage to the new province of Pistoia of all the municipalities of the Val di Nievole.\nThe province of Massa and Carrara was left crippled, waiting for a reorganization. In 1938, the municipalities of Carrara, Massa, and Montignoso joined and became the municipality of Apuania. In the same year, the industrial zone Apuana was instituted, including in relative Consortium C.Z.I.The municipalities of neighboring Versilia and the province assumed the name of a province of Apuania. In 1946, with decree Lieutenant one (Umberto II of Savoia) the new municipality of Apuania was formed, and the province (for error and/or historical ignorance) resumptions the denomination does not date from 1859 when it was \"Massa and Carrara\" but Massa. This was the name that had been designated to the city of Massa or Massa of Carrara from 1700 until the formation of the Kingdom of Italy (1860), to distinguish it from other homonymous cities.\nIn 2009, both decrees of 1938 and 1946 were abolished, restoring the old name.\nGeography and administration.\nThe province covers an area of and a total population of about 200,000. There are 17 \"comuni\" (singular: \"comune\") in the province.\nEconomy.\nThe province's economical relevance, once mainly based on the production of the famous white Carrara marble, has now shifted to the importation and fabrication of blocks of marble and granite from all over the world.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20996", "revid": "8005368", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20996", "title": "Monti", "text": "Monti may refer to:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "20997", "revid": "1313171856", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20997", "title": "Montalcino", "text": "Montalcino () is a hill town and (municipality) in the province of Siena, Tuscany, central Italy.\nThe town is located to the west of Pienza, close to the Crete Senesi in Val d'Orcia. It is from Siena, from Florence and from Pisa. Monte Amiata is located nearby.\nHistory.\nThe hill upon which Montalcino sits has probably been settled since Etruscan times. Its first mention in historical documents in 814 AD suggests there was a church here in the 9th century, most likely built by monks associated with the nearby Abbey of Sant'Antimo. The population grew suddenly in the middle of the tenth century, when people fleeing the nearby town of Roselle took up residence in the town.\nThe town takes its name from a variety of oak tree that once covered the terrain. The very high site of the town provides views over the Asso, Ombrone and Arbia valleys of Tuscany, dotted with olive orchards, vineyards, fields and villages. The lower slopes of the Montalcino hill itself are dominated by vines and olive orchards.\nDuring medieval times the city was known for its tanneries and for the shoes and other leather goods that were made from the high-quality leathers that were produced there. As time went by, many medieval hill towns, including Montalcino, went into serious economic decline.\nLike many of the medieval towns of Tuscany, Montalcino experienced long periods of peace and often enjoyed a measure of prosperity. This peace and prosperity was, however, interrupted by a number of extremely violent episodes.\nDuring the late Middle Ages it was an independent commune with considerable importance owing to its location on the old Via Francigena, the main road between France and Rome, but increasingly Montalcino came under the sway of the larger and more aggressive city of Siena.\nAs a satellite of Siena since the Battle of Montaperti in 1260, Montalcino was deeply involved and affected by the conflicts in which Siena became embroiled, particularly in those with the city of Florence in the 14th and 15th centuries, and like many other cities in central and northern Italy, the town was also caught up in the internecine wars between the Ghibellines (supporters of the Holy Roman Empire) and the Guelphs (supporters of the Papacy). Factions from each side controlled the town at various times in the late medieval period.\nOnce Siena had been conquered by Florence under the rule of the Medici family in 1555, Montalcino held out for almost four years, but ultimately fell to the Florentines, under whose control it remained until the Grand Duchy of Tuscany was amalgamated into a united Italy in 1861.\nIn the case of Montalcino, gradual economic decline has recently been reversed by economic growth due to the increasing popularity of the town's famous wine Brunello di Montalcino, made from the sangiovese grosso grapes grown within the comune. The number of producers of the wine has grown from only 11 in the 1960s to more than 200 today, producing some 330,000 cases of the Brunello wine annually. Brunello was the first wine to be awarded \"Denominazione di Origine Controllata e Garantita\" (DOCG) status. In addition to Brunello di Montalcino, which must be aged five years prior to release, 6 years for the Riserva, Rosso di Montalcino (DOC), made from sangiovese grosso grapes and aged one year, and a variety of Super Tuscan wines are also produced within the comune, as well as the Moscadello sweet white wines for which it was most famous until the development of the Brunello series.\nMain sights.\nMedieval structures.\nThe first walls of the town were built in the 13th century. The fortress, built in 1361 atop the highest point of the town, was designed with a pentagonal layout by the Sienese architects Mino Foresi and Domenico di Feo. The fortress incorporates some of the pre-existing southern walls, the pre-existing structures including the keep of Santo Martini, the San Giovanni tower and an ancient basilica which now serves as the fortress chapel. Though the town itself was eventually conquered, the fortress itself never submitted, an admirable feat, considering the size of the Sienese and Florentine forces that besieged Montalcino at varying intervals.\nThe narrow, short street leads down from the main gate of the fortress to the \"Chiesa di Sant'Agostino\" with its simple 13th-century, Romanesque fa\u00e7ade. Adjacent to the church is the former convent, now the Musei Riuniti, both a civic and diocesan museum, housing among its collections: a wooden crucifix by an unknown artist of the Sienese school, two 15th century wooden sculptures, including a \"Madonna\" by an anonymous artist, and several terracotta sculptures attributed to the Della Robbia school. The collection also includes a \"St Peter and St Paul\" by Ambrogio Lorenzetti and a \"Virgin and Child\" by Simone Martini. There are also modern works from the early 20th century in the museum.\nThe \"Duomo\" (cathedral), dedicated to San Salvatore, was built originally in the 14th Century, but now has a 19th-century Neoclassical fa\u00e7ade designed by the Sienese architect Agostino Fantasici.\nThe \"Piazza della Principessa Margherita\" is down the hill from the fortress and Duomo on the via Matteotti. The principal building on the piazza is the former \"Palazzo dei Priori\" or \"Palazzo Comunale\" (built late 13th, early 14th century), now town hall. The palace is adorned with the coats of arms of the Podesta, once rulers of the city. A tall medieval tower is incorporated into the palazzo. Close by is a Renaissance-style building with six round arches, called \"La Loggia\", for which construction began at the very end of the 14th century and finished in the early 15th, but which has undergone much restoration work over the subsequent centuries.\nMontalcino is divided, like most medieval Tuscan cities, into quarters called \"contrade\", Borghetto, Travaglio, Pianello and Ruga, each with their own colors, songs and separate drum rhythms to distinguish them. Twice a year they meet together in a breath taking archery contest under the walls of the Fortezza, conducted in Medieval dress, with lords and ladies of each contrada who accompany the proceedings.\nThe 13th-century church of \"San Francesco\" in the Castlevecchio \"contrada\" has undergone several renovations. It contains 16th-century frescoes by Vincenzo Tamagni.\n\"Frazioni\".\nThe municipality is formed by the municipal seat of Montalcino and the towns and villages (\"frazioni\") of Camigliano, Castelnuovo dell'Abate, Montisi, San Giovanni d'Asso, Sant'Angelo in Colle, Sant'Angelo Scalo and Torrenieri. Other notable villages include Argiano, La Croce, Lucignano d'Asso, Monte Amiata Scalo, Montelifr\u00e9, Monterongriffoli, Pieve a Pava, Pieve a Salti, Poggio alle Mura, Tavernelle, Vergelle and Villa a Tolli.\nMunicipal government.\nMontalcino is headed by a mayor (') assisted by a legislative body, the ', and an executive body, the '. Since 1995 the mayor and members of the ' are directly elected together by resident citizens, while from 1945 to 1995 the mayor was chosen by the legislative body. The ' is chaired by the mayor, who appoints others members, called '. The offices of the ' are housed in a building usually called the ' or \"\".\nSince 1995 the mayor of Montalcino is directly elected by citizens, originally every four, then every five years. The current mayor is Silvio Franceschelli (PD), elected on 7 May 2012 with 80.3% of votes, re-elected on 12 June 2017 with 74.2% of votes and re-elected again for a third term on 13 June 2022 with 80.3% of votes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHonorary citizens.\nPeople awarded the honorary citizenship of Montalcino are:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20999", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20999", "title": "List of marine aquarium fish species", "text": "The following list of marine aquarium fish species commonly available in the aquarium trade is not a completely comprehensive list; certain rare specimens may be available commercially but not yet listed here. A brief section on each, with a link to the page about the particular species is provided along with references for further information.\nReef-safe fish do not consume corals or invertebrates, while fish categorized as not safe do. Fish labelled as \"with caution\" may have individuals within the species that could potentially eat invertebrates or cause damage to corals.\nAngelfish (large).\nThese large fish are considered to be quite hardy, but because of their size may present a significant challenge to the keeper. They need huge aquariums, up to 180 gallons to house one for its entire lifespan. Two angels might be kept in the same aquarium provided it is a large aquarium, they are properly acclimated as juveniles, and they have very different colouring and body shape. However, because all Angelfish have essentially the same diet, mixing them is a feat that should be left to only advanced keepers. Most are not reef safe, and a potential owner should be aware that they need to have plenty of vegetable matter in their diet. They undergo major changes in colouration while maturing, and unless specified given descriptions are for adult specimens.\nAngelfish (dwarf).\nAlthough Dwarf Angelfish are smaller and generally more manageable than their larger counterparts, they still have some specific care requirements. They are omnivores, but plenty of vegetable matter, preferably in the form of macroalgae, should be provided for their grazing pleasure. Their suitability for reef tanks is hotly debated, so add at your own risk. Specimens that have been successfully maintained in reef aquaria include the Flame and Coral Beauty angels. However, for obvious reasons they should not be put into tanks with expensive decorative macroalgae.\nAnthias.\nAlthough Anthias resemble damsels in shape and size, the two should never be confused. Anthias (also known as \"fairy basslets\") are finicky and many starve to death in captivity. In the wild, they eat zooplankton, and will not accept anything else in the aquarium. They also need to be fed nearly constantly, three times a day at least. The best way to ensure the health and longevity of an Anthias is to attach a refugium where copepods can be grown to \"drip\" into the display tank. Unlike many other saltwater aquarium inhabitants, they can be kept in groups.\nBass and groupers.\nIn this exceedingly large group of fish, few are considered proper aquarium inhabitants, for various reasons including diet and size. Basses vary greatly from species to species. Appropriate research should be done before purchasing a specimen. Many unsuspecting hobbyists bring home cute little specimens of popular aquarium fish such as the lyretail grouper, only to realize several months later that they do not have the resources to care for a meter-long that may cost hundreds of dollars a month to feed.\nBasslets and assessors.\nBasslets and Assessors are small, long bodied fish strongly resembling Anthias. Their care requirements, however, are closer to those of damsels. They should be kept individually, and generally not with other fish of similar shape and colour. Feeding is easy: they will generally eat any meaty foods offered. Good water quality should be maintained at all times.\nBatfish.\nBatfish are gorgeous and striking fish that are not common in aquaria for one major reason: they get huge. A two or three hundred gallon tank is needed for one, minimum, and larger is better. They start out as tiny, manageable-looking cuties, which often fools aquarists into purchasing them for their small aquariums. However they quickly grow to gargantuan proportions, and require large amounts of food as well as space, so beware. They are not reef safe and should be fed plenty of large meaty foods.\nBatfish change greatly as they grow, however the potential aquarist is most likely to see them in their juvenile form, so that is the description of the colouration here. They all have generally the same body shape: disk-like with tall dorsal and anal fins, similar to a Freshwater Angelfish.\nBlennies and the Engineer Goby.\nBlennies are popular aquarium fish, and for good reason. Most of them are peaceful to other fish, while very aggressive to other blennies which has a similar shape. Some blennies are colorful, and many are downright helpful. For example, the aptly named Lawnmower Blenny will keep your green algae well trimmed and presentable. With the exception of Fang Blennies, Blennies are totally reef safe- in fact a reef environment is really best for them because they can be shy and the intricate rockwork of a reef provides ample hiding spaces. They are omnivores and should be fed a varied diet of frozen or live foods and plant matter. Blennies do not have teeth or functional jaw, so food must be small enough for them to swallow whole.&lt;br&gt;\nBlennies are often confused with Gobies, but there is an easy way to tell the difference. Gobies have two distinct dorsal fins, Blennies have a single dorsal fin that runs the length of their body. Also, Gobies' pelvic fins are fused to form a sucker, similar to Remoras.\nThe engineer goby is a close relative of cichlids and leaf fishes, the juvenile can often be found in aquarium trade, while the adult is rare.\nBoxfish and blowfish.\nMembers of the family Tetraodontidae, Boxfish, Blowfish or Pufferfish and their cousins Cowfishes and Porcupinefishes can be very personable and quirky pets, for the prepared. &lt;br&gt;\nThey are not thought of as an ordinary aquarium tank mate, but are quickly gaining popularity. They do pose a hazard in the community tank however. They are capable of releasing a very powerful toxin which can kill other fish and in some cases, the boxfish itself. They generally only use it when threatened or dying, but can become disturbed easily with aggressive tank mates or overcrowded aquarium. Generally they are reef safe, though they will pick at invertebrates if not fed well enough. &lt;br&gt;\nMany people think puffed up Pufferfish, like in the picture, are cute, but an owner should never subject their pet to this as they are often unable to expel the air should they be out of the water. To prevent this, never remove a puffer from the water.\nButterflyfish.\nWhen properly cared for, Butterflyfish can make beautiful and distinctive additions to fish only marine aquariums. Specimens often grow to large sizes and are not well suited to smaller aquariums. Butterflyfish can be fussy and overparticular, but when fed a varied diet and kept in pristine conditions they will usually thrive. Some species in this family do not do well in captivity, and potential keepers must take care to purchase only those species that have a fighting chance. When selecting Butterflyfish especially, specimens presenting any sign or signs of mishandling are to be avoided.\nThe following species are relatively hardy and experienced aquarists should have no trouble with them, so long as they are diligent.\nCardinalfish.\nOne of the few groups of shoaling fish commonly available to marine aquarists, Cardinalfish are nocturnal and tend to be quite shy. They require meaty foods and will often not take prepared foods such as flakes and tablets. For the best chance of success, keep a wide variety of frozen foods on hand. In the event of a hunger strike, they will almost always take adult brine shrimp. As far as other care requirements they are similar to damsels: not picky. So long as they are properly acclimated, they tolerate a wide range of parameters. A marine aquarist should watch the ammonia/nitrite levels of the environment, as cardinalfish are particularly sensitive to these chemicals.\nChromis.\nChromis are perhaps the ultimate reef fish. Generally peaceful, most species are easy to take care of and quite colorful. Like anthias, they will school, but in many cases this tendency disappears as they age. They are, nevertheless, at least ambivalent with their own species, as well as completely reef safe. Like Damsels and Anemonefish, their close cousins, Chromis are omnivores and will accept most foods offered. A flake staple is usually sufficient, but for best color and health supplement with frozen and live foods when possible.\nClownfish.\nClownfish, more technically known as Anemonefish, are the classic aquarium fish. Both hardy and attractive, they are perhaps best known for their symbiotic relationship with Sea Anemones, a relative of coral. In the wild, Anemonefish are always found with a host, leading many potential keepers to believe that an anemone is necessary to keep them. Anemonefish are easy to keep, but their cnidarian counterparts are inordinately finicky and need high light levels, and luckily Anemonefish will thrive without them. Aquarists often find that Anemonefish will host in other things, from corals and Feather Duster Worms to powerheads and other equipment.\nAnemonefish care is identical to that of Damselfish, as they are actually very closely related.\nDamselfish.\nAll Damselfish can be considered reef-safe, sometimes excluding larger, more aggressive Dascyllus varieties. Some Damselfish will host in anemones like clownfish. Most Damselfish are aggressive and difficult to catch once you put them in an aquarium.\nDamselfish change gender as they grow larger and older. Small damselfish are ungendered. Eventually, they become males if no males prevent them from doing so. One or sometimes two males live with a female and guard over the eggs. Females are the largest fish and dominant over the males and juveniles. They will not allow other females into an area they have claimed as their territory without a fight. They may not allow new males or juveniles, either. Aggression increases with each change.\nDartfish.\nMost should be kept as pairs or small groups where all individuals are added at once.\nDragonets.\nDragonets are often mis-categorized as gobies or blennies by fish sellers. They are bottom-dwelling fish that constantly hunt tiny invertebrates for food. Most starve to death in a marine aquarium unless you provide a refugium or place for the invertebrates to reproduce safely without any fish being able to reach them.\nEels.\nMost eels are easily kept in a large aquarium, although several species such as the blue ribbon eel should usually be avoided. With any moray eel care must be taken to secure the lid as one of the most common causes of death is escaping from the tank, and onto the floor.\nFilefish.\nLess often kept than their relatives the triggerfish and puffers, there are many filefish that make good aquarium residents, and a few that require specialized diets, making it hard to sustain them in an aquarium.\nFrogfish.\nA type of Anglerfish, Frogfish are ambush predators with huge mouths. They are capable of eating fish up to twice their length so care should be taken in choosing tank mates.\nGoatfish.\nWhile not as common a choice for aquariums as many other species, they are typically hardy and brightly colored\nGobies and clingfishes.\nAre typically hardy and do not harm invertebrates which makes them a good choice of fish for a reef tank.\nHawkfish.\nAttractive and relatively small, Hawkfish make excellent additions to fish only or FOWLR aquariums. With extreme caution taken, they could be kept in reef aquariums, but because of their propensity to eat small ornamental shrimps and other mobile invertebrates (usually leaving sessile invertebrates alone) they are not considered reef safe. Lacking a swim bladder, Hawkfish can often be found resting in crevices of rocks or among the branches of corals or gorgonians. Hawkfish are easy to care for and not picky at all about water quality. A varied diet, including spirulina and small meaty foods like Mysis is recommended.\nJawfish.\nJawfish are burrowers and require a sandy substrate of sufficient depth.\nLionfish.\n\"Lionfish\" specifically refer to the genus \"Pterois\" within the family Scorpaenidae. They have venomous spines and should be treated with caution. Other species within Scorpaenidae but outside \"Pterois\" may also have \"lionfish\" in their common names. Feeder goldfish are not the proper nutrition for a lion fish.\nPipefish.\nPipefish are relatives of seahorses and require a similar level of care. They should only be bought by experienced aquarium owners. Captive bred specimens are sometimes available, and are significantly more likely to survive.\nPseudochromidae.\nUsually only a single specimen can be kept in an aquarium. Sometimes multiple specimens can be kept in larger aquariums, but usually this requires them to be added at the same time or they will be too territorial.\nRabbitfish and Foxfaces.\nLess commonly kept than some other species, many still make hardy and colorful aquarium residents.\nRays.\nMost rays have a venomous spine near the base of the tail. Care must be taken to avoid this animal when performing tank maintenance and during capture.\nScorpionfish.\nBecause they are relatively inactive fishes, most species can be kept in smaller aquariums than other equally large fish, and 30 gallon tanks are not unusual. Because they are capable of eating fish that are surprisingly large, but will often be picked at by fish that eat invertebrates a species tank is often set up for them. Some fish will never accept anything but live food, typically these specimens are fed on gut packed guppies, mollies, or ghost shrimp. Similarly to the lionfish, care should be taken when handling these fish as they are also venomous.\nSeahorses.\nIt takes a special aquarist to maintain these delicate beauties. A potential keeper must be dedicated and willing to throw artistic creativity to the winds- as what seahorses need is not always beautiful. They require taller tanks, live/frozen food, and many hitching posts, as well as very peaceful tankmates. In fact, beginners would be well-advised not to mix seahorses with any other species until they have more experience. Good tank mates would include other peaceful, microfauna consuming species such as pipefish and dragonets.&lt;br&gt;\nSeahorses found in stores are generally Captive Bred, but occasionally one might find a wild caught (WC) specimen. WC Seahorses should only be purchased by seahorse experts who are going to breed them, as they tend to be finicky and most are endangered in the wild. &lt;br&gt;\nOne of the advantages of Seahorses is that many species stay small and can (in fact, some \"should\") be kept in smaller tanks, making them ideal for aquarists who are pressed for space or money.\nSeahorses are among the few popular marine aquarium species that can be temperate. Species vary in their temperature requirement, so here an extra category has been added.&lt;br&gt;\nTR=Tropical ST=Sub-Tropical TM=Temperate\nSquirrelfish.\nTypically are hardy fish that can be kept with a wide variety of tankmates.\nSharks.\nMany sharks will outgrow most home aquariums and/or adapt poorly to captivity. However, numerous coastal and coral reef sharks do well in good aquarium surroundings although you should have experience in keeping other saltwater fish before trying to keep sharks as they are more difficult to care for. In a shark aquarium setup (preferably an oval-shaped tank for more active species), there should be much surface area (wide and long tanks with good gas exchange/more room for biological filtration and room for sharks to swim, glide, and turn with little constraint opposed to tall, thin tanks), fine substrate (coarse substrate can irritate the shark's underside), little d\u00e9cor and rockwork (which should be secure) for swimming space (sharks in the orders Orectolobiformes and Heterodontiformes however, feel more secure in tanks with caves and ledges), excellent filtration (sharks are messy eaters and need good water conditions), protected heaters, filter intakes, etc. by surrounding them in polyurethane foam barriers (unprotected equipment can be dangerous to active sharks), and a secure canopy (sharks can jump out of the water) as well as, strong, steady, linear water flow (10+ x the volume of the aquarium per hour) moving in a gyre circling the aquarium, dissolved oxygen levels of 7\u20138ppm (slightly more if you are using ozone), low light levels, and no stray electrical currents/amounts of metal in the aquarium water. Many sharks feed on invertebrates to a great degree along with fish (even ones that are larger than themselves), and although they don't eat coral, they can knock them over and rest on them. There are also many fish and invertebrates that can harm/irritate sharks such as Scorpionfish, Butterflyfish, Angelfish (large), Filefish, Triggerfish, Pufferfish, Suckerfish (over time), Porcupinefish, certain other sharks, large crabs, Hermit crabs, sea anemones, and stinging corals. Also, sharks need iodine which can be provided through regular water changes or supplements for sharks (iodine deficiencies and possibly the buildup of nitrates can result in goiter), and feeding frequency is species-specific. Copper treatments should not be administered to most shark species.\nTangs.\nTangs generally feed on algae, though there are a few carnivorous species. Most tangs will not tolerate other fish the same color and/or shape as them. They have a spine on their tails that can cut open other fish and unprotected hands. All tangs should be given plenty of swimming room; try to have at least a 4' tank. Contrary to popular belief they will tolerate smaller (4' to 5') tanks just fine but tend to live better in larger tanks, over 5'.\nTilefish.\nThough often categorized as gobies, tilefish are a separate species.\nTriggerfish.\nWhile they are generally considered monsters that will chomp invertebrates, a few species can make great reef fish. Other more aggressive species such as the undulated trigger, and clown trigger will sometimes be so aggressive that it is necessary to keep as the sole inhabitant of the aquarium. All will require large tanks, with good filtration.\nWrasse.\nA diverse group of fish with an equally wide range of characteristics. Some wrasse species are aggressive towards small fish and invertebrates, others are reef safe. Some are quite hardy, some typically die within weeks.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "21001", "revid": "46977059", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21001", "title": "Magazine", "text": "Publication that is typically distributed at a regular interval\nA magazine is a periodical publication, print or digital, produced on a regular schedule, that contains any of a variety of subject-oriented textual and visual content forms. Magazines are generally financed by advertising, purchase price, prepaid subscriptions, or by a combination of the three. They are categorised by their frequency of publication (i.e., as weeklies, monthlies, quarterlies, etc.), their target audiences (e.g., women's and trade magazines), their subjects of focus (e.g., popular science and religious), and their tones or approach (e.g., works of satire or humor). Appearance on the cover of print magazines has historically been understood to convey a place of honor or distinction to an individual or event.\nTerm origin and definition.\nOrigin.\nThe etymology of the word \"magazine\" suggests derivation from the Arabic (), the broken plural of () meaning \"depot, storehouse\" (originally military storehouse); that comes to English via Middle French and Italian . In its original sense, the word \"magazine\" referred to a storage space or device.\nDefinitions.\nIn the case of written publication, it refers to a collection of written articles; hence, magazine publications share the moniker with storage units for military equipment such as gunpowder, artillery and firearm magazines, and in French and Russian (adopted from the French, as ), retailers such as department stores.\nThe difference between magazines and journals are their audience, purpose, and publication process. Journal articles are written by experts for experts, while magazine articles are usually intended for the general public or a demographic. Journals contain recent research on specific areas, while magazines aim to entertain, inform, or educate a general audience on a wide range of topics. Journals are published by academic or professional organizations, and may be peer-reviewed, while magazine articles are typically shorter and more accessible than journal articles, often written in a journalistic style.\nDistribution.\nPrint magazines can be distributed through the mail, through sales by newsstands, bookstores, or other vendors, or through free distribution at selected pick-up locations. Electronic distribution methods can include social media, email, news aggregators, and visibility of a publication's website and search engine results. The traditional subscription business models for distribution fall into three main categories.\nPaid circulation.\nIn this model, the magazine is sold to readers for a price, either on a per-issue basis or by subscription, where an annual fee or monthly price is paid and issues are sent by post to readers. Paid circulation allows for defined readership statistics.\nNon-paid circulation.\nThis means that there is no cover price and issues are given away, for example in street dispensers, on airlines, or included with other products or publications. Because this model involves giving issues away to unspecific populations, the statistics only entail the number of issues distributed, and not who reads them.\nControlled circulation.\nThis is the model used by many trade magazines (industry-based periodicals) distributed only to qualifying readers, often for free and determined by some form of survey. Because of costs (e.g., printing and postage) associated with the medium of print, publishers may not distribute free copies to everyone who requests one (unqualified leads); instead, they operate under controlled circulation, deciding who may receive free subscriptions based on each person's qualification as a member of the trade (and likelihood of buying, for example, likelihood of having corporate purchasing authority, as determined by job title). This allows a high level of certainty that advertisements will be received by the advertiser's target audience, and it avoids wasted printing and distribution expenses. This latter model was widely used before the rise of the World Wide Web and is still employed by some titles. For example, in the United Kingdom, a number of computer-industry magazines use this model, including \"Computer Weekly\" and \"Computing\", and in finance, \"Waters Magazine\". For the global media industry, an example would be \"VideoAge International\".\nHistory.\nThe earliest example of magazines was \"Erbauliche Monaths Unterredungen\", a literary and philosophy magazine, which was launched in 1663 in Germany. \"The Gentleman's Magazine\", first published in 1741 in London was the first general-interest magazine. Edward Cave, who edited \"The Gentleman's Magazine\" under the pen name \"Sylvanus Urban\", was the first to use the term \"magazine\", on the analogy of a military storehouse, the quote being: \"a monthly collection, to treasure up as in a magazine\". Founded by Herbert Ingram in 1842, \"The Illustrated London News\" was the first illustrated weekly news magazine.\nBritain.\nThe oldest consumer magazine still in print is \"The Scots Magazine\", which was first published in 1739, though multiple changes in ownership and gaps in publication totalling over 90 years weaken that claim. \"Lloyd's List\" was founded in Edward Lloyd's England coffee shop in 1734; although its online platform is still updated daily, it has not been published as a printed magazine since 2013, when it ended print publication after 274 years.\nFrance.\nUnder the Ancien R\u00e9gime, the most prominent magazines were , , founded in 1665 for scientists, and , founded in 1631. Jean Loret was one of France's first journalists. He disseminated the weekly news of music, dance and Parisian society from 1650 until 1665 in verse, in what he called a \"gazette burlesque\", assembled in three volumes of \"La Muse historique\" (1650, 1660, 1665). The French press lagged a generation behind the British, for they catered to the needs of the aristocracy, while the newer British counterparts were oriented toward the middle and working classes.\nPeriodicals were censored by the central government in Paris. They were not totally quiescent politically\u2014often they criticized Church abuses and bureaucratic ineptitude. They supported the monarchy and they played at most a small role in stimulating the revolution. During the Revolution, new periodicals played central roles as propaganda organs for various factions. Jean-Paul Marat (1743\u20131793) was the most prominent editor. His \"L'Ami du peuple\" advocated vigorously for the rights of the lower classes against the enemies of the people Marat hated; it closed when he was assassinated. After 1800 Napoleon reimposed strict censorship.\nMagazines flourished after Napoleon left in 1815. Most were based in Paris and most emphasized literature, poetry and stories. They served religious, cultural and political communities. In times of political crisis they expressed and helped shape the views of their readership and thereby were major elements in the changing political culture. For example, there were eight Catholic periodicals in 1830 in Paris. None were officially owned or sponsored by the Church and they reflected a range of opinion among educated Catholics about current issues, such as the 1830 July Revolution that overthrew the Bourbon monarchy. Several were strong supporters of the Bourbon kings, but all eight ultimately urged support for the new government, putting their appeals in terms of preserving civil order. They often discussed the relationship between church and state. Generally, they urged priests to focus on spiritual matters and not engage in politics. Historian M. Patricia Dougherty says this process created a distance between the Church and the new monarch and enabled Catholics to develop a new understanding of church-state relationships and the source of political authority.\nTurkey.\nGeneral.\nThe \"Moniteur Ottoman\" was a gazette written in French and first published in 1831 on the order of Mahmud II. It was the first official gazette of the Ottoman Empire, edited by Alexandre Blacque at the expense of the Sublime Porte. Its name perhaps referred to the French newspaper \"Le Moniteur Universel\". It was issued weekly. \"Takvim-i vekayi\" was published a few months later, intended as a translation of the \"Moniteur\" into Ottoman Turkish. After having been edited by former Consul for Denmark \"\"M. Franceschi\", and later on by \"Hassuna de Ghiez\"\", it was lastly edited by Lucien Rouet. However, facing the hostility of embassies, it was closed in the 1840s.\nSatire.\nSatirical magazines of Turkey have a long tradition. One of the earliest satirical magazines was \"Diyojen\" which was launched in 1869. There are around 20 satirical magazines; the leading ones are \"Penguen\" (70,000 weekly circulation), \"LeMan\" (50,000) and \"Uykusuz\". Historical examples include O\u011fuz Aral's magazine \"G\u0131rg\u0131r\" (which reached a circulation of 500,000 in the 1970s) and \"Marko Pa\u015fa\" (launched in 1946). Others include \"L-Manyak\" and \"Lombak\".\nUnited States.\nColonial America.\nPublishing was a very expensive industry in colonial times. Paper and printer's ink were taxed imported goods and their quality was inconsistent. Interstate tariffs and a poor road system hindered distribution, even on a regional scale. Many magazines were launched, most failing within a few editions, but publishers kept trying. Benjamin Franklin is said to have envisioned one of the first magazines of the American colonies in 1741, the \"General Magazine and Historical Chronicle\". The \"Pennsylvania Magazine\", edited by Thomas Paine, ran only for a short time but was a very influential publication during the Revolutionary War. The final issue containing the text of the Declaration of Independence was published in 1776.\nLate 19th century.\nIn the mid-19th century, monthly magazines gained popularity. They were general interest to begin, containing some news, vignettes, poems, history, political events, and social discussion. Unlike newspapers, they were more of a monthly record of current events along with entertaining stories, poems, and pictures. The first periodicals to branch out from news were \"Harper's\" and \"The Atlantic\", which focused on fostering the arts. Both \"Harper's\" and \"The Atlantic\" persist to this day, with \"Harper's\" being a cultural magazine and The Atlantic focusing mainly on world events. Early publications of \"Harper's\" even held famous works such as early publications of \"Moby Dick\" or famous events such as the laying of the world's first transatlantic telegraph cable; however, the majority of early content was trickle down from British events.\nThe development of the magazines stimulated an increase in literary criticism and political debate, moving towards more opinionated pieces from the objective newspapers. The increased time between prints and the greater amount of space to write provided a forum for public arguments by scholars and critical observers.\nThe early periodical predecessors to magazines started to evolve to modern definition in the late 1800s. Works slowly became more specialized and the general discussion or cultural periodicals were forced to adapt to a consumer market which yearned for more localization of issues and events.\nProgressive era: 1890s\u20131920s.\nMass-circulation magazines became much more common after 1900, some with circulations in the hundreds of thousands of subscribers. Some passed the million-mark in the 1920s. It was an age of mass media. Because of the rapid expansion of national advertising, the cover price fell sharply to about 10 cents. One cause was the heavy coverage of corruption in politics, local government and big business, especially by \"Muckrakers.\" They were journalists who wrote for popular magazines to expose social and political sins and shortcomings. They relied on their own investigative journalism reporting; muckrakers often worked to expose social ills and corporate and political corruption. Muckraking magazines\u2013notably \"McClure's\"\u2013took on corporate monopolies and crooked political machines while raising public awareness of chronic urban poverty, unsafe working conditions, and social issues such as child labor.\nThe journalists who specialized in exposing waste, corruption, and scandal operated at the state and local level, like Ray Stannard Baker, George Creel, and Brand Whitlock. Others, including Lincoln Steffens, exposed political corruption in many large cities; Ida Tarbell went after John D. Rockefeller's Standard Oil Company. Samuel Hopkins Adams in 1905 showed the fraud involved in many patent medicines, Upton Sinclair's 1906 novel \"The Jungle\" gave a horrid portrayal of how meat was packed, and, also in 1906, David Graham Phillips unleashed a blistering indictment of the U.S. Senate. Roosevelt gave these journalists their nickname when he complained that they were not being helpful by raking up all the muck.\n21st century.\nAccording to the Research Department of Statista, closures of magazines outnumbered launches in North America during 2009. Although both figures declined during 2010\u20132015, launches outnumbered closures in each of those years, sometimes by a 3:1 ratio. Focusing more narrowly, MediaFinder.com found that 93 new magazines were launched during the first six months of 2014, while only 30 closed in that time frame. The category which produced the most new publications was \"Regional interest\", of which six new magazines were launched, including \"12th &amp; Broad\" and \"Craft Beer &amp; Brewing\". However, two magazines had to change their print schedules. Johnson Publishing's \"Jet\" stopped printing regular issues, making the transition to digital format, though still printing an annual print edition. \"Ladies' Home Journal\" stopped their monthly schedule and home delivery for subscribers to become a quarterly newsstand-only special interest publication.\nAccording to statistics from the end of 2013, subscription levels for 22 of the top 25 magazines declined from 2012 to 2013, with just \"Time\", \"Glamour\" and \"ESPN The Magazine\" gaining numbers. However, by 2024, some titles, notably outdoors magazines, appeared to be growing in popularity. Furthermore, recent research (2025) has shown that print magazines are seen as more trustworthy, with better quality journalism.\nWomen's magazines.\nThe \"seven sisters\" of American women's magazines are \"Ladies' Home Journal\", \"Good Housekeeping\", \"McCall's\", \"Woman's Day\", \"Redbook\", \"Family Circle\", and \"Better Homes and Gardens\". Some magazines, among them \"Godey's Lady's Book\" and \"Harper's Bazaar\", were intended exclusively for a female audience, emphasizing the traditional gender roles of the 19th century. \"Harper's Bazaar\" was the first to focus exclusively on couture fashion, fashion accessories and textiles. The inclusion of didactic content about housekeeping may have increased the appeal of the magazine for a broader audience of women and men concerned about the frivolity of a fashion magazine.\nTypes.\nThere are many types of magazines. While some zero in on topics such as niche trade journals, cutting-edge research, or women's mags, others include topics like religion and pop culture. These may include deliciously satirical, dead serious, or a laugh-out-loud funny.\nCategories.\nBased on periodicity.\nMagazines are often categorised by their frequencies of publication (i.e., as weeklies, monthlies, quarterlies, etc.).\nBased on target audience and subject.\nWomen's fashion.\nThe first women's magazine targeted toward wives and mothers was published in 1852. In the 1920s, new magazines appealed to young German women with a sensuous image and advertisements for the appropriate clothes and accessories they would want to purchase. The glossy pages of \"Die Dame\" and \"Das Blatt der Hausfrau\" displayed the \"Neue Frauen\", \"New Girl\" \u2013 what Americans called the flapper. This ideal young woman was chic, financially independent, and an eager consumer of the latest fashions. Magazines kept her up to date on fashion, arts, sports, and modern technology such as automobiles and telephones.\nParenting.\nOther women's magazines have influenced views of motherhood and child-rearing through the use of advice columns, advertisements, and articles related to parenting. Mass-marketed women's magazines have shaped and transformed cultural values related to parenting practices. As such, magazines targeting women and parenthood have exerted power and influence over ideas about motherhood and child-rearing.\nReligion.\nReligious magazines have a long and varied history. In the United States, religious magazines are among the first magazines to appear, and their content helped shape the early Republic's literacy, morals, and political events. But during the past 150 years, their influence has lessened.\nCelebrity gossip, human interest.\nMagazines publishing stories and photos of high-profile individuals and celebrities have long been a popular format in the United States. In 2019, \"People Magazine\" ranked second behind ESPN Magazine in total reach with a reported reach of 98.51 million.\nProfessional.\nProfessional magazines, also called trade magazines, or business-to-business magazines are targeted to readers employed in particular industries. These magazines typically cover industry trends and news of interest to professionals in the industry. Subscriptions often come with membership in a professional association. Professional magazines may derive revenue from advertisement placements or advertorials by companies selling products and services to a specific professional audience. Examples include \"Advertising Age,\" \"Automotive News, Broadcast, The Bookseller,\" and \"The Stage\".\nBased on tone or approach.\nMagazines can be categorised by their tone or approach, e.g., as with periodical works of satire or humor.\nPuzzle magazines.\nLike to Games World of Puzzles that is an American games and puzzle magazine.\nCover.\nBeing on the cover of a magazine is sometimes considered an honor, or even historic; examples are one-time common statements to the effect that an individual had \"appeared on the cover of \"Time\"\" or of the \"Rolling Stone\", etc.\nThe English \"Wikipedia\" presents a number of List-type articles that survey subjects and individuals appearing in the covers of specific magazines; see for example:\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nLists.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "21002", "revid": "7007500", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21002", "title": "Marcus Antonius", "text": ""}
{"id": "21003", "revid": "24043204", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21003", "title": "Astyanax mexicanus", "text": ""}
{"id": "21008", "revid": "50342655", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21008", "title": "Multivibrator", "text": "Electronic circuit used to implement two-state devices\nA multivibrator is an electronic circuit used to implement a variety of simple two-state devices such as relaxation oscillators, timers, latches and flip-flops. The first multivibrator circuit, the astable multivibrator oscillator, was invented by Henri Abraham and Eugene Bloch during World War I. It consisted of two vacuum tube amplifiers cross-coupled by a resistor-capacitor network. They called their circuit a \"multivibrator\" because its output waveform was rich in harmonics. A variety of active devices can be used to implement multivibrators that produce similar harmonic-rich wave forms; these include transistors, neon lamps, tunnel diodes and others. Although cross-coupled devices are a common form, single-element multivibrator oscillators are also common.\nThe three types of multivibrator circuits are:\nMultivibrators find applications in a variety of systems where square waves or timed intervals are required. For example, before the advent of low-cost integrated circuits, chains of multivibrators found use as frequency dividers. A free-running multivibrator with a frequency of one-half to one-tenth of the reference frequency would accurately lock to the reference frequency. This technique was used in early electronic organs, to keep notes of different octaves accurately in tune. Other applications included early television systems, where the various line and frame frequencies were kept synchronized by pulses included in the video signal.\nHistory.\nThe first multivibrator circuit, the classic astable multivibrator oscillator (also called a \"plate-coupled multivibrator\") was first described by Henri Abraham and Eugene Bloch in \"Publication 27\" of the French \"Minist\u00e8re de la Guerre\", and in \"Annales de Physique 12, 252 (1919)\". Since it produced a square wave, in contrast to the sine wave generated by most other oscillator circuits of the time, its output contained many harmonics above the fundamental frequency, which could be used for calibrating high frequency radio circuits. For this reason Abraham and Bloch called it a \"multivibrateur\". It is a predecessor of the Eccles-Jordan trigger which was derived from the circuit a year later.\nHistorically, the terminology of multivibrators has been somewhat variable:\nAstable.\nSource:\nAn astable multivibrator consists of two amplifying stages connected in a positive feedback loop by two capacitive-resistive coupling networks. The amplifying elements may be junction or field-effect transistors, vacuum tubes, operational amplifiers, or other types of amplifier. Figure 1, below right, shows bipolar junction transistors (BJT).\nThe circuit is usually drawn in a symmetric form as a cross-coupled pair. The two output terminals can be defined at the active devices and have complementary states. One has high voltage while the other has low voltage, except during the brief transitions from one state to the other.\nOperation of a BJT astable multivibrator.\nThe circuit has two astable (unstable) states that change alternatively with maximum transition rate because of the \"accelerating\" positive feedback. It is implemented by the coupling capacitors that instantly transfer voltage changes because the voltage across a capacitor cannot suddenly change. In each state, one transistor is switched on and the other is switched off. Accordingly, one fully charged capacitor discharges (reverse charges) slowly thus converting the time into an exponentially changing voltage. At the same time, the other empty capacitor quickly charges thus restoring its charge (the first capacitor acts as a time-setting capacitor and the second prepares to play this role in the next state). The circuit operation is based on the fact that the forward-biased base-emitter junction of the switched-on bipolar transistor can provide a path for the capacitor restoration.\nState 1 (Q1 is switched on, Q2 is switched off)\nIn the beginning, the capacitor C1 is fully charged (in the previous State 2) to the power supply voltage \"V\" with the polarity shown in Figure 1. Q1 is \"on\" and connects the left-hand positive plate of C1 to ground. As its right-hand negative plate is connected to Q2 base, a maximum negative voltage (-\"V\") is applied to Q2 base that keeps Q2 firmly \"off\". C1 begins discharging (reverse charging) via the high-value base resistor R2, so that the voltage of its right-hand plate (and at the base of Q2) is rising from below ground (-\"V\") toward +\"V\". As Q2 base-emitter junction is reverse-biased, it does not conduct, so all the current from R2 goes into C1. Simultaneously, C2 that is fully discharged and even slightly charged to 0.6 V (in the previous State 2) quickly charges via the low-value collector resistor R4 and Q1 forward-biased base-emitter junction (because R4 is less than R2, C2 charges faster than C1). Thus C2 restores its charge and prepares for the next State C2 when it will act as a time-setting capacitor. Q1 is firmly saturated in the beginning by the \"forcing\" C2 charging current added to R3 current. In the end, only R3 provides the needed input base current. The resistance R3 is chosen small enough to keep Q1 (not deeply) saturated after C2 is fully charged.\nWhen the voltage of C1 right-hand plate (Q2 base voltage) becomes positive and reaches 0.6 V, Q2 base-emitter junction begins diverting a part of R2 charging current. Q2 begins conducting and this starts the avalanche-like positive feedback process as follows. Q2 collector voltage begins falling; this change transfers through the fully charged C2 to Q1 base and Q1 begins cutting off. Its collector voltage begins rising; this change transfers back through the almost empty C1 to Q2 base and makes Q2 conduct more thus sustaining the initial input impact on Q2 base. Thus the initial input change circulates along the feedback loop and grows in an avalanche-like manner until finally Q1 switches off and Q2 switches on. The forward-biased Q2 base-emitter junction fixes the voltage of C1 right-hand plate at 0.6 V and does not allow it to continue rising toward +\"V\".\nState 2 (Q1 is switched off, Q2 is switched on)\nNow, the capacitor C2 is fully charged (in the previous State 1) to the power supply voltage \"V\" with the polarity shown in Figure 1. Q2 is \"on\" and connects the right-hand positive plate of C2 to ground. As its left-hand negative plate is connected to Q1 base, a maximum negative voltage (-\"V\") is applied to Q1 base that keeps Q1 firmly \"off\". C2 begins discharging (reverse charging) via the high-value base resistor R3, so that the voltage of its left-hand plate (and at the base of Q1) is rising from below ground (-\"V\") toward +\"V\". Simultaneously, C1 that is fully discharged and even slightly charged to 0.6 V (in the previous State 1) quickly charges via the low-value collector resistor R1 and Q2 forward-biased base-emitter junction (because R1 is less than R3, C1 charges faster than C2). Thus C1 restores its charge and prepares for the next State 1 when it will act again as a time-setting capacitor...and so on... (the next explanations are a mirror copy of the second part of State 1).\nMultivibrator frequency.\nDerivation.\nThe duration of state 1 (low output) will be related to the time constant \"R\"2\"C\"1 as it depends on the charging of C1, and the duration of state 2 (high output) will be related to the time constant \"R\"3\"C\"2 as it depends on the charging of C2. Because they do not need to be the same, an asymmetric duty cycle is easily achieved.\nThe voltage on a capacitor with non-zero initial charge is:\nformula_1\nLooking at C2, just before Q2 turns on, the left terminal of C2 is at the base-emitter voltage of Q1 (VBE_Q1) and the right terminal is at \"V\"CC (\"\"V\"CC\" is used here instead of \"+\"V\"\" to ease notation). The voltage across C2 is \"V\"CC minus \"V\"BE_Q1 . The moment after Q2 turns on, the right terminal of C2 is now at 0\u00a0V which drives the left terminal of C2 to 0\u00a0V minus (\"V\"CC - \"V\"BE_Q1) or \"V\"BE_Q1 - \"V\"CC. From this instant in time, the left terminal of C2 must be charged back up to VBE_Q1. How long this takes is half our multivibrator switching time (the other half comes from C1). In the charging capacitor equation above, substituting:\n\"V\"BE_Q1 for formula_2\n(\"V\"BE_Q1 - \"V\"CC) for formula_3\n\"V\"CC for formula_4\nresults in:\nformula_5\nSolving for t results in:\nformula_6\nFor this circuit to work, VCC\u00bbVBE_Q1 (for example: VCC=5\u00a0V, VBE_Q1=0.6\u00a0V), therefore the equation can be simplified to:\nformula_7\nwhich can be simplified to: \nformula_8\nThe period of each \"half\" of the multivibrator is therefore given by formula_9.\nThe total period of oscillation is given by:\nformula_10\nformula_11\nwhere...\nFor the special case where\nformula_12\nOutput pulse shape.\nThe output voltage has a shape that approximates a square waveform. It is considered below for the transistor Q1.\nDuring State 1, Q2 base-emitter junction is reverse-biased and capacitor C1 is \"unhooked\" from ground. The output voltage of the switched-on transistor Q1 changes rapidly from high to low since this low-resistive output is loaded by a high impedance load (the series connected capacitor C1 and the high-resistive base resistor R2).\nDuring State 2, Q2 base-emitter junction is forward-biased and capacitor C1 is \"hooked\" to ground. The output voltage of the switched-off transistor Q1 changes exponentially from low to high since this relatively high resistive output is loaded by a low impedance load (capacitor C1). This is the output voltage of R1C1 integrating circuit.\nTo approach the needed square waveform, the collector resistors have to be low in resistance. The base resistors have to be low enough to make the transistors saturate in the end of the restoration (RB &lt; \u03b2.RC).\nInitial power-up.\nWhen the circuit is first powered up, neither transistor will be switched on. However, this means that at this stage they will both have high base voltages and therefore a tendency to switch on, and inevitable slight asymmetries will mean that one of the transistors is first to switch on. This will quickly put the circuit into one of the above states, and oscillation will ensue. In practice, oscillation always occurs for practical values of \"R\" and \"C\".\nHowever, if the circuit is temporarily held with both bases high, for longer than it takes for both capacitors to charge fully, then the circuit will remain in this stable state, with both bases at 0.60 V, both collectors at 0 V, and both capacitors charged backwards to \u22120.60 V. This can occur at startup without external intervention, if \"R\" and \"C\" are both very small.\nFrequency divider.\nAn astable multivibrator can be synchronized to an external chain of pulses. A single pair of active devices can be used to divide a reference by a large ratio, however, the stability of the technique is poor owing to the variability of the power supply and the circuit elements. A division ratio of 10, for example, is easy to obtain but not dependable. Chains of bistable flip-flops provide more predictable division, at the cost of more active elements.\nProtective components.\nWhile not fundamental to circuit operation, diodes connected in series with the base or emitter of the transistors are required to prevent the base-emitter junction being driven into reverse breakdown when the supply voltage is in excess of the \"V\"eb breakdown voltage, typically around 5-10 volts for general purpose silicon transistors. In the monostable configuration, only one of the transistors requires protection.\nAstable multivibrator using an op-amp.\nAssume all the capacitors to be discharged at first. The output of the op-amp Vo at node c is +Vsat initially. At node a, a voltage of +\u03b2 Vsat is formed due to voltage division where formula_13. The current that flows from nodes c and b to ground charges the capacitor C towards +Vsat. During this charging period, the voltage at b becomes greater than +\u03b2 Vsat at some point. The voltage at inverting terminal will be greater than the voltage at the non-inverting terminal of the op-amp. This is a comparator circuit and hence, the output becomes -Vsat. The voltage at node a becomes -\u03b2Vsat due to voltage division. Now the capacitor discharges towards -Vsat. At some point, the voltage at b becomes less than -\u03b2 Vsat. The voltage at the non-inverting terminal will be greater than the voltage at the inverting terminal of the op-amp. So, the output of the op-amp is +Vsat. This repeats and forms a free-running oscillator or an astable multivibrator.\nIf VC is the voltage across the capacitor and from the graph, the time period of the wave formed at capacitor and the output would match, then the time period could be calculated in this way:formula_14\nformula_15\nAt \"t\" =\"T1\",\nformula_16\nUpon solving, we get:\nformula_17\nWe are taking values of R, C and \u03b2 such that we get a symmetrical square wave. Thus, we get \"T1\" = \"T2\" and total time period \"T\" = \"T1\" + \"T2\". So, the time period of the square wave generated at the output is:\nformula_18\nMonostable.\nIn the monostable multivibrator, one resistive-capacitive network (C2-R3 in Figure 1) is replaced by a resistive network (just a resistor). The circuit can be thought as a 1/2 astable multivibrator. Q2 collector voltage is the output of the circuit (in contrast to the astable circuit, it has a perfect square waveform since the output is not loaded by the capacitor).\nWhen triggered by an input pulse, a monostable multivibrator will switch to its unstable position for a period of time, and then return to its stable state. The time period monostable multivibrator remains in unstable state is given by \"t\"\u00a0= ln(2)\"R\"2\"C\"1. If repeated application of the input pulse maintains the circuit in the unstable state, it is called a \"retriggerable\" monostable. If further trigger pulses do not affect the period, the circuit is a \"non-retriggerable\" multivibrator.\nFor the circuit in Figure 2, in the stable state Q1 is turned off and Q2 is turned on. It is triggered by zero or negative input signal applied to Q2 base (with the same success it can be triggered by applying a positive input signal through a resistor to Q1 base). As a result, the circuit goes in State 1 described above. After elapsing the time, it returns to its stable initial state.\nMonostable using op-amp.\nThe circuit is useful for generating single output pulse of adjustable time duration in response to a triggering signal. The width of the output pulse\ndepends only on external components connected to the op-amp. A diode D1 clamps the capacitor voltage to 0.7 V when the output is at +Vsat. Let us assume that in the stable\nstate the output Vo = +Vsat. The diode D1 clamps the capacitor to 0.7 V. The voltage at the non-inverting terminal through the potential divider will be + \u03b2Vsat. Now a negative trigger of magnitude V1 is applied to the non-inverting terminal so that the effective signal at this terminal is less than 0.7 V. Then the output voltage switches from +Vsat to -Vsat. The diode will now get reverse biased and the capacitor starts charging exponentially to -Vsat through R. The voltage at the non-inverting terminal through the potential divider will be - \u03b2Vsat. After some time the capacitor charges to a voltage more than - \u03b2Vsat. The voltage on the non-inverting input is now greater than on the inverting input and the output of the op-amp switches again to +Vsat. The capacitor discharges through resistor R and charges again to 0.7 V.\nThe pulse width T of a monostable multivibrator is calculated as follows:\nThe general solution for a low pass RC circuit is\nformula_19\nwhere formula_20 and formula_21, the diode forward voltage. Therefore,\nformula_22\nat formula_23,\nformula_24\nformula_25\nafter simplification,\nformula_26\nwhere formula_27\nIf formula_28 and formula_29 so that formula_30, then\nformula_31\nBistable.\nIn the bistable multivibrator, both resistive-capacitive networks (C1-R2 and C2-R3 in Figure 1) are replaced by resistive networks (just resistors or direct coupling).\nThis latch circuit is similar to an astable multivibrator, except that there is no charge or discharge time, due to the absence of capacitors. Hence, when the circuit is switched on, if Q1 is on, its collector is at 0 V. As a result, Q2 gets switched off. This results in more than half +\"V\" volts being applied to R4 causing current into the base of Q1, thus keeping it on. Thus, the circuit remains stable in a single state continuously. Similarly, Q2 remains on continuously, if it happens to get switched on first.\nSwitching of state can be done via Set and Reset terminals connected to the bases. For example, if Q2 is on and Set is grounded momentarily, this switches Q2 off, and makes Q1 on. Thus, Set is used to \"set\" Q1 on, and Reset is used to \"reset\" it to off state."}
{"id": "21009", "revid": "28481209", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21009", "title": "Marsh gas", "text": "Gas produced naturally within marshes, swamps and bogs\nMarsh gas, also known as swamp gas or bog gas, is a mixture primarily of methane and smaller amounts of hydrogen sulfide, carbon dioxide, and trace phosphine that is produced naturally within some geographical marshes, swamps, and bogs.\nThe surface of marshes, swamps, and bogs is initially porous vegetation that rots to form a crust that prevents oxygen from reaching the organic material trapped below. That is the condition that allows anaerobic digestion and fermentation of any plant or animal matter, which then produces methane.\nThe trapped methane can escape through any of three main pathways: by the diffusion of methane molecules across an air\u2013water interface, by bubbling out of water in a process known as ebullition, or through plant-mediated transport.\nMethane formation.\nMethane is the primary gas that makes up the product colloquially known as \"marsh gas\". Much of the biogenic methane produced in nature is derived from either acetate cleavage or by the hydrogen reduction of carbon dioxide. Methane can also be produced by methanogens, archaea that produce methane under anoxic conditions, in a process known as methanogenesis. Methanogenic genera \"Methanosarcina\" are common in marsh environments. They are both known to stimulate methane production in aquatic muds and use acetate, methanol, and trimethylamine as substrates for methane production.\nEscape routes.\nGlobal wetlands are one of the largest sources of atmospheric methane. This methane, which is produced by the decomposition of organic matter in an anoxic environment, escapes through either diffusion, a process that occurs mostly at night, ebullition, or plant-mediated transportation.The diffusive process is controlled by the passage of gas across the air\u2013water interface. The diffusion can be accelerated and intensified by upwelling, such as the motion from turbulent eddies, and cooling processes. At night, heat is emitted from the water surface by radiation. The colder surface water sinks, pushing the warmer surface water out and forming eddies. These eddies circulate the dissolved methane throughout the water column and increase the methane flux to the atmosphere. This process is called hydrodynamic transport, and it accounts for more than half of nighttime methane fluxes as well as 32% of annual methane emissions from wetland environments.\nEbullition, also known as bubbling, is a type of one-way transport of gases from nutrient rich sediments, to the water column, and then to the atmosphere. It is a major mechanism for gas exchange in freshwater and coastal marine ecosystems and is known to peak during the daytime and at warm temperatures. It has been reported that ebullition is responsible for 45% of the annual methane flux for fresh water marshes and that it is more important in the summer months during the daytime and can also be triggered by increased wind.\nOne of the most common species of grass in marsh environments is \"Spartina\". These spartina and other common marsh grasses use a gas transport system found in the stems and roots of the plants. The gas transport system works by gaseous diffusion that occurs through the leaf blades and then moves down into the furthest tips of the plant roots. This transport system is sufficient to supply all of the aerobic respiratory needs of the grass roots and also helps to aerate the surrounding mud."}
{"id": "21011", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21011", "title": "Materials engineering", "text": ""}
{"id": "21012", "revid": "18953656", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21012", "title": "Merseburg", "text": "Town in Saxony-Anhalt, Germany\nMerseburg () is a town in central Germany in southern Saxony-Anhalt, situated on the river Saale, and approximately 14\u00a0km south of Halle (Saale) and 30\u00a0km west of Leipzig. It is the capital of the Saalekreis district. It had a diocese founded by Archbishop Adalbert of Magdeburg.\nThe University of Merseburg is located within the town. Merseburg has around 35,000 inhabitants. \nGeography.\nThe town Merseburg consists of Merseburg proper and the following four \"Ortschaften\" or municipal divisions:\nAdministrative reforms.\nVenenien was incorporated into Merseburg on 1 January 1949. The parish K\u00f6tzschen followed on 1 July 1950. Since 30 May 1994, Meuschau is part of Merseburg. Trebnitz, previously part of Kreypau, followed in 2003. Beuna was annexed on 1 January 2009. Geusa is a part of Merseburg since 1 January 2010.\nHistory.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHistorical affiliations\n Bishopric of Merseburg 1004-1565&lt;br&gt;\n Electorate of Saxony 1565-1657&lt;br&gt;\n Duchy of Saxe-Merseburg 1657-1738&lt;br&gt;\n Poland-Saxony 1738-1763&lt;br&gt;\n Electorate of Saxony 1763-1806&lt;br&gt;\n Kingdom of Saxony 1806-1815&lt;br&gt;\n Kingdom of Prussia 1815-1871&lt;br&gt;\n German Empire 1871-1918&lt;br&gt;\n Weimar Republic 1918-1933&lt;br&gt;\n Nazi Germany 1933-1945&lt;br&gt;\n Allied-occupied Germany 1945-1949&lt;br&gt;\n East Germany 1949-1990&lt;br&gt;\n 1990-present\nMiddle Ages.\nMerseburg was first mentioned in 850. King Henry the Fowler built a royal palace at Merseburg; in the 933 Battle of Riade, he gained his great victory over the Hungarians in the vicinity.\nThietmar, appointed in 973, became the first bishop of the newly created bishopric of Prague in Bohemia. Prague had been part of the archbishopric of Mainz for a hundred years before that. From 968 until the Protestant Reformation, Merseburg was the seat of the Bishop of Merseburg, and in addition to being for a time the residence of the margraves of Meissen, it was a favorite residence of the German kings during the 10th, 11th and 12th centuries. Fifteen diets were held here during the Middle Ages, during which time its fairs enjoyed the importance which was afterwards transferred to those of Leipzig. After Ekkehard's treacherous death on 3 April 1002, Boles\u0142aw I Chrobry took Merseburg and Meissen, and then Milsko with Bautzen and Strehla, with the help of the local Slavic population. The German princes accepted the sovereignty of the Polish prince in these areas. Some historians believe that since the convention in Gniezno, the Brave might have had certain rights to the German throne after Otto III, guaranteed by some succession document. Merseburg was later the site of a failed assassination attempt on Polish ruler Boles\u0142aw I Chrobry in 1002. The town suffered severely during the German Peasants' War and also during the Thirty Years' War.\n17th century to 20th century.\nFrom 1657 to 1738 Merseburg was the residence of the Dukes of Saxe-Merseburg, after which it fell to the Electorate of Saxony. In 1815 following the Napoleonic Wars, the town became part of the Prussian Province of Saxony.\nMerseburg is where the Merseburg Incantations were rediscovered in 1841. Written down in Old High German, they are hitherto the only preserved German documents with a heathen theme. One of them is a charm to release warriors caught during battle, and the other is a charm to heal a horse's sprained foot.\nAt the beginning of the 20th century, Merseburg was transformed into an industrial town, largely due to the pioneering work done by Carl Bosch and Friedrich Bergius, who laid down the scientific fundamentals of the catalytic high-pressure ammonia synthesis from 1909 to 1913. The nearby Leuna works continue this tradition of chemical industry. The \"Merseburger Tageblatt\" was published as a local newspaper in Merseburg.\nMerseburg was badly damaged in World War II. In 23 air raids, 6,200 dwellings were completely or partly destroyed. The historic town centre was almost completely destroyed.\nBriefly part of Saxony-Anhalt after the war, it was then administered within the \"Bezirk\" Halle in East Germany. It became part of Saxony-Anhalt again after the reunification of Germany.\nDemographics.\nLike many towns in the former East Germany, Merseburg has had a general decline in population since German Reunification despite annexing and merging with a number of smaller nearby villages.\nPopulation of Merseburg \"(from 1960, population on 31 December, unless otherwise indicated)\":\nSights.\nAmong the notable buildings of Merseburg are the Merseburg Cathedral of St John the Baptist (founded 1015, rebuilt in the 13th and 16th centuries) and the episcopal palace (15th century). The cathedral-and-palace ensemble also features a palace garden.\nOther sights include the Merseburg House of Trades with a cultural stage and the German Museum of Chemistry, Merseburg.\nArts and culture.\nThe Merseburg Palace Festival with the Historical Pageant, the International Palace-Moat Concerts, Merseburg Organ Days and the Puppet Show Festival Week are events celebrated every year.\nTransport.\nMerseburg station is located on the Halle\u2013Bebra railway. Leipzig/Halle Airport is 25 kilometers away.\nMerseburg is connected with the Halle (Saale) tramway network. A tram ride from Halle's city centre to Merseburg takes about 50 minutes.\nTwin towns \u2013 sister cities.\nMerseburg is twinned with:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "21016", "revid": "1666642", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21016", "title": "Marsh Gas", "text": ""}
{"id": "21017", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21017", "title": "Microcontroller", "text": "Small computer on a single integrated circuit\nA microcontroller (MC, uC, or \u03bcC) or microcontroller unit (MCU) is a small computer on a single integrated circuit. A microcontroller contains one or more processor cores along with memory and programmable input/output peripherals. Program memory in the form of NOR flash, OTP ROM, or ferroelectric RAM is also often included on the chip, as well as a small amount of RAM. Microcontrollers are designed for embedded applications, in contrast to the microprocessors used in personal computers or other general-purpose applications consisting of various discrete chips.\nIn modern terminology, a microcontroller is similar to, but less sophisticated than, a system on a chip (SoC). A SoC may include a microcontroller as one of its components but usually integrates it with advanced peripherals like a graphics processing unit (GPU), a Wi-Fi module, or one or more coprocessors.\nMicrocontrollers are used in automatically controlled products and devices, such as automobile engine control systems, implantable medical devices, remote controls, office machines, appliances, power tools, toys, and other embedded systems. By reducing the size and cost compared to a design that uses a separate microprocessor, memory, and input/output devices, microcontrollers make digital control of more devices and processes practical. Mixed-signal microcontrollers are common, integrating analog components needed to control non-digital electronic systems. In the context of the Internet of Things, microcontrollers are an economical and popular means of data collection, sensing and actuating the physical world as edge devices.\nSome microcontrollers may use four-bit words and operate at frequencies as low as 4 kHz for low power consumption (single-digit milliwatts or microwatts). They generally have the ability to retain functionality while waiting for an event such as a button press or other interrupt; power consumption while sleeping (with the CPU clock and most peripherals off) may be just nanowatts, making many of them well suited for long lasting battery applications. Other microcontrollers may serve performance-critical roles, where they may need to act more like a digital signal processor (DSP), with higher clock speeds and power consumption.\nHistory.\nBackground.\nThe first multi-chip microprocessors, the Four-Phase Systems AL1 in 1969 and the Garrett AiResearch MP944 in 1970, were developed with multiple MOS LSI chips. The first single-chip microprocessor was the Intel 4004, released on a single MOS LSI chip in 1971. It was developed by Federico Faggin, using his silicon-gate MOS technology, along with Intel engineers Marcian Hoff and Stan Mazor, and Busicom engineer Masatoshi Shima. It was followed by the 4-bit Intel 4040, the 8-bit Intel 8008, and the 8-bit Intel 8080. All of these processors required several external chips to implement a working system, including memory and peripheral interface chips. As a result, the total system cost was several hundred (1970s US) dollars, making it impossible to economically computerize small appliances.\nMOS Technology introduced its sub-$100 microprocessors in 1975, the 6501 and 6502. Their chief aim was to reduce this cost barrier but these microprocessors still required external support, memory, and peripheral chips which kept the total system cost in the hundreds of dollars.\nDevelopment.\nOne book credits TI engineers Gary Boone and Michael Cochran with the successful creation of the first microcontroller in 1971. The result of their work was the TMS 1000, which became commercially available in 1974. It combined read-only memory, read/write memory, processor and clock on one chip and was targeted at embedded systems.\nDuring the early-to-mid-1970s, Japanese electronics manufacturers began producing microcontrollers for automobiles, including 4-bit MCUs for in-car entertainment, automatic wipers, electronic locks, and dashboard, and 8-bit MCUs for engine control.\nPartly in response to the existence of the single-chip TMS 1000, Intel developed a computer system on a chip optimized for control applications, the Intel 8048, with commercial parts first shipping in 1977. It combined RAM and ROM on the same chip with a microprocessor. Among numerous applications, this chip would eventually find its way into over one billion PC keyboards. At that time Intel's President, Luke J. Valenter, stated that the microcontroller was one of the most successful products in the company's history, and he expanded the microcontroller division's budget by over 25%.\nMost microcontrollers at this time had concurrent variants. One had EPROM program memory, with a transparent quartz window in the lid of the package to allow it to be erased by exposure to ultraviolet light. These erasable chips were often used for prototyping. The other variant was either a mask-programmed ROM or a PROM variant which was only programmable once. For the latter, sometimes the designation \"OTP\" was used, standing for \"one-time programmable\". In an OTP microcontroller, the PROM was usually of identical type as the EPROM, but the chip package had no quartz window; because there was no way to expose the EPROM to ultraviolet light, it could not be erased. Because the erasable versions required ceramic packages with quartz windows, they were significantly more expensive than the OTP versions, which could be made in lower-cost opaque plastic packages. For the erasable variants, quartz was required, instead of less expensive glass, for its transparency to ultraviolet light\u2014to which glass is largely opaque\u2014but the main cost differentiator was the ceramic package itself. Piggyback microcontrollers were also used.\nIn 1993, the introduction of EEPROM memory allowed microcontrollers (beginning with the Microchip PIC16C84) to be electrically erased quickly without an expensive package as required for EPROM, allowing both rapid prototyping, and in-system programming. (EEPROM technology had been available prior to this time, but the earlier EEPROM was more expensive and less durable, making it unsuitable for low-cost mass-produced microcontrollers.) The same year, Atmel introduced the first microcontroller using Flash memory, a special type of EEPROM. Other companies rapidly followed suit, with both memory types.\nNowadays microcontrollers are cheap and readily available for hobbyists, with large online communities around certain processors.\nVolume and cost.\nIn 2002, about 55% of all CPUs sold in the world were 8-bit microcontrollers and microprocessors.\nOver two billion 8-bit microcontrollers were sold in 1997, and according to Semico, over four billion 8-bit microcontrollers were sold in 2006. More recently, Semico has claimed the MCU market grew 36.5% in 2010 and 12% in 2011.\nA typical home in a developed country is likely to have only four general-purpose microprocessors but around three dozen microcontrollers. A typical mid-range automobile has about 30 microcontrollers. They can also be found in many electrical devices such as washing machines, microwave ovens, and telephones.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Historically, the 8-bit segment has dominated the MCU market [..] 16-bit microcontrollers became the largest volume MCU category in 2011, overtaking 8-bit devices for the first time that year [..] IC Insights believes the makeup of the MCU market will undergo substantial changes in the next five years with 32-bit devices steadily grabbing a greater share of sales and unit volumes. By 2017, 32-bit MCUs are expected to account for 55% of microcontroller sales [..] In terms of unit volumes, 32-bit MCUs are expected account for 38% of microcontroller shipments in 2017, while 16-bit devices will represent 34% of the total, and 4-/8-bit designs are forecast to be 28% of units sold that year.\nThe 32-bit MCU market is expected to grow rapidly due to increasing demand for higher levels of precision in embedded-processing systems and the growth in connectivity using the Internet. [..] In the next few years, complex 32-bit MCUs are expected to account for over 25% of the processing power in vehicles.\u2014\u200a\nCost to manufacture can be under US$ per unit.\nCost has plummeted over time, with the cheapest 8-bit microcontrollers being available for under US$ in 2018, and some 32-bit microcontrollers around US$ for similar quantities.\nIn 2012, following a global crisis\u2014a worst ever annual sales decline and recovery and average sales price year-over-year plunging 17%\u2014the biggest reduction since the 1980s\u2014the average price for a microcontroller was US$ (US$ for 4-/8-bit, US$ for 16-bit, US$ for 32-bit).\nIn 2012, worldwide sales of 8-bit microcontrollers were around US$, while 4-bit microcontrollers also saw significant sales.\nIn 2015, 8-bit microcontrollers could be bought for US$ (1,000 units), 16-bit for US$ (1,000 units), and 32-bit for US$ (1,000 units, but at US$ for 5,000).\nIn 2018, 8-bit microcontrollers could be bought for US$, 16-bit for US$ (1,000 units, but at US$ for 100 or US$ for full reel of 2,000), and 32-bit for US$ (1,000 units, but at US$ for 5,000).\nIn 2018, the low-priced microcontrollers above from 2015 were all more expensive (with inflation calculated between 2018 and 2015 prices for those specific units) at: the 8-bit microcontroller could be bought for US$ (1,000 units) or 2.6% higher, the 16-bit one for US$ (1,000 units) or 21% higher, and the 32-bit one for US$ (1,000 units, but at US$ for 5,000) or 33% higher.\nSmallest computer.\nOn 21 June 2018, the \"world's smallest computer\" was announced by the University of Michigan. The device is a \" wireless and batteryless sensor system with integrated Cortex-M0+ processor and optical communication for cellular temperature measurement.\" It \"measures just to a side\u2014dwarfed by a grain of rice. [...] In addition to the RAM and photovoltaics, the new computing devices have processors and wireless transmitters and receivers. Because they are too small to have conventional radio antennae, they receive and transmit data with visible light. A base station provides light for power and programming, and it receives the data.\" The device is &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u204410th the size of IBM's previously claimed world-record-sized computer from months back in March 2018, which is \"smaller than a grain of salt\", has a million transistors, costs less than $ to manufacture, and, combined with blockchain technology, is intended for logistics and \"crypto-anchors\"\u2014digital fingerprint applications.\nEmbedded design.\nA microcontroller can be considered a self-contained system with a processor, memory and peripherals and can be used as an embedded system. The majority of microcontrollers in use today are embedded in other machinery, such as automobiles, telephones, appliances, and peripherals for computer systems.\nWhile some embedded systems are very sophisticated, many have minimal requirements for memory and program length, with no operating system, and low software complexity. Typical input and output devices include switches, relays, solenoids, LEDs, small or custom liquid-crystal displays, radio frequency devices, and sensors for data such as temperature, humidity, light level etc. Embedded systems usually have no keyboard, screen, disks, printers, or other recognizable I/O devices of a personal computer, and may lack human interaction devices of any kind.\nInterrupts.\nMicrocontrollers must provide real-time (predictable, though not necessarily fast) response to events in the embedded system they are controlling. When certain events occur, an interrupt system can signal the processor to suspend processing the current instruction sequence and to begin an interrupt service routine (ISR, or \"interrupt handler\") which will perform any processing required based on the source of the interrupt, before returning to the original instruction sequence. Possible interrupt sources are device-dependent and often include events such as an internal timer overflow, completing an analog-to-digital conversion, a logic-level change on an input such as from a button being pressed, and data received on a communication link. Where power consumption is important as in battery devices, interrupts may also wake a microcontroller from a low-power sleep state where the processor is halted until required to do something by a peripheral event.\nPrograms.\nTypically microcontroller programs must fit in the available on-chip memory, since it would be costly to provide a system with external, expandable memory. Compilers and assemblers are used to convert both high-level and assembly language code into a compact machine code for storage in the microcontroller's memory. Depending on the device, the program memory may be permanent, read-only memory that can only be programmed at the factory, or it may be field-alterable flash or erasable read-only memory.\nManufacturers have often produced special versions of their microcontrollers in order to help the hardware and software development of the target system. Originally these included EPROM versions that have a \"window\" on the top of the device through which program memory can be erased by ultraviolet light, ready for reprogramming after a programming (\"burn\") and test cycle. Since 1998, EPROM versions are rare and have been replaced by EEPROM and flash, which are easier to use (can be erased electronically) and cheaper to manufacture.\nOther versions may be available where the ROM is accessed as an external device rather than as internal memory, however these are becoming rare due to the widespread availability of cheap microcontroller programmers.\nThe use of field-programmable devices on a microcontroller may allow field update of the firmware or permit late factory revisions to products that have been assembled but not yet shipped. Programmable memory also reduces the lead time required for deployment of a new product.\nWhere hundreds of thousands of identical devices are required, using parts programmed at the time of manufacture can be economical. These \"mask-programmed\" parts have the program laid down in the same way as the logic of the chip, at the same time.\nA customized microcontroller incorporates a block of digital logic that can be personalized for additional processing capability, peripherals and interfaces that are adapted to the requirements of the application. One example is the AT91CAP from Atmel.\nOther microcontroller features.\nMicrocontrollers usually contain from several to dozens of general purpose input/output pins (GPIO). GPIO pins are software configurable to either an input or an output state. When GPIO pins are configured to an input state, they are often used to read sensors or external signals. Configured to the output state, GPIO pins can drive external devices such as LEDs or motors, often indirectly, through external power electronics.\nMany embedded systems need to read sensors that produce analog signals. However, because they are built to interpret and process digital data, i.e. 1s and 0s, they are not able to do anything with the analog signals that may be sent to it by a device. So, an analog-to-digital converter (ADC) is used to convert the incoming data into a form that the processor can recognize. A less common feature on some microcontrollers is a digital-to-analog converter (DAC) that allows the processor to output analog signals or voltage levels.\nIn addition to the converters, many embedded microprocessors include a variety of timers as well. One of the most common types of timers is the programmable interval timer (PIT). A PIT may either count down from some value to zero, or up to the capacity of the count register, overflowing to zero. Once it reaches zero, it sends an interrupt to the processor indicating that it has finished counting. This is useful for devices such as thermostats, which periodically test the temperature around them to see if they need to turn the air conditioner on/off, the heater on/off, etc.\nA dedicated pulse-width modulation (PWM) block makes it possible for the CPU to control power converters, resistive loads, motors, etc., without using many CPU resources in tight timer loops.\nA universal asynchronous receiver/transmitter (UART) block makes it possible to receive and transmit data over a serial line with very little load on the CPU. Dedicated on-chip hardware also often includes capabilities to communicate with other devices (chips) in digital formats such as Inter-Integrated Circuit (I\u00b2C), Serial Peripheral Interface (SPI), Universal Serial Bus (USB), and Ethernet.\nHigher integration.\nMicrocontrollers may not implement an external address or data bus as they integrate RAM and non-volatile memory on the same chip as the CPU. Using fewer pins, the chip can be placed in a much smaller, cheaper package.\nIntegrating the memory and other peripherals on a single chip and testing them as a unit increases the cost of that chip, but often results in decreased net cost of the embedded system as a whole. Even if the cost of a CPU that has integrated peripherals is slightly more than the cost of a CPU and external peripherals, having fewer chips typically allows a smaller and cheaper circuit board, and reduces the labor required to assemble and test the circuit board, in addition to tending to decrease the defect rate for the finished assembly.\nA microcontroller is a single integrated circuit, commonly with the following features:\nThis integration drastically reduces the number of chips and the amount of wiring and circuit board space that would be needed to produce equivalent systems using separate chips. Furthermore, on low pin count devices in particular, each pin may interface to several internal peripherals, with the pin function selected by software. This allows a part to be used in a wider variety of applications than if pins had dedicated functions.\nMicrocontrollers have proved to be highly popular in embedded systems since their introduction in the 1970s.\nSome microcontrollers use a Harvard architecture: separate memory buses for instructions and data, allowing accesses to take place concurrently. Where a Harvard architecture is used, instruction words for the processor may be a different bit size than the length of internal memory and registers; for example: 12-bit instructions used with 8-bit data registers.\nThe decision of which peripheral to integrate is often difficult. The microcontroller vendors often trade operating frequencies and system design flexibility against time-to-market requirements from their customers and overall lower system cost. Manufacturers have to balance the need to minimize the chip size against additional functionality.\nMicrocontroller architectures vary widely. Some designs include general-purpose microprocessor cores, with one or more ROM, RAM, or I/O functions integrated onto the package. Other designs are purpose-built for control applications. A microcontroller instruction set usually has many instructions intended for bit manipulation (bit-wise operations) to make control programs more compact. For example, a general-purpose processor might require several instructions to test a bit in a register and branch if the bit is set, where a microcontroller could have a single instruction to provide that commonly required function.\nMicrocontrollers historically have not had math coprocessors, so floating-point arithmetic has been performed by software. However, some recent designs do include FPUs and DSP-optimized features. An example would be Microchip's PIC32 MIPS-based line.\nProgramming environments.\nMicrocontrollers were originally programmed only in assembly language, but various high-level programming languages, such as C, Python and JavaScript, are now also in common use to target microcontrollers and embedded systems. Compilers for general-purpose languages will typically have some restrictions as well as enhancements to better support the unique characteristics of microcontrollers. Some microcontrollers have environments to aid developing certain types of applications. Microcontroller vendors often make tools freely available to make it easier to adopt their hardware.\nMicrocontrollers with specialty hardware may require their own non-standard dialects of C, such as SDCC for the 8051, which prevent using standard tools (such as code libraries or static analysis tools) even for code unrelated to hardware features. Interpreters may also contain nonstandard features, such as MicroPython, although a fork, CircuitPython, has looked to move hardware dependencies to libraries and have the language adhere to a more CPython standard.\nInterpreter firmware is also available for some microcontrollers. For example, BASIC on the early microcontroller Intel 8052; BASIC and FORTH on the Zilog Z8 as well as some modern devices. Typically these interpreters support interactive programming.\nSimulators are available for some microcontrollers. These allow a developer to analyze what the behavior of the microcontroller and their program should be if they were using the actual part. A simulator will show the internal processor state and also that of the outputs, as well as allowing input signals to be generated. While on the one hand most simulators will be limited from being unable to simulate much other hardware in a system, they can exercise conditions that may otherwise be hard to reproduce at will in the physical implementation, and can be the quickest way to debug and analyze problems.\nRecent microcontrollers are often integrated with on-chip debug circuitry that when accessed by an in-circuit emulator (ICE) via JTAG, allow debugging of the firmware with a debugger. A real-time ICE may allow viewing and/or manipulating of internal states while running. A tracing ICE can record executed program and MCU states before/after a trigger point.\nTypes.\nAs of 2008[ [update]], there are several dozen microcontroller architectures and vendors including:\nMany others exist, some of which are used in very narrow range of applications or are more like applications processors than microcontrollers. The microcontroller market is extremely fragmented, with numerous vendors, technologies, and markets. Note that many vendors sell or have sold multiple architectures.\nInterrupt latency.\nIn contrast to general-purpose computers, microcontrollers used in embedded systems often seek to optimize interrupt latency over instruction throughput. Issues include both reducing the latency, and making it be more predictable (to support real-time control).\nWhen an electronic device causes an interrupt, during the context switch the intermediate results (registers) have to be saved before the software responsible for handling the interrupt can run. They must also be restored after that interrupt handler is finished. If there are more processor registers, this saving and restoring process may take more time, increasing the latency. (If an ISR does not require the use of some registers, it may simply leave them alone rather than saving and restoring them, so in that case those registers are not involved with the latency.) Ways to reduce such context/restore latency include having relatively few registers in their central processing units (undesirable because it slows down most non-interrupt processing substantially), or at least having the hardware not save them all (this fails if the software then needs to compensate by saving the rest \"manually\"). Another technique involves spending silicon gates on \"shadow registers\": One or more duplicate registers used only by the interrupt software, perhaps supporting a dedicated stack.\nOther factors affecting interrupt latency include:\nLower end microcontrollers tend to support fewer interrupt latency controls than higher end ones.\nMemory technology.\nTwo different kinds of memory are commonly used with microcontrollers, a non-volatile memory for storing firmware and a read\u2013write memory for temporary data.\nData.\nFrom the earliest microcontrollers to today, six-transistor SRAM is almost always used as the read/write working memory, with a few more transistors per bit used in the register file.\nIn addition to the SRAM, some microcontrollers also have internal EEPROM and/or NVRAM for data storage; and ones that do not have any (such as the BASIC Stamp), or where the internal memory is insufficient, are often connected to an external EEPROM or flash memory chip.\nA few microcontrollers beginning in 2003 have \"self-programmable\" flash memory.\nFirmware.\nThe earliest microcontrollers used mask ROM to store firmware. Later microcontrollers (such as the early versions of the Freescale 68HC11 and early PIC microcontrollers) had EPROM memory, which used a translucent window to allow erasure via UV light, while production versions had no such window, being OTP (one-time-programmable). Firmware updates were equivalent to replacing the microcontroller itself, thus many products were not upgradeable.\nMotorola MC68HC805 was the first microcontroller to use EEPROM to store the firmware. EEPROM microcontrollers became more popular in 1993 when Microchip introduced PIC16C84 and Atmel introduced an 8051-core microcontroller that was first one to use NOR Flash memory to store the firmware. Today's microcontrollers almost all use flash memory, with a few models using FRAM and some ultra-low-cost parts still using OTP or Mask ROM.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "21018", "revid": "45938645", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21018", "title": "Marcel Proust", "text": "French novelist, literary critic, and essayist (1871\u20131922)\nValentin Louis Georges Eug\u00e8ne Marcel Proust ( ; ; 10 July 1871 \u2013 18 November 1922) was a French novelist, literary critic, and essayist best known for his novel (translated in English as \"Remembrance of Things Past\" or \"In Search of Lost Time\"), which was published in seven volumes between 1913 and 1927. He is considered by critics and writers to be one of the most influential authors of the twentieth century.\nProust was born in the Auteuil quarter of Paris, to a wealthy bourgeois family. His father, Adrien Proust, was a prominent pathologist and epidemiologist who studied cholera. His mother, Jeanne Cl\u00e9mence Weil, was from a prosperous Jewish family. Proust was raised in his father's Catholic faith, though he later became an atheist. From a young age, he struggled with severe asthma attacks which caused him to have a disrupted education. As a young man, Proust cultivated interests in literature and writing while moving in elite Parisian high society salons frequented by aristocrats and the upper bourgeoisie. These social connections provided inspiration and material for his later novel. His first works, including the collection of stories \"Les plaisirs et les jours\", were published in the 1890s to little public success.\nIn 1908, Proust began work on \"\u00c0 la recherche du temps perdu\". The novel consists of seven volumes totaling around 1.25 million words. It explores themes of memory, art, love, High Society and the human experience through the narrator's recollections. Begun when Proust was 38, the novel was partially published in his lifetime, with the initial sections appearing in 1913. The remaining volumes were revised and published posthumously by his brother Robert based on drafts and proofs. \"\u00c0 la recherche du temps perdu\" helped pioneer the stream of consciousness literary technique. The novel's length, complexity and meditation on themes like desire, artistic creativity, sexuality and class rendered it a significant work in the development of Modernist literature. The work was translated into English by C. K. Scott Moncrieff and others.\nDespite spending the last three years of his life confined by illness, Proust was able to complete the Princeton portions of his novel. He died of pneumonia and pulmonary problems in 1922, aged 51, and was buried in the P\u00e8re Lachaise Cemetery in Paris. Proust's sexuality and relationships with men were an open secret among his social circles, though the author himself never publicly acknowledged being homosexual.\nBiography.\nProust was born on 10 July 1871 at the home of his great-uncle in the Paris Borough of Auteuil (the south-western sector of the then-rustic 16th arrondissement), two months after the Treaty of Frankfurt formally ended the Franco-Prussian War. His birth coincided with the beginning of the French Third Republic, during the violence that surrounded the suppression of the Paris Commune, and his childhood corresponded with the consolidation of the Republic. Much of \"In Search of Lost Time\" concerns the vast changes, most particularly the decline of the aristocracy and the rise of the middle classes, that occurred in France during the \"fin de si\u00e8cle.\"\nProust's father, Adrien Proust, was a prominent French pathologist and epidemiologist, studying cholera in Europe and Asia. He wrote numerous articles and books on medicine and hygiene. Proust's mother, Jeanne Cl\u00e9mence (maiden name: Weil), was the daughter of a wealthy German\u2013Jewish family from Alsace. Literate and well-read, she demonstrated a well-developed sense of humour in her letters, and her command of the English language was sufficient to help with her son's translations of John Ruskin. Proust was raised in his father's Catholic faith. He was baptized on 5 August 1871 at the Church of Saint-Louis-d'Antin and later confirmed as a Catholic, but he never formally practised that faith. He later became an atheist and was something of a mystic.\nBy the age of nine, Proust had had his first serious asthma attack, and thereafter was considered a sickly child. Proust spent long holidays in the village of Illiers. This village, combined with recollections of his great-uncle's house in Auteuil, became the model for the fictional town of Combray, where some of the most important scenes of \"In Search of Lost Time\" take place. (Illiers was renamed Illiers-Combray in 1971 on the occasion of the Proust centenary celebrations.)\nIn 1882, at the age of eleven, Proust became a pupil at the Lyc\u00e9e Condorcet; however, his education was disrupted by his illness. Despite this, he excelled in literature, receiving an award in his final year. Thanks to his classmates, he was able to gain access to some of the salons of the upper bourgeoisie, providing him with copious material for \"In Search of Lost Time\".\nIn spite of his poor health, Proust served a year (1889\u201390) in the French army, stationed at Coligny Barracks in Orl\u00e9ans, an experience that provided a lengthy episode in \"The Guermantes' Way\", part three of his novel. As a young man, Proust was a dilettante and a social climber whose aspirations as a writer were hampered by his lack of self-discipline. His reputation from this period, as a snob and an amateur, contributed to his later troubles with getting \"Swann's Way\", the first part of his large-scale novel, published in 1913. At this time, he attended the \"salons\" of Mme Straus, widow of Georges Bizet and mother of Proust's childhood friend Jacques Bizet, of Madeleine Lemaire and of Mme Arman de Caillavet, one of the models for Madame Verdurin, and mother of his friend Gaston Arman de Caillavet, with whose fianc\u00e9e (Jeanne Pouquet) he was in love. It is through Mme Arman de Caillavet, he made the acquaintance of Anatole France, her lover.\nProust had a close relationship with his mother. To appease his father, who insisted that he pursue a career, Proust obtained a volunteer position at Biblioth\u00e8que Mazarine in the summer of 1896. After exerting considerable effort, he obtained a sick leave that extended for several years until he was considered to have resigned. He never worked at his job, and he did not move from his parents' apartment until after both were dead.\nHis life and family circle changed markedly between 1900 and 1905. In February 1903, Proust's brother, Robert Proust, married and left the family home. His father died in November of the same year. Finally, and most crushingly, Proust's beloved mother died in September 1905. She left him a considerable inheritance. His health throughout this period continued to deteriorate.\nProust spent the last three years of his life mostly confined to his bedroom of his apartment 44 rue Hamelin (in Chaillot), sleeping during the day and working at night to complete his novel. He died of pneumonia and a pulmonary abscess in 1922. He was buried in the P\u00e8re Lachaise Cemetery in Paris.\nPersonal life.\nProust is known to have been homosexual; his sexuality and relationships with men are often discussed by his biographers. Although his housekeeper, C\u00e9leste Albaret, denies this aspect of Proust's sexuality in her memoirs, her denial runs contrary to the statements of many of Proust's friends and contemporaries, including his fellow writer Andr\u00e9 Gide as well as his valet Ernest A. Forssgren.\nProust never openly disclosed his homosexuality, though his family and close friends either knew or suspected it. In 1897, he fought a duel with writer Jean Lorrain, who publicly questioned the nature of Proust's relationship with Proust's lover Lucien Daudet; both duellists survived. Despite Proust's public denials, his romantic relationship with composer Reynaldo Hahn and his infatuation with his chauffeur and secretary, Alfred Agostinelli, are well documented. On the night of 11 January 1918, Proust was one of the men identified by police in a raid on a male brothel run by Albert Le Cuziat. Proust's friend Paul Morand openly teased Proust about his visits to male prostitutes. In his journal, Morand refers to Proust, as well as Gide, as \"constantly hunting, never satiated by their adventures ... eternal prowlers, tireless sexual adventurers.\"\nThe exact influence of Proust's sexuality on his writing is a topic of debate. However, \"In Search of Lost Time\" discusses homosexuality at length and features several principal characters, both men and women, who are either homosexual or bisexual: the Baron de Charlus, Robert de Saint-Loup, Odette de Cr\u00e9cy, and Albertine Simonet. Homosexuality also appears as a theme in \"Les plaisirs et les jours\" and his unfinished novel, \"Jean Santeuil\".\nProust inherited much of his mother's political outlook, which was supportive of the French Third Republic and near the liberal centre of French politics. In an 1892 article published in \"Le Banquet\" entitled \"L'Irr\u00e9ligion d'\u00c9tat\", Proust condemned extreme anti-clerical measures such as the expulsion of monks, observing that \"one might just be surprised that the negation of religion should bring in its wake the same fanaticism, intolerance, and persecution as religion itself.\" He argued that socialism posed a greater threat to society than the Church. He was equally critical of the right, lambasting \"the insanity of the conservatives,\" whom he deemed \"as dumb and ungrateful as under Charles X,\" and referring to Pope Pius X's obstinacy as foolish. Proust always rejected the bigoted and illiberal views harbored by many priests at the time, but believed that the most enlightened clerics could be just as progressive as the most enlightened secularists, and that both could serve the cause of \"the advanced liberal Republic\". He approved of the more moderate stance taken in 1906 by Aristide Briand, whom he described as \"admirable\".\nProust was among the earliest Dreyfusards, even attending \u00c9mile Zola's trial and proudly claiming to have been the one who asked Anatole France to sign the petition in support of Alfred Dreyfus's innocence. In 1919, when representatives of the right-wing Action Fran\u00e7aise published a manifesto upholding French colonialism and the Catholic Church as the embodiment of civilised values, Proust rejected their nationalistic and chauvinistic views in favor of a liberal pluralist vision which acknowledged Christianity's cultural legacy in France. Julien Benda commended Proust in \"La Trahison des clercs\" as a writer who distinguished himself from his generation by avoiding the twin traps of nationalism and class sectarianism.\nBecause of his allergies and frequent asthma attacks, and the misunderstanding of the disease at the time, Proust was considered a hypochondriac by his doctors. His correspondence provides some clues on his symptoms. According to Yellowlees Douglas, Proust suffered from the vascular subtype of Ehlers\u2013Danlos Syndrome.\nEarly writing.\nProust was involved in writing and publishing from an early age. In addition to the literary magazines with which he was associated, and in which he published while at school (\"La Revue verte\" and \"La Revue lilas\"), from 1890 to 1891 he published a regular society column in the journal \"Le Mensuel\". In 1892, he was involved in founding a literary review called \"Le Banquet\" (also the French title of Plato's \"Symposium\"), and throughout the next several years Proust published small pieces regularly in this journal and in the prestigious \"La Revue Blanche\".\nIn 1896 \"Les plaisirs et les jours\", a compendium of many of these early pieces, was published. The book included a foreword by Anatole France, drawings by Mme Lemaire in whose \"salon\" Proust was a frequent guest, and who inspired Proust's Mme Verdurin. She invited him and Reynaldo Hahn to her ch\u00e2teau de R\u00e9veillon (the model for Mme Verdurin's La Raspeli\u00e8re) in summer 1894, and for three weeks in 1895. Despite the contents being well received, the book sold poorly due to its high price, which was widely ridiculed. The price was due to the fact that the book was so sumptuously produced.\nThat year Proust also began working on a novel, which was eventually published in 1952 and titled \"Jean Santeuil\" by his posthumous editors. Many of the themes later developed in \"In Search of Lost Time\" find their first articulation in this unfinished work, including the enigma of memory and the necessity of reflection; several sections of \"In Search of Lost Time\" can be read in the first draft in \"Jean Santeuil\". The portrait of the parents in \"Jean Santeuil\" is quite harsh, in marked contrast to the adoration with which the parents are painted in Proust's masterpiece. Following the poor reception of \"Les Plaisirs et les Jours\", and internal troubles with resolving the plot, Proust gradually abandoned \"Jean Santeuil\" in 1897 and stopped work on it entirely by 1899.\nBeginning in 1895 Proust spent several years reading Thomas Carlyle, Ralph Waldo Emerson, and John Ruskin. Through this reading, he refined his theories of art and the role of the artist in society. Also, in \"Time Regained\" Proust's universal protagonist recalls having translated Ruskin's \"Sesame and Lilies\". The artist's responsibility is to confront the appearance of nature, deduce its essence and retell or explain that essence in the work of art. Ruskin's view of artistic production was central to this conception, and Ruskin's work was so important to Proust that he claimed to know \"by heart\" several of Ruskin's books, including \"The Seven Lamps of Architecture\", \"The Bible of Amiens\", and \"Praeterita\".\nProust set out to translate two of Ruskin's works into French, but was hampered by an imperfect command of English. To compensate for this he made his translations a group affair: sketched out by his mother, the drafts were first revised by Proust, then by Marie Nordlinger, the English cousin of his friend and sometime lover Reynaldo Hahn, then finally polished by Proust. Questioned about his method by an editor, Proust responded, \"I don't claim to know English; I claim to know Ruskin\". \"The Bible of Amiens\", with Proust's extended introduction, was published in French in 1904. Both the translation and the introduction were well-reviewed; Henri Bergson called Proust's introduction \"an important contribution to the psychology of Ruskin\", and had similar praise for the translation. At the time of this publication, Proust was already translating Ruskin's \"Sesame and Lilies\", which he completed in June 1905, just before his mother's death, and published in 1906. Literary historians and critics have ascertained that, apart from Ruskin, Proust's chief literary influences included Balzac, Saint-Simon, Montaigne, Stendhal, Flaubert, George Eliot, Fyodor Dostoyevsky, and Leo Tolstoy.\nIn Proust\u2019s 1904 article \"La mort des cath\u00e9drales\" (The Death of Cathedrals) published in \"Le Figaro\", Proust called Gothic cathedrals \u201cprobably the highest, and unquestionably the most original expression of French genius\u201d.\n1908 was an important year for Proust's development as a writer. During the first part of the year he published in various journals pastiches of other writers. These exercises in imitation may have allowed Proust to solidify his own style. In addition, in the spring and summer of the year Proust began work on several different fragments of writing that would later coalesce under the working title of \"Contre Sainte-Beuve\". Proust described his efforts in a letter to a friend: \"I have in progress: a study on the nobility, a Parisian novel, an essay on Sainte-Beuve and Flaubert, an essay on women, an essay on pederasty (not easy to publish), a study on stained-glass windows, a study on tombstones, a study on the novel\".\nFrom these disparate fragments Proust began to shape a novel on which he worked continually during this period. The rough outline of the work centred on a first-person narrator, unable to sleep, who during the night remembers waiting as a child for his mother to come to him in the morning. The novel was to have ended with a critical examination of Sainte-Beuve and a refutation of his theory that biography was the most important tool for understanding an artist's work. Present in the unfinished manuscript notebooks are many elements that correspond to parts of the \"Recherche\", in particular, to the \"Combray\" and \"Swann in Love\" sections of Volume 1, and to the final section of Volume 7. Trouble with finding a publisher, as well as a gradually changing conception of his novel, led Proust to shift work to a substantially different project that still contained many of the same themes and elements. By 1910 he was at work on \"\u00c0 la recherche du temps perdu\".\n\"In Search of Lost Time\".\nBegun in 1909, when Proust was 38 years old, \"\u00c0 la recherche du temps perdu\" consists of seven volumes totaling around 3,200 pages (about 4,300 in The Modern Library's translation). Graham Greene called Proust the \"greatest novelist of the twentieth century, just as Tolstoy was of the nineteenth\" and W. Somerset Maugham called the novel the \"greatest fiction to date\". Andr\u00e9 Gide was initially not so taken with his work. The first volume was refused by the publisher Gallimard on Gide's advice. He later wrote to Proust apologizing for his part in the refusal and calling it one of the most serious mistakes of his life. Finally, the book was published at the author's expense by Grasset and Proust paid critics to speak favorably about it.\nProust died before he was able to complete his revision of the drafts and proofs of the final volumes, the last three of which were published posthumously and edited by his brother Robert. The book was translated into English by C. K. Scott Moncrieff, appearing under the title \"Remembrance of Things Past\" between 1922 and 1931. Scott Moncrieff translated volumes one through six of the seven volumes, dying before completing the last. This last volume was rendered by other translators at different times. When Scott Moncrieff's translation was later revised (first by Terence Kilmartin, then by D. J. Enright) the title of the novel was changed to the more literal \"In Search of Lost Time\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "21019", "revid": "50255754", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21019", "title": "Michelangelo", "text": "Italian artist and architect (1475\u20131564)\nMichelangelo di Lodovico Buonarroti Simoni (6March 1475\u00a0\u2013 18February 1564), known mononymously as Michelangelo, was an Italian sculptor, painter, architect, and poet of the High Renaissance. He was born in the Republic of Florence but was mostly active in Rome from his 30s onwards. His work was inspired by models from classical antiquity and had a lasting influence on Western art. Michelangelo's creative abilities and mastery in a range of artistic arenas define him as an archetypal Renaissance man, along with his rival and elder contemporary, Leonardo da Vinci. Given the sheer volume of surviving correspondence, sketches, and reminiscences, Michelangelo is one of the best-documented artists of the 16th century. He was lauded by contemporary biographers as the most accomplished artist of his era.\nMichelangelo achieved fame early. Two of his best-known works, the \"Piet\u00e0\" and \"David\", were sculpted before the age of 30. Although he did not consider himself a painter, Michelangelo created two of the most influential frescoes in the history of Western art: the scenes from Genesis on the ceiling of the Sistine Chapel in Rome, and \"The Last Judgment\" on its altar wall. His design of the Laurentian Library pioneered Mannerist architecture. At the age of 71, he succeeded Antonio da Sangallo the Younger as the architect of St. Peter's Basilica. Michelangelo transformed the plan so that the Western end was finished to his design, as was the dome, with some modification, after his death.\nMichelangelo was the first Western artist whose biography was published while he was alive. Three biographies were published during his lifetime. One of them, by Giorgio Vasari, proposed that Michelangelo's work transcended that of any artist living or dead, and was \"supreme in not one art alone but in all three\".\nIn his lifetime, Michelangelo was often called (\"the divine one\"). His contemporaries admired his \"terribilit\u00e0\"\u2014his ability to instill a sense of awe in viewers of his art. Attempts by subsequent artists to imitate the expressive physicality of Michelangelo's style contributed to the rise of Mannerism, a short-lived movement in Western art between the High Renaissance and the Baroque.\nEarly life and career.\nEarly life, 1475\u20131488.\nMichelangelo di Lodovico Buonarroti Simoni was born on 6 March 1475 in Caprese, known today as Caprese Michelangelo, a small town situated in Valtiberina, near Arezzo, Tuscany. For several generations, his family had been small-scale bankers in Florence; but the bank failed, and his father Ludovico briefly took a government post in Caprese. At the time of Michelangelo's birth, his father was the town's judicial administrator and \"podest\u00e0\" (local administrator) of Chiusi della Verna. Michelangelo's mother was Francesca di Neri del Miniato di Siena. The Buonarrotis claimed to descend from the Countess Matilde di Canossa\u2014a claim that remains unproven, but which Michelangelo believed.\nSeveral months after Michelangelo's birth, the family returned to Florence, where he was raised. During his mother's later prolonged illness, and after her death in 1481 (when he was six years old), Michelangelo lived with a nanny and her husband, a stonecutter, in the town of Settignano, where his father owned a marble quarry and a small farm. There the young boy gained his love for marble. As his biographer Giorgio Vasari quotes him:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nApprenticeships, 1488\u20131492.\nAs a young boy, Michelangelo was sent to the city of Florence to study grammar under the Humanist Francesco da Urbino. Michelangelo showed no interest in his schooling, preferring to copy paintings from churches and seek the company of other painters. Florence was at that time Italy's greatest centre of the arts and learning. Art was sponsored by the (the town council), the merchant guilds, and wealthy patrons such as the Medici and their banking associates. The Renaissance, a renewal of Classical scholarship and the arts, had its first flowering in Florence. In the early 15th century, the architect Filippo Brunelleschi, having studied the remains of Classical buildings in Rome, had created two churches, San Lorenzo's and Santo Spirito, which embodied the Classical precepts. The sculptor Lorenzo Ghiberti had laboured for 50 years to create the north and east bronze doors of the Baptistry, which Michelangelo was to describe as \"The Gates of Paradise\". The exterior niches of the Church of Orsanmichele contained a gallery of works by the most acclaimed sculptors of Florence: Donatello, Ghiberti, Andrea del Verrocchio, and Nanni di Banco. The interiors of the older churches were covered with frescos (mostly in Late Medieval, but also in the Early Renaissance style), begun by Giotto and continued by Masaccio in the Brancacci Chapel, both of whose works Michelangelo studied and copied in drawings.\nDuring Michelangelo's childhood, a team of painters had been called from Florence to the Vatican to decorate the walls of the Sistine Chapel. Among them was Domenico Ghirlandaio, a master in fresco painting, perspective, figure drawing and portraiture who had the largest workshop in Florence. In 1488, at the age of 13, Michelangelo was apprenticed to Ghirlandaio. The next year, his father persuaded Ghirlandaio to pay Michelangelo as an artist, which was rare for someone that young. When in 1489, Lorenzo de' Medici, \"de facto\" ruler of Florence, asked Ghirlandaio for his two best pupils, Ghirlandaio sent Michelangelo and Francesco Granacci.\nFrom 1490 to 1492, Michelangelo attended the Platonic Academy, a Humanist academy founded by the Medicis. There, his work and outlook were influenced by many of the most prominent philosophers and writers of the day, including Marsilio Ficino, Pico della Mirandola and Poliziano. At this time, Michelangelo sculpted the reliefs \"Madonna of the Stairs\" and \"Battle of the Centaurs\", the latter based on a theme suggested by Poliziano and commissioned by Lorenzo de' Medici. Michelangelo worked for a time with the sculptor Bertoldo di Giovanni. When he was 17, another pupil, Pietro Torrigiano, struck him on the nose, causing the disfigurement that is conspicuous in the portraits of Michelangelo.\nBologna, Florence, and Rome, 1492\u20131499.\nLorenzo de' Medici's death on 8 April 1492 changed Michelangelo's circumstances. He left the security of the Medici court and returned to his father's house. In the following months he carved a polychrome wooden \"Crucifix\" (1493), as a gift to the prior of the Florentine church of Santo Spirito, which had allowed him to do some anatomical studies of the corpses from the church's hospital. This was the first of several instances during his career that Michelangelo studied anatomy by dissecting cadavers.\nBetween 1493 and 1494, Michelangelo bought a block of marble, and carved a larger-than-life statue of Hercules. On 20 January 1494, after heavy snowfalls, Lorenzo's heir, Piero de Medici, commissioned a statue made of snow, and Michelangelo again entered the court of the Medici. In the same year, the Medici were expelled from Florence as the result of the rise of Savonarola. Michelangelo left the city before the end of the political upheaval, moving to Venice and then to Bologna. In Bologna, he was commissioned to carve several of the last small figures for the completion of the Shrine of St. Dominic, in the church dedicated to that saint. At this time Michelangelo studied the robust reliefs carved by Jacopo della Quercia around the main portal of the Basilica of St Petronius, including the panel of \"The Creation of Eve\", the composition of which was to reappear on the Sistine Chapel ceiling. Towards the end of 1495, the political situation in Florence was calmer; the city, previously under threat from the French, was no longer in danger as Charles VIII had suffered defeats. Michelangelo returned to Florence but received no commissions from the new city government under Savonarola. He returned to the employment of the Medici. During the half-year he spent in Florence, he worked on two small statues, a child \"St. John the Baptist\" and a sleeping \"Cupid\". According to Condivi, Lorenzo di Pierfrancesco de' Medici, for whom Michelangelo had sculpted \"St. John the Baptist\", asked that Michelangelo \"fix it so that it looked as if it had been buried\" so he could \"send it to Rome\u00a0... pass [it off as] an ancient work and\u00a0... sell it much better.\" Both Lorenzo and Michelangelo were unwittingly cheated out of the real value of the piece by a middleman. Cardinal Raffaele Riario, to whom Lorenzo had sold it, discovered that it was a fraud, but was so impressed by the quality of the sculpture that he invited the artist to Rome. This apparent success in selling his sculpture abroad as well as the conservative Florentine situation may have encouraged Michelangelo to accept the prelate's invitation.\nMichelangelo arrived in Rome on 25 June 1496 at the age of 21. On 4 July of the same year, he began work on a commission for Cardinal Riario, an over-life-size statue of the Roman wine god \"Bacchus\". Upon completion, the work was rejected by the cardinal, and subsequently entered the collection of the banker Jacopo Galli, for his garden. In November 1497, the French ambassador to the Holy See, Cardinal Jean de Bilh\u00e8res-Lagraulas, commissioned him to carve a \"Piet\u00e0\", a sculpture showing the Virgin Mary grieving over the body of Jesus. The subject, which is not part of the Biblical narrative of the Crucifixion, was common in religious sculpture of medieval northern Europe and would have been very familiar to the Cardinal. The contract was agreed upon in August of the following year. Michelangelo was 24 at the time of its completion. It was soon to be regarded as one of the world's great masterpieces of sculpture, \"a revelation of all the potentialities and force of the art of sculpture\". Contemporary opinion was summarised by Vasari: \"It is certainly a miracle that a formless block of stone could ever have been reduced to a perfection that nature is scarcely able to create in the flesh.\" Michelangelo's only work known to have been signed, his name on Mary's sash, it is now located in St Peter's Basilica.\nFlorence, 1499\u20131505.\nMichelangelo returned to Florence in 1499. The Republic was changing after the fall of its leader, anti-Renaissance priest Girolamo Savonarola, who was executed in 1498, and the rise of the \"gonfaloniere\" Piero Soderini. Michelangelo was asked by the consuls of the Guild of Wool to complete an unfinished project begun 40 years earlier by Agostino di Duccio: a colossal statue of Carrara marble portraying David as a symbol of Florentine freedom to be placed on the gable of Florence Cathedral. Michelangelo responded by completing his most famous work, the statue of \"David\", in 1504. The masterwork definitively established his prominence as a sculptor of extraordinary technical skill and strength of symbolic imagination. A team of consultants, including Botticelli, Leonardo da Vinci, Filippino Lippi, Pietro Perugino, Lorenzo di Credi, Antonio and Giuliano da Sangallo, Andrea della Robbia, Cosimo Rosselli, Davide Ghirlandaio, Piero di Cosimo, Andrea Sansovino and Michelangelo's dear friend Granacci, was called together to decide upon its placement, ultimately the Piazza della Signoria, in front of the Palazzo Vecchio. It now stands in the Accademia, and in 1910 a marble replica was raised in its place in the square. In the same period of placing the \"David\", Michelangelo may have been involved in creating the sculptural profile on Palazzo Vecchio's fa\u00e7ade known as the Importuno di Michelangelo. The hypothesis of Michelangelo's possible involvement in the creation of the profile is based on the strong resemblance of the latter to a profile drawn by the artist, datable to the beginning of the 16th century, now preserved in the Louvre.\nWith the completion of the \"David\" came another commission. In early 1504 Leonardo da Vinci had been commissioned to paint \"The Battle of Anghiari\" in the council chamber of the Palazzo Vecchio, depicting the battle between Florence and Milan in 1440. Michelangelo was then commissioned to paint the \"Battle of Cascina\". The two paintings are very different: Leonardo depicts soldiers fighting on horseback, while Michelangelo has soldiers being ambushed as they bathe in the river. Neither work was completed and both were lost forever when the chamber was refurbished. Both works were much admired, and copies remain of them, Leonardo's work having been copied by Rubens and Michelangelo's by Bastiano da Sangallo.\nAlso during this period, Michelangelo was commissioned by Angelo Doni to paint a \"Holy Family\" as a present for his wife, Maddalena Strozzi. It is known as the \"Doni Madonna\" and hangs in the Uffizi Gallery, still in its original magnificent frame, which Michelangelo may have designed. He also may have painted the Madonna and Child with John the Baptist, known as the \"Manchester Madonna\" and now in the National Gallery, London.\nTomb of Julius II, 1505\u20131545.\nIn 1505 Michelangelo was invited back to Rome by the newly elected Pope Julius II and commissioned to build the Pope's tomb, which was to include forty statues and be finished in five years. Under the patronage of the pope, Michelangelo experienced constant interruptions to his work on the tomb in order to accomplish numerous other tasks.\nThe commission for the tomb forced the artist to leave Florence with his planned \"Battle of Cascina\" painting unfinished. By this time, Michelangelo was established as an artist; both he and Julius II had hot tempers and soon argued. On 17 April 1506, Michelangelo left Rome in secret for Florence, remaining there until the Florentine government pressed him to return to the pope.\nAlthough Michelangelo worked on the tomb for 40 years, it was never finished to his satisfaction. It is located in the Church of San Pietro in Vincoli in Rome and is most famous for the central figure of Moses, completed in 1516. Of the other statues intended for the tomb, two, known as the \"Rebellious Slave\" and the \"Dying Slave\", are now in the Louvre.\nSistine Chapel ceiling, 1508 \u20131512.\nDuring the same period, Michelangelo painted the ceiling of the Sistine Chapel, which took approximately four years to complete (1508\u20131512). According to Condivi's account, Bramante, who was working on the building of St. Peter's Basilica, resented Michelangelo's commission for the pope's tomb and convinced the pope to commission him in a medium with which he was unfamiliar, in order that he might fail at the task. Michelangelo was originally commissioned to paint the Twelve Apostles on the triangular pendentives that supported the ceiling, and to cover the central part of the ceiling with ornament. Michelangelo persuaded Pope Julius II to give him a free hand and proposed a different and more complex scheme, representing the Creation, the Fall of Man, the Promise of Salvation through the prophets, and the genealogy of Christ. The work is part of a larger scheme of decoration within the chapel that represents elements of the doctrine of the Catholic Church.\nThe composition stretches over 500 square metres of ceiling and contains over 300 figures. At its centre are nine episodes from the Book of Genesis, divided into three groups: God's creation of the earth; God's creation of humankind and their fall from God's grace; and lastly, the state of humanity as represented by Noah and his family. On the pendentives supporting the ceiling are painted twelve men and women who prophesied the coming of Jesus, seven prophets of Israel, and five Sibyls, prophetic women of the Classical world. Among the most famous paintings on the ceiling are The Creation of Adam, Adam and Eve in the Garden of Eden, the Deluge, the Prophet Jeremiah, and the Cumaean Sibyl.\nFlorence under Medici popes, 1513 \u2013 early 1534.\nIn 1513, Pope Julius II died and was succeeded by Pope Leo X, the second son of Lorenzo de' Medici. From 1513 to 1516, Pope Leo was on good terms with Pope Julius's surviving relatives, so encouraged Michelangelo to continue work on Julius's tomb, but the families became enemies again in 1516 when Pope Leo tried to seize the Duchy of Urbino from Julius's nephew Francesco Maria I della Rovere. Pope Leo then had Michelangelo stop working on the tomb, and commissioned him to reconstruct the fa\u00e7ade of the Basilica of San Lorenzo in Florence and to adorn it with sculptures. He spent three years creating drawings and models for the fa\u00e7ade, as well as attempting to open a new marble quarry at Pietrasanta specifically for the project. In 1520, the work was abruptly cancelled by his financially strapped patrons before any real progress had been made. The basilica lacks a fa\u00e7ade to this day.\nIn 1520, the Medici came back to Michelangelo with another grand proposal, this time for a family funerary chapel in the Basilica of San Lorenzo. For posterity, this project, occupying the artist for much of the 1520s and 1530s, was more fully realised. Michelangelo used his own discretion to create the composition of the Medici Chapel, which houses the large tombs of two of the younger members of the Medici family, Giuliano, Duke of Nemours, and Lorenzo, his nephew. It also serves to commemorate their more famous predecessors, Lorenzo the Magnificent and his brother Giuliano, who are buried nearby. The tombs display statues of the two Medici and allegorical figures representing \"Night\" and \"Day\", and \"Dusk\" and \"Dawn\". The chapel also contains Michelangelo's \"Medici Madonna\". In 1976, a concealed corridor was discovered with drawings on the walls that related to the chapel itself.\nPope Leo X died in 1521 and was succeeded briefly by the austere Adrian VI, and then by his cousin Giulio Medici as Pope Clement VII. In 1524, Michelangelo received an architectural commission from the Medici pope for the Laurentian Library at San Lorenzo's Church. He designed both the interior of the library itself and its vestibule, a building utilising architectural forms with such dynamic effect that it is seen as the forerunner of Baroque architecture. It was left to assistants to interpret his plans and carry out construction. The library was not opened until 1571, and the vestibule remained incomplete until 1904.\nIn 1527, Florentine citizens, encouraged by the sack of Rome, threw out the Medici and restored the republic. A siege of the city ensued, and Michelangelo went to the aid of his beloved Florence by working on the city's fortifications from 1528 to 1529. The city fell in 1530, and the Medici were restored to power, with the young Alessandro Medici as the first Duke of Florence. Pope Clement, a Medici, sentenced Michelangelo to death. It is thought that Michelangelo hid for two months in a small chamber under the Medici chapels in the Basilica of San Lorenzo with light from just a tiny window, making many charcoal and chalk drawings which remained hidden until the room was rediscovered in 1975, and opened to small numbers of visitors in 2023. Michelangelo was eventually pardoned by the Medicis and the death sentence lifted, so that he could complete work on the Sistine Chapel and the Medici family tomb. He left Florence for Rome in 1534. Despite Michelangelo's support of the republic and resistance to the Medici rule, Pope Clement reinstated an allowance that he had previously granted the artist and made a new contract with him over the tomb of Pope Julius.\nRome, 1534\u20131546.\nIn Rome, Michelangelo lived near the church of Santa Maria di Loreto. It was at this time that he met the poet Vittoria Colonna, marchioness of Pescara, who was to become one of his closest friends until her death in 1547.\nShortly before his death in 1534, Pope Clement VII commissioned Michelangelo to paint a fresco of \"The Last Judgment\" on the altar wall of the Sistine Chapel. His successor, Pope Paul III, was instrumental in seeing that Michelangelo began and completed the project, which he laboured on from 1534 to October 1541. The fresco depicts the Second Coming of Christ and his Judgement of the souls. Michelangelo ignored the usual artistic conventions in portraying Jesus, showing him as a massive, muscular figure, youthful, beardless and naked. He is surrounded by saints, among whom Saint Bartholomew holds a drooping flayed skin, bearing the likeness of Michelangelo. The dead rise from their graves, to be consigned either to Heaven or to Hell.\nOnce completed, the depiction of Christ and the Virgin Mary naked was considered sacrilegious, and Cardinal Carafa and Monsignor Sernini (Mantua's ambassador) campaigned to have the fresco removed or censored, but the Pope resisted. At the Council of Trent, shortly before Michelangelo's death in 1564, it was decided to obscure the genitals and Daniele da Volterra, an apprentice of Michelangelo, was commissioned to make the alterations. An uncensored copy of the original, by Marcello Venusti, is in the Capodimonte Museum of Naples.\nMichelangelo worked on a number of architectural projects at this time. They included a design for the Capitoline Hill with its trapezoid piazza displaying the ancient bronze statue of Marcus Aurelius. He designed the upper floor of the Palazzo Farnese and the interior of the Church of Santa Maria degli Angeli, in which he transformed the vaulted interior of an Ancient Roman bathhouse. Other architectural works include San Giovanni dei Fiorentini, the Sforza Chapel (Capella Sforza) in the Basilica di Santa Maria Maggiore and the Porta Pia.\nSt Peter's Basilica, 1546\u20131564.\nWhile still working on the \"Last Judgment\", Michelangelo received yet another commission for the Vatican. This was for the painting of two large frescos in the Cappella Paolina depicting significant events in the lives of the two most important saints of Rome, the \"Conversion of Saint Paul\" and the \"Crucifixion of Saint Peter\". Like the \"Last Judgment\", these two works are complex compositions containing a great number of figures. They were completed in 1550. In the same year, Giorgio Vasari published his \"Vita\", including a biography of Michelangelo.\nIn 1546, Michelangelo was appointed architect of St. Peter's Basilica, Rome. The process of replacing the Constantinian basilica of the 4th century had been underway for fifty years and in 1506 foundations had been laid to the plans of Bramante. Successive architects had worked on it, but little progress had been made. Michelangelo was persuaded to take over the project. He returned to the concepts of Bramante, and developed his ideas for a centrally planned church, strengthening the structure both physically and visually. The dome, not completed until after his death, has been called by Banister Fletcher, \"the greatest creation of the Renaissance\".\nAs construction was progressing on St Peter's, there was concern that Michelangelo would die before the dome was finished. However, once building commenced on the lower part of the dome, the supporting ring, the completion of the design was inevitable.\nPersonal life.\nFaith.\nMichelangelo was a devout Catholic whose faith deepened at the end of his life. Along with Raphael, he was enrolled in the Secular Franciscan Order.\nHis poetry includes the following closing lines from what is known as poem 285 (written in 1554): \"Neither painting nor sculpture will be able any longer to calm my soul, now turned toward that divine love that opened his arms on the cross to take us in.\"\nPersonal habits.\nMichelangelo was moderate in his personal life, and once told his apprentice, Ascanio Condivi: \"However rich I may have been, I have always lived like a poor man.\" Michelangelo's bank accounts and numerous deeds of purchase show that his net worth was about 50,000 gold ducats, more than many princes and dukes of his time. Condivi said he was indifferent to food and drink, eating \"more out of necessity than of pleasure\" and that he \"often slept in his clothes and\u00a0... boots.\" His biographer Paolo Giovio says, \"His nature was so rough and uncouth that his domestic habits were incredibly squalid, and deprived posterity of any pupils who might have followed him.\" This, however, may not have affected him, as he was by nature a solitary and melancholy person, , a man who \"withdrew himself from the company of men.\"\nRelationships and poetry.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\u2014\u200a\nMichelangelo wrote more than three hundred sonnets and madrigals. About sixty are addressed to men \u2013 \"the first significant modern corpus of love poetry from one man to another\".\nThe longest sequence, displaying deep loving feeling, was written to the young Roman patrician Tommaso dei Cavalieri (c.\u20091509\u20131587), who was 23 years old when Michelangelo first met him in 1532, at the age of 57. In his \"Lives of the Artists\", Vasari observed: \"But infinitely more than any of the others he loved M. Tommaso de' Cavalieri, a Roman gentleman, for whom, being a young man and much inclined to these arts, [Michelangelo] made, to the end that he might learn to draw, many most superb drawings of divinely beautiful heads, designed in black and red chalk; and then he drew for him a Ganymede rapt to Heaven by Jove's Eagle, a Tityus with the Vulture devouring his heart, the Chariot of the Sun falling with Pha\u00ebthon into the Po, and a Bacchanal of children, which are all in themselves most rare things, and drawings the like of which have never been seen.\" Some scholars downplay the relationship between Michelangelo and Cavalieri as one of platonic friendship. The poems to Cavalieri make up the first large sequence of poems in any modern tongue addressed by one man to another; they predate by 50 years Shakespeare's sonnets to the fair youth:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\u2014\u200a\nCavalieri replied: \"I swear to return your love. Never have I loved a man more than I love you, never have I wished for a friendship more than I wish for yours.\" Cavalieri remained devoted to Michelangelo until the latter's death.\nIn 1542, Michelangelo met Cecchino dei Bracci who died only a year later, inspiring Michelangelo to write 48 funeral epigrams. Some of the objects of Michelangelo's affections, and subjects of his poetry, took advantage of him: the model Febo di Poggio asked for money in response to a love-poem, and a second model, Gherardo Perini, shamelessly stole from him.\nThe nature of the poetry has been a source of discomfort to later generations. Michelangelo's grandnephew, Michelangelo Buonarroti the Younger, published the poems in 1623 with the gender of pronouns changed; he also removed words or in other instances insisted that Michelangelo's poems be read allegorically and philosophically, a judgment some modern scholars still repeat today. Anthony Hughes, for example, says that it is impossible to know whether Michelangelo was sexually active and, while acknowledging that it is a reasonable guess that Michelangelo's sexuality was inclined towards men rather than women, insists the letters and poems Michelangelo addressed to Cavalieri cannot be taken as expressions of personal desire, and should be understood in the context of the realities of Italian Renaissance culture.\nBut since John Addington Symonds translated the poems into English in 1893, restoring the original genders, it has become more accepted that Michelangelo's poems should be understood at face value, that is, as indicating his personal feelings and a preference for young men.\nLate in life, Michelangelo nurtured a friendship with the poet and noble widow Vittoria Colonna, whom he met in Rome in 1536 or 1538 and who was in her late forties at the time. They wrote sonnets for each other and were in regular contact until she died. These sonnets mostly deal with the spiritual issues that occupied them. Condivi, who in his biography was preoccupied with downplaying Michelangelo's attraction to men, alleged Michelangelo said his sole regret in life was that he did not kiss the widow's face in the same manner that he had her hand.\nFeuds with other artists.\nIn a letter from late 1542, Michelangelo blamed the tensions between Julius\u00a0II and him on the envy of Bramante and Raphael, saying of the latter, \"all he had in art, he got from me\". According to Gian Paolo Lomazzo, Michelangelo and Raphael met once: the former was alone, while the latter was accompanied by several others. Michelangelo commented that he thought he had encountered the chief of police with such an assemblage, and Raphael replied that he thought he had met an executioner, as they are wont to walk alone.\nWorks.\nMadonna and Child.\nThe \"Madonna of the Stairs\" is Michelangelo's earliest known work in marble. It is carved in shallow relief, a technique often employed by the master-sculptor of the early 15th century, Donatello, and others such as Desiderio da Settignano. While the Madonna is in profile, the easiest aspect for a shallow relief, the child displays a twisting motion that was to become characteristic of Michelangelo's work. The \"Taddei Tondo\" of 1502 shows the Christ Child frightened by a Bullfinch, a symbol of the Crucifixion. The lively form of the child was later adapted by Raphael in the \"Bridgewater Madonna\". The \"Madonna of Bruges\" was, at the time of its creation, unlike other such statues depicting the Virgin proudly presenting her son. Here, the Christ Child, restrained by his mother's clasping hand, is about to step off into the world. The \"Doni Tondo\", depicting the Holy Family, has elements of all three previous works: the frieze of figures in the background has the appearance of a low-relief, while the circular shape and dynamic forms echo the Taddeo Tondo. The twisting motion present in the \"Madonna of Bruges\" is accentuated in the painting. The painting heralds the forms, movement and colour that Michelangelo was to employ on the ceiling of the Sistine Chapel.\nMale figure.\nThe kneeling \"Angel\" is an early work, one of several that Michelangelo created as part of a large decorative scheme for the Arca di San Domenico in the church dedicated to that saint in Bologna. Several other artists had worked on the scheme, beginning with Nicola Pisano in the 13th century. In the late 15th century, the project was managed by Niccol\u00f2 dell'Arca. An angel holding a candlestick, by Niccol\u00f2, was already in place. Although the two angels form a pair, there is a great contrast between the two works, the one depicting a delicate child with flowing hair clothed in Gothic robes with deep folds, and Michelangelo's depicting a robust and muscular youth with eagle's wings, clad in a garment of Classical style. Everything about Michelangelo's \"Angel\" is dynamic. Michelangelo's \"Bacchus\" was a commission with a specified subject, the youthful God of Wine. The sculpture has all the traditional attributes, a vine wreath, a cup of wine and a fawn, but Michelangelo ingested an air of reality into the subject, depicting him with bleary eyes, a swollen bladder and a stance that suggests he is unsteady on his feet. While the work is plainly inspired by Classical sculpture, it is innovative for its rotating movement and strongly three-dimensional quality, which encourages the viewer to look at it from every angle.\nIn the so-called \"Dying Slave\", Michelangelo again utilised the figure with marked contrapposto to suggest a particular human state, in this case waking from sleep. With the \"Rebellious Slave\", it is one of two such earlier figures for the Tomb of Pope Julius II, now in the Louvre, that the sculptor brought to an almost finished state. These two works were to have a profound influence on later sculpture, through Rodin who studied them at the Louvre. The \"Atlas Slave\" is one of the later figures for Pope Julius' tomb. The works, known collectively as \"The Captives\", each show the figure struggling to free itself, as if from the bonds of the rock in which it is lodged. The works give a unique insight into the sculptural methods that Michelangelo employed and his way of revealing what he perceived within the rock.\nSistine Chapel ceiling.\nThe Sistine Chapel ceiling was painted between 1508 and 1512. The ceiling is a flattened barrel vault supported on twelve triangular pendentives that rise from between the windows of the chapel. The commission, as envisaged by Julius II, was to adorn the pendentives with figures of the twelve apostles. Michelangelo, who was reluctant to take the job, persuaded the Pope to give him a free hand in the composition. The resultant scheme of decoration awed his contemporaries and has inspired other artists ever since. The scheme is of nine panels illustrating episodes from the Book of Genesis, set in an architectonic frame. On the pendentives, Michelangelo replaced the proposed Apostles with Prophets and Sibyls who heralded the coming of the Messiah.\nMichelangelo began painting with the later episodes in the narrative, the pictures including locational details and groups of figures, the \"Drunkenness of Noah\" being the first of this group. In the later compositions, painted after the initial scaffolding had been removed, Michelangelo made the figures larger. One of the central images, \"The Creation of Adam\" is one of the best known and most reproduced works in the history of art. The final panel, showing the \"Separation of Light from Darkness\" is the broadest in style and was painted in a single day. As the model for the Creator, Michelangelo has depicted himself in the action of painting the ceiling.\nAs supporters to the smaller scenes, Michelangelo painted twenty youths who have variously been interpreted as angels, as muses, or simply as decoration. Michelangelo referred to them as \"ignudi\". The figure reproduced may be seen in context in the above image of the \"Separation of Light from Darkness\".\nIn the process of painting the ceiling, Michelangelo made studies for different figures, of which some, such as that for \"The Libyan Sibyl\" have survived, demonstrating the care taken by Michelangelo in details such as the hands and feet. The prophet Jeremiah, contemplating the downfall of Jerusalem, is a self-portrait.\nFigure compositions.\nMichelangelo's relief of the \"Battle of the Centaurs\", created while he was still a youth associated with the Medici Academy, is an unusually complex relief in that it shows a great number of figures involved in a vigorous struggle. Such a complex disarray of figures was rare in Florentine art, where it would usually only be found in images showing either the Massacre of the Innocents or the Torments of Hell. The relief treatment, in which some of the figures are boldly projecting, may indicate Michelangelo's familiarity with Roman sarcophagus reliefs from the collection of Lorenzo Medici, and similar marble panels created by Nicola and Giovanni Pisano, and with the figurative compositions on Ghiberti's Baptistry Doors.\nThe composition of the \"Battle of Cascina\" is known in its entirety only from copies, as the original cartoon, according to Vasari, was so admired that it deteriorated and was eventually in pieces. It reflects the earlier relief in the energy and diversity of the figures, with many different postures, and many being viewed from the back, as they turn towards the approaching enemy and prepare for battle.\nIn \"The Last Judgment\" it is said that Michelangelo drew inspiration from a fresco by Melozzo da Forl\u00ec in Rome's Santi Apostoli. Melozzo had depicted figures from different angles, as if they were floating in the Heaven and seen from below. Melozzo's majestic figure of Christ, with windblown cloak, demonstrates a degree of foreshortening of the figure that had also been employed by Andrea Mantegna, but was not usual in the frescos of Florentine painters. In \"The Last Judgment\" Michelangelo had the opportunity to depict, on an unprecedented scale, figures in the action of either rising heavenward or falling and being dragged down.\nIn the two frescos of the Pauline Chapel, \"The Crucifixion of St. Peter\" and \"The Conversion of Saul\", Michelangelo has used the various groups of figures to convey a complex narrative. In the \"Crucifixion of Peter\" soldiers busy themselves about their assigned duty of digging a post hole and raising the cross while various people look on and discuss the events. A group of horrified women cluster in the foreground, while another group of Christians is led by a tall man to witness the events. In the right foreground, Michelangelo walks out of the painting with an expression of disillusionment.\nArchitecture.\nMichelangelo's architectural commissions included a number that were not realised, notably the fa\u00e7ade for Brunelleschi's Church of San Lorenzo in Florence, for which Michelangelo had a wooden model constructed, but which remains to this day unfinished rough brick. At the same church, Giulio de' Medici (later Pope Clement VII) commissioned him to design the Medici Chapel and the tombs of Giuliano and Lorenzo Medici. Pope Clement also commissioned the Laurentian Library, for which Michelangelo also designed the extraordinary vestibule with columns recessed into niches, and a staircase that appears to spill out of the library like a flow of lava, according to Nikolaus Pevsner, \"...\u00a0revealing Mannerism in its most sublime architectural form\".\nIn 1546 Michelangelo produced the highly complex ovoid design for the pavement of the Campidoglio and began designing an upper storey for the Farnese Palace. In 1547 he took on the job of completing St Peter's Basilica, begun to a design by Bramante, and with several intermediate designs by several architects. Michelangelo returned to Bramante's design, retaining the basic form and concepts by simplifying and strengthening the design to create a more dynamic and unified whole. Although the late 16th-century engraving depicts the dome as having a hemispherical profile, the dome of Michelangelo's model is somewhat ovoid and the final product, as completed by Giacomo della Porta, is more so.\nFinal years.\nIn his old age, Michelangelo created a number of \"Piet\u00e0s\" in which he apparently reflects upon mortality. They are heralded by the \"Victory\", perhaps created for the tomb of Pope Julius II but left unfinished. In this group, the youthful victor overcomes an older hooded figure, with the features of Michelangelo. The \"Piet\u00e0 of Vittoria Colonna\" is a chalk drawing of a type described as \"presentation drawings\", as they might be given as a gift by an artist, and were not necessarily studies towards a painted work. In this image, Mary's upraised arms and hands are indicative of her prophetic role. The frontal aspect is reminiscent of Masaccio's fresco of the Holy Trinity in the Basilica of Santa Maria Novella, Florence. In the \"Florentine Piet\u00e0\", Michelangelo again depicts himself, this time as the aged Nicodemus lowering the body of Jesus from the cross into the arms of Mary his mother and Mary Magdalene. Michelangelo smashed the left arm and leg of the figure of Jesus. His pupil Tiberio Calcagni repaired the arm and drilled a hole in which to fix a replacement leg which was not subsequently attached. He also worked on the figure of Mary Magdalene.\nThe last sculpture that Michelangelo worked on (six days before his death), the \"Rondanini Piet\u00e0,\" could never be completed because Michelangelo carved it away until there was insufficient stone. The legs and a detached arm remain from a previous stage of the work. As it remains, the sculpture has an abstract quality, in keeping with 20th-century concepts of sculpture.\nMichelangelo died in Rome on 18 February 1564, at the age of 88. His body was taken from Rome for interment at the Basilica of Santa Croce, fulfilling the maestro's last request to be buried in his beloved Florence. His heir Lionardo Buonarroti commissioned Vasari to design and build the \"Tomb of Michelangelo\", a monumental project that cost 770 scudi, and took over 14 years to complete. Marble for the tomb was supplied by Cosimo I de' Medici, Duke of Tuscany, who had also organized a state funeral to honour Michelangelo in Florence.\nLegacy.\nMichelangelo, with Leonardo da Vinci and Raphael, is one of the three giants of the Florentine High Renaissance. Although their names are often cited together, Michelangelo was younger than Leonardo by 23 years, and eight years older than Raphael. Because of his reclusive nature, he had little to do with either artist and outlived both of them by more than 40 years. Michelangelo took few sculpture students. He employed Granacci, who was his fellow pupil at the Medici Academy, and became one of several assistants on the Sistine Chapel ceiling. Michelangelo appears to have used assistants mainly for the more manual tasks of preparing surfaces and grinding colours. Despite this, his works were to have a great influence on painters, sculptors and architects for many generations to come.\nWhile Michelangelo's \"David\" is arguably the most famous nude of all time (it is called by the BBC \"the world's most famous statue\"), some of his other works have had perhaps even greater impact on the course of art. The twisting forms and tensions of the \"Victory\", the \"Bruges Madonna\" and the \"Medici Madonna\" make them the heralds of the Mannerist art. The unfinished giants for the tomb of Pope Julius II had profound effect on sculptors such as Rodin and Henry Moore.\nMichelangelo's vestibule of the Laurentian Library was one of the earliest buildings to use classical forms in a plastic and expressive manner. This dynamic quality was later to find its major expression in his centrally planned St. Peter's, with its giant order, its rippling cornice and its upward-launching pointed dome. The dome of St. Peter's was to influence the building of churches for many centuries, including Sant'Andrea della Valle in Rome and St Paul's Cathedral, London, as well as the civic domes of public buildings and state capitals across the United States.\nArtists who were directly influenced by Michelangelo include Raphael, whose monumental treatment of the figure in the \"School of Athens\" and \"The Expulsion of Heliodorus from the Temple\" owes much to Michelangelo, and whose fresco of \"Isaiah\" in Sant'Agostino closely imitates the older master's prophets. Other artists, such as Pontormo, drew on the writhing forms of the \"Last Judgment\" and the frescoes of the Cappella Paolina.\nThe Sistine Chapel ceiling was a work of unprecedented grandeur, both for its architectonic forms, to be imitated by many Baroque ceiling painters, and also for the wealth of its inventiveness in the study of figures. Vasari wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "21020", "revid": "6488475", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21020", "title": "Poecilia latipinna", "text": ""}
{"id": "21021", "revid": "40414428", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21021", "title": "Mecca", "text": "Holiest city in Islam and Capital of Mecca Province, Saudi Arabia\nMecca, officially Makkah al-Mukarramah, is the holiest city in Islam. It is located in the Hejaz region of western Saudi Arabia and is the capital of Mecca Province. Mecca is considered the birthplace of Islam and the birthplace of the Islamic prophet Muhammad.\nIt is inland from Jeddah on the Red Sea, in a narrow valley above sea level. Its metropolitan population in 2022 was 2.4million, making it the third\u2013most populated city in Saudi Arabia after Riyadh and Jeddah. The Cave of Hira atop the , just outside the city, is where Muslims believe the Quran was first revealed to Muhammad. Visiting Mecca for the is an obligation upon all able Muslims. The Great Mosque of Mecca, known as the , is home to the Kaaba, believed by Muslims to have been built by Abraham and Ishmael. It is Islam's holiest site and the direction of prayer () for all Muslims worldwide. Around 44.5% of the population are Saudi citizens and around 55.5% are Muslim foreigners from other countries. Pilgrims more than triple the population number every year during the pilgrimage, observed in the twelfth Hijri month of . With over 10.8 million international visitors in 2023, Mecca was one of the ten most visited cities in the world.\nMuslim rulers from in and around the region long tried to take the city and keep it in their control, and thus, much like most of the Hejaz region, the city has seen several regime changes. The city was most recently conquered in the Saudi conquest of Hejaz by Ibn Saud and his allies in 1925. Since then, Mecca has seen a tremendous expansion in size and infrastructure, with newer, modern buildings such as The Clock Towers, the world's fourth\u2013tallest building and third\u2013largest by floor area, towering over the Great Mosque. The Saudi government has also carried out the destruction of several historical structures and archaeological sites, such as the Ajyad Fortress. However, many of the demolitions have officially been part of the continued expansion of the Masjid al-Haram at Mecca and the Prophet's Mosque in Medina and their auxiliary service facilities in order to accommodate the ever-increasing number of Muslims performing the pilgrimage (\"hajj\"). Non-Muslims are \nprohibited from entering the city.\nUnder the Saudi government, Mecca is governed by the Mecca Regional Municipality, a municipal council of 14 locally elected members headed by the mayor (called in Arabic) appointed by the Saudi government. In 2015, the mayor of the city was Osama bin Fadhel Al-Barr; as of January 2022[ [update]], the mayor is Saleh Al-Turki. The City of Mecca , which constitutes Mecca and the surrounding region, is the capital of the Mecca Province, which includes the neighbouring cities of Jeddah and Taif, even though Jeddah is considerably larger in population than Mecca. Prince Khalid Al-Faisal has been the provincial governor since 16 May 2007.\nEtymology.\nMecca has been referred to by many names. Its etymology is obscure as with many Arabic words. Widely believed to be a synonym for , it is said to be more specifically the early name for the valley located therein. At the same time, Muslim scholars generally use it to refer to the sacred area of the city that immediately surrounds and includes the Kaaba.\n is the official transliteration used by the Saudi government and is closer to the Arabic pronunciation. The government adopted as the official spelling in the 1980s, but it is not universally known or used worldwide. The full official name is (). is used to refer to the city in the Quran in Surah Al-Fath (48), verse 24.\nThe word \"Mecca\" in English has come to be used to refer to any place that draws large numbers of people, and because of this some English-speaking Muslims have come to regard the use of this spelling for the city as offensive. Nonetheless, \"Mecca\" is the familiar form of the English transliteration for the Arabic name of the city.\nMacoraba, another ancient city name Claudius Ptolemy says was within Arabia Felix, was also claimed to be Mecca. Some studies have questioned this association. Many etymologies have been proposed: the traditional one is that it is derived from the Old South Arabian root M-K-R-B which means \"temple\".\nOther names.\nAnother name used for Mecca in the Quran is at 6:92 where it is called (, meaning \"Mother of all Settlements\"). The city has been called several other names in both the Quran and . Another name used historically for Mecca is . According to an Islamic suggestion, another name for Mecca, , is synonymous with the Desert of Paran mentioned in the Old Testament at Genesis 21:21. Arab and Islamic tradition holds that the wilderness of Paran, broadly speaking, is the Tihamah coastal plain and the site where Ishmael settled was Mecca. Yaqut al-Hamawi, the 12th-century Syrian geographer, wrote that was \"an arabized Hebrew word, one of the names of Mecca mentioned in the Torah.\"\nThe Quran refers to the city as in Surah Al Imran (3), verse 96: \"Indeed the first House [of worship], established for mankind was that at Bakkah\". This is said to have been the name of the city at the time of Ibrahim and it is also transliterated as and , among others. It was a name for the city in the ancient world.\nHistory.\nPrehistory.\nIn 2010, Mecca and the surrounding area became an important site for paleontology with respect to primate evolution, with the discovery of a \"Saadanius\" fossil. \"Saadanius\" is considered to be a primate closely related to the common ancestor of the Old World monkeys and apes. The fossil habitat, near what is now the Red Sea in western Saudi Arabia, was a damp forest area between 28\u00a0million and 29\u00a0million years ago. Paleontologists involved in the research hope to find further fossils in the area.\nEarly history (up to 6th century CE).\nThe early history of Mecca is still largely shrouded by a lack of clear sources. The city lies in the hinterland of the middle part of western Arabia of which there are sparse textual or archaeological sources available. This lack of knowledge is in contrast to both the northern and southern areas of western Arabia, specifically the Syro-Palestinian frontier and Yemen, where historians have various sources available such as physical remains of shrines, inscriptions, observations by Greco-Roman authors, and information collected by church historians. The area of Hejaz that surrounds Mecca was characterized by its remote, rocky, and inhospitable nature, supporting only meagre settled populations in scattered oases and occasional stretches of fertile land. The Red Sea coast offered no easily accessible ports and the oasis dwellers and bedouins in the region were illiterate.\nAcademic research suggests that at the time of Muhammad the population of Mecca was around 550. Muslims scholars using traditional sources may place the number as high as 10,000.\nThe first clear reference to Mecca in non-Islamic literature appears in 741, long after the death of Muhammad, in the Byzantine-Arab Chronicle or \"Chronicle of 741\", though here the author places the region in Mesopotamia (\"midway between Ur and Harran\") rather than the Hejaz.\nPossible earlier mentions are not unambiguous. The Greek historian Diodorus Siculus writes about Arabia in the 1st century BCE in his work \"Bibliotheca Historica\", describing a holy shrine: \"And a temple has been set up there, which is very holy and exceedingly revered by all Arabians\". Claims have been made this could be a reference to the Kaaba in Mecca. However, the geographic location Diodorus describes is located in northwest Arabia, around the area of Leuke Kome, within the former Nabataean Kingdom and the Roman province of Arabia Petraea.\nPtolemy lists the names of 50 cities in Arabia, one going by the name of Macoraba. There has been speculation since 1646 that this could be a reference to Mecca. Historically, there has been a general consensus in scholarship that Macoraba mentioned by Ptolemy in the 2nd century CE is indeed Mecca, but more recently, this has been questioned. Bowersock favors the identity of the former, with his theory being that \"Macoraba\" is the word \"Makkah\" followed by the aggrandizing Aramaic adjective \"rabb\" (great). The Roman 4th-century historian Ammianus Marcellinus also enumerated many cities of Western Arabia, most of which can be identified. According to Bowersock, he did mention Mecca as \"Geapolis\" or \"Hierapolis\", the latter one meaning \"holy city\" potentially referring to the sanctuary of the Kaaba. Patricia Crone, from the Revisionist school of Islamic studies on the other hand, writes that \"the plain truth is that the name Macoraba has nothing to do with that of Mecca [...] if Ptolemy mentions Mecca at all, he calls it Moka, a town in Arabia Petraea\".\nProcopius' 6th century statement that the Ma'add tribe possessed the coast of western Arabia between the Ghassanids and the Himyarites of the south supports the Arabic sources tradition that associates Quraysh as a branch of the Ma'add and Muhammad as a direct descendant of Ma'add ibn Adnan.\nHistorian Patricia Crone has cast doubt on the claim that Mecca was a major historical trading outpost. However, other scholars such as Glen W. Bowersock disagree and assert that Mecca was a major trading outpost. Crone later on disregarded some of her theories. She argues that Meccan trade relied on skins, hides, manufactured leather goods, clarified butter, Hijazi woollens, and camels. She suggests that most of these goods were destined for the Roman army, which is known to have required colossal quantities of leather and hides for its equipment.\nMecca is mentioned in the following early Quranic manuscripts:\nThe earliest Muslim inscriptions are from the Mecca\u2013Taif area.\nIslamic narrative\nIn the Islamic view, the beginnings of Mecca are attributed to the Biblical figures, Adam, Abraham, Hagar and Ishmael. It was Adam himself who built the first God's house in Mecca according to a heavenly prototype but this building was destroyed in the Noahic Flood. The civilization of Mecca is believed to have started after Ibr\u0101h\u012bm (Abraham) left his son Ism\u0101\u02bf\u012bl (Ishmael) and wife H\u0101jar (Hagar) in the valley at Allah's command. Some people from the Yemeni tribe of Jurhum settled with them, and Isma'il reportedly married two women, one after divorcing the first, on Ibrahim's advice. At least one man of the Jurhum helped Ism\u0101\u02bf\u012bl and his father to construct or according to Islamic narratives, reconstruct, the \"Kaaba\" ('Cube'), which would have social, religious, political and historical implications for the site and region.\nMuslims see the mention of a pilgrimage at the Valley of the Bakha in the Old Testament chapter Psalm 84:3\u20136 as a reference to Mecca, similar to the Quran at Surah https:// In the \"'\u0101l \u02bfimr\u0101n\", a commentary on the Samaritan midrashic chronology of the Patriarchs, of unknown date but probably composed in the 10th century CE, it is claimed that Mecca was built by the sons of Nebaioth, the eldest son of Ism\u0101\u02bf\u012bl or Ishmael.\nThamudic inscriptions.\nSome Thamudic inscriptions which were discovered in southern Jordan contained names of some individuals such as \"\u02bfAbd Mekkat\" (, \"Servant of Mecca\").\nSome related inscriptions contained personal names such as \"Makki\" (, \"Makkan, of Makkah\"), but Jawwad Ali from the University of Baghdad suggested that there's also a probability of a tribe named \"Makkah\".\nUnder the Quraish.\nSometime in the 5th century, the Ka'bah was a place of worship for the deities of Arabia's pagan tribes. Mecca's most important pagan deity was Hubal, which had been placed there by the ruling Quraysh tribe, and remained until the Conquest of Mecca by Muhammad. In the 5th century, the Quraish took control of Mecca, and became skilled merchants and traders. In the 6th century, they joined the lucrative spice trade, since battles elsewhere were diverting trade routes from dangerous sea routes to more secure overland routes. The Byzantine Empire had previously controlled the Red Sea, but piracy had been increasing. Another previous route that ran through the Persian Gulf via the Tigris and Euphrates rivers was also being threatened by exploitations from the Sasanian Empire, and was being disrupted by the Lakhmid kingdom, the Ghassanids, and the Roman\u2013Persian wars. Mecca's prominence as a trading center also surpassed the cities of Petra and Palmyra. The Sassanids however did not always pose a threat to Mecca, as in 575 they protected it from a Yemeni invasion, led by its Christian leader Abraha. The tribes of southern Arabia asked the Persian king Khosrow I for aid, in response to which he came south to Arabia with foot-soldiers and a fleet of ships near Mecca.\nBy the middle of the 6th century, there were three major settlements in northern Arabia, all along the south-western coast that borders the Red Sea, in a habitable region between the sea and the Hejaz mountains to the east. Although the area around Mecca was completely barren, it was the wealthiest of the three settlements with abundant water from the renowned Zamzam Well and a position at the crossroads of major caravan routes.\nThe harsh conditions and terrain of the Arabian peninsula meant a near-constant state of conflict between the local tribes, but once a year they would declare a truce and converge upon Mecca in an annual pilgrimage. Up to the 7th century, this journey was intended for religious reasons by the pagan Arabs to pay homage to their shrine, and to drink Zamzam. However, it was also the time each year that disputes would be arbitrated, debts would be resolved, and trading would occur at Meccan fairs. These annual events gave the tribes a sense of common identity and made Mecca an important focus for the peninsula.\nYear of the Elephant (570).\nThe \"Year of the Elephant\" is the name in Islamic history for the year approximately equating to 570\u2013572, when, according to Islamic sources such as Ibn Ishaq, Abraha descended upon Mecca, riding an elephant, with a large army after building a cathedral at San'aa, named \"al-Qullays\" in honor of the Negus of Axum. It gained widespread fame, even gaining attention from the Byzantine Empire. Abraha attempted to divert the pilgrimage of the Arabs from the Ka'bah to al-Qullays, effectively converting them to Christianity. According to Islamic tradition, this was the year of Muhammad's birth. Abraha allegedly sent a messenger named Muhammad ibn Khuza'i to Mecca and Tihamah with a message that al-Qullays was both much better than other houses of worship and purer, having not been defiled by the housing of idols. When Muhammad ibn Khuza'i got as far as the land of Banu Kinana, the people of the lowland, knowing what he had come for, sent a man of Hudhayl called \u02bfUrwa bin Hayyad al-Milasi, who shot him with an arrow, killing him. His brother Qays who was with him, fled to Abraha and told him the news, which increased his rage and fury and he swore to raid the Kinana tribe and destroy the Ka'bah. Ibn Ishaq further states that one of the men of the Quraysh tribe was angered by this, and going to Sana'a, entering the church at night and defiling it; widely assumed to have done so by defecating in it.\nAbraha marched upon the Kaaba with a large army, which included one or more war elephants, intending to demolish it. When news of the advance of his army came, the Arab tribes of Quraysh, Kinanah, Banu Khuza'ah and Hudhayl united in the defense of the Kaaba and the city. A man from the Himyarite Kingdom was sent by Abraha to advise them that Abraha only wished to demolish the Ka'bah and if they resisted, they would be crushed. Abd al-Muttalib told the Meccans to seek refuge in the hills while he and some members of the Quraysh remained within the precincts of the Kaaba. Abraha sent a dispatch inviting Abdul-Muttalib to meet with Abraha and discuss matters. When Abdul-Muttalib left the meeting he was heard saying: \"The Owner of this House is its Defender, and I am sure he will save it from the attack of the adversaries and will not dishonor the servants of His House.\"\nAbraha eventually attacked Mecca. However, the lead elephant, known as Mahmud, is said to have stopped at the boundary around Mecca and refused to enter. It has been theorized that an epidemic such as by smallpox could have caused such a failed invasion of Mecca. The reference to the story in Quran is rather short. According to the 105th Surah of the Quran, Al-Fil, the next day, a dark cloud of small birds sent by Allah appeared. The birds carried small rocks in their beaks, and bombarded the Ethiopian forces, and smashed them to a state like that of eaten straw.\nEconomy.\nCamel caravans, said to have first been used by Muhammad's great-grandfather, were a major part of Mecca's bustling economy. Alliances were struck between the merchants in Mecca and the local nomadic tribes, who would bring goods \u2013 leather, livestock, and metals mined in the local mountains \u2013 to Mecca to be loaded on the caravans and carried to cities in Shaam and Iraq. Historical accounts also provide some indication that goods from other continents may also have flowed through Mecca. Goods from Africa and the Far East passed through en route to Syria including spices, leather, medicine, cloth, and slaves; in return Mecca received money, weapons, cereals, and wine, which in turn were distributed throughout Arabia. The Meccans signed treaties with both the Byzantines and the Bedouins, and negotiated safe passages for caravans, giving them water and pasture rights. Mecca became the center of a loose confederation of client tribes, which included those of the Banu Tamim. Other regional powers such as the Abyssinians, Ghassanids, and Lakhmids were in decline leaving Meccan trade to be the primary binding force in Arabia in the late 6th century.\nMuhammad and the conquest of Mecca.\nMuhammad was born in Mecca in 570, and thus Islam has been inextricably linked with it ever since. He was born into the faction of Banu Hashim in the ruling tribe of Quraysh. It was in the nearby mountain cave of Hira on Jabal al-Nour that Muhammad began receiving divine revelations from God through the archangel Jibreel in 610, according to Islamic tradition. Advocating his form of Abrahamic monotheism against Meccan paganism, and after enduring persecution from the pagan tribes for 13 years, Muhammad emigrated (Hijrah) in 622 with his companions, the \"Muhajirun\", to Yathrib (later renamed Medina). The conflict between the Quraysh and the Muslims is accepted to have begun at this point. Overall, Meccan efforts to annihilate Islam failed and proved to be costly and unsuccessful. During the Battle of the Trench in 627, the combined armies of Arabia were unable to defeat Muhammad's forces (as the trench surrounding Muhammad's forces protected them from harm and a storm was sent to breach the Quraysh tribe). In 628, Muhammad and his followers wanted to enter Mecca for pilgrimage, but were blocked by the Quraysh. Subsequently, Muslims and Meccans entered into the Treaty of al-Hudaybiya, whereby the Quraysh and their allies promised to cease fighting Muslims and their allies and pledged to permit Muslims into the city to perform the pilgrimage the following year. It was meant to be a ceasefire for 10 years; however, just two years later, the Banu Bakr, allies of the Quraish, violated the truce by slaughtering a group of the Banu Khuza'ah, allies of the Muslims. Muhammad and his companions, now 10,000 strong, marched into Mecca and conquered the city. The pagan imagery was destroyed by Muhammad's followers and the location Islamized and rededicated to the worship of Allah alone. Mecca was declared the holiest site in Islam ordaining it as the center of Muslim pilgrimage (\"Hajj\"), one of the Islamic faith's Five Pillars.\nMuhammad then returned to Medina, after assigning Attab ibn Asid as governor of the city. His other activities in Arabia led to the unification of the Arabian Peninsula under the banner of Islam. Muhammad died in 632. Within the next few hundred years, the area under the banner of Islam stretched from North Africa into Asia and parts of Europe. As the Islamic realm grew, Mecca continued to attract pilgrims from all across the Muslim world and beyond, as Muslims came to perform the annual Hajj pilgrimage. Mecca attracted a year-round population of scholars, pious Muslims who wished to live close to the Kaaba, and local inhabitants who served the pilgrims. Due to the difficulty and expense of the Hajj, pilgrims arrived by boat at Jeddah, and came overland, or joined the annual caravans from Syria or Iraq.\nMedieval and pre-modern times.\nMecca was never the capital of any of the Islamic states. Muslim rulers did contribute to its upkeep, such as during the reigns of 'Umar (r. 634\u2013644) and Uthman (r. 644\u2013656) when concerns of flooding caused the caliphs to bring in Christian engineers to build barrages in the low-lying quarters and construct dykes and embankments to protect the area around the Kaaba.\nMuhammad's return to Medina shifted the focus away from Mecca and later even further away when 'Ali, the fourth caliph, took power and chose Kufa as his capital. The Umayyad Caliphate moved the capital to Damascus in Syria and the Abbasid Caliphate to Baghdad, in modern-day Iraq, which remained the center of the Islamic Empire for nearly 500 years. Mecca re-entered Islamic political history during the Second Fitna, when it was held by Abdullah ibn az-Zubayr and the Zubayrids. The city was twice besieged by the Umayyads in 683 and 692, and for some time thereafter, the city figured little in politics, remaining a city of devotion and scholarship governed by various other factions. In 930, Mecca was attacked and sacked by Qarmatians, a millenarian Shi'a Isma'ili Muslim sect led by Abu Tahir al-Jannabi and centered in eastern Arabia. The Black Death pandemic hit Mecca in 1349.\nIbn Battuta's description of Mecca.\nOne of the most famous travelers to Mecca in the 14th century was a Moroccan scholar and traveler, Ibn Battuta. In his \"rihla\" (account), he provides a vast description of the city. Around the year 1327 (729 AH), Ibn Battuta arrived at the holy city. Immediately, he says, it felt like a holy sanctuary, and thus he started the rites of the pilgrimage. He remained in Mecca for three years and left in 1330. During his second year in the holy city, he says his caravan arrived \"with a great quantity of alms for the support of those who were staying in Mecca and Medina\". While in Mecca, prayers were made for (not to) the King of Iraq and also for Salaheddin al-Ayyubi, Sultan of Egypt and Syria at the Ka'bah. Battuta says the Ka'bah was large, but was destroyed and rebuilt smaller than the original. According to Ibn Battuta, the original Kaaba, prior to the conquest of Makkah by the Prophet, contained images of angels and prophets including Jesus (Isa in Islamic tradition), his mother Mary (Maryam in Islamic tradition), and many others - Ibn Battuta however states these were all destroyed by the Prophet in the year of victory. Battuta describes the Ka'bah in his time as an important part of Mecca due to the fact that many people make the pilgrimage to it. Battuta describes the people of the city as being humble and kind, and also willing to give a part of everything they had to someone who had nothing. The inhabitants of Mecca and the village itself, he says, were very clean. There was also a sense of elegance to the village.\nUnder the Ottomans.\nIn 1517, the Sharif of Mecca, Barakat bin Muhammad, acknowledged the supremacy of the Ottoman Caliph but retained a great degree of local autonomy. In 1803 the city was captured by the First Saudi state, which held Mecca until 1813, destroying some of the historic tombs and domes in and around the city. The Ottomans assigned the task of bringing Mecca back under Ottoman control to their powerful \"Khedive\" (viceroy) and \"Wali\" of Egypt, Muhammad Ali Pasha. Muhammad Ali Pasha successfully returned Mecca to Ottoman control in 1813. In 1818, the Saud were defeated again but survived and founded the Second Saudi state that lasted until 1891 and led on to the present country of Saudi Arabia. In 1853, Sir Richard Francis Burton undertook the Muslim pilgrimage to Mecca and Medina disguised as a Muslim. Although Burton was certainly not the first non-Muslim European to make the \"Hajj\" (Ludovico di Varthema did this in 1503), his pilgrimage remains one of the most famous and documented of modern times. Mecca was regularly hit by cholera outbreaks. Between 1830 and 1930, cholera broke out among pilgrims at Mecca 27 times.\nModern history.\nHashemite revolt and subsequent control by the Sharifate of Mecca.\nIn World War I, the Ottoman Empire was at war with the Allies. It had successfully repulsed an attack on Istanbul in the Gallipoli campaign and on Baghdad in the Siege of Kut. The British intelligence officer T. E. Lawrence conspired with the Ottoman governor, Hussain bin Ali, the Sharif of Mecca to revolt against the Ottoman Empire and it was the first city captured by his forces in the Battle of Mecca (1916). Sharif's revolt proved a turning point of the war on the eastern front. Hussein declared a new state, the Kingdom of Hejaz, declaring himself the Sharif of the state and Mecca his capital. News reports in November 1916 via contact in Cairo with returning Hajj pilgrims, stated that with the Ottoman Turkish authorities gone, the Hajj of 1916 was free of the previous massive extortion and monetary demands made by the Turks who were agents of the Ottoman government.\nSaudi conquest.\nFollowing the Capture of Mecca (1924), the Sharif of Mecca was overthrown by the Saud family, and Mecca was incorporated into Saudi Arabia. Under Saudi rule, much of the historic city has been demolished as a result of the Saudi government fearing these sites might become sites of association in worship besides Allah (\"shirk\"). The city has been expanded to include several towns previously considered to be separate from the holy city and now is just a few kilometers outside the main sites of the Hajj, Mina, Muzdalifah, and Arafat. Mecca is not served by any airport, due to concerns about the city's safety. It is instead served by the King Abdulaziz International Airport in Jeddah (approx. 70\u00a0km away) internationally and the Taif International Airport (approx. 120\u00a0km away) for domestic flights.\nThe city today is at the junction of the two most important highways in all of the Saudi Arabian highway system, Highway 40, which connects the city to Jeddah in the west and the capital, Riyadh and Dammam in the east and Highway 15, which connects it to Medina, Tabuk and onward to Jordan in the north and Abha and Jizan in the south. The Ottomans had planned to extend their railway network to the holy city, but were forced to abandon this plan due to their entry into World War I. This plan was later carried out by the Saudi government, which connected the two holy cities of Medina and Mecca with the modern Haramain High Speed Railway system which runs at 300\u00a0km/h (190\u00a0mph) and connects the two cities via Jeddah, King Abdulaziz International Airport and King Abdullah Economic City near Rabigh within two hours.\nThe haram area of Mecca, in which the entry of non-Muslims is forbidden, is much larger than that of Medina.\n1979 Grand Mosque seizure.\nOn 20 November 1979, two hundred armed dissidents led by Juhayman al-Otaybi, seized the Grand Mosque, claiming the Saudi royal family no longer represented pure Islam and that the Masjid al-Haram and the Ka'bah, must be held by those of true faith. The rebels seized tens of thousands of pilgrims as hostages and barricaded themselves in the mosque. The siege lasted two weeks, and resulted in several hundred deaths and significant damage to the shrine, especially the Safa and Marwa gallery. A multinational force was finally able to retake the mosque from the dissidents. Since then, the Grand Mosque has been expanded several times, with many other expansions being undertaken in the present day.\nDestruction of Islamic heritage sites.\nUnder Saudi rule, it has been estimated that since 1985, about 95% of Mecca's historic buildings, most over a thousand years old, have been demolished. It has been reported that there are now fewer than 20 structures remaining in Mecca that date back to the time of Muhammad. Some important buildings that have been destroyed include the house of Khadijah, the wife of Muhammad, the house of Abu Bakr, Muhammad's birthplace, and the Ottoman\u2013era Ajyad Fortress. The reason for much of the destruction of historic buildings has been for the construction of hotels, apartments, parking lots, and other infrastructure facilities for Hajj pilgrims.\nIncidents during pilgrimage.\nMecca has been the site of several incidents and failures of crowd control because of the large numbers of people who come to make the Hajj. For example, on 2 July 1990, a pilgrimage to Mecca ended in tragedy when the ventilation system failed in a crowded pedestrian tunnel and 1,426 people were either suffocated or trampled to death in a stampede. On 24 September 2015, 700 pilgrims were killed in a stampede at Mina during the stoning-the-Devil ritual at Jamarat.\n2027 total solar eclipse.\nMecca will experience a total solar eclipse on Monday, 2 August 2027, for a duration of 5 minutes and 8 seconds.\nSignificance in Islam.\nMecca holds an important place in Islam and is considered the holiest city in all branches of the religion. The city derives its importance from the role it plays in the Hajj and 'Umrah and for its status as the birthplace of Muhammad.\nMasjid al-Haram.\nThe \"Masjid al-Haram\" is the site of two of the most important rites of both the Hajj and of the Umrah, the circumambulation around the Ka'bah (\"tawaf\") and the walking between the two mounts of Safa and Marwa (\"sa'ee\"). The masjid is also the site of the Zamzam Well. According to Islamic tradition, a prayer in the masjid is equal to 100,000 prayers in any other masjid around the world.\nKaaba.\nThere is a difference of opinion between Islamic scholars upon who first built the Ka'bah, some believe it was built by the angels while others believe it was built by Adam. Regardless, it was built several times before reaching its current state. The Ka'bah is also the common direction of prayer (\"qibla\") for all Muslims. The surface surrounding the Ka'bah on which Muslims circumambulate it is known as the Mataf.\nHajr-e-Aswad (The Black Stone).\nThe Black Stone is a stone, considered by scientists to be a meteorite or of similar origin and believed by Muslims to be of divine origin. It is set in the eastern corner of the Ka'bah and it is Sunnah to touch and kiss the stone. The area around the stone is generally always crowded and guarded by policemen to ensure the pilgrims' safety. In Islamic tradition, the stone was sent down from Jannah (Paradise) and used to build the Ka'bah. It used to be a white stone (and was whiter than milk). Because of the worldly sins of man, it slowly changed color to black over the years after it was brought down to Earth.\nMaqam Ibrahim.\nThis is the stone that Ibrahim (Abraham) stood on to build the higher parts of the Ka'bah. It contains two footprints that are comparatively larger than average modern-day human feet. The stone is raised and housed in a golden hexagonal chamber beside the Ka'bah on the Mataf plate. The stone inside the casing is square shaped and measures in length and width, and in height. It used to be enclosed by a structure called the \"Maqsurat Ibrahim\" which was covered by a \"sitara\": an ornamental, embroidered curtain that was replaced annually. Currently, it is placed inside a golden-metal enclosure. The outer casing has changed a number of times over the years; historic photographs show that the arch of the Banu Shaybah Gate stood next to it.\nSafa and Marwa.\nMuslims believe that in the divine revelation to Muhammad, the Quran, Allah describes the mountains of Safa and Marwah as symbols of His divinity. Walking between the two mountains seven times, four times from Safa to Marwah and three times from Marwah interchangeably, is considered a mandatory pillar (\"rukn\") of Umrah.\nHajj and 'Umrah.\nThe Hajj pilgrimage, also called the greater pilgrimage, attracts millions of Muslims from all over the world and almost triples Mecca's population for one week in the twelfth and final Islamic month of \"Dhu al-Hijjah\". In 2019, the Hajj attracted 2,489,406 pilgrims to the holy city. The 'Umrah, or the lesser pilgrimage, can be done at anytime during the year. Every adult, healthy Muslim who has the financial and physical capacity to travel to Mecca must perform the Hajj at least once in a lifetime. Umrah, the lesser pilgrimage, is not obligatory, but is recommended in the Quran. In addition to the \"Masjid al-Haram\", pilgrims also must visit the nearby towns of Mina/Muna, Muzdalifah and Mount Arafat for various rituals that are part of the Hajj.\nJabal al-Nour.\nJabal al-Nour is a mountain believed by Muslims to have been the place where Muhammad spent his time away from the bustling city of Mecca in seclusion. The mountain is located on the eastern entrance of the city and is the highest point in the city at 642 meters (2,106 feet).\nHira'a Cave.\nSituated atop Jabal al-Nour, this is the cave where Muslims believe Muhammad received the first revelation from Allah through the archangel Gabriel (Jibril in Islamic tradition) at the age of 40.\nGeography.\n Mecca is located in the Hejaz region, a wide strip of mountains separating the Nafud desert from the Red Sea. The city is situated in a valley with the same name around east of the port city of Jeddah. Mecca is one of the lowest cities in elevation in the Hejaz region, located at an elevation of above sea level at 21\u00ba23' north latitude and 39\u00ba51' east longitude. Mecca is divided into 34 districts.\nThe city centers on the al-Haram area, which contains the Masjid al-Haram. The area around the mosque is the old city and contains the most famous district of Mecca, Ajyad. The main street that runs to \"al-Haram\" is the Ibrahim al-Khalil Street, named after Ibrahim. Traditional, historical homes built of local rock, two to three stories long are still present within the city's central area, within view of modern hotels and shopping complexes. The total area of modern Mecca is over .\nElevation.\nMecca is at an elevation of above sea level, and approximately 70\u00a0km (44\u00a0mi) inland from the Red Sea. It is one of the lowest in the Hejaz region, although some mountain peaks in Mecca reach in height.\nTopography.\nThe city center lies in a corridor between mountains, which is often called the \"Hollow of Mecca\". The area contains the valley of al-Taneem, the valley of Bakkah and the valley of Abqar. This mountainous location has defined the contemporary expansion of the city.\nSources of water.\nDue to Mecca's climatic conditions water scarcity has been an issue throughout its history. In pre-modern Mecca, the city used a few chief sources of water. Among them were local wells, such as the Zamzam Well, that produced generally brackish water. Finding a sustainable water source to supply Mecca's permanent population and the large number of annual pilgrims was an undertaking that began in the Abbasid era under the auspices of Zubayda, the wife of the caliph Harun ar-Rashid. She donated funds for the deepening of Zamzam Well and funded a massive construction project likely costing 1.75 million gold dinars. The project encompassed the construction of an underground aqueduct from the and smaller water sources in the area to Mecca in addition to the construction of a waterworks on Mount Arafat called using a separate conduit to connect it to Mecca and the Masjid al-Haram. Over time however the system deteriorated and failed to fulfil its function. Thus in 1245, 1361, 1400, 1474, and 1510 different rulers invested into extensive repairs of the system. In 1525, due to the system's troubles persisting however the Ottoman sultan Suleiman the Magnificent began a construction project to rebuild the aqueduct in its entirety, the project took until 1571 to be completed. Its water quality was greatly lacking during the 19th century until a restoration and cleaning project by Osman Pasha began.\nAnother source which sporadically provided water was rainfall which was stored by the people in small reservoirs or cisterns. According to al-Kurd\u012b, there had been 89 floods by 1965. In the last century, the most severe flood was that of 1942. Since then, dams have been built to ameliorate this problem.\nIn the modern day, water treatment plants and desalination facilities have been constructed and are being constructed to provide suitable amounts of water fit for human consumption to the city.\nClimate.\nMecca features a hot desert climate (K\u00f6ppen: \"BWh\"), in three different plant hardiness zones: 10, 11 and 12. Like most Saudi Arabian cities, Mecca retains warm to hot temperatures even in winter, which can range from at night to in the afternoon. Summer temperatures are extremely hot and consistently break the mark in the afternoon, dropping to in the evening, but humidity remains relatively low, at 30\u201340%. Rain usually falls in Mecca in small amounts scattered between November and January, with heavy thunderstorms also common during the winter. Occasional summer rainfall in recent years has been associated with the northward movement of the Intertropical Convergence Zone. \nEconomy.\nThe Meccan economy has been heavily dependent on pilgrimages coming for Umrah and Hajj. Income generated through pilgrims not only powers the Meccan economy but has historically had far-reaching effects on the economy of the entire Arabian Peninsula. The income was generated in a number of ways. One method was taxing the pilgrims. Taxes were especially increased during the Great Depression, and many of these taxes existed to as late as 1972. Another way the Hajj generates income is through services to pilgrims. For example, the Saudi flag carrier, Saudia, generates 12% of its income from the pilgrimage. Fares paid by pilgrims to reach Mecca by land also generate income; as do the hotels and lodging companies that house them. The city takes in more than $100\u00a0million, while the Saudi government spends about $50\u00a0million on services for the Hajj. There are some industries and factories in the city, but Mecca no longer plays a major role in Saudi Arabia's economy, which is mainly based on oil exports. The few industries operating in Mecca include textiles, furniture, and utensils. The majority of the economy is service-oriented.\nNevertheless, many industries have been set up in Mecca. Various types of enterprises that have existed since 1970 in the city include corrugated iron manufacturing, copper extraction, carpentry, upholstery, bakeries, farming and banking. The city has grown substantially in the 20th and 21st centuries, as the convenience and affordability of jet travel has increased the number of pilgrims participating in the Hajj. Thousands of Saudis are employed year-round to oversee the Hajj and staff the hotels and shops that cater to pilgrims; these workers in turn have increased the demand for housing and services. The city is now ringed by freeways and contains shopping malls and skyscrapers.\nA new industrial city is being developed in \"Al Akashiya\" district of Makkah by the Saudi Authority for Industrial Cities and Technology Zones. It covers an area of .\nHuman resources.\nFormal education started to be developed in the late Ottoman period continuing slowly into Hashemite times. The first major attempt to improve the situation was made by a Jeddah merchant, Muhammad \u02bfAl\u012b Zaynal Ri\u1e0d\u0101, who founded the Madrasat al-Fal\u0101\u1e25 in Mecca in 1911\u201312 that cost \u00a3400,000. The school system in Mecca has many public and private schools for both males and females. As of 2005, there were 532 public and private schools for males and another 681 public and private schools for female students. The medium of instruction in both public and private schools is Arabic with emphasis on English as a second language, but some private schools founded by foreign entities such as International schools use the English language as the medium of instruction. Some of these are coeducational while other schools are not. For higher education, the city has only one university, Umm Al-Qura University, which was established in 1949 as a college and became a public university in 1981.\nHealthcare is provided by the Saudi government free of charge to all pilgrims. There are ten main hospitals in Mecca:\nThere are also many walk-in clinics available for both residents and pilgrims. Several temporary clinics are set up during the Hajj to tend to wounded pilgrims.\nDemographics.\nMecca is very densely populated. Most long-term residents live in the Old City, the area around the Great Mosque and many work to support pilgrims, known locally as the \"Hajj\" industry. 'Iyad Madani, the Saudi Arabian Minister for Hajj, was quoted saying, \"We never stop preparing for the Hajj.\"\nYear-round, pilgrims stream into the city to perform the rites of 'Umrah, and during the last weeks of eleventh Islamic month, Dhu al-Qi'dah, on average 2\u20134\u00a0million Muslims arrive in the city to take part in the rites known as Hajj. Pilgrims are from varying ethnicities and backgrounds, mainly South and Southeast Asia, Europe and Africa. Many of these pilgrims have remained and become residents of the city. By the 19th century, people of South Asian origin had come to constitute 20% of the population. The Burmese are an older, more established community who number roughly 250,000. Adding to this, the discovery of oil in the past 50 years has brought hundreds of thousands of working immigrants.\nNon-Muslims are not permitted to enter Mecca under Saudi law, and using fraudulent documents to do so may result in arrest and prosecution. The prohibition extends to Ahmadis, as they are considered non-Muslims. Nevertheless, many non-Muslims and Ahmadis have visited the city as these restrictions are loosely enforced. The first such recorded example of a non-Muslim entering the city is that of Ludovico di Varthema of Bologna in 1503. Guru Nanak, the founder of Sikhism, is said to have visited Mecca in December 1518. One of the most famous was Richard Francis Burton, who traveled as a Qadiriyya Sufi from Afghanistan in 1853.\nMecca Province is the only province where expatriates outnumber Saudis.\nCulture.\nMecca's culture has been affected by the large number of pilgrims that arrive annually, and thus boasts a rich cultural heritage. As a result of the vast numbers of pilgrims coming to the city each year, Mecca has become by far the most diverse city in the Muslim world.\nSports.\nIn pre-modern Mecca, the most common sports were impromptu wrestling and foot races. Football is now the most popular sport in Mecca and the kingdom. The city hosts some of the oldest sport clubs in Saudi Arabia, such as Al Wehda FC (established in 1945). King Abdulaziz Stadium is the largest stadium in Mecca with a capacity of 38,000.\nArchitectural landmarks.\nAdorning the southern facade of the Masjid al-Haram is the Abraj al-Bait Complex; towering over the Great Mosque, it is a seven-building complex with the central clock tower having a length of 601 m (1,972 feet), making it the world's fourth-tallest building. All seven buildings in the complex also form the third-largest building by floor area.\nThe Mecca Gate, known popularly as the Quran Gate, sits on the western entrance of the city, which is the route from Jeddah. Located on Highway 40, it marks the boundary of the Haram area where non-Muslims are prohibited from entering. The gate was designed in 1979 by an Egyptian architect, Samir Elabd, for the architectural firm IDEA Center. The structure is that of a book, representing the Quran, sitting on a \"rehal\", or bookrest.\nCommunications.\nPress and newspapers.\nThe first press was brought to Mecca in 1885 by Osman Nuri Pasha, an Ottoman W\u0101li. During the Hashemite period, it was used to print the city's official gazette, \"Al Qibla\". The Saudi regime expanded this press into a larger operation, introducing the new Saudi official gazette of Mecca, \"Umm al-Qur\u0101\". Mecca also has its own paper owned by the city, \"Al Nadwa\". However, other Saudi newspapers are also provided in Mecca such as the \"Saudi Gazette\", \"Al Madinah\", \"Okaz\" and \"Al Bilad\", in addition to other international newspapers.\nTelevision.\nTelecommunications in the city were emphasized early under the Saudi reign. King Abdulaziz pressed them forward as he saw them as a means of convenience and better governance. While under Hussein bin Ali, there were about 20 public telephones in the entire city; in 1936, the number jumped to 450, totaling about half the telephones in the country. During that time, telephone lines were extended to Jeddah and Ta'if, but not to the capital, Riyadh. By 1985, Mecca, like other Saudi cities, possessed modern telephone, telex, radio and television communications. Many television stations serve the city area, including Saudi TV1, Saudi TV2, Saudi TV Sports, Al-Ekhbariya, Arab Radio and Television Network and various cable, satellite and other specialty television providers.\nRadio.\nLimited radio communication was established within the Kingdom under the Hashemites. In 1929, wireless stations were set up in various towns in the region, creating a network that would become fully functional by 1932. Soon after World War II, the existing network was greatly expanded and improved. Since then, radio communication has been used extensively in directing the pilgrimage and addressing the pilgrims. This practice started in 1950, with the initiation of broadcasts on the Day of 'Arafah (9 Dhu al-Hijjah), and increased until 1957, at which time Radio Makkah became the most powerful station in the Middle East at 50\u00a0kW. Later, power was increased nine-fold to 450\u00a0kW. Music was not immediately broadcast; gradually, folk music was introduced.\nTransportation.\nAir.\nThe only airport near the city is the Mecca East airport, which is not active. Mecca is primarily served by King Abdulaziz International Airport in Jeddah for international and regional connections and Ta'if Regional Airport for regional connections. To cater to the large number of Hajj pilgrims, Jeddah Airport has a Hajj Terminal, specifically for use during the \"Hajj\" season; the terminal can accommodate 47 planes simultaneously while receiving 3,800 pilgrims per hour during the Hajj season.\nRoads.\nMecca, similar to Medina, lies at the junction of two of the most important highways in Saudi Arabia, Highway 40, connecting it to the important port city of Jeddah in the west and the capital of Riyadh and the other major port city, Dammam, in the east. The other, Highway 15, connects Mecca to the other holy Islamic city of Medina approximately in the north and onward to Tabuk and Jordan. While in the south, it connects Mecca to Abha and Jizan. Mecca is served by four ring roads, and these are very crowded compared to the three ring roads of Medina. Mecca also has many tunnels.\nRapid transit.\nAl Masha'er Al Muqaddassah Metro\nThe Al Masha'er Al Muqaddassah Metro is a metro line in Mecca opened on 13 November 2010. The 18.1-kilometer (11.2-mile) elevated metro transports pilgrims to the holy sites of 'Arafat, Muzdalifah and Mina in the city to reduce congestion on the road and is only operational during the \"Hajj\" season. It consists of nine stations, three in each of the aforementioned towns.\nMecca Metro\nThe Mecca Metro, officially known as Makkah Mass Rail Transit, is a planned four-line metro system for the city. This will be in addition to the Al Masha'er Al Muqaddassah Metro which carries pilgrims.\nRail.\nIntercity.\nIn 2018, the Haramain High Speed Railway entered operation, connecting the holy cities of Mecca and Medina together via Jeddah, King Abdulaziz International Airport and King Abdullah Economic City in Rabigh. The railway consists of 35 electric trains and is capable of transporting 60\u00a0million passengers annually. Each train can achieve speeds of up to 300\u00a0kmh (190\u00a0mph), traveling a total distance of 450\u00a0km (280\u00a0mi), reducing the travel time between the two cities to less than two hours.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "21023", "revid": "43070105", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21023", "title": "Mormonism", "text": "Religious tradition and theology founded by Joseph Smith\nMormonism is the theology and religious tradition of the Latter Day Saint movement of Restorationist Christianity started by Joseph Smith in Western New York in the 1820s and 1830s. As a label, Mormonism has been applied to various aspects of the Latter Day Saint movement, although since 2018 there has been a push from The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (LDS Church) to distance itself from this label. \nA prominent feature of Mormon theology is the Book of Mormon, a 19th-century text which describes itself as a chronicle of early Indigenous peoples of the Americas and their dealings with God. Mormon theology includes mainstream Christian beliefs with modifications stemming from belief in revelations to Smith and other religious leaders. This includes the use of and belief in the Bible and other religious texts, including the Doctrine and Covenants and the Pearl of Great Price. Mormonism includes significant doctrines of eternal marriage, eternal progression, baptism for the dead, sexual purity, health, fasting, Sabbath observance, and formerly, plural marriage.\nThe theology itself is not uniform; as early as 1831, and most significantly after Smith's death, various groups split from the Church of Christ that Smith established. One source estimated over 400 denominations have sprung from founder Joseph Smith's original movement. Other than differences in leadership, these groups most significantly differ in their stances on polygamy, which the Utah-based LDS Church banned in 1890, and Trinitarianism, which the LDS Church does not affirm. The branch of theology which seeks to maintain the practice of polygamy is known as Mormon fundamentalism and includes several different churches. Other groups affirm Trinitarianism, such as the Community of Christ (formerly the Reorganized Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints), and describe their doctrine as Trinitarian Christian restorationist.\n\"Cultural Mormonism\" is a term coined by cultural Mormons who identify with the culture, especially present in much of the American West, but do not necessarily identify with the theology.\nHistorical overview.\nThe doctrines of Mormonism began with the farmboy Joseph Smith in the 1820s in Western New York during a period of religious excitement known as the Second Great Awakening. Smith, at 14 years old, was determined to find out which church taught the \"true\" doctrine of God. He believed that God existed, but was confused by what he believed to be contradictions in the beliefs of churches available to him. In \"Joseph Smith-History\", he wrote: \"While I was laboring under the extreme difficulties caused by the contests of these parties of religionists, I was one day reading the Epistle of James, first chapter and fifth verse, which reads: 'If any of you lack wisdom, let him ask of God, that giveth to all men liberally, and upbraideth not; and it shall be given him.'\" After praying about which denomination he should join, Smith said he received a vision in the spring of 1820. Called the \"First Vision\", Smith said that God the Father and his son, Jesus Christ, appeared to him and instructed him to join none of the existing churches because they were all wrong. During the 1820s, Smith chronicled several angelic visitations, and was eventually told (by the angels) that God would use him to re-establish the \"true Christian church.\"\nIn 1830 Smith published the Book of Mormon which he claimed to have translated from ancient writings found on golden plates. He said an angel first showed him the location of the plates in 1823, buried in a nearby hill. After obtaining the plates in 1827, Smith began dictating the text of the Book of Mormon in April 1828 with the assistance of Martin Harris and later Oliver Cowdery. After several interruptions, Smith completed the manuscript in June 1829. Smith said the plates were returned to the angel after he finished the translation. \nThe Book of Mormon claims to be a chronicle of early Israelites who left the Near East and traveled to the Americas. The book begins c.\u2009600 BC with the departure from Jerusalem of the family of a prophet named Lehi, and their sailing to the Americas. It tells of people in the Americas (presumably Native Americans) with a belief in Jesus hundreds of years before his birth; their witnessing Jesus's personal visitation to them after his resurrection; and of their eventually losing Christianity after generations of wars and apostasy. According to Smith, the \"Book of Mormon\" and other revelations would be the means of establishing correct doctrine for a restored church. Smith began baptizing new converts in 1829, and formally organized the Church of Christ in 1830. Smith was seen by his followers as a modern-day prophet.\nThe early church encountered criticism and persecution from residents of Palmyra, New York and surrounding several towns when they began to organize. To avoid confrontation, Smith and the early church members, known as Mormons, moved West to Kirtland, Ohio, and Jackson County, Missouri where they hoped to establish a permanent New Jerusalem or City of Zion. However, they were expelled from Jackson County in 1833 and fled to other parts of Missouri. In 1838, fighting between the Missourians and Mormons resulted in the governor of Missouri issuing an \"extermination order\" against the Mormons, forcing them to flee the state. The displaced church relocated to Illinois where under Smith's direction, the church bought a small town, renamed it Nauvoo, and lived with a degree of peace and prosperity for a few years. However, tensions between Mormons and their neighbors again escalated. In 1844 Smith was killed by a mob, precipitating a succession crisis.\nThe largest group of Mormons, now called the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, followed Brigham Young as the new prophet and, under his direction, emigrated to what became the Utah Territory. There, the church began the open practice of plural marriage, a form of religious polygamy which Smith had instituted in Nauvoo. Polygamy became the faith's most sensational characteristic during the 19th century, and vigorous opposition by the United States Congress threatened the church's existence as a legal institution. Further, polygamy was also a major cause for the opposition to Mormonism in the states of Idaho and Arizona. In the 1890 Manifesto, church president Wilford Woodruff announced the official end of plural marriage.\nDue to this formal abolition of plural marriage, several small groups broke from the LDS Church forming many smaller Mormon fundamentalist denominations. During the latter half of the 20th century the LDS Church grew rapidly, going from about 1.7 million members in 1960 to around 7.7 million members in 1990. Growth since then has slowed, and the church claimed a membership of 16\u00a0million in 2020.\nTheology.\nNature of God.\nIn orthodox Mormonism, the term \"God\" generally refers to the biblical God the Father, whom Latter Day Saints refer to as \"Elohim\", and the term \"Godhead\" refers to a council of three distinct divine persons consisting of God the Father, Jesus (his firstborn Son, whom Latter Day Saints refer to as \"Jehovah\"), and the Holy Ghost. Latter Day Saints believe that the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost are three distinct beings, and that the Father and Jesus have perfected, glorified, physical bodies, while the Holy Ghost is a spirit without a physical body. Latter Day Saints also believe that there are other gods and goddesses outside the Godhead, such as a Heavenly Mother\u2014who is married to God the Father\u2014and that faithful Latter-day Saints may attain godhood in the afterlife. Joseph Smith taught that God was once a man on another planet before being exalted to Godhood.\nThis conception differs from the traditional Christian Trinity in several ways, one of which is that Mormonism has not adopted or continued to hold the doctrine of the Nicene Creed, that the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost are of the same substance or being. Also, Mormonism teaches that the intelligence dwelling in each human is coeternal with God. Mormons use the term \"omnipotent\" to describe God, and regard him as the creator: they understand him as being almighty and eternal but subject to eternal natural law which governs intelligences, justice and the eternal nature of matter (i.e. God organized the world but did not create it from nothing). The Mormon conception of God also differs substantially from the Jewish tradition of ethical monotheism in which \"elohim\" () is a completely different conception.\nThis description of God represents the Mormon orthodoxy, formalized in 1915 based on earlier teachings. Other currently existing and historical branches of Mormonism have adopted different views of god, such as the Adam\u2013God doctrine and Trinitarianism.\nRestoration.\nMormonism describes itself as falling within world Christianity, but as a distinct restored dispensation; it characterizes itself as the only true form of the Christian religion since the time of a \"Great Apostasy\" that began not long after the ascension of Jesus Christ. According to Mormons this apostasy involved the corruption of the pure, original Christian doctrine with Greek and other philosophies, and followers dividing into different ideological groups. Additionally, Mormons claim the martyrdom of the Apostles led to the loss of Priesthood authority to administer the Church and its ordinances.\nMormons believe that God re-established the 1st-century early Christian church as found in the New Testament through the restoration of Joseph Smith. In particular, Mormons believe that angels such as Peter, James, John, and John the Baptist appeared to Joseph Smith and others and bestowed various Priesthood authorities on them. Mormons thus believe that their Church is the \"only true and living church\" because divine authority was restored to it through Smith. In addition, Mormons believe that Smith and his legitimate successors are modern prophets who receive revelation from God to guide the church. They maintain that other Christian religions have a portion of the truth and are guided by the light of Christ.\nCosmology.\nSmith's cosmology is laid out mostly in Smith's later revelations and sermons\u2014particularly the Book of Abraham, the Book of Moses, and the King Follett discourse. Mormon cosmology presents a unique view of God and the universe and places high importance on human agency. In Mormonism, life on earth is just a short part of an eternal existence. Mormons believe that in the beginning, all people existed as spirits or \"intelligences\" in the presence of God. In this state, God proposed a plan of salvation whereby they could progress and \"have a privilege to advance like himself.\" The spirits were free to accept or reject this plan, and a \"third\" of them, led by Satan rejected it. The rest accepted the plan, coming to earth and receiving bodies with an understanding that they would experience sin and suffering.\nIn Mormonism, the central part of God's plan is the atonement of Jesus Christ. Mormons believe that one purpose of earthly life is to learn to choose good over evil. In this process, people inevitably make mistakes, becoming unworthy to return to the presence of God. Mormons believe that Jesus paid for the sins of the world and that all people can be saved through his atonement. Mormons accept Christ's atonement through faith, repentance, formal covenants or ordinances such as baptism, and consistently trying to live a Christ-like life.\nAccording to Mormon scripture, the Earth's creation was not \"ex nihilo\", but organized from existing matter. The Earth is just one of many inhabited worlds, and there are many governing heavenly bodies, including the planet or star Kolob, which is said to be nearest the throne of God.\nAmerica.\nMormon theology teaches that the United States is a unique place and that Mormons are God's chosen people, selected for a singular destiny. The Book of Mormon alludes to the United States as being the Biblical promised land, with the Constitution of the United States being divinely inspired, and argues that America is an exceptional nation.\nIn Upstate New York in 1823, Joseph Smith claimed to have had a vision in which the Angel Moroni told him about engraved golden plates buried in a nearby hill. According to Smith, he received subsequent instruction from Moroni and, four years later, excavated the plates and translated them from \"reformed Egyptian\" into English; the resultant Book of Mormon\u2014so called after an ancient American prophet who, according to Smith, had compiled the text recorded on the golden plates\u2014recounts the history of a tribe of Israelites, led by the prophet Lehi, who migrated from Jerusalem to the Americas in the 7th century BCE. In Mormonism, these Israelite tribes who migrated to the Americas centuries before the birth of Jesus Christ are considered to be among the ancestors of pre-Columbian Native Americans.\nJoseph Smith argued that the millennial New Jerusalem was to be built in America (10th Article of Faith). In the Doctrine and Covenants, Smith records God as saying \"it is not right that any man should be in bondage one to another. And for this purpose have I established the Constitution of this land, by the hands of wise men whom I raised up unto this very purpose, and redeemed the land by the shedding of blood\" (D&amp;C 101:79\u201380). To Mormons, this places America as the originator of religious liberty and freedom, while noting a need to expand these American values worldwide.\nAlthough officially shunned by the LDS Church, fundamentalist Mormons believe in the White Horse Prophecy, which argues that Mormons will be called upon to preserve the Constitution as it hangs \"by a thread\".\nOrdinances.\nIn Mormonism, an ordinance is a religious ritual of special significance, often involving the formation of a covenant with God. Ordinances are performed by the authority of the priesthood and in the name of Jesus Christ. The term has a meaning roughly similar to the term \"sacrament\" in other Christian denominations.\n A young man baptizing a child into the LDS Church in Panama\nSaving ordinances (or ordinances viewed as necessary for salvation) include: baptism by immersion after the age of accountability (normally age 8); confirmation and reception of the gift of the Holy Ghost, performed by laying hands on the head of a newly baptized member; ordination to the Aaronic and Melchizedek priesthoods for males; an endowment (including washing and anointing) received in temples; and marriage (or sealing) to a spouse.\nMormons also perform other ordinances, which include the Lord's supper (commonly called the sacrament), naming and blessing children, giving priesthood blessings and patriarchal blessings, anointing and blessing the sick, participating in prayer circles, and setting apart individuals who are called to church positions.\nIn Mormonism, the saving ordinances are seen as necessary for salvation, but they are insufficient in and of themselves. For example, baptism is required for exaltation, but having been baptized does not guarantee any eternal reward. The baptized person is expected to obey God's commandments, repent of any sinful conduct subsequent to baptism, and receive the other saving ordinances.\nBecause Mormons believe that everyone must receive specific ordinances to be saved, Mormons perform ordinances on behalf of deceased persons. These ordinances are performed vicariously or by \"proxy\" on behalf of the dead. In accordance with their belief in each individual's \"free agency\", living or dead, Mormons believe that the deceased may accept or reject the offered ordinance in the spirit world, just as all spirits decided to accept or reject God's plan originally. In addition, these \"conditional\" ordinances on behalf of the dead are performed only when a deceased person's genealogical information has been submitted to a temple and correctly processed there before the ordinance ritual is performed. Only ordinances for salvation are performed on behalf of dead people.\nScripture.\nMormons believe in the Old and New Testaments, and the LDS Church uses the Authorized King James Version as its official scriptural text of the Bible. While Mormons believe in the general accuracy of the modern-day text of the Bible, they also believe that it is incomplete and that errors have been introduced. According to Mormon theology, many lost truths are restored in the Book of Mormon, which Mormons hold to be divine scripture and equal in authority to the Bible.\nThe Mormon scriptural canon also includes a collection of revelations and writings contained in the Doctrine and Covenants, which contains doctrine and prophecy, and the Pearl of Great Price, which addresses briefly Genesis to Exodus. These books, as well as the Joseph Smith Translation of the Bible, have varying degrees of acceptance as divine scripture among different denominations of the Latter Day Saint movement.\nRevelation.\nIn Mormonism, continuous revelation is the principle that God or his divine agents still communicate to humankind. This communication can be manifest in many ways: influences of the Holy Ghost (the principal form in which this principle is manifest), visions, visitations of divine beings, and others. Joseph Smith used the example of the Lord's revelations to Moses in Deuteronomy to explain the importance of continuous revelation:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;God said, \"Thou shalt not kill\"; at another time he said, \"Thou shalt utterly destroy.\" This is the principle on which the government of heaven is conducted, by revelation adapted to the circumstances in which the children of the Kingdom are placed. Whatever God requires is right, no matter what it is, although we may not see the reason thereof till long after the events transpire.\nMormons believe Smith and subsequent church leaders could speak scripture \"when moved upon by the Holy Ghost.\" In addition, many Mormons believe that ancient prophets in other regions of the world received revelations that resulted in additional scriptures that have been lost and may, one day, be forthcoming. In Mormonism, revelation is not limited to church members. For instance, Latter Day Saints believe the United States Constitution is a divinely inspired document.\nMormons are encouraged to develop a personal relationship with the Holy Ghost and receive personal revelation for their own direction and that of their family. The Latter-Day Saint concept of revelation includes the belief that revelation from God is available to all those who earnestly seek it with the intent of doing good. It also teaches that everyone is entitled to personal revelation concerning their stewardship (leadership responsibility). Thus, parents may receive inspiration from God in raising their families; individuals can receive divine inspiration to help them meet personal challenges, and church officers may receive revelation for those they serve.\nThe important consequence is that each person may receive confirmation that a prophet's doctrines are true and gain divine insight in using those truths for their own benefit and eternal progress. In the church, personal revelation is expected and encouraged, and many converts believe that personal revelation from God was instrumental in their conversion.\nRelationship with other faiths.\nRelationship with mainstream Christianity.\nMormonism categorizes itself within Christianity, and nearly all Mormons self-identify as Christian. For some who define Christianity within the doctrines of Catholicism, Eastern and Oriental Orthodoxy, the Churches of the East, and Protestantism, Mormonism's differences place it outside the umbrella of Christianity.\nSince its beginnings, the faith has proclaimed itself to be Christ's Church restored with its original authority, structure and power; maintaining that existing denominations believed in incorrect doctrines and were not acknowledged by God as his church and kingdom. Though the religion quickly gained a large following of Christian seekers, in the 1830s, many American Christians came to view the church's early doctrines and practices as politically and culturally subversive, as well as doctrinally heretical, abominable, and condemnable. This discord led to a series of sometimes-deadly conflicts between Mormons and others who saw themselves as orthodox Christians. Although such violence declined during the twentieth century, the religion's unique doctrinal views and practices still generate criticism, sometimes vehemently so. This gives rise to efforts by Mormons and opposing types of Christians to proselytize each other.\nMormons believe in Jesus Christ as the literal Son of God and Messiah, his crucifixion as a conclusion of a sin offering, and subsequent resurrection. However, Latter-day Saints (LDS) reject the ecumenical creeds and the definition of the Trinity. (In contrast, the second-largest Latter Day Saint denomination, the Community of Christ, is Trinitarian and monotheistic.) Mormons hold the view that the New Testament prophesied both the apostasy from the teachings of Christ and his apostles as well as the restoration of all things prior to the second coming of Christ.\nSome notable differences with mainstream Christianity include a belief that Jesus began his atonement in the garden of Gethsemane and continued it to his crucifixion, rather than the orthodox belief that the crucifixion alone was the physical atonement; and an afterlife with three degrees of glory, with hell (often called spirit prison) being a temporary repository for the wicked between death and the resurrection. Additionally, Mormons do not believe in creation \"ex nihilo\", believing that matter is eternal, and creation involved God organizing existing matter.\nMuch of the Mormon belief system is geographically oriented around the North and South American continents. Mormons believe that the people of the Book of Mormon lived in the western hemisphere, that Christ appeared in the western hemisphere after his death and resurrection, that the true faith was restored in Upstate New York by Joseph Smith, that the Garden of Eden was located in North America, and that the New Jerusalem would be built in Missouri. For this and other reasons, including a belief by many Mormons in American exceptionalism, Molly Worthen speculates that this may be why Leo Tolstoy described Mormonism as the \"quintessential 'American religion'\".\nRelationship with Judaism.\nAlthough Mormons do not claim to be part of Judaism, Mormon theology claims to situate Mormonism within the context of Judaism to an extent that goes beyond what most other Christian denominations claim. The faith incorporates many Old Testament ideas into its theology, and the beliefs of Mormons sometimes parallel those of Judaism and certain elements of Jewish culture. In the earliest days of Mormonism, Joseph Smith taught that the Indigenous peoples of the Americas were members of some of the Lost Tribes of Israel. Later, he taught that Mormons were Israelites, and that they may learn of their tribal affiliation within the twelve Israelite tribes. Members of the LDS Church receive Patriarchal blessings which declare the recipient's lineage within one of the tribes of Israel. The lineage is either through true blood-line or adoption. The LDS Church teaches that if one is not a direct descendant of one of the twelve tribes, upon baptism he or she is adopted into one of the tribes. Patriarchal blessings also include personal information which is revealed through a patriarch by the power of the priesthood.\nSmith hired Joshua (James) Seixas, son of Gershom Mendes Seixas and Hebrew school teacher at Congregation Shearith Israel, to teach Mormon leaders Hebrew. Smith himself attended some of these classes and went on to use his basic Hebrew in teachings. For example, Smith named the largest Mormon settlement he founded \"Nauvoo\", which means \"beautiful\" (pl.) in Biblical Hebrew. Brigham Young named a tributary of the Great Salt Lake the \"Jordan River\". The LDS Church has a Jerusalem Center in Israel, where students focus their study on Near Eastern history, culture, language, and the Bible.\nThere has been some controversy involving Jewish groups who see the actions of some elements of Mormonism as offensive. In the 1990s, Jewish groups vocally opposed the LDS practice of baptism for the dead on behalf of Jewish victims of the Holocaust and Jews in general. According to LDS Church general authority Monte J. Brough, \"Mormons who baptized 380,000 Holocaust victims posthumously were motivated by love and compassion and did not understand their gesture might offend Jews ... they did not realize that what they intended as a 'Christian act of service' was 'misguided and insensitive'\". Mormons believe that when the dead are baptized through proxy, they have the option of accepting or rejecting the ordinance.\nRelationship with UFOlogy.\nMany Mormons are believers, experiencers, or promotors of UFOs as an interstellar or non-human phenomenon. Matthew Bowman, scholar of Mormon Studies, writes that while some people use this to try to make Mormonism look silly, \"a good number of Latter-day Saints\" have welcomed being associated with UFOs. \"Latter-day Saints have pointed to the phenomenon as either entirely consistent with their faith or even proof of it. ... These folks are the heirs to a strain of theology going back to Brigham Young that peaked with the early 20th-century writings of church leaders like B.H. Roberts or John Widtsoe.\"\nTheological divisions.\nMormon theology includes three main movements. By far the largest of these is \"mainstream Mormonism\", defined by the leadership of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (LDS Church). The two broad movements outside mainstream Mormonism are Mormon fundamentalism, and liberal reformist Mormonism.\nMainstream Mormon theology.\nMainstream Mormonism is defined by the leadership of the LDS Church which identifies itself as Christian. Members of the LDS Church consider their top leaders to be prophets and apostles, and are encouraged to accept their positions on matters of theology, while seeking confirmation of them through personal study of the Book of Mormon and the Bible. Personal prayer is encouraged as well. The LDS Church is by far the largest branch of Mormonism. It has continuously existed since the succession crisis of 1844 that split the Latter Day Saint movement after the death of founder Joseph Smith, Jr.\nThe LDS Church seeks to distance itself from other branches of Mormonism, particularly those that practice polygamy.\nThe church maintains a degree of orthodoxy by excommunicating or disciplining its members who take positions or engage in practices viewed as apostasy. For example, the LDS Church excommunicates members who practice polygamy or who adopt the beliefs and practices of Mormon fundamentalism.\nMormon fundamentalism.\nOne way Mormon fundamentalism distinguishes itself from mainstream Mormonism is through the practice of plural marriage. Fundamentalists initially broke from the LDS Church after that doctrine was discontinued around the beginning of the 20th century. Mormon fundamentalism teaches that plural marriage is a requirement for exaltation (the highest degree of salvation), which will allow them to live as gods and goddesses in the afterlife. Mainstream Mormons, by contrast, believe that a single Celestial marriage is necessary for exaltation.\nIn distinction with the LDS Church, Mormon fundamentalists also often believe in a number of other doctrines taught and practiced by Brigham Young in the 19th century, which the LDS Church has either abandoned, repudiated, or put in abeyance. These include:\nMormon fundamentalists believe that these principles were wrongly abandoned or changed by the LDS Church, in large part due to the desire of its leadership and members to assimilate into mainstream American society and avoid the persecutions and conflict that had characterized the church throughout its early years. Others believe that it was a necessity at some point for \"a restoration of all things\" to be a truly restored Church.\nLiberal reformist theology.\nSome LDS Church members have worked towards a more liberal reform of the church. Others have left the LDS Church and still consider themselves to be cultural Mormons. Others have formed new religions (many of them now defunct). For instance the Godbeites broke away from the LDS Church in the late 19th century, on the basis of both political and religious liberalism, and in 1985 the Restoration Church of Jesus Christ broke away from the LDS Church as an LGBT-friendly denomination, which was formally dissolved in 2010.\nCriticism.\nAs the largest denomination within Mormonism, the LDS Church has been the subject of criticism since it was founded by Joseph Smith in 1830.\nPerhaps the most controversial, and a key contributing factor for Smith's murder, is the claim that plural marriage (as defenders call it) or polygamy (as critics call it) is biblically authorized. Under heavy pressure\u2014Utah would not be accepted as a state if polygamy was practiced\u2014the church formally and publicly renounced the practice in 1890. Utah's statehood soon followed. However, plural marriage remains a controversial and divisive issue, as despite the official renunciation of 1890, it still has sympathizers, defenders, and semi-secret practitioners within Mormonism, though not within the LDS Church.\nMore recent criticism has concerned questions of historical revisionism, homophobia, racism, sexist policies, inadequate financial disclosure, and the historical authenticity of the Book of Mormon.\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "21025", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21025", "title": "Modifications and Additions Reactor Facility", "text": ""}
{"id": "21026", "revid": "50622521", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21026", "title": "Meat Loaf", "text": "American singer and actor (1947\u20132022)\nMichael Lee Aday (born Marvin Lee Aday; September 27, 1947 \u2013 January 20, 2022), better known by his stage name Meat Loaf, was an American singer and actor. He was known for his powerful, wide-ranging voice and theatrical live shows. His \"Bat Out of Hell\" album trilogy\u2014\"Bat Out of Hell\" (1977), ' (1993), and ' (2006)\u2014has sold more than 100 million records worldwide, making him one of the best-selling music artists of all time. The first album stayed on the charts for over nine years and is one of the best-selling albums in history, still selling an estimated 200,000 copies annually as of 2016[ [update]].\nDespite the commercial success of \"Bat Out of Hell\" and \"Bat Out of Hell II: Back Into Hell\", and earning a Grammy Award for Best Solo Rock Vocal Performance for the song \"I'd Do Anything for Love\", Meat Loaf nevertheless experienced some difficulty establishing a steady career within the United States. However, his career still saw success due to his popularity in Europe, especially in the United Kingdom and Ireland. He received the 1994 Brit Award in the United Kingdom for best-selling album and single, and was ranked 23rd for the number of weeks spent on the UK charts in 2006. He ranks 96th on VH1's \"100 Greatest Artists of Hard Rock\".\nMeat Loaf also acted in over 50 films and television shows, sometimes as himself or as characters resembling his stage persona. His notable film roles include Eddie in \"The Rocky Horror Picture Show\" (1975), the bus driver in \"Spice World\" (1997), and Robert Paulson in \"Fight Club\" (1999). His early stage work included dual roles in the original Broadway cast of \"The Rocky Horror Show;\" he also appeared in the musical \"Hair\", both on and Off-Broadway.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nEarly life.\nMarvin Lee Aday was born in Dallas, Texas, on September 27, 1947, the son of Wilma Artie (\"n\u00e9e\" Hukel), a schoolteacher and member of the Vo-di-o-do Girls gospel music quartet, and Orvis Wesley Aday, a former police officer who went into business selling a homemade cough remedy with his wife and a friend under the name of the Griffin Grocery Company. He stated in an interview that when he was born, he was \"bright red and stayed that way for days\" and that his father said he looked like \"nine pounds of ground chuck\", and convinced hospital staff to put the name \"Meat\" on his crib. He was later called \"M.L.\" in reference to his initials, but when his weight increased, his seventh-grade classmates referred to him as \"Meat Loaf\", referring to his , stature. He also attributed the nickname to an incident where, after he stepped on a football coach's foot, the coach yelled \"Get off my foot, you hunk of meatloaf!\"\nMeat Loaf's father would binge-drink alcohol for days at a time, a habit he started when he was medically discharged from the U.S. Army during World War II after being wounded by fragments from a mortar shell. Meat Loaf often accompanied his mother in driving to the bars in Dallas to look for his father, and often stayed with his grandmother. He attended church and Bible study every Sunday.\nHe was 16 years old on November 22, 1963, the day of the assassination of John F. Kennedy. That morning, Meat Loaf had seen the President when he arrived at Dallas Love Field. Later, after hearing of Kennedy's death, he and a friend drove to Parkland Hospital where he witnessed Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis, covered in her husband's blood, getting out of the car that brought her to the hospital.\nIn 1965, Meat Loaf graduated from Thomas Jefferson High School, having appeared in school stage productions such as \"Where's Charley?\" and \"The Music Man\". He played high school football as a defensive tackle. After attending college at Lubbock Christian College, he transferred to North Texas State University (now the University of North Texas).\nIn 1967, when Meat Loaf was 19 years old, his mother died of cancer, and his father lunged at him with a knife after falsely accusing the teen of having girls in his bedroom. Meat Loaf used the money his mother left him to rent an apartment in Dallas, where he isolated for three and a half months, at which time a friend found him. Soon after, he went to the airport and caught the next flight to Los Angeles.\nMeat Loaf intentionally gained 60 pounds (27\u00a0kg) to fail his physical examination for the Vietnam War draft. Despite this strategy, he still received his notice to appear before his local draft board, but chose to ignore it.\nCareer.\nEarly career.\nIn Los Angeles, Meat Loaf formed his first band, Meat Loaf Soul. The band received several recording contracts. Meat Loaf Soul's first gig was in Huntington Beach, California in 1968 at the Cave, opening for Van Morrison's band Them and Question Mark and the Mysterians. Meat Loaf later described his early days in the music industry as being treated like a \"circus clown.\"\nThe band underwent several changes of lead guitarists, changing the name of the band each time, to names including Popcorn Blizzard and Floating Circus. As Floating Circus, they opened for the Who, the Fugs, the Stooges, MC5, the Grateful Dead, and the Grease Band. Their regional success led them to release a single, \"Once Upon a Time\", backed with \"Hello\". Meat Loaf then joined the Los Angeles production of the musical \"Hair\".\n1970s.\nWith the publicity generated from \"Hair\", Meat Loaf accepted an invitation by Motown, in Detroit. In addition to appearing as \"Mother\" and \"Ulysses S. Grant\" at Detroit's Vest Pocket Theatre, he recorded the vocals with fellow \"Hair\" performer Shaun \"Stoney\" Murphy on an album of songs written and selected by the Motown production team. The album, titled \"Stoney &amp; Meatloaf\" (with Meatloaf spelled as one word), was released in September 1971 and included the single \"What You See Is What You Get\"; it reached number 36 on the Best Selling Soul Singles chart and number 71 on the \"Billboard\" Hot 100 chart. Meat Loaf and Stoney toured with Jake Wade and the Soul Searchers, opening for Richie Havens, the Who, the Stooges, Bob Seger, Alice Cooper, and Rare Earth. Meat Loaf left Motown soon after the label replaced his and Stoney's vocals from the one song he liked, \"Who Is the Leader of the People?\" with new vocals by Edwin Starr. He moved to Freeland, Michigan, for a year and was the opening act at the Grande Ballroom 80 times.\nIn December 1972, Meat Loaf was in the original off-Broadway production of \"Rainbow\" at the Orpheum Theatre in New York. After the tour, Meat Loaf rejoined the cast of \"Hair\", this time at a Broadway theater. After he hired an agent, he auditioned for the Public Theater's production of \"More Than You Deserve\". During the audition, Meat Loaf met Jim Steinman. He sang a Stoney and Meat Loaf favorite of his, \"(I'd Love to Be) As Heavy as Jesus\", and subsequently got the part of Rabbit, a maniac that blows up his fellow soldiers so they can \"go home.\" Ron Silver and Fred Gwynne were also in the show. In the summer between the show's workshop production (April 1973) and full production (November 1973 \u2013 January 1974), Meat Loaf appeared in a Shakespeare in the Park production of \"As You Like It\" with Raul Julia and Mary Beth Hurt.\nIn late 1973, Meat Loaf was cast in the original L.A. Roxy cast of \"The Rocky Horror Show\", playing the parts of both Eddie and Dr. Scott. The success of the musical led to the filming of \"The Rocky Horror Picture Show\" in which Meat Loaf played only Eddie while Jonathan Adams was cast as Dr. Scott, a decision Meat Loaf said made the movie not as good as the musical.\nAbout the same time, Meat Loaf and Steinman started work on \"Bat Out of Hell\". Meat Loaf convinced Epic Records to shoot music videos for four songs, \"Bat Out of Hell\", \"Paradise by the Dashboard Light\", \"You Took the Words Right Out of My Mouth\", and \"Two Out of Three Ain't Bad\" and convinced Lou Adler, the producer of \"Rocky Horror\", to run the \"Paradise\" video as a trailer to the movie. During his recording of the soundtrack for \"Rocky Horror\", Meat Loaf recorded two more songs: \"Stand by Me\" (a Ben E. King cover), and \"Clap Your Hands.\" They remained unreleased for a decade, until 1984, when they appeared as B-sides to the \"Nowhere Fast\" single.\nIn 1976, Meat Loaf recorded lead vocals for Ted Nugent's album \"Free-for-All\" when regular Nugent lead vocalist Derek St. Holmes temporarily quit the band. Meat Loaf sang lead on five of the album's nine tracks. That same year, Meat Loaf appeared in his final theatrical show in New York City, the short-lived Broadway production of Gower Champion's rock musical \"Rockabye Hamlet\". It closed two weeks into its initial run.\nMeat Loaf and Steinman started working on \"Bat Out of Hell\" in 1972, but did not get serious about it until the end of 1974. Meat Loaf then decided to leave theater and concentrate exclusively on music. Meat Loaf was cast as an understudy for John Belushi in \"The National Lampoon Show\". It was at the \"Lampoon\" show that Meat Loaf met Ellen Foley, the co-star who sang \"Paradise by the Dashboard Light\" and \"Bat Out of Hell\" with him on the album \"Bat Out of Hell\".\nMeat Loaf and Steinman spent time seeking a record deal; however, their approaches were rejected by each record company, because their songs did not fit any specific recognized music industry style. Todd Rundgren, under the impression that they already had a record deal, agreed to produce the album as well as play lead guitar along with other members of Rundgren's band Utopia and Max Weinberg. They then shopped the record around, but they still had no takers until Steve Popovich's Cleveland International Records took a chance, releasing \"Bat Out of Hell\" in October 1977.\nMeat Loaf and Steinman formed the band Neverland Express to tour in support of \"Bat Out of Hell\". Their first gig was opening for Cheap Trick in Chicago. Meat Loaf gained national exposure as the musical guest on \"Saturday Night Live\" on March 25, 1978. Host Christopher Lee introduced him with a groan worthy joke. In 1978, Meat Loaf jumped off a stage in Ottawa, Ontario, breaking his leg. He finished his tour performing in a wheelchair.\n\"Bat Out of Hell\" has sold an estimated 43 million copies globally, including 15\u00a0million in the United States, making it one of the best-selling albums of all time. In the United Kingdom alone, its 2.1\u00a0million sales put it in 38th place. Despite peaking at No. 9 and spending only two weeks in the top ten in 1981, it has now spent 485 weeks on the UK Albums Chart (May 2015), a figure bettered only by \"Rumours\" by Fleetwood Mac with 487 weeks. In Australia, it knocked the Bee Gees off the No. 1 spot and became the biggest-selling album of all time in that country. \"Bat Out of Hell\" has, as of December 2020, spent a total of 522 weeks in the Top 200 in the UK chart.\n1980s.\nIn 1979, Steinman started to work on \"Bad for Good\", the intended follow-up to 1977's \"Bat Out of Hell\". During that time, a combination of touring, drugs and exhaustion had caused Meat Loaf to lose his voice. Without a singer, and pressured by the record company, Steinman decided that he should sing on \"Bad for Good\" himself. While Steinman worked on Bad for Good, Meat Loaf played the role of Travis Redfish in the movie \"Roadie\" until his singing voice returned. Steinman then wrote a new album for Meat Loaf, \"Dead Ringer\", which was released in September 1981. Steinman had written five new songs which, in addition to the track \"More Than You Deserve\" (sung by Meat Loaf in the stage musical of the same name) and a reworked monologue, formed the album \"Dead Ringer\", which was produced by Meat Loaf and Stephan Galfas, with backing tracks produced by Todd Rundgren, Jimmy Iovine, and Steinman. In 1976, Meat Loaf appeared on the track \"Keeper Keep Us\", from the Intergalactic Touring Band's self-titled album, produced by Galfas. The song \"Dead Ringer for Love\" was the pinnacle of the album, and launched Meat Loaf to even greater success. While it failed to chart in the US, it reached No. 5 in the United Kingdom and stayed in the UK Singles Chart for 19 weeks. Cher provided the lead female vocals in the song.\nOn December 5, 1981, Meat Loaf and the Neverland Express were the musical guests for \"Saturday Night Live\" where he and former fellow \"Rocky Horror Picture Show\" actor Tim Curry performed a skit depicting a One-Stop Rocky Horror Shop. Also on the show, Curry performed \"The Zucchini Song\" and Meat Loaf &amp; the Neverland Express performed \"Bat Out of Hell\" and \"Promised Land.\"\nFollowing a dispute with his former songwriter Jim Steinman, Meat Loaf was contractually obliged to release a new album, resulting in \"Midnight at the Lost and Found\", released in May 1983. According to Meat Loaf, Steinman had given the songs \"Total Eclipse of the Heart\" and \"Making Love Out of Nothing at All\" to Meat Loaf for this album. However, Meat Loaf's record company did not want Meat Loaf to sing Steinman's songs, saying that nobody wanted to hear them. Bonnie Tyler's version of \"Eclipse\" and Air Supply's version of \"Making Love\" topped the charts together, holding No. 1 and No. 2 for a period during 1983. Meat Loaf is credited with having been involved in the writing of some of the tracks on the album, including the title track, \"Midnight at the Lost and Found.\"\nPoor money management as well as 45 lawsuits totaling US$80 million, including ones from Steinman, resulted in Meat Loaf filing for personal bankruptcy in 1983. The bankruptcy resulted in Meat Loaf losing the rights to his songs, although he received royalties for \"Bat Out of Hell\" in 1997.\nIn 1984, Meat Loaf went to England, where he felt increasingly at home, to record the album \"Bad Attitude\"; it was released that year. It features two songs by Steinman, both previously recorded, \"Nowhere Fast\" and \"Surf's Up.\" The American release on RCA Records was in April 1985 and features a slightly different track list, as well as alternate mixes for some songs. The title track features a duet with the Who's lead singer Roger Daltrey. It was a minor success with a few commercially successful singles, the most successful being \"Modern Girl\". In 1985, Meat Loaf took part in some comedy sketches in the UK with Hugh Laurie. Meat Loaf also tried stand-up comedy, appearing several times in Connecticut.\nMeat Loaf worked with songwriter John Parr on his next album, \"Blind Before I Stop\", which was released in 1986 by Arista Records. It features production, mixing, and general influence by Frank Farian. Meat Loaf was involved in the composition of three of the songs on the album. Meat Loaf performed \"Thrashin\" for the soundtrack of the 1986 skateboarding film \"Thrashin\"' (directed by David Winters and starring Josh Brolin).\n1990s.\nFollowing the success of Meat Loaf's touring in the 1980s, he and Steinman began work during December 1990 on \"\"; the album was released in September 1993. The immediate success of \"Bat Out of Hell II\" led to the sale of over 15 million copies, and the single \"I'd Do Anything for Love (But I Won't Do That)\" reached number one in 28 countries. In March 1994, at the 36th Annual Grammy Awards, Meat Loaf won the Grammy Award for Best Rock Vocal Performance, Solo for \"I'd Do Anything for Love.\" This song stayed at No. 1 in the UK chart for seven consecutive weeks. The single featured a female vocalist who was credited only as \"Mrs. Loud.\" Mrs. Loud was later identified as Lorraine Crosby, a performer from England. Meat Loaf promoted the song with American vocalist Patti Russo, who performed lead female vocals on tour with him. Also in 1994, he sang the U.S. national anthem \"The Star-Spangled Banner\" at the Major League Baseball All-Star Game. He released the single \"Rock and Roll Dreams Come Through\", which reached No. 13 in the United States.\nIn 1995, Meat Loaf released his seventh studio album, \"Welcome to the Neighborhood\". The album went platinum in the United States and the United Kingdom. It included three singles that hit the top 40, including \"I'd Lie for You (And That's the Truth)\" (which reached No. 13 in the United States and No. 2 in the UK), and \"Not a Dry Eye in the House\" (which reached No. 7 in the UK chart). \"I'd Lie for You (And That's the Truth)\" was a duet with Patti Russo, who had been touring with Meat Loaf and singing on his albums since 1993. Of the twelve songs on the album, two are written by Steinman. Both are cover versions, the \"Original Sin\" from Pandora's Box's \"Original Sin\" album and \"Left in the Dark\" first appeared on Steinman's own \"Bad for Good\" as well as the 1984 album \"Emotion\" by Barbra Streisand. His other singles, \"I'd Lie for You (And That's the Truth)\" and \"Not a Dry Eye in the House\", were written by Diane Warren.\nIn 1998, Meat Loaf released \"The Very Best of Meat Loaf\". The album featured three new songs co-written by Steinman \u2013 two with Andrew Lloyd Webber and one with Don Black, \"Is Nothing Sacred\", released as a single. The single version of this song is a duet with Patti Russo, whereas the album version is a solo song by Meat Loaf.\n2000s.\nIn 2003, Meat Loaf released his album \"Couldn't Have Said It Better\". For only the third time in his career, Meat Loaf released an album without any songs written by Steinman (not counting live bonus tracks on special edition releases). Although Meat Loaf claimed that \"Couldn't Have Said It Better\" was \"the most perfect album [he] did since \"Bat Out of Hell\", it was not as commercially successful. The album was a minor commercial success worldwide and reached No. 4 on the UK Albums Chart, accompanied by a sellout world tour to promote the album and some of Meat Loaf's best selling singles. One such performance on his world tour was at the 2003 NRL Grand Final in Sydney. There were many writers for the album including Diane Warren and James Michael, who were both asked to contribute to his 2006 album, \". The album featured duets with Patti Russo and Meat Loaf's daughter Pearl Aday.\nOn November 17, 2003, during a performance at London's Wembley Arena, on his \"Couldn't Have Said It Better\" tour, he collapsed of what was later diagnosed as Wolff\u2013Parkinson\u2013White syndrome, a condition marked by an extra electrical pathway in the heart which causes symptoms like a rapid heartbeat. The following week, he underwent a surgical procedure intended to correct the problem. As a result, Meat Loaf's insurance agency did not allow him to perform for any longer than one hour and 45 minutes.\nFrom February 20 to 22, 2004, during an Australian tour, Meat Loaf performed with the Melbourne Symphony Orchestra, in a set of concerts recorded for the album \"\". The performances included the Australian Boys' Choir singing back-up on a \"Couldn't Have Said It Better\" track, \"Testify.\"\nMeat Loaf and Steinman had begun to work on the third installment of \"Bat Out of Hell\" when Steinman suffered a heart attack. According to Meat Loaf, Steinman was too ill to work on such an intense project while Steinman's manager said health was not an issue.\nSteinman had registered the phrase \"Bat Out of Hell\" as a trademark in 1995. In May 2006, Meat Loaf sued Steinman and his manager in federal District Court in Los Angeles, seeking $50\u00a0million and an injunction against Steinman's use of the phrase. Steinman and his representatives attempted to block the album's release. An agreement was reached in July 2006. Denying reports in the press over the years of a rift between Meat Loaf and Steinman, in an interview with Dan Rather, Meat Loaf stated that he and Steinman never stopped talking, and that the lawsuits reported in the press were between lawyers and managers, and not between Meat Loaf and Steinman.\nThe album \"\" was released on October 31, 2006, and was produced by Desmond Child. The first single from the album \"It's All Coming Back to Me Now\" (featuring Marion Raven) was released on October 16, 2006. It entered the UK Singles Chart at No. 6, giving Meat Loaf his highest UK chart position in nearly 11 years. The album debuted at No. 8 on the Billboard 200, and sold 81,000 copies in its opening week, but after that did not sell as well in the United States and yielded no hit singles, although it was certified gold. The album also featured duets with Patti Russo and Jennifer Hudson. In the weeks following the release of \"Bat III\", Meat Loaf and the Neverland Express did a brief tour of the U.S. and Europe, known as the Bases are Loaded Tour. In October 2006, Meat Loaf's private jet had to make an emergency landing at London Stansted Airport after the plane's forward landing gear failed.\nIn 2007, Meat Loaf began The Seize the Night Tour, with Marion Raven, serving as a supporting act. Portions of the tour in February 2007 were featured in the documentary \"\", directed by Bruce David Klein. The film was an official selection of the Montreal World Film Festival in 2007. It opened in theaters in March 2008 and was released on DVD in May 2008.\nDuring a performance at the Metro Radio Arena in Newcastle upon Tyne, England, on October 31, 2007, at the opening of \"Paradise by the Dashboard Light\" Meat Loaf walked off the stage early in the song and said that it was his last performance. His tour promoter, Andrew Miller, said that it was a result of \"exhaustion and stress\" and said that Meat Loaf would continue touring after suitable rest. The next two gigs in the tour, at the NEC and Manchester Evening News Arena were canceled because of \"acute laryngitis\" and were rescheduled for late November. The concert scheduled for November 6, 2007, at London's Wembley Arena was also canceled. Meat Loaf canceled his entire European tour for 2007 after being diagnosed with a cyst on his vocal cords.\nOn June 27, 2008, Meat Loaf began The Casa de Carne Tour in Plymouth, England alongside his longtime duet partner Patti Russo, who debuted one of her own original songs during the show. The tour continued through July and August with twenty dates throughout England, Ireland, Germany, Portugal, the Netherlands, Norway, Sweden, Finland, and Denmark. Six U.S. shows were also added for October and December 2008.\nIn May 2009, Meat Loaf began work on the album \"Hang Cool Teddy Bear\" in the studio with Green Day's \"American Idiot\" album producer Rob Cavallo, working with such writers as Justin Hawkins, Rick Brantley, Ollie Wride, Tommy Henriksen, and Jon Bon Jovi. The album is based on the story of a fictional soldier, whose \"story\" furnishes the theme. The album is based on a short story by the Los Angeles-based screenwriter and director Kilian Kerwin, a long-time friend of the singer. Hugh Laurie and Jack Black both perform on the album, Laurie plays piano on the song \"If I Can't Have You\", while Black sings a duet with Meat Loaf on \"Like A Rose\". Patti Russo and Kara DioGuardi also duet on the album. Brian May of Queen features on guitar along with Steve Vai. It received positive reviews from critics and fans alike. The first single from the album, \"Los Angeloser\", was released for download on April 5 with the album charting at number 4 in the UK Albums Chart on April 25, 2010. The Hang Cool Tour followed in the United States, United Kingdom, and Canada. Patti Russo accompanied him on the tour, continuing through mid-2011.\n2010s.\n\"Hell in a Handbasket\", released in October 2011 for Australia and New Zealand, and February 2012 for the rest of the world, was recorded and produced by Paul Crook; Doug McKean did the mix with input from Rob Cavallo. The album features songs called \"All of Me\", \"Blue Sky\", \"The Giving Tree\", \"Mad, Mad World\", and a duet with Patti Russo called \"Our Love and Our Souls.\"\nAt the 2011 AFL Grand Final, the pre-match entertainment was headlined by a 12-minute medley performed by Meat Loaf. The performance was panned as the worst in the 34-year history of AFL Grand Final pre-game entertainment in a multitude of online reviews by football fans and Australian sport commentators. Meat Loaf responded by calling online critics \"butt-smellers\", and the AFL \"jerks\", vowing to convince other artists not to play at the event.\nIn 2011, Meat Loaf planned to release a Christmas album called \"Hot Holidays\" featuring Garth Brooks and Reba McEntire, but the album was never released.\nMeat Loaf collapsed on stage while performing in Edmonton, Canada on June 16, 2016.\nIn September 2016, \"Braver Than We Are\", a 10-track album created with Jim Steinman, was released. Meat Loaf recorded reworked versions of Steinman's songs \"Braver Than We Are\", \"Speaking in Tongues\", \"Who Needs the Young\", and \"More\" (previously recorded by the Sisters of Mercy) for the album. Additionally, the song \"Prize Fight Lover\", originally issued as a download-only bonus track for \"Hang Cool Teddy Bear\", was re-recorded for the album.\nLater projects and Jim Steinman's death.\nIn January 2020, during an interview for \"The Mirror\", Meat Loaf announced, \"I'm not old. I've got songs for another record and I'm reading a script.\" In a February 2020 Facebook post, Meat Loaf announced his intention to record a new album containing 'four or five new tracks', including Steinman's \"What Part of My Body Hurts the Most\" (a song long requested by fans, but previously under contract restrictions for the \"Bat Out of Hell\" musical), along with the original 1975 demo recordings made for the \"Bat Out of Hell\" album. Meat Loaf's longtime collaborator Jim Steinman died on April 19, 2021, of kidney failure.\nIn a Facebook post in November 2021, he further elaborated that he and his band would be returning to the studio in January 2022 to record seven new songs for a forthcoming album, which would also include live tracks from the 1970s, 1980s, 1990s, and 2000s. However, on January 20, 2022, he died at age 74. At the time of his death, the recording process had not yet begun.\nActing.\nIn addition to his role in 1975 for \"Rocky Horror Picture Show\", Meat Loaf also had a career as an actor in television and film. 1992 he was a main character in \"Leap Of Faith\" where he played as the band director/bus driver/piano player, He also played a small role as a doorman/bouncer in \"Wayne's World\". He appeared as the Spice Girls' bus driver in the 1997 movie \"Spice World\" and as Red in the 1998 thriller/drama film \"Black Dog\" alongside Patrick Swayze and Randy Travis. In David Fincher's 1999 film \"Fight Club\" he played Robert Paulsen, a man who joins a men's self-help group. He also reportedly assisted director David Fincher with the editing of the film.\nIn 2000, he played a character in the sixth-season episode \"Gettysburg\" of \"The Outer Limits\". Meat Loaf appears (uncredited) as Jack Black's father in the 2006 film \"Tenacious D in The Pick of Destiny\", providing vocals on the film's opening song \"Kickapoo.\"\nIn 2009, Meat Loaf acted in \"House\" S5 E20 \"Simple Explanation\", playing Eddie, a husband who is determined to die in order to donate his liver to his wife.\nOn October 26, 2010, Meat Loaf (credited as Meat Loaf Aday) appeared on the Fox television series \"Glee\" in \"The Rocky Horror Glee Show\", the series' tribute episode to \"The Rocky Horror Picture Show\". In 2011, he was a contestant in season 11 of \"Celebrity Apprentice\", during which he was eliminated after task number 12. In the course of the contest he had a notable dramatic showdown with fellow contestant Gary Busey which was then televised.\nPersonal life.\nFamily and residences.\nIn December 1978, Meat Loaf went to work with Steinman in Woodstock, New York, where his future wife, Leslie G. Edmonds, was working as a secretary at Bearsville Studios; they were married in early 1979. From a previous marriage, Leslie had a daughter named Pearl, who later married Anthrax rhythm guitarist Scott Ian. Meat Loaf adopted Pearl in 1979, and her last name was changed to Aday. \nAlso in 1979, he and his family moved to a house on Eagle Drive in Stamford, Connecticut. In 1981, Leslie gave birth to Amanda Aday, who later became a television actress. For a brief time after Amanda's birth, they lived in Westport, Connecticut. He coached children's baseball or softball in each of the Connecticut towns where he lived, including for his daughter's team at Joel Barlow High School. He lived on Orchard Drive in Redding, Connecticut, from 1989 to 1998. He had also lived on Beach Road in Fairfield, Connecticut. In February 1998, the family purchased a house in Beverly Hills, California for $1.6 million. Meat Loaf and Leslie divorced in 2001.\nIn 2001, he sold his 5,083-square-foot house in Mandeville Canyon near Los Angeles to Greg Kinnear for $3.6 million. In 2003, the BBC said that he was seeking a residence in Hartlepool; Meat Loaf supported Hartlepool United F.C. In May 2005, he purchased a 7,142-square-foot Spanish-style home off Mulholland Highway in Calabasas, California, for $2,999,000; he sold it for $3,065,000 in May 2011.\nMeat Loaf married Deborah Gillespie in 2007. In May 2012, he moved to Austin, Texas, purchasing a newly constructed 5,200-square-foot house at 17701 Flagler Drive for $1,475,000. Before his death, he lived in Brentwood, Tennessee.\nName change.\nIn 1984, Meat Loaf legally changed his first name from Marvin to Michael because he was \"haunted\" by a Levi Strauss &amp; Co. commercial which\u2014according to him\u2014contained the line \"Poor fat Marvin can't wear Levi's.\"\nSports.\nMeat Loaf was a fan of the New York Yankees. He got Phil Rizzuto to recite the play-by-play of a young man racing around the bases in \"Paradise by the Dashboard Light\". He participated in multiple fantasy baseball leagues every season. He also expressed support for the English Association football team Hartlepool United F.C. In June 2008, he took part in a football penalty shootout competition on behalf of two cancer charities in Newcastle upon Tyne. He auctioned shots to the 100 highest bidders and then took his place between the goal posts. He also participated in celebrity golf tournaments. In April 2005, he was one of the celebrity drivers in the 2005 Toyota Pro/Celebrity Race, finishing seventh among the 12 celebrity drivers in the race.\nSocial anxiety.\nHe revealed that he had social anxiety and said, \"I never meet anybody much in a social situation because when I go into a social situation, I have no idea what to do.\" He said that he does not \"even go anywhere\" and that he felt that he led a \"boring life\", in having said that he \"completely freaked\" when having to attend a party and that he was \"so nervous, so scared\" of the idea. He also said that he spent time with fellow musicians mainly in work-related situations rather than social ones. He also said that as a kid, \"Being too fat to play with the other children, I had to spend a lot of time alone, which probably has a lot to do with the way I am today. I'm usually alone in my hotel room from right after the show until the next day's sound check. And I'm never bored; I don't get bored. Probably because mothers wouldn't let their kids play with me.\"\nVegetarianism.\nMeat Loaf was a vegetarian from 1981 to 1992. Discussing the confusion caused by his contrasting stage name and dietary habits, he once told \"Entertainment Weekly\", \"There've been vegetarians who wouldn't speak to me because of my name. I was sitting with Jon Bon Jovi at one of those awards things, and I say, 'Oh, man, I love k.d. lang. I'd really like to meet her.' They went to find out if it was okay, and she goes, 'No. His name is Meat Loaf.' I stopped being a k.d. lang fan after that.\" He declared in 2019 that he would try veganism for Veganuary in 2020 and would be partnering with UK restaurant chain Frankie &amp; Benny's to promote its vegan options.\nReligion.\nAlthough he did not belong to any faith-based institution, Meat Loaf was religious. While growing up, he attended church with his mother and studied the Bible, which influenced his work. Several of his songs, such as \"40 Days\" and \"Fall from Grace\", have religious themes. He prayed every night.\nPolitics.\nPolitical affiliations.\nMeat Loaf was not officially registered with any political party. In 1997, he performed at an inaugural ball during the second inauguration of Bill Clinton, and attended the first inauguration of George W. Bush in 2001. He donated to the presidential campaigns of Republican candidates Rick Santorum and John McCain, the latter of whom became the party's nominee in the 2008 United States presidential election.\nOn October 25, 2012, Meat Loaf endorsed Mitt Romney for president, citing poor Russia\u2013United States relations as a major reason he had been \"arguing for Mitt Romney for a year.\" He said, \"I have never been in any political agenda in my life, but I think that in 2012 this is the most important election in the history of the United States.\" He then said there are \"storm clouds\" over the United States and \"thunder storms\" over Europe: \"There are hail storms \u2013 and I mean major hail storms! \u2013 in the Middle East. There are storms brewing through China, through Asia, through everywhere.\" The same day, he performed \"America the Beautiful\" standing next to Romney.\nIn a 2017 interview with \"Billboard\", he made positive remarks about President Donald Trump, Ivanka Trump, and Donald Trump Jr.; they had worked together on \"The Celebrity Apprentice\" in 2011. When asked during an episode of \"The Celebrity Apprentice\" if he would vote for Trump, Meat Loaf said: \"I would vote for you. In fact, I'll help you with your campaign.\" Though months after that, according to a 2020 interview, he had a confrontation with Trump over a response to a journalist implying that Trump would be better as a financial advisor than a president. He recalls saying \"You\u2019re not running for President, back off man!\" and said of the event \"I stood up to him because I\u2019m really not afraid of him\".\nClimate change views.\nMeat Loaf said that he did not believe in climate change. In an interview with the \"Daily Mail\" in 2020, he called Greta Thunberg \"brainwashed\" due to her views on climate change, saying: \"I feel for that Greta. She has been brainwashed into thinking that there is climate change and there isn't. She hasn't done anything wrong but she's been forced into thinking that what she is saying is true.\"\nCriticism of COVID-19 rules.\nHe was critical of the COVID-19 lockdowns during the COVID-19 pandemic, telling the \"Pittsburgh Post-Gazette\" in August 2021: \"I hug people in the middle of COVID ... I understood stopping life for a little while, but they cannot continue to stop life because of politics.\" He opposed mask mandates and described a person who called for people on airplanes to wear masks as a \"Nazi\" and \"power-mad.\" Meat Loaf then said: \"If I die, I die, but I'm not going to be controlled.\" While no official cause of death has been announced, it is speculated that he did die of COVID-19.\nHealth.\nIn 2003, Meat Loaf was diagnosed with Wolff\u2013Parkinson\u2013White syndrome, a condition marked by an extra electrical pathway in the heart that causes symptoms like a rapid heartbeat. Meat Loaf had asthma and, in July 2011, he fainted on stage while performing in Pittsburgh due to an asthma attack.\nHe collapsed again while on stage in Edmonton in June 2016 due to severe dehydration, after having already canceled two other shows due to illness. The playback containing his pre-recorded, voice-over vocal track continued while he lay unconscious on the stage, which caused controversy over lip syncing, claims that Meat Loaf denied, saying that his mic was live. After the incident, Meat Loaf used acupuncture, physical therapy and a trainer for four days a week, an hour and a half each session. Meat Loaf had emergency back surgery in November 2016 including a spinal fusion due to a cyst that was pinching nerves, and in 2019, he was using a cane and a wheelchair to get around.\nAt the 2019 Texas Frightmare Weekend at the Hyatt Regency DFW hotel, Meat Loaf fell off an interview stage and broke his clavicle. Meat Loaf and his wife sued Texas Frightmare Weekend and Hyatt due to the accident.\nDeath.\nMeat Loaf died in Nashville, Tennessee, on the evening of January 20, 2022, at the age of 74. No official cause of death was released. He was reportedly ill with COVID-19 earlier in January, and reporting by TMZ suggested that he died from COVID-19 complications. As his health rapidly declined, his two daughters rushed to see him in the hospital with his wife beside him as he died. His daughter had posted to Instagram in early January that: \"We are not sick, but we have too many friends and family testing positive [for COVID-19] right now, positive but doing OK.\" Notable people who posted tributes include Bonnie Tyler, Cher, Brian May, Boy George, Travis Tritt, Marlee Matlin, Stephen Fry, and his \"Rocky Horror\" co-star Nell Campbell. The Queen's Guard performed a rendition of \"I'd Do Anything for Love (But I Won't Do That).\"\nDiscography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt; \nTours.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNote: Meat Loaf's band The Neverland Express has since continued with American Idol winner Caleb Johnson\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "21027", "revid": "50149415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21027", "title": "List of military tactics", "text": "This article contains a list of military tactics.\nThe meaning of the phrase is context sensitive, and has varied over time, such as the difference between \"strategy\" and \"tactics\".\nTactics.\nDeception.\nIn the 4th century BCE, Sun Tzu said \"the Military is a Tao of deception\". Diversionary attacks, feints, decoys; there are thousands of tricks that have been successfully used in warfare, and still have a role in the modern day.\nDefensive.\nElectronic countermeasures\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "21028", "revid": "1309878929", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21028", "title": "Mach (kernel)", "text": "Operating system microkernel\nMach () is an operating system kernel developed at Carnegie Mellon University by Richard Rashid and Avie Tevanian to support operating system research, primarily distributed and parallel computing. Mach is often considered one of the earliest examples of a microkernel. However, not all versions of Mach are microkernels. Mach's derivatives are the basis of the operating system kernel in GNU Hurd and of Apple's XNU kernel used in macOS, iOS, iPadOS, tvOS, and watchOS.\nThe project at Carnegie Mellon ran from 1985 to 1994, ending with Mach 3.0, which is a true microkernel. Mach was developed as a replacement for the kernel in the BSD version of Unix, not requiring a new operating system to be designed around it. Mach and its derivatives exist within several commercial operating systems, including all those using the XNU operating system kernel, which incorporates an earlier non-microkernel version of Mach as a major component. The Mach virtual memory management system was also adopted in 4.4BSD by the BSD developers at CSRG, and appears in modern BSD-derived Unix systems such as FreeBSD.\nMach is the logical successor to Carnegie Mellon's Accent kernel. Mach's lead developer Richard Rashid has been employed at Microsoft since 1991; he founded the Microsoft Research division. Co-founding Mach developer Avie Tevanian, was formerly head of software at NeXT, then Chief Software Technology Officer at Apple Inc. until March 2006.\nHistory.\nName.\nThe developers rode bicycles to lunch through rainy Pittsburgh's mud puddles, and Tevanian joked the word \"muck\" could form a backronym for their Multi-User (or Multiprocessor Universal) Communication Kernel. Italian CMU engineer Dario Giuse later asked project leader Rick Rashid about the project's current title and received \"MUCK\" as the answer, though not spelled out but just pronounced . According to the Italian alphabet, he wrote \"Mach\". Rashid liked Giuse's spelling \"Mach\" so much that it prevailed.\nUnix pipes.\nA key concept in the original Unix operating system is the idea of a pipe. A pipe is an abstraction allowing data to be moved as an unstructured stream of bytes between programs. Using pipes, users can link together multiple programs to complete tasks, feeding data through several consecutive small programs. This contrasts with typical operating systems of the era, which require a single large program that can handle the entire task, or alternately, used files to pass data, which was resource-expensive and time-consuming.\nPipes were built on the underlying input/output system. This system is, in turn, based on a model where drivers are expected to periodically \"block\" while they wait for tasks to complete. For instance, a printer driver might send a line of text to a line printer and then have nothing to do until the printer completes printing that line. In this case, the driver indicates that it was blocked, and the operating system allows some other program to run until the printer indicates it is ready for more data. In the pipes system the limited resource was memory, and when one program filled the memory assigned to the pipe, it would naturally block. Normally this would cause the consuming program to run, emptying the pipe again. In contrast to a file, where the entire file has to be read or written before the next program can use it, pipes made the movement of data across multiple programs occur in a piecemeal fashion without any programmer intervention.\nHowever, implementing pipes in memory buffers forced data to be copied from program to program, a time-consuming and resource intensive operation. This made the pipe concept unsuitable for tasks where quick turnaround or low latency was needed, such as in most device drivers. The operating system's kernel and most core functionality was instead written in a single large program. When new functionality, such as computer networking, was added to the operating system, the size and complexity of the kernel grew, too.\nNew concepts.\nUnix pipes offered a conceptual system that could be used to build arbitrarily complex solutions out of small cooperating programs. These smaller programs were easier to develop and maintain, and had well-defined interfaces that simplified programming and debugging. These qualities are even more valuable for device drivers, where small size and bug-free performance was extremely important. There was a strong desire to model the kernel on the same basis of small cooperating programs.\nOne of the first systems to use a pipe-like system underpinning the operating system was the Aleph kernel developed at the University of Rochester. This introduced the concept of ports, which were essentially a shared memory implementation. In Aleph, the kernel was reduced to providing access to the hardware, including memory and the ports, while conventional programs using the ports system implemented all behavior, from device drivers to user programs. This concept greatly reduced the size of the kernel, and permitted users to experiment with different drivers simply by loading them and connecting them together at runtime. This greatly eased the problems when developing new operating system code, which would otherwise require the machine to be restarted. The overall concept of a small kernel and external drivers became known as a microkernel.\nAleph was implemented on Data General Eclipse minicomputers and was tightly bound to them. This machine was far from ideal, since it required memory to be copied between programs, which resulted in considerable performance overhead. It was also quite expensive. Nevertheless, Aleph proved that the basic system was sound, and went on to demonstrate computer clustering by copying the memory over an early Ethernet interface.\nAround this time a new generation of central processors (CPUs) were coming to market, offering a 32-bit address space and (initially optional) support for a memory management unit (MMU). The MMU handled the instructions needed to implement a virtual memory system by keeping track of which \"pages\" of memory were in use by various programs. This offered a new solution to the port concept, using the copy-on-write (COW) mechanism provided by the virtual memory system. Instead of copying data between programs, all that was required was to instruct the MMU to provide access to that same memory. This system would implement the interprocess communications (IPC) system with dramatically higher performance.\nThis concept was picked up at Carnegie-Mellon, who adapted Aleph for the PERQ workstation and implemented it using copy-on-write. The port was successful, but the resulting Accent kernel was of limited practical use because it did not run existing software. Moreover, Accent was as tightly tied to PERQ as Aleph was to the Eclipse.\nMach.\nThe major change between these experimental kernels and Mach was the decision to make a version of the existing 4.2BSD kernel re-implemented on the Accent message-passing concepts. Such a kernel would be binary compatible with existing BSD software, making the system immediately available for everyday use while still being a useful experimental platform. Additionally, the new kernel would be designed from the start to support multiple processor architectures, even allowing heterogeneous clusters to be constructed. In order to bring the system up as quickly as possible, the system would be implemented by starting with the existing BSD code, and gradually re-implementing it as inter-process communication-based (IPC-based) programs. Thus Mach would begin as a monolithic system similar to existing UNIX systems, and progress toward the microkernel concept over time.\nMach started largely being an effort to produce a clearly defined, UNIX-based, highly portable Accent. The result was a short list of generic concepts:\nMach developed on Accent's IPC concepts, but made the system much more UNIX-like in nature, making it possible to run UNIX programs with little or no modification. To do this, Mach introduced the port, representing each endpoint of a two-way IPC. Ports had a concept of permissions like files under UNIX, permitting a very UNIX-like model of protection to be applied to them. Additionally, Mach allowed any program to handle privileges that would normally be given to the operating system only, in order to permit user space programs to handle things such as controlling hardware.\nUnder Mach, and like UNIX, the operating system again becomes primarily a collection of utilities. As with UNIX, Mach keeps the concept of a driver for handling the hardware. Therefore, all the drivers for the present hardware have to be included in the microkernel. Other architectures based on hardware abstraction layer or exokernels could move the drivers out of the microkernel.\nThe main difference with UNIX is that instead of utilities handling files, they can handle any \"task\". More operating system code was moved out of the kernel and into user space, resulting in a much smaller kernel and the rise of the term microkernel. Unlike traditional systems, under Mach a process, or \"task\", can consist of a number of threads. While this is common in modern systems, Mach was the first system to define tasks and threads in this way. The kernel's job was reduced from essentially being the operating system to running the \"utilities\" and providing them access to the hardware.\nThe existence of ports and the use of IPC is perhaps the most fundamental difference between Mach and traditional kernels. Under UNIX, calling the kernel consists of an operation named a \"system call\" or \"trap\". The program uses a library to place data in a well known location in memory and then causes a \"fault\", a type of error. When a system is first started, its kernel is set up to be the \"handler\" of all faults; thus, when a program causes a fault, the kernel takes over, examines the information passed to it, then carries out the instructions.\nUnder Mach, the IPC system was used for this role instead. To call system functionality, a program would ask the kernel for access to a port, then use the IPC system to send messages to that port. Although sending a message requires a system call, just as a request for system functionality on other systems requires a system call, under Mach sending the message is pretty much all the kernel does; handling the actual request would be up to some other program.\nThread and concurrency support benefited by message passing with IPC mechanisms since tasks now consist of multiple code threads which Mach could freeze and unfreeze during message handling. This permits the system to be distributed over multiple processors, either by using shared memory directly as in most Mach messages, or by adding code to copy the message to another processor if needed. In a traditional kernel this is difficult to implement; the system has to be sure that different programs do not try to write to the same region of memory from different processors. However, using Mach ports makes this well defined and easy to implement, so Mach ports were made first-class citizens in that system.\nThe IPC system initially had performance problems, so a few strategies were developed to improve performance. Like its predecessor, Accent, Mach used a single shared-memory mechanism for physically passing the message from one program to another. Physically copying the message would be too slow, so Mach relies on the machine's memory management unit (MMU) to quickly map the data from one program to another. Only if the data is written to would it have to be physically copied, a process called \"copy-on-write\".\nMessages were also checked for validity by the kernel, to avoid bad data crashing one of the many programs making up the system. Ports were deliberately modeled on the UNIX file system concepts. This permits the user to find ports using existing file system navigation concepts, as well as assigning rights and permissions as they would on the file system.\nDevelopment under such a system would be easier. Not only would the code being worked on exist in a traditional program that could be built using existing tools, it could also be started, debugged and killed off using the same tools. With a monokernel a bug in new code would take down the entire machine and require a reboot, whereas under Mach this would require only that the program be restarted. Additionally the user could tailor the system to include, or exclude, whatever features they required. Since the operating system was simply a collection of programs, they could add or remove parts by simply running or killing them as they would any other program.\nFinally, under Mach, all of these features were deliberately designed to be extremely platform neutral. To quote one text on Mach:\nUnlike UNIX, which was developed without regard for multiprocessing, Mach incorporates multiprocessing support throughout. Its multiprocessing support is also exceedingly flexible, ranging from shared memory systems to systems with no memory shared between processors. Mach is designed to run on computer systems ranging from one to thousands of processors. In addition, Mach is easily ported to many varied computer architectures. A key goal of Mach is to be a distributed system capable of functioning on heterogeneous hardware.\nThere are a number of disadvantages, however. A relatively mundane one is that it is not clear how to find ports. Under UNIX this problem was solved over time as programmers agreed on a number of \"well known\" locations in the file system to serve various duties. While this same approach worked for Mach's ports as well, under Mach the operating system was assumed to be much more fluid, with ports appearing and disappearing all the time. Without some mechanism to find ports and the services they represented, much of this flexibility would be lost.\nDevelopment.\nMach was initially hosted as additional code written directly into the existing 4.2BSD kernel, allowing the team to work on the system long before it was complete. Work started with the already functional Accent IPC/port system, and moved on to the other key portions of the OS: tasks, threads, and virtual memory. As portions were completed various parts of the BSD system were re-written to call into Mach, and a change to 4.3BSD was also made during this process.\nBy 1986 the system was complete to the point of being able to run on its own on the DEC VAX. Although doing little of any practical value, the goal of making a microkernel was realized. This was soon followed by versions on the IBM RT PC and for Sun Microsystems 68030-based workstations, proving the system's portability. By 1987 the list included the Encore Multimax and Sequent Balance machines, testing Mach's ability to run on multiprocessor systems. A public Release 1 was made that year, and Release 2 followed the next year.\nThroughout this time the promise of a \"true\" microkernel had not yet been delivered. These early Mach versions included the majority of 4.3BSD in the kernel, a system known as a POE Server, resulting in a kernel that was actually larger than the UNIX it was based on. The idea, however, was to move the UNIX layer out of the kernel into user-space, where it could be more easily worked on and even replaced outright. Unfortunately performance proved to be a major problem, and a number of architectural changes were made in order to solve this problem. Unwieldy UNIX licensing issues also plagued researchers, so this early effort to provide a non-licensed UNIX-like system environment continued to find use, well into the further development of Mach.\nThe resulting Mach 3 was released in 1990, and generated intense interest. A small team had built Mach and ported it to a number of platforms, including complex multiprocessor systems which were causing serious problems for older-style kernels. This generated considerable interest in the commercial market, where a number of companies were considering changing hardware platforms. If the existing system could be ported to run on Mach, it seemed it would then be easy to change the platform underneath.\nMach received a major boost in visibility when the Open Software Foundation (OSF) announced they would be hosting future versions of OSF/1 on Mach 2.5, and were investigating Mach 3 as well. Mach 2.5 was also selected for the NeXTSTEP system and a number of commercial multiprocessor vendors. Mach 3 led to a number of efforts to port other operating systems parts for the microkernel, including IBM's Workplace OS and several efforts by Apple to build a cross-platform version of the classic Mac OS. Support for running DOS applications in a Mach 3.0 environment was demonstrated by researchers, following on from earlier work running the classic Mac OS and MultiFinder under Mach 2.5. A research project at Digital Equipment Corporation investigated the feasibility of hosting OpenVMS on top of the Mach 3 kernel, and created a proof of concept with a subset of VMS' features.\nPerformance issues.\nMach was originally intended to be a replacement for classical monolithic UNIX, and for this reason contained many UNIX-like ideas. For instance, Mach provided a permissions and security system similar to that used by UNIX's file system. Since the kernel was privileged (running in \"kernel-space\") over other OS servers and software, it was possible for malfunctioning or malicious programs to send it commands that would cause damage to the system, and for this reason the kernel checked every message for validity. Additionally most of the operating system functionality was to be located in user-space programs, so this meant there needed to be some way for the kernel to grant these programs additional privileges, e.g. to directly access hardware.\nSome of Mach's more esoteric features were also based on this same IPC mechanism. For instance, Mach was able to support multi-processor machines with ease. In a traditional kernel extensive work needs to be carried out to make it reentrant or \"interruptible\", as programs running on different processors could call into the kernel at the same time. Under Mach, the bits of the operating system are isolated in servers, which are able to run, like any other program, on any processor. Although in theory the Mach kernel would also have to be reentrant, in practice this is not an issue because its response times are so fast it can simply wait and serve requests in turn. Mach also included a server that could forward messages not just between programs, but even over the network, which was an area of intense development in the late 1980s and early 1990s.\nUnfortunately, the use of IPC for almost all tasks turned out to have serious performance impact. Benchmarks on 1997 hardware showed that Mach 3.0-based UNIX single-server implementations were about 50% slower than native UNIX.\nStudy of the exact nature of the performance problems turned up a number of interesting facts. One was that the IPC was not the problem: there was some overhead associated with the memory mapping needed to support it, but this added only a small amount of time to making a call. The rest, 80% of the time being spent, was due to additional tasks the kernel was running on the messages. Primary among these was the port rights checking and message validity. In benchmarks on an 486DX-50, a standard UNIX system call took an average of 21\u03bcs to complete, while the equivalent operation with Mach IPC averaged 114\u03bcs. Only 18\u03bcs of this was hardware related; the rest was the Mach kernel running various routines on the message. Given a syscall that does nothing, a full round-trip under BSD would require about 40\u03bcs, whereas on a user-space Mach system it would take just under 500\u03bcs.\nWhen Mach was first being seriously used in the 2.x versions, performance was slower than traditional monolithic operating systems, perhaps as much as 25%. This cost was not considered particularly worrying, however, because the system was also offering multi-processor support and easy portability. Many felt this was an expected and acceptable cost to pay. When Mach 3 attempted to move most of the operating system into user-space, the overhead became higher still: benchmarks between Mach and Ultrix on a MIPS R3000 showed a performance hit as great as 67% on some workloads.\nFor example, getting the system time involves an IPC call to the user-space server maintaining system clock. The caller first traps into the kernel, causing a context switch and memory mapping. The kernel then checks that the caller has required access rights and that the message is valid. If it is, there is another context switch and memory mapping to complete the call into the user-space server. The process must then be repeated to return the results, adding up to a total of four context switches and memory mappings, plus two message verifications. This overhead rapidly compounds with more complex services, where there are often code paths passing through many servers.\nThis was not the only source of performance problems. Another centered on the problems of trying to handle memory properly when physical memory ran low and paging had to occur. In the traditional monolithic operating systems the authors had direct experience with which parts of the kernel called which others, allowing them to fine-tune their pager to avoid paging out code that was about to be used. Under Mach this was not possible because the kernel had no real idea what the operating system consisted of. Instead they had to use a single one-size-fits-all solution, which added to the performance problems. Mach 3 attempted to address this problem by providing a simple pager, relying on user-space pagers for better specialization. But this turned out to have little effect. In practice, any benefits it had were wiped out by the expensive IPC needed to call it in.\nOther performance problems were related to Mach's support for multiprocessor systems. From the mid-1980s to the early 1990s, commodity CPUs grew in performance at a rate of about 60% a year, but the speed of memory access grew at only 7% a year. This meant that the cost of accessing memory grew tremendously over this period, and since Mach was based on mapping memory around between programs, any \"cache miss\" made IPC calls slow.\nPotential solutions.\nIPC overhead is a major issue for Mach 3 systems. However, the concept of a \"multi-server operating system\" is still promising, though it still requires some research. The developers have to be careful to isolate code into modules that do not call from server to server. For instance, the majority of the networking code would be placed in a single server, thereby minimizing IPC for normal networking tasks.\nMost developers instead stuck with the original POE concept of a single large server providing the operating system functionality. In order to ease development, they allowed the operating system server to run either in user-space or kernel-space. This allowed them to develop in user-space and have all the advantages of the original Mach idea, and then move the debugged server into kernel-space in order to get better performance. Several operating systems have since been constructed using this method, known as \"co-location\", among them Lites, MkLinux, OSF/1, and NeXTSTEP/OPENSTEP/macOS. The Chorus microkernel made this a feature of the basic system, allowing servers to be raised into the kernel space using built-in mechanisms.\nMach 4 attempted to address these problems with a more radical set of upgrades. In particular, it was found that program code was typically not writable, so potential hits due to copy-on-write were rare. Thus it made sense to not map the memory between programs for IPC, but instead migrate the program code being used into the local space of the program. This led to the concept of \"shuttles\" and it seemed performance had improved, but the developers moved on with the system in a semi-usable state. Mach 4 also introduced built-in co-location primitives, making it a part of the kernel.\nBy the mid-1990s, work on microkernel systems was largely stagnant, although the market had generally believed that all modern operating systems would be microkernel based by the 1990s. The primary remaining widespread uses of the Mach kernel are Apple's macOS and its sibling iOS, which run atop a heavily modified hybrid Open Software Foundation Mach Kernel (OSFMK 7.3) called \"XNU\" also used in OSF/1. In XNU, the file systems, networking stacks, and process and memory management functions are implemented in the kernel; and file system, networking, and some process and memory management functions are invoked from user mode via ordinary system calls rather than message passing; XNU's Mach messages are used for communication between user-mode processes, and for some requests from user-mode code to the kernel and from the kernel to user-mode servers.\nSecond-generation microkernels.\nFurther analysis demonstrated that the IPC performance problem was not as obvious as it seemed. Recall that a single-side of a syscall took 20\u03bcs under BSD and 114\u03bcs on Mach running on the same system. Of the 114, 11 were due to the context switch, identical to BSD. An additional 18 were used by the MMU to map the message between user-space and kernel space. This adds up to only 29\u03bcs, longer than a traditional syscall, but not by much.\nThe rest, the majority of the actual problem, was due to the kernel performing tasks such as checking the message for port access rights. While it would seem this is an important security concern, in fact, it only makes sense in a UNIX-like system. For instance, a single-user operating system running a cell phone or robot might not need any of these features, and this is exactly the sort of system where Mach's pick-and-choose operating system would be most valuable. Likewise Mach caused problems when memory had been moved by the operating system, another task that only really makes sense if the system has more than one address space. DOS and the early Mac OS have a single large address space shared by all programs, so under these systems the mapping did not provide any benefits.\nThese realizations led to a series of second generation microkernels, which further reduced the complexity of the system and placed almost all functionality in the user space. For instance, the L4 kernel (version 2) includes only seven system calls and uses 12k of memory, whereas Mach 3 includes about 140 functions and uses about 330k of memory. IPC calls under L4 on a 486DX-50 take only 5\u03bcs, faster than a UNIX syscall on the same system, and over 20 times as fast as Mach. Of course this ignores the fact that L4 is not handling permissioning or security; but by leaving this to the user-space programs, they can select as much or as little overhead as they require.\nThe potential performance gains of L4 are tempered by the fact that the user-space applications will often have to provide many of the functions formerly supported by the kernel. In order to test the end-to-end performance, MkLinux in co-located mode was compared with an L4 port running in user-space. L4 added about 5%\u201310% overhead, compared to Mach's 29%.\nSoftware based on Mach.\nThe following is a list of operating system kernels derived from Mach and operating systems with kernels derived from Mach:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "21029", "revid": "445772", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21029", "title": "Molokans", "text": "Ethno-religious group of Russian origin\nThe Molokans (Russian: , or , \"dairy-eater\") are a Russian Spiritual Christian sect that evolved from Eastern Orthodoxy in the East Slavic lands. Their traditions, especially dairy consumption during Christian fasts, did not conform to those of the Russian Orthodox Church, and they were regarded as heretics (). The term is an exonym used by their Orthodox neighbors. Members tend to identify themselves as Spiritual Christians (, ).\nThe specific beliefs and practices varied sharply between the various sects of Molokans. Some built chapels for worship, kept sacraments, and revered saints and icons, while others (like the Ikonobortsy, \"iconoclasts\") discarded these practices in the pursuit of individual approaches to scripture. In general, they rejected the institutionalized formalism of Orthodoxy and denominations with similar doctrines in favor of more emphasis on \"Original Christianity\" as they understood it. They emphasized spirituality and spiritual practice; such sacramental practices as water baptism have been permitted only as tangible signs and symbols of more important spiritual truths.\nSimilar to Presbyterians among Protestants, and considered heretical by the Orthodox Church, they elect a council of dominant elders who preserve a sort of apostolic succession in their view. Molokans had some practices similar to the European Quakers and Mennonites, such as pacifism, communal organization, spiritual meetings, and sub-groupings, but they arose in Russia together with the Doukhobors and Sabbatarians (also known as Subbotniks) and similar Spiritual Christian movements of Duhovnye Kristyanye and Ikonobortsy. They migrated into central Russia and Ukraine around the same time. As such, the Molokans have been compared to certain kinds of Protestants (such as Anabaptists and Baptists) because they have multiple similar aspects since they reject the Orthodox priesthood and icons, have their own presbyters, hold the Bible as their main guide and interpret the sacraments \"spiritually\". They are thus in many ways similar to Anabaptist and Quaker Christians.\nFormation and development.\n11th\u201314th centuries and origins of milk-drinking during Lent.\nThere are approximately 200 fasting days\u2014especially the Great Fast (Lent)\u2014when drinking milk was prohibited by Christian Orthodox ecclesiastical authorities. The practice of milk-drinking during these fasts was first sanctioned by the Nestorian Church in the 11th century in order to accommodate the conversion of some 200,000 Turkic Christians, who lived on meat and milk, to Nestorian Christianity. Two theories emerge regarding the formation of the milk-drinking practice during Lent.\nThe first one suggests that the Keraite Khan, Markus Buyruk Khan (formerly Sadiq Khan, prior to Christian conversion), had converted to Nestorian Christianity along with around 200,000 of his Turco-Mongolic nomadic tribespeople in 1007. The Keraite people were one of the five dominant Turco-Mongol tribes of the Tatar confederation prior to Genghis Khan. Genghis Khan united the Tatar tribes into the Mongol Empire. The Keraite resided upon the Orkhon Steppes, south of Lake Baikal and north of the Gobi Desert, also referred to as the Altai-Sayan region. The Nestorian Metropolitan, upon the conversion of the Turco-Mongolic people, asked the Patriarch John VI what the appropriate fast for Lent should be for the new converts and it was decreed that the converts should abstain from meat eating and instead of drinking \"soured\" milk should consume \"sweet\" milk. Meat and fermented horse milk were staples of the Turco-Mongolic diet prior to the conversion to Christianity and instead of eliminating a long-held tradition of the nomadic people it was Christianized. Soured milk refers to fermented milk and sweet milk refers to fresh milk.\nArriving in the Rus' lands with the 13th century Tatar (Mongolian) invasion of Batu and M\u00f6ngke, the practice was adopted by other Christian groups, who had pastoral communities on the Eurasian plains.\nThe second theory proposes that King David IV of Georgia converted 40,000 Cuman\u2013Kipchak tribal families to Christianity and resettled them in Georgia between 1118 and 1120. David IV assimilated these northern Turkic tribes because he was at war with the Muslim Seljuk Turks to the south and desired to reform his army. Each Kipchak family was required to provide one soldier with a horse and weapons. Though David IV is not reported as being a religious adherent, he was a promoter of Christian culture.\nThe Cumans, Kipchaks, Tatars, Mongolians, and Bashkirs (who descend from Kipchaks) all have the tradition of making fermented milk products. The Cumans call it \"kumis,\" Mongolians call it \"airag,\" Tatars call it \"azegay\", and the Baskir call it \"azekay\". This lends itself to the possibility of the second theory, as well as the first.\nOne hundred families of the original Molokan Karaits were settled in Halychyna (specifically Lviv) by hostage arrangement between Daniel of Galicia and Batu Khan in 1246.\n15th\u201316th centuries.\nThe Judaizers preceded the modern day Molokans. Although they are sometimes also called \"Molokans\", they constitute an independent movement. Their leader Matvei Dalmatov was tortured to death in a monastery prison by breaking wheel.\nIn 1428, Crimea became independent and supported the original Molokan-Subbotniks, the Crimean Karaites (Qara-Tatars / Karaylar), who had always played an important role in Mongol politics. The linguistically dominant Church of the East Karait-Tatars, who had similar origins to the Khavars, became \"Karaimstvuiuschie\" (or Molokan Karaits).\n17th\u201318th centuries.\nThe first recorded use of the term \"Molokan\" appears in the 1670s, in reference to a group of people who had the practice of not fasting as well as eating dairy products during the 200 fasting days stipulated by the Orthodox Church. In Russian, means \"milk\", and thus this came to be the name for these particular Christians. Nonetheless, these were \"Spiritual Christians\" who were not directly related to the group later known as \"Molokans\".\nThe \"Molokans\" that are known today by that name split in 1779 and 1780 from the Doukhobors because they thought that the Doukhobors neglected the Bible; in their belief, God had placed the Word directly into their hearts. The Molokans, however, held the written Bible in the highest regard. The founder of the Molokans, Semyon Matveevich Uklein (1733\u20131809), was a son-in-law of the Doukhobor leader Ilarion Poberokhin (1720\u20131792) as explained by O. Beznosova: \"Soon (approximately in 1779\u20131780) a group broke away from Pobirohin's disciples. It was led by his son-in-law Semyon Uklein, who did not share the mystical spirit and self-deification of the former leader and defended the need for reliance on the Gospel texts in the organization of church life (Margaritov, 1914). This group (called 'Molokans') became a 'rational' direction of Spiritual Christianity, as opposed to the 'mystics' \u2013 'christoverchestvo' adherents, 'Doukhobors', and 'skoptsy'.\"\nUklein's Molokans from Tambov energetically proselytized in settlements along the Volga River and Russia's south-eastern frontier, spreading the Molokan faith in the provinces of Orenburg, Saratov, and Astrakhan; Uklein would further continue organizing congregations until his death in 1809.\n19th\u201320th centuries.\nFrom the intervention of Count Nikolay Zubov in 1795, Molokans were tolerated under Catherine the Great but constrained by strict rules imposed upon them intended to curb community growth. Those who ignored the restrictions were punished in Tsarist Russia as heretics. Molokan evangelists and missionaries suffered imprisonment, banishment, and other forms of punishment. Prohibited from winning converts, the Molokans were forced into endogamy. The government's policy was to send the Molokans away from the center of Russia into the Caucasus (1833) and other outlying areas to prevent their having influence on other peasants; they were sent to Armenia, Azerbaijan (1834), Ukraine (1830s), central Asia, and Siberia, where many communities have survived into the present.\nIt is said that in 1900, despite the persecutions by the Tsarist government and Orthodox Church, there could have been about a half-million Spiritual Christians in the Russian empire. These figures appear, however, to be vastly exaggerated. In 1912, there were only 133,935 \"Molokane\" and 4,844 \"Pryguny\" counted in Russia (census of the Department of Spiritual Affairs).\nFewer than one thousand \"Molokane\" fled Russia in the early 1900s (mostly 1905\u20131912), many of whom settled near other non-Orthodox immigrants from Russia in an ethnic enclave on and near Potrero Hill, San Francisco, California, where they built a prayer hall in 1929. A second prayer hall was established near Sheridan, California, to serve those scattered in Northern California. There has been a population of Molokans in Whittier in southern California. As of 2022, there is still a church called New United Molokan Church. Though some Spiritual Christian faith groups fled Russia in the early 1900s to avoid the military draft, all eligible \"Molokan\" boys registered for the Selective Service Act of 1917, but were disqualified as aliens who did not speak English. During World War II, 136 eligible American \"Molokan\" boys enlisted during World War II, and two were conscientious objectors.\nBeing prohibited from winning converts under the laws of the Russian Empire, they adopted endogamy and were classified as an ethnic group under the Bolsheviks.\nGroups.\nFrom 1904 through the 1920s, many different faith tribes in the Caucasus immigrated to North America under the guise of \"Molokan\". In 1899, when about a third of all \"Dukhobortsty\" left the Caucasus to central Canada, the Canadian government also gave permission for \"Molokans\" to migrate and get the same privileges (land, communal, non-military). To take advantage of this generous privilege, many different faith tribes of spiritual Christians in the Caucasus all claimed to be \"Molokan\" while leaving Russia for Canada. Most all were diverted from Canada to Los Angeles by Peter Demens, where they clashed, never uniting. Many descendants of those different tribes still claim the coveted \"Molokan\" heritage label which perpetuates confusion.\nConstant Molokans and Molokan Jumpers.\nThe Russian term \"constant\" (invariable, steadfast, unchanged, original: : ) applied to the \"Molokans\" has been used with two different intentions. Original \"Molokans\" either refused to be evangelized by Protestant denominations or insisted that they would retain their faith unchanged by the \"Jumper\" revivalist movement in the 1830s. They originally constituted the by far largest segment of Molokanism. In 1833, a schism occurred that was framed by collective cataclysms of disease, famine, and persecution. A portion of the Molokans during this time began to experience a charismatic outpouring of the Holy Spirit, similar to later Pentecostal faiths. Eventually this sect evolved into what is known today as the \"Molokan Jumpers\". The old Molokans were termed \"Constants\" (), and the newly evolved \"Molokans jumpers\" (), also called (leapers). The Molokan \"Jumpers\" believed they were visited by a manifestation of the Holy Spirit, and this new smaller Molokan sect began a revival with intense zeal, reporting miracles that purportedly rivaled those of Christ's apostles.\nSeeds of exodus.\nThe \"Constant\" Molokan sect condemned the new sect to authorities, resulting in betrayals and imprisonment for many of the Molokan Jumpers. Some of these Molokan Jumpers called themselves \"New Israelites\", when one leader Maxim Rudomyotkin in Nikitino, Erivan Guberniya was announced to be the \"King of the Spirits\" in 1853. The group, also known as Maximists\", considered Efim Gerasimovich Klubnikin (1842-1915) in Romanovka, Kars oblast, a divinely inspired 12-year-old boy prophet. He prophesied a \"coming time that would be unbearable and that the time to leave Russia was now.\" During the early 20th century under his leadership, about 2,000 emigrated to the United States, first settling on the east side of Los Angeles. Most seeking rural isolation moved to Baja Mexico, then Arizona, Central California, and some other parts of the West Coast and Canada. Other Jumpers received a land grant from the Mexican government and settled in the Guadalupe Valley in Baja California, Mexico. \nIn Los Angeles, a small number of the Molokan Jumpers joined the development of the American Revival called \"the Pentecostal Azusa Street Revival.\" The founder of The Full Gospel Business Men's Association associates this Pentecostal Revival to a child prophet of the Molokan Jumpers, E.G. Klubnikin.\nDiaspora.\nAbout 20,000 people identify as Molokans, at least ethnically, in the former Soviet Union. There are approximately 200 Molokan churches, 150 of them in Russia and Azerbaijan. They also lived in the North Caucasus, Southern Ukraine, Armenia, and Central Asia, where their ancestors had been exiled long ago.\nApproximately 25,000 Molokans reside in the United States, of whom about 5,000 \"ethnically\" identify as \"Molokans\". The majority live in or near Los Angeles, particularly in East Los Angeles, Boyle Heights, and Commerce.\nDuring the 1960s other Molokans settled in southern Alaska and Australia. Molokans are said to be numerous in Australia. The majority are in South Australia, with a number of families in Western Australia and a small group residing in Queensland. Over 1,000 reside in Canada in the province of British Columbia and hundreds more in Alberta, keeping their traditional communal lifestyle. A group of Molokan families are also living in Latin America in the Guadalupe Valley, Mexico and in the country of Uruguay.\nA small Molokan community was located in the eastern province of Kars, Turkey. They are known as Kars Molokans. Most of the community returned to Russia years ago; in the 21st century only one family of Molokans is left in Kars.\nSpiritual practices.\nThe Molokans have been compared to the Anabaptists that originated through the Radical Reformation and to the Quakers. They have a protestant-like view of the authority of scripture, but interpreting the bible allegorically or \"spiritually\", they see the sacraments \"spiritually\", reject the use of icons, images of the cross, and Church hierarchy along with venerating the saints. The Molokans advocate for pacifism, congregate in their own homes, do not drink or smoke, and oppose contraception and modern technology.\nThe Molokans follow the Old Testament laws, refusing to eat pork, shellfish, or unclean foods, they additionally refused to obey Orthodox mandates on fasting.\nRacial, ethnic, and familial lineage.\nThe Molokans from Tambov who proselytized in settlements along the Volga River and in the Orenburg, Saratov and Astrakhan provinces were mostly of Slavic descent. Tambov Oblast had been completely settled by Slavic people by the 17th century. The regions they proselytized in all had or still have high populations of Islamic adherents and people of 'Tatar' or Turkic ancestry.\nBetween the 1600s and late 1800s, intermarriage between ethnic Russians and Tatars (Tatar at this point meaning anyone of Turkic background) was common. For a Tatar, marrying a Russian was a way to increase social status or class. Muslim Tatars who converted to Christianity were exempted from taxes and gained other privileges.\nMolokans as partially an admixture of Slavic and Turkic genetics is also supported by other accounts. Molokans complicated the work of the Eastern Orthodox Church in the conversion of Tatar or Turkic Muslims, as Molokans taught that religious iconography was a sin. Molokans are well-known iconoclasts, which was heresy to the Orthodox Church. Muslims, also being iconoclasts, found a draw to the Molokan faith as it preserved some Islamic traditions. Muslim converts in Russia were also well known to convert to Christianity to receive the benefits of conversion, only to convert back to Islam later. Molokans, being constrained to endogamy and marrying within their religion, would marry converts indiscriminate of their genetic background.\nIn the United States.\nHistory.\nRoughly 3,500 Molokans left Russia between 1901 and 1911 in search of religious freedom, escaping the persecution inflicted upon them by the Russian Orthodox Church and state. Starting around the early 1900s, many Molokans settled in the Potrero Hill neighborhood of San Francisco, California. The Potrero Hill Neighborhood House was built in 1922 by the California Synodical Society of Home Mission, Inc. and the Presbyterian Church, in order to support this newfound community, provided adult education classes, a community center, and a kindergarten. By the 1970s, the Potrero Hill community was still in existence, but other smaller groups of the Molokans had become assimilated into the broader Russian-American community. \nToday, Molokans in the United States are largely assimilated into the general mainstay of American culture. They do however work to preserve the uniqueness of their own traditions and culture, such as the usage of Russian in their church services, community dinners (referred to as 'obed'), and a shared adherence to diet based upon their religious beliefs.\nPerception by others.\nUpon their arrival in the USA, the Molokans and their religious observances seemed very strange to Americans. The Molokan colonies and communities were labeled \"cults\" and Molokans were harassed by Americans with the creation of the derogatory term \"Molokan Slackers\". The Molokans were given this moniker primarily because they did not want to serve in World War I, as they were conscientious objectors.\nLegal issues.\nOn June 8, 1917, the \"Arizona Republic\" reported that the Molokan community in Glendale, Arizona, refused to register under the Selective Service Act of 1917. The likely result would be the arrest of Molokan men who refused to sign the order. Molokans claimed that their religious precepts forbade them from signing such an agreement. The Czars had forced them into the military, and that is why they had fled Russia for the United States. The Molokans feared that history would repeat itself in America.\nOn August 9, 1917, \"The Daily Missoulian\" reported that 35 Molokans were arrested and given sentences of one year each for disobeying the Selective Service Act of 1917. Thirty-three other Molokans were arrested for creating a disturbance outside of the jail house; women struck police with their umbrellas and a knife-wielding man had to be overpowered. After the 35 men were sentenced, the Molokans in the courtroom broke out into ecstatic singing and dancing and some participants were slightly injured while being subdued.\nNaming after immigration.\nMolokans are known for having different spellings of last names within the same immediate family for a few reasons. When Molokans arrived in the United States, some family names were horribly misspelled by immigration officials who could not read Cyrillic\u2014for example, \"\u0421\u0443\u0441\u043e\u0435\u0432\" became \"Sessoyeff,\" which is unpronounceable in English. Also, like members of other pacifist communities, some Molokans changed the spelling of their names to avoid deportation. Many chose to use American versions of their names. So \"Vasilli Bukroff\" becomes \"Bill\" or \"William Bukroff\" or \"Ivan Metchikoff\" becomes \"John Mitchell\", and \"Dunya Tikunov\" becomes \"Julie Tyler\". They sometimes use \"first names\" that are not their legal names and are based on nicknames from childhood within the church that stuck with people as adults. For example, \"Hazel Valov\" became known as \"Percy Valov\" for being very \"persistent\". Another naming custom that can confuse those who are unfamiliar with the community was practiced by Molokans who settled in the Guadalupe Valley, Mexico. Many settlers adopted the Mexican versions of their names, so Rodion Pavlov became \"Rodolfo Pabloff,\" and they named their children following the Mexican format. Accordingly, one will see what would have been a Russian name like \"Ivan Pavilovich Pabloff\" (Ivan son of Pavil (Paul) (Pavlov)), whose mother's maiden name is \"Samarin,\" become \"Juan Pablo Pabloff de Samarin\" or \"Juan Samarin Pabloff\". In all these instances, tracing family history can be very difficult. Otherwise, they adhere to the common naming practices. Much can be learned from a Russian headstone which will commonly go back to the use of the Russian naming protocol regardless of what name the individual used while alive. If translated correctly, one can learn the names of an individual's father and grandfather from a male's headstone. If it is displayed in English at the bottom it most likely will not contain the information.\nEcumenical relations.\nIn Russia, the \"Molokane\" historically maintained close relations with Baptists.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "21030", "revid": "328950", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21030", "title": "Musical chairs", "text": "Elimination genre party game\n \nMusical chairs is a game of elimination involving players, chairs, and music. It is a staple of many parties worldwide.\nGameplay.\nA set of chairs is arranged in a circle with one fewer chair than the number of players (i.e. nine players would use eight chairs). While music plays, the contestants walk around the set of chairs. When the music stops abruptly, all players must find their own individual chair to sit on. The player who fails to sit on a chair is eliminated. One chair is then removed for the next round, and the process repeats until only one player remains and is declared the winner.\nHistory of the name.\nThe origins of the game's name as \"Trip to Jerusalem\" is disputed. However, it is known to come from its German name \"Reise nach Jerusalem\" (\"Journey to Jerusalem\"). One theory suggests that the name was inspired by the Crusades, wherein several heavy losses were incurred. Another theory suggests that it was inspired by the immigration of Jews from the diaspora to Palestine, wherein it is stated that spaces on ships taking the Jews to the said land were limited. None of these theories have been confirmed.\nAs metaphor.\nThe term \"playing musical chairs\" is also a metaphor for describing any activity where items or people are repeatedly and usually pointlessly shuffled among various locations or positions. It can also refer to a condition where people have to expend time searching for a resource, such as having to travel from one gasoline station to another when there is a shortage. It may also refer to political situations where one leader replaces another, only to be rapidly replaced due to the instability of the governing system (see cabinet reshuffle).\nIn popular culture.\nThe game is featured in the original incarnation of the Andrew Lloyd Webber musical, \"Evita\", during the number \"The Art of the Possible\", wherein it serves as a symbolic metaphor of Juan Per\u00f3n's rise to power. In this sequence, Peron and a number of military officers play the game, which the former wins.\nThe game is used on the lenten special of \"Sunday PinaSaya\" entitled \"Trip to Jerusalem\" aired on GMA Network on April 9, 2017. It featured the young girl Jessie (played by Barbie Forteza).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "21031", "revid": "753665", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21031", "title": "Mike Moore (New Zealand politician)", "text": "Prime Minister of New Zealand in 1990\nMichael Kenneth Moore (28 January 1949 \u2013 2 February 2020) was a New Zealand politician, union organiser, and author. In the Fourth Labour Government he served in several portfolios including minister of foreign affairs, and was the 34th prime minister of New Zealand for 59 days before the 1990 general election elected a new parliament. Following Labour's defeat in that election, Moore served as Leader of the Opposition until the 1993 election, after which Helen Clark successfully challenged him for the Labour Party leadership.\nFollowing his retirement from New Zealand politics, Moore was Director-General of the World Trade Organization from 1999 to 2002. He also held the post of New Zealand Ambassador to the United States from 2010 to 2015.\nEarly life.\nMoore was born in 1949 in Whakat\u0101ne, Bay of Plenty Region, New Zealand, the son of Audrey Evelyn (n\u00e9e Goodall) and Alan George Moore. \nHe was raised in Moerewa and while aged only two his mother pushed him around town in a pram which concealed Labour Party leaflets, which had been made illegal under the emergency powers enacted during the 1951 waterfront dispute. His father died when he was five years old after which he moved to Dilworth School as a boarder. He was then educated at Bay of Islands College before leaving school at 14 to work as a labourer and then as a printer. \nHe became an active trade unionist and at the age of 17 was elected to the Auckland Trades Council. He became the first youth representative on the Labour Party executive and was vice-president of the International Union of Socialist Youth for two consecutive terms. \nIn 1975, he married Yvonne Dereany, a teacher and presenter of the children's television programme \"Romper Room\"."}
{"id": "21032", "revid": "48680707", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21032", "title": "Mohism", "text": "Ancient Chinese philosophy\nMohism or Moism (, ) was an ancient Chinese philosophy of ethics and logic, rational thought, and scientific technology developed by the scholars who studied under the ancient Chinese philosopher Mozi (c.\u2009470 BC\u00a0\u2013 c.\u2009391 BC), embodied in an eponymous book: the \"Mozi\". Among its major ethical tenets were altruism and a universal, unbiased respect and concern for all people, stressing the virtues of austerity and utilitarianism. Illuminating its original doctrine, later Mohist logicians were pivotal in the development of Chinese philosophy.\nMohism developed at about the same time as Confucianism, Taoism and Legalism, and was one of the four main philosophic schools from around 770\u2013221 BC, during the Spring and Autumn and Warring States period. During that time, Mohism was seen as a major rival to Confucianism. While its influence endured, Mohism almost disappeared as an independent school of thought as it transformed and integrated into sects of Taoism in the wake of the cultural transformations of the Qin dynasty, after 221\u00a0BC.\nParamilitaries.\nThe Mohists formed a highly structured political organization that tried to realize the ideas they preached, the writings of Mozi. This political structure consisted of a network of local units in all the major kingdoms of China at the time, made up of elements from both the scholarly and working classes. Each unit was led by a juzi (literally, \"chisel\"\u2014an image from craft making). Within the unit, a frugal and ascetic lifestyle was enforced. Each juzi would appoint his own successor. Like Confucians, they hired out their services not only for gain, but also in order to realize their own ethical ideals. They were often hired by the many warring kingdoms as advisers to the state. In this way, they were similar to the other wandering philosophers and knights-errant of the period. \nMohists believed in aiding the defensive warfare of smaller Chinese states against the hostile offensive warfare of larger domineering states. Mohists developed the sciences of fortification and statecraft, and wrote treatises on government, with topics ranging from efficient agricultural production to the laws of inheritance. One consequence of Mohist understanding of mathematics and the physical sciences, combined with their anti-militarist philosophy and skills as artisans, was that they became the pre-eminent siege-defense engineers prior to the Qin unification of China. Popular in early China, Mohist followers were employed for their ability as negotiators and as defense engineers.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Mozi and his disciples worked concertedly and systematically to invent and synthesise measures of benefit to defence, including defensive arms and strategy, and their corresponding logistics and military mobilisation. Many were actually applied, and remained an aspect of military affairs throughout history. The \"Mozi\" is hence highly respected by modern scholars, and ranks as a classic on military matters on a par with Sunzi's \"Art of War,\" the former of defensive strategy, the latter of offensive strategy.\nThis component of Mohism is dramatized in the story of Gongshu, recorded in the Mohist canon. Mozi travels 10 days and nights when he hears that Gongshu Pan has built machines for the king of Chu to use in an invasion of the smaller state of Song. Upon arriving in Chu, Mozi makes a wall out of his belt and sticks to represent machines, and shows Gongshu Pan that he can defend Song against any offensive strategy Chu might use. Mozi then announces that three hundred of his disciples are already on the walls of Song, ready to defend against Chu. The king cancels the invasion.\nOverview.\nMohism is best known for the concept popularly translated as \"universal love\" (). According to Edward Craig, a more accurate translation for is \"impartial care\" because Mozi was more concerned with ethics than morality, as the latter tends to be based on fear more than hope.\nCaring and impartiality.\nMohism promotes a philosophy of impartial caring; that is, a person should care equally for all other individuals, regardless of their actual relationship to them. The expression of this indiscriminate caring is what makes a person a righteous being in Mohist thought. This advocacy of impartiality was a target of attack by other Chinese philosophical schools, most notably the Confucians, who believed that while love should be unconditional, it should not be indiscriminate. For example, children should hold a greater love for their parents than for random strangers.\nMozi is known for his insistence that all people are equally deserving of receiving material benefit and being protected from physical harm. In Mohism, morality is defined not by tradition and ritual, but rather by a constant moral guide that parallels utilitarianism. Tradition varies from culture to culture, and human beings need an extra-traditional guide to identify which traditions are morally acceptable. The moral guide must then promote and encourage social behaviours that maximize the general utility of all the people in that society.\nThe concept of \"Ai\" () was developed by the Chinese philosopher Mozi in the 4th century BC in reaction to Confucianism's benevolent love. Mozi tried to replace what he considered to be the long-entrenched Chinese over-attachment to family and clan structures with the concept of \"universal love\" (ji\u0101n'\u00e0i, ). In this, he argued directly against Confucians who believed that it was natural and correct for people to care about different people in different degrees. Mozi, by contrast, believed people in principle should care for all people equally. Mohism stressed that rather than adopting different attitudes towards different people, love should be unconditional and offered to everyone without regard to reciprocation, not just to friends, family and other Confucian relations. Later in Chinese Buddhism, the term \"Ai\" () was adopted to refer to a passionate caring love and was considered a fundamental desire. In Buddhism, \"Ai\" was seen as capable of being either selfish or selfless, the latter being a key element towards enlightenment.\nConsequentialism.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nIt is the business of the benevolent man to seek to promote what is beneficial to the world and to eliminate what is harmful, and to provide a model for the world. What benefits he will carry out; what does not benefit men he will leave alone.\nUnlike hedonistic utilitarianism, which views pleasure as a moral good, \"the basic goods in Mohist consequentialist thinking are... order, material wealth, and increase in population\". During Mozi's era, war and famines were common, and population growth was seen as a moral necessity for a harmonious society. The \"material wealth\" of Mohist consequentialism refers to basic needs like shelter and clothing. Stanford sinologist David Shepherd Nivison, in \"The Cambridge History of Ancient China\", writes that the moral goods of Mohism \"are interrelated: An example of this would be, more basic wealth, then more reproduction; more people, then more production and wealth... if people have plenty, they would be good, filial, kind, and so on unproblematically\". In contrast to Bentham's views, state consequentialism is not utilitarian because it is not hedonistic. The importance of outcomes that are good for the state outweigh the importance of individual pleasure and pain.\nSociety.\nMozi posited that, when society functions as an organized organism, the wastes and inefficiencies found in the natural state (without organization) are reduced. He believed that conflicts are born from the absence of moral uniformity found in human cultures in the natural state, i.e. the absence of the definition of what is right ( sh\u00ec) and what is wrong ( f\u0113i). According to Mozi, we must therefore choose leaders who will surround themselves with righteous followers, who will then create the hierarchy that harmonizes Shi/Fei. In that sense, the government becomes an authoritative and automated tool. Assuming that the leaders in the social hierarchy are perfectly conformed to the ruler, who is perfectly submissive to Heaven, conformity in speech and behaviour is expected of all people. There is no freedom of speech in this model. However, the potentially repressive element is countered by compulsory communication between the subjects and their leaders. Subjects are required to report all things good or bad to their rulers. Mohism is opposed to any form of aggression, especially war between states. It is, however, permissible for a state to use force in legitimate defense.\nMeritocratic government.\nMozi opposed nepotism, which was a social norm at the time. This practice allowed important government positions to be assigned based on familial ties rather than merit, restricting social mobility. Mozi taught that as long as a person was qualified for a task, he should keep his position, regardless of blood relations. If an officer was incapable, even if he was a close relative of the ruler, he ought to be demoted, even if it meant poverty.\nA ruler should be in close proximity to talented people, treasuring talents and seeking their counsel frequently. Without discovering and understanding talents within the country, the country will be destroyed. History unfortunately saw many people who were murdered, not because of their frailties, but rather because of their strengths. A good bow is difficult to pull, but it shoots high. A good horse is difficult to ride, but it can carry weight and travel far. Talented people are difficult to manage, but they can bring respect to their rulers.\nLaw and order was an important aspect of Mozi's philosophy. He compared the carpenter, who uses standard tools to do his work, with the ruler, who might not have \"any\" standards by which to rule at all. The carpenter is always better off when depending on his standard tools, rather than on his emotions. Ironically, as his decisions affect the fate of an entire nation, it is even more important that a ruler maintains a set of standards, and yet he has none. These standards cannot originate from man, since no man is perfect; the only standards that a ruler uses have to originate from Heaven, since only Heaven is perfect. That law of Heaven is Love.\nIn a perfect governmental structure where the ruler loves all people benevolently, and officials are selected according to meritocracy, the people should have unity in belief and in speech. His original purpose in this teaching was to unite people and avoid sectarianism. However, in a situation of corruption and tyranny, this teaching might be misused as a tool for oppression.\nShould the ruler be unrighteous, seven disasters would result for that nation. These seven disasters are:\nA country facing these seven disasters will be destroyed easily by the enemy.\nThe measure of a country's wealth in Mohism is a matter of sufficient provision and a large population. Thriftiness is believed to be key to this end. With contentment with that which suffices, men will be free from excessive labour, long-term war and poverty from income gap disparity. This will enable birth rate to increase. Mozi also encourages early marriage.\nSupernatural forces.\nRulers of the period often ritually assigned punishments and rewards to their subjects in spiritually important places to garner the attention of these spirits and ensure that justice was done. The respect of these spirits was deemed so important that prehistoric Chinese ancestors had left their instructions on bamboo, plates and stones to ensure the continual obedience of their future descendants to the dictates of heaven. In Mozi's teachings, sacrifices of bulls and rams were mentioned during appointed times during the spring and autumn seasons. Spirits were described to be the preexisting primal spirits of nature, or the souls of humans who had died.\nThe Mohists polemicized against elaborate funeral ceremonies and other wasteful rituals, and called for austerity in life and in governance, but did not deem spiritual sacrifices wasteful. Using historical records, Mohists argued that the spirits of innocent men wrongfully murdered had appeared before to enact their vengeance. Spirits had also been recorded to have appeared to carry out other acts of justice. Mohists believed in heaven as a divine force ( \"Tian\"), the celestial bureaucracy and spirits which knew about the immoral acts of man and punished them, encouraging moral righteousness, and were wary of some of the more atheistic thinkers of the time, such as Han Fei. Due to the vague nature of the records, there is a possibility that the Mohist scribes themselves may not have been clear about this subject.\nAgainst fatalism.\nMozi disagrees with the fatalistic mindset of people, accusing the mindset of bringing about poverty and suffering. To argue against this attitude, Mozi used three criteria (\"San Biao\") to assess the correctness of views. These were:\nIn summary, fatalism, the belief that all outcomes are predestined or fated to occur, is an irresponsible belief espoused by those who refuse to acknowledge that their own lack of responsibility or the western view of sinfulness has caused the hardships of their lives. Prosperity or poverty are directly correlated with either virtue or vice, respectively, so realised by deductive thinking and by one's own logic; not fate. Mozi calls fatalism that almost indefinitely ends in misanthroponic theory and behaviour, \"A social heresy which needs to be disarmed, dissolved and destroyed\".\nAgainst ostentation.\nBy the time of Mozi, Chinese rulers and the wealthier citizens already had the practice of extravagant burial rituals. Much wealth was buried with the dead, and ritualistic mourning could be as extreme as walking on a stick hunchback for three years in a posture of mourning. During such lengthy funerals, people are not able to attend to agriculture or care for their families, leading to poverty. Mozi spoke against such long and lavish funerals and also argued that this would even create resentment among the living.\nMozi views aesthetics as nearly useless. Unlike Confucius, he holds a distinctive repulsion to any development in ritual music and the fine arts. Mozi takes some whole chapters named \"Against Music\" () to discuss this. Though he mentions that he does enjoy and recognize what is pleasant, he sees them of no utilization in terms of governing, or of the benefit of common people. Instead, since development of music involves man's power, it reduces production of food; furthermore, appreciation of music results in less time for administrative works. This overdevelopment eventually results in shortage of food, as well as anarchy. This is because manpower will be diverted from agriculture and other fundamental works towards ostentations. Civilians will eventually imitate the ruler's lusts, making the situation worse. Mozi probably advocated this idea in response to the fact that during the Warring States period, the Zhou king and the aristocrats spent countless time in the development of delicate music while ordinary peasants could hardly meet their subsistence needs. To Mozi, bare necessities are sufficient; resources should be directed to benefit man.\nSchool of Names.\nOne of the offshoots of Mohism that has received some attention is the School of Names, who were interested in resolving logical puzzles. Not much survives from the writings of this school, since problems of logic were deemed trivial by most subsequent Chinese philosophers. Historians such as Joseph Needham have seen this group as developing a precursor philosophy of science that was never fully developed, but others believe that recognizing these Logicians as proto-scientists reveals too much of a modern bias.\nMathematics.\nThe Mohist canon (\"Mo Jing\") described various aspects of many fields associated with physical science, and provided a small wealth of information on mathematics as well. It provided an 'atomic' definition of the geometric point, stating that a line is separated into parts, and the part which has no remaining parts (i.e. cannot be divided into smaller parts) and thus the extreme end of a line is a point. Much like Euclid's first and third definitions and Plato's 'beginning of a line', the \"Mo Jing\" stated that \"a point may stand at the end (of a line) or at its beginning like a head-presentation in childbirth. (As to its invisibility) there is nothing similar to it.\" Similar to the atomists of Democritus, the \"Mo Jing\" stated that a point is the smallest unit, and cannot be cut in half, since 'nothing' cannot be halved. It stated that two lines of equal length will always finish at the same place, while providing definitions for the \"comparison of lengths\" and for \"parallels\", along with principles of space and bounded space. It also described the fact that planes without the quality of thickness cannot be piled up since they cannot mutually touch. The book provided definitions for circumference, diameter, and radius, along with the definition of volume.\nDecline.\nWith the unification of China under the Qin, China was no longer divided into various states constantly fighting each other: where previously the Mohists proved to be an asset when defending a city against an external threat, without wars, and in particular siege wars, there was no more need for their skills. The \"Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy\" suggests, in addition to the decline of siege warfare, \"...the major factor is probably that as a social and philosophical movement, Mohism gradually collapsed into irrelevance. By the middle of the former Han dynasty, the more appealing aspects of Mohist thought were all shared with rival schools.\nTheir core ethical doctrines had largely been absorbed into Confucianism, though in a modified and unsystematic form. Key features of their political philosophy were probably shared with most other political thinkers, and their trademark opposition to warfare had been rendered effectively redundant by unification. The philosophy of language, epistemology, metaphysics, and science of the later Mohist Canons were recorded in difficult, dense texts that would have been nearly unintelligible to most readers (and that in any case quickly became corrupt). What remained as distinctively Mohist was a package of harsh, unappealing economic and cultural views, such as their obsession with parsimony and their rejection of music and ritual. Compared with the classical learning and rituals of the Confucians, the speculative metaphysics of Yin-Yang thinkers, and the romantic nature mysticism and literary sophistication of the Daoists, Mohism offered little to attract adherents, especially politically powerful ones.\"\nModern perspectives.\nJin Guantao, a professor of the Institute of Chinese Studies at the Chinese University of Hong Kong, Fan Hongye, a research fellow with the Chinese Academy of Sciences' Institute of Science Policy and Managerial Science, and Liu Qingfeng, a professor of the Institute of Chinese Culture at the Chinese University of Hong Kong, have argued that without the influence of proto-scientific precepts in the ancient philosophy of Mohism, Chinese science lacked a definitive structure:\nFrom the middle and late Eastern Han to the early Wei and Jin dynasties, the net growth of ancient Chinese science and technology experienced a peak (second only to that of the Northern Song dynasty)... Han studies of the Confucian classics, which for a long time had hindered the socialization of science, were declining. If Mohism, rich in scientific thought, had rapidly grown and strengthened, the situation might have been very favorable to the development of a scientific structure. However, this did not happen because the seeds of the primitive structure of science were never formed. During the late Eastern Han, disastrous upheavals again occurred in the process of social transformation, leading to the greatest social disorder in Chinese history. One can imagine the effect of this calamity on science.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "21034", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21034", "title": "Migraine treatment drug", "text": ""}
{"id": "21035", "revid": "28481209", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21035", "title": "Migraine", "text": "Disorder resulting in recurrent moderate\u2013severe headaches\nMedical condition&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Infobox/styles-images.css\" /&gt;\nMigraine (, ) is a complex neurological disorder characterized by episodes of moderate-to-severe headache, most often unilateral and generally associated with nausea, light sensitivity and sound sensitivity. Other symptoms may include vomiting, unusual pain, dizziness, and cognitive dysfunction. Some people with migraine experience aura, a period of sensory disturbance at the onset of a migraine attack.\nAlthough primarily considered to be a headache disorder, migraine is highly varied in its clinical presentation and is better thought of as a spectrum disease rather than a distinct clinical entity. Disease burden can range from episodic discrete attacks to chronic disease. Incidence of migraines may increase over time, evolving from episodic migraine to chronic migraine. Overuse of acute pain medications may hasten this process and is a risk factor for developing medication overuse headache.\nMigraine is believed to be caused by a combination of genetic, environmental, and neurological factors that influence the behavior of nerve cells, chemical signals and blood vessels within the brain. Migraine attacks are theorized to occur when the brain exceeds an individual sensitivity threshold. Attacks are more likely to occur if stable conditions within the brain are disrupted by changes in hormones, sleep, or stress. \nThe initial phase of a migraine attack starts 48 hours before the main headache phase, with increasing activity in the hypothalamus and the appearance of early (premonitory) symptoms. \nThe subsequent pain phase of a migraine attack may be linked to loss of control between the hypothalamus and the limbic system, and increased activity in the pain pathway from the trigeminal nerve to the brainstem. Release of the neuropeptide CGRP increases blood flow and the transmission of pain signals.\nMigraineurs display heightened neural sensitivity to stimuli such as light, sound or smell and to pain perception. \nMechanisms that normally enable people to habituate to repeated stimuli may be disrupted in migraineurs.\nA migraine management plan often includes lifestyle modifications to cope with migraine triggers and reduce the impact of co-occurring conditions. Non-pharmacological preventive therapies include stress management, improving sleep habits, eating regularly, and some types of exercise. Initial recommended treatment for acute mild to moderate attacks is with over-the-counter medications such as ibuprofen (Advil, Motrin) and paracetamol (acetaminophen, Tylenol) for pain. Triptans are recommended as a first-line therapy for moderate to severe attacks. The approval of CGRP inhibitors (gepants) is seen as a major advance in migraine treatment. According to the American Headache Society, CGRP therapies are a first-line option for migraine prevention. Anti-nausea medications are used as a second-line treatment for migraine-related nausea. Ergotamines may be used by those experiencing headaches that do not respond to over-the-counter pain medications. Opioids should not be prescribed, because higher doses of opioids are linked to medication overuse headache (MOH) and increased risk of progression from episodic to chronic migraines.\nCommonly prescribed preventive medications include beta blockers (e.g. metoprolol, propranolol), anticonvulsants (e.g.valproate), antidepressants (e.g. amitriptyline, venlafaxine), calcium channel blockers (e.g. flunarizine), and CGRP inhibitors. Medications inhibit migraine through various mechanisms, such as blocking calcium and sodium channels, activation of the neurotransmitter serotonin, and blocking of CGRP transmission in the network of neurons and blood vessels in the brain's protective layers (the meninges).\nAccording to the Global Burden of Disease 2021 database approximately 14% (1.16 billion) of people worldwide are affected by migraine, making it the third most disabling condition affecting the nervous system and one of the most common causes of disability. Beginning at puberty, women experience higher rates than men of incidence, severity of symptoms, and disability related to migraines, in particular to migraine without aura. Occurrence of migraine without aura displays an age-related pattern, beginning around menarche, increasing through the childbearing years, peaking during perimenopause when estrogen levels tend to fluctuate, and tending to decrease following menopause when estrogen levels tend to stabilize. From age 30 to 50, up to 4 times as many women experience migraine attacks as men. Estrogen levels may impact migraine mechanisms of action through blood flow, neurotransmitters, and ion transport across cell membranes.\nSigns and symptoms.\nMigraine typically presents as recurrent, mostly unilateral, pulsating headaches, along with heightened reactivity to light, sound, and other sensory stimuli. The severity of the pain, duration of the headache, and frequency of attacks are variable. Symptoms may last for hours or days, seriously affecting quality of life.\nAbout 30% of people living with migraine experience episodes with aura. Women are more likely than men to experience migraine without aura. Mechanisms in migraine patients with and without aura differ, and it is recommended that these subtypes of migraine be treated separately.\nMigraine attacks can be described in terms of four stages or phases, which may not all be experienced. In addition, the period between migraine attacks is sometimes referred to as the interictal phase.\nA migraine attack lasting longer than 72 hours despite treatment is referred to as status migrainosus. This can lead to complications like dehydration and electrolyte imbalances, and may require emergency room or hospital-level care.\nMigraine is associated with neuropsychiatric disorders including major depression, bipolar disorder, anxiety disorders, obsessive\u2013compulsive disorder, and sleep disorders. Shared neurobiological mechanisms may underly multiple conditions. Co-occurrence with specific psychiatric disorders differs for those experiencing migraine with and without aura.\nProdrome phase.\nThe prodrome phase of migraine is generally defined as the 48 hours preceding the pain or aura phases of an attack.\nEstimates of the occurrence of premonitory or prodromal symptoms in people with migraine vary widely. Results of a systematic review and metanalysis of studies suggests that around 29% of people with migraine in population-based studies report at least one premonitory symptom, while around 66% of people in clinic populations report premonitory symptoms. \nThese symptoms may include a wide variety of phenomena, including altered mood, irritability, depression or euphoria, fatigue, craving for certain food(s), difficulty speaking or reading, yawning, stiff muscles (especially in the neck), constipation or diarrhea, and sensitivity to smells or noise. Premonitory symptoms may occur with both migraine without aura and migraine with aura. Neuroimaging indicates that changes in activity in the limbic system and hypothalamus are associated with prodromal symptoms in migraine.\nAura phase.\nAura is a transient neurological event that can occur over 5\u201360 minutes, generally just prior to the onset of headache pain. Symptoms can be visual, sensory or motoric in nature, but visual effects occur most frequently, in as many as 99% of cases of migraine with aura. In rare cases known as persistent aura, aura symptom may remain after 60 minutes.\nVisual disturbances often consist of a scintillating scotoma (an area of partial alteration in the field of vision, which flickers and may interfere with a person's ability to read or drive). These typically start near the center of vision and then spread out to the sides with zigzagging lines, which have been described as looking like fortifications or walls of a castle. Usually, the lines are in black and white, but some people also see colored lines. Some people lose part of their field of vision known as hemianopsia while others experience blurring.\nSensory auras are the second most common type; they occur in 30\u201340% of people with auras. Often, a feeling of pins-and-needles begins on one side in the hand and arm and spreads to the nose\u2013mouth area on the same side. Numbness usually occurs after the tingling has passed with a loss of position sense. Other symptoms of the aura phase can include speech or language disturbances, world spinning, and, less commonly, motor problems. Motor symptoms indicate that this is a hemiplegic migraine, and weakness often lasts longer than one hour unlike other auras.\nPain phase.\nClassically the headache is unilateral, throbbing, and moderate to severe in intensity. \nThe feeling of pulsating pain is not in phase with the pulse. In around 40% of cases, the pain may be bilateral, affecting both sides of the head. The pain usually lasts 4 to 72 hours in adults. Pediatric and adolescent migraines differ from adult presentations, more often involving bilateral headaches with shorter duration. \nPain is frequently accompanied by nausea, vomiting, sensitivity to light, sensitivity to sound, sensitivity to smells, fatigue, and irritability. Many prefer a dark and quiet environment, and seek to avoid stimuli to which they are sensitive. Nausea occurs in almost 90% of people, and vomiting occurs in about one-third. Other symptoms may include blurred vision, sino-nasal symptoms such as nasal stuffiness, diarrhea, neck pain, and swelling or tenderness of the scalp. In rare cases of migraine with brainstem aura (basilar migraine), neurological symptoms related to the brain stem may affect both sides of the body, including a sense of the world spinning, light-headedness, and confusion.\nDuring the pain phase, motion and physical activity may increase pain. Migraineurs are likely to decrease physical activity during this time. However, the effects of physical activity on migraine are complex, and regular exercise on an on-going basis may have a preventive effect and decrease frequency of migraine attacks.\nSilent migraine.\nIt has been suggested that aura may occur without a subsequent headache. This is referred to in modern classification as a typical aura without headache, or acephalgic migraine in previous classification, or commonly as a \"silent migraine\".&lt;ref name=\"jmedicalcaserep-Yusheng-2015-aura-w/o-headache\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; Symptoms such as visual disturbance, vision loss, alterations in color perception, and sensitivity to light, sound, and odors may still be debilitating in the absence of pain.\nPostdrome.\nThe migraine postdrome, sometimes referred to as the \"migraine hangover\", is the constellation of symptoms occurring after the acute headache has ceased. ICHD-3 defines this as the 48 hours after the pain ceases. Common symptoms include tiredness, difficulty concentrating, mood changes, and thirst. Other symptoms reported include dizziness and euphoria.\nCauses.\nMigraine is believed to result from a mix of genetic, environmental, and neurological factors. Migraine runs in families, with heritability estimates of 34\u201364%, but this rarely reflects a single gene defect. Rather, a variety of genetic factors may relate to neuronal, vascular and other systems, and create genetic susceptibility. Migraine often occurs with conditions such as depression, anxiety, and bipolar disorder, which may have a bidirectional relationship (either one can worsen the other). It is likely that shared genetic and neurobiological mechanisms contribute to risk factors that underlie multiple conditions.\nGenetics.\nStudies of twin adults indicate a 0.36 to 0.48 genetic influence on the likelihood of developing migraine. However, few studies examine non-European populations, or distinguish between migraine with aura and migraine without aura. It is clear from family and populations studies that migraine is a complex disorder, where numerous genetic risk variants exist, and where each variant increases the risk of migraine marginally. It is also known that having several of these risk variants increases the risk by a small to moderate amount.\nSingle gene disorders that result in migraine are rare. One of these is known as familial hemiplegic migraine, a type of migraine with aura, which is inherited in an autosomal dominant fashion. Three main genes have been shown to be involved in familial hemiplegic migraine via ion transport: CACNA1A, ATP1A2, and SCN1A (FHM3). The axonal protein PRRT2, associated with the exocytosis complex, may be a fourth causal gene for FHM, but this is still under debate. \nAnother genetic disorder that has been associated with migraine is CADASIL syndrome or cerebral autosomal dominant arteriopathy with subcortical infarcts and leukoencephalopathy. Despite some similarities in symptoms, ICHD-3 recommends that this be diagnosed \u201cheadache attributed to CADASIL\u201d (code 6.8.1) rather than migraine with aura (MA) or migraine without aura (MO) (codes 1.1 and 1.2). The \"TRPM8\" gene, which codes for a cation channel, has been linked to migraine. One meta-analysis found a protective effect from angiotensin converting enzyme polymorphisms on migraine.\nThe common forms of migraine are polygenetic, where common variants of numerous genes contribute to the predisposition for migraine. These genes can be placed in three categories: increasing the risk of migraine in general, specifically migraine with aura, or migraine without aura. Three of these genes, \"CALCA\", \"CALCB\", and \"HTR1F\" are already target for migraine specific treatments. Five genes are specific risk to migraine with aura, \"PALMD\", \"ABO\", \"LRRK2, CACNA1A\" and \"PRRT2\", and 13 genes are specific to migraine without aura. Using the accumulated genetic risk of the common variations, into a so-called polygenetic risk, it is possible to assess e.g. the treatment response to triptans.\nTriggers.\nA migraine trigger reduces the threshold at which a migraine attack occurs in someone who is predisposed to migraine. Categories of hypothesized migraine triggers include emotion, nutrition, sleep disturbance, hormones, weather, sensory overstimulation and strenuous exercise. Migraine triggers may be classified as internal, modifying the body's homeostasis (e.g. hormonal variability, stress, sleep disturbance, fasting) or external, originating outside the body and influencing the perception of sensory signals (e.g. temperature fluctuations, noises, and odors). In some cases, factors reported as triggers (e.g. sensory sensitivities, food cravings and mood change) may be more appropriately considered as premonitory symptoms resulting from changes in brain activity during the prodromal phase of migraine. Determining whether and when something acts as a true causal trigger, and when it is a symptom of already-occurring changes, is an ongoing area of study.\nStudies of the brain's structure and function indicate that brain activity changes during the 48 (or even 72) hours before the pain phase of migraine. During this initial phase of a migraine attack, people may report prodromal/premonitory symptoms (PSs) such as fatigue, yawning, difficulty concentrating, mood changes, dizziness, neck pain, light sensitivity, food cravings, and nausea. Such symptoms may continue into the pain phase and postdrome. Some studies suggest that PSs may be linked to activity in particular neuroanatomical pathways and areas of the brain. Yawning, food cravings, homeostatic regulation, and sleep disturbance may be linked to activation in the hypothalamus. Other PSs, such as neck pain and nausea, may be related to activity in the brainstem. The stimuli that are found disturbing vary from person to person. Those experiencing PSs can sometimes correctly predict an oncoming attack.\nThe extent to which a possible trigger has an actual causal connection with headache onset is uncertain in most cases, and some relationships may be bidirectional. However, there are strong associations between migraine and hormonal changes, stress, quality of sleep, and fasting. It has been theorized that these \"catalyst triggers\" may act by increasing activity in the hypothalamus or trigeminal system and exceeding the brain's migraine threshold. Lifestyle changes that help to maintain bodily homeostasis, such as regular sleep, managing of stress, and eating regularly, can be helpful interventions. Whether a possible trigger is a cause or an early symptom of a migraine attack, it may help to manage exposure to sensory stimuli such as smells, lights, sound or touch.\nHormonal changes.\nFrom puberty onwards, women experience migraine attacks at greater rates and with greater severity of symptoms than men. Women are more likely than men to experience migraine without aura. A population-based study in Denmark suggests that sex differences in rate and severity of migraine attacks almost exclusively reflect the incidence of migraine without aura (11% in females and 3.59% in males). In comparison, sex differences were not significant in migraine with aura (1.72% in females and 1.58% in males).\nPatterns of migraine attacks in men and women begin to diverge at the onset of puberty, as a result of changes in sex hormones. The incidence of attacks of migraine without aura is strongly related to hormonal fluctuations in estrogen, which varies monthly and across a woman's lifespan. Migraine episodes are more likely to occur immediately before and during menstruation, possibly due to the drop in estrogen levels prior to the menstrual period.\nOccurrence of migraine without aura displays an age-related pattern. First onset of migraine is often reported around menarche, and prevalence increases from early adulthood throughout the childbearing years. Incidence and severity of migraine without aura peaks between ages 35 and 50. Attacks may worsen during perimenopause due to irregular periods and fluctuating estrogen levels. The first onset of migraine may occur during perimenopause. Following menopause, estrogen levels tend to stabilize at a lower rate, and migraine frequency and severity are likely to decrease.\nHormonal changes may also affect incidence and occurrence of migraines in relation to pregnancy. Migraine episodes tend to diminish during the 2nd and 3rd trimesters of pregnancy, when elevated estrogen levels are stable. They are likely to return following the abrupt drop in estrogen levels after childbirth.\nRelationships between oral contraceptive use and migraine are less clear, and may differ depending on migraine type, age, and characteristics of the menstrual cycle. In some cases, use of oral contraceptives or hormone replacement therapy can help to stabilize estrogen levels and prevent migraines, while suddenly ceasing to use hormonal contraceptives may be associated with increased attacks.\nWomen who experience migraine with aura differ from women who experience migraine without aura in onset, symptoms and recommended treatments. Women who perceive aura are more likely to have experienced the first onset of migraine before menarche. For women who experience migraine with aura, migraines are less likely to improve during pregnancy, and use of oral contraceptives is more likely to worsen attacks. Women with migraine with aura who use combined hormonal contraceptives (ethinylestradiol dose between 20 and 40\u2009\u03bcg) have a higher risk of ischemic stroke.\nStress.\nThe headache trigger that people are most aware of is stress, ranking first in reports for men, and second to hormonal factors for women. Best practices for psychologically addressing stress as a possible migraine trigger include relaxation therapy, biofeedback, and cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT). Activities such as relaxation therapy are more likely to be effective when used as a routine part of daily life or to address incidents of stress as a risk factor, rather than during the pain phase of a migraine attack.\nSleep.\nMigraineurs report a variety of sleep-related issues as possible triggers. These include undersleeping, irregular sleep, frequent night-time waking, and oversleeping. Those who experience chronic migraine may be less likely to maintain consistent sleep habits than those who experience episodic migraines. Jet-lag, shift work, and other disruptions of circadian rhythms may increase migraines. Changes in migraine frequency have been reported in relation to changes between daylight savings time and standard time.\nSleep hygiene improvements and maintaining a consistent sleep schedule are among the most frequently recommended migraine management techniques.\nDiet.\nFasting or missed meals are a commonly perceived trigger for migraines, and dietary modifications are a frequent management technique. Missing meals like breakfast can reduce brain glucose levels, leading to hypoglycemia and triggering the release of stress hormones like cortisol and adrenaline, which can affect migraines. Irregular meals are particularly strong predictors of attacks for those experiencing chronic migraines. Eating balanced meals at consistent times and hydrating well can help to prevent migraines and lessen migraine symptoms.\nA wide variety of specific foods and drinks have been reported as possible triggers, including alcohol, coffee, chocolate, cheese, nuts, citrus fruits, fatty foods, processed meats, monosodium glutamate, and aspartame. Mechanisms of action have been proposed for some of the commonly reported foods and drinks, such as red and white wine, hot dogs, and chocolate. Tyramine, which is naturally present in alcoholic beverages, most cheeses, processed meats, and other foods may trigger migraine symptoms in some individuals. Tyramine is also present at low levels in chocolate. Monosodium glutamate (MSG) has been reported as a trigger for migraine in some individuals, but whether or not there is a causative relationship continues to be debated.\nPeople may experience food cravings as a result of changes in brain activity during the prodromal phase of migraine. Reports that foods such as chocolate are triggers may actually reflect a increased desire for such foods as an early symptom of migraine attacks.\nSensory sensitivity.\nSensitivity to light (photophobia), sensitivity to sound (phonophobia), and sensitivity to smells (osmophobia) are often reported as migraine triggers. Some migraineurs may also report sensitivity to touch (allodynia). Neuroimaging and neurophysiological studies show changes in sensory thresholds relating to sensitivity to light, sound and smell and to pain perception. Patient reports of sensitivity triggers may be early symptoms in the premonitory phase of a migraine attack. People often deal with migraine attacks by seeking a dark and quiet space, and avoiding further sensory stimulation including movement, light, sounds, touch or smells.\nLight.\nSensitivity to light is a common symptom in migraine. Discomfort is associated with four categories of stimulation: bright light, flickering light, pattern, and color. While retinal mechanisms also may be involved, cortical mechanisms are increasingly seen as explaining discomfort from all four types of visual stimulation.\nPeople have been shown to have different thresholds for discomfort from stimuli. During migraine, stimulation can provoke a hyper-excitable cortical response involving specific subsets of neurons. Thresholds at which a response occurs and the size of the response that occurs may both be involved. For example, those with a more sensitive discomfort glare threshold have been shown to display greater activity in the cunei, lingual gyri and superior parietal lobules in response to peripheral lights. Photophobia may reflect individual differences in homeostatic response to stimuli, in which cortical hyper-excitability is further aggravated by visual stimulation. Those who are less sensitive to light may better reduce discomfort and avoid over-stimulation. It has been suggested that migraineurs may experience dysfunction in inhibitory mechanisms, have difficulty habituating to ongoing stimuli, and even become sensitized to such stimuli.\nStrategies for reducing discomfort may include staying in a darkened room, wearing sunglasses or hats to avoid direct sunlight and minimize glare, using fluorescent light filters to soften and diffuse light and reduce flicker, using green lights in preference to other colors, and using anti-glare filters with computers. Evaluating the ergonomics of workspaces and using suitable chairs and proper posture while working, may also be helpful.\nSound.\nMigraineurs frequently report hypersensitivity to auditory stimuli. Research indicates that they may have lower hearing thresholds and lower thresholds of discomfort for sounds than non-migraineurs generally, not just during migraine attacks. Migraineurs also have lower hearing thresholds than usual while they are experiencing headaches. Lower hearing threshold correlates with headache frequency, and with frequency of auditory, visual, and tactile triggers. Phonophobia in migraineurs correlates with higher brainstem neuronal excitability. There is some evidence suggesting that migraineurs experience an increase or potentiation in response to blocks of sound, rather than habituation.\nSmell.\nOsmophobia is a possible diagnostic marker of migraine, distinguishing it from other types of headaches.\nMigraineurs may report increased aversion to a smell that would not be unpleasant normally, heightened awareness of a smell, or other olfaction-related symptoms. Osmophobia is more often observed in people with a longer history of migraines and greater migraine-related impairment. This may suggest that sensitivity to stimuli increases over time. Migraineurs who experience scent-related symptoms are more likely to experience insomnia, depression, fatigue and neuropathic pain, and to report lower quality of life than those without osmophobia.\nThe brain processes odorous stimuli through the olfactory, trigeminal, and pheromone systems. There is evidence that different odors may activate different brain regions. Reported trigger smells have been grouped into six general categories of products: oil derivatives and others; fetid odor; cooking products; shampoos and conditioners; cleaning products; and perfumes, insecticides, and rose. Perfumes were the smells most frequently reported in connection with migraine attacks. There is evidence that those with chronic migraines are more likely than those with episodic migraines to be sensitive to floral scents in various types of products. Strategies for reducing scent exposure include using fragrance-free products, improving ventilation and air quality, wearing masks, and using air cleaners.\nWeather.\nMigraines have been reported to be triggered by changes in weather conditions such as temperature, ambient pressure, and humidity, but studies have shown mixed results.\nMechanism.\nMigraine is a complex neurovascular pain disorder involving blood vessels, neurons, and cerebrospinal fluid within the meninges, the brain's protective layers. The areas involved are sometimes referred to as the trigeminovascular system. The trigeminal nerve, located within the dura mater, carries sensory information about pain, touch, heat and cold from the face to the brain. The hypothalamus receives input from the trigeminal nerve and can modulate trigeminal nerve activity. Migraine patients appear to experience impairments in cortical habituation, a process which would normally decrease cortical responses to repetitive sensory stimuli.\nInitiation of a migraine attack may begin with disruption in the hypothalamus and limbic system. Gradually increasing hypothalamic activity has been observed in the period leading up to a migraine attack, followed by a disruption or collapse of hypothalamic connectivity to the limbic system during an attack. Disruption of the connection between the hypothalamus and limbic system may increase activity in the pain pathway from the trigeminal nerve to the brain, resulting in a migraine attack.\nThe meninges, particularly the dura mater, are rich in pain-sensitive nerve endings. Sensory information travels along trigeminal nerve fibers to cell bodies located within the trigeminal ganglion (TG). Axons of the trigeminal ganglion neurons enter the brainstem and travel to the trigeminal nucleus caudalis (TNC).\nThe activity of calcitonin gene-related peptide (CGRP) in the meninges is linked to migraine. \nCGRP is released from both the trigeminal ganglion (TG) and the trigeminal nucleus caudalis (TNC) in response to trigeminal nerve activation. CGRP activates receptors on meningeal blood vessels, causing dilation and changes in blood flow. CGRP also activates specialized nerve endings in the dura mater (nociceptors) that transmit pain signals to the central nervous system. Increased neuronal activity in the trigeminal pain pathway reaches higher cortical pain regions via the brainstem, midbrain, and thalamus.\nStimulation of the trigeminal nerve may result in release of neuropeptides such as CGRP, vasodilation of cerebral and dural blood vessels, neurogenic inflammation, and the transmission of pain signals via nerves in the meninges. Cerebrospinal fluid may also play a role in migraine by conveying signals from the brain to overlying pain-sensitive meningeal tissues, including the dura mater.\nThe experience of aura in migraine is associated with cortical spreading depression (CSD) at the onset of a migraine attack. In cortical spreading depression, a wave of depolarization propagates across the cerebral cortex, followed by suppression of spontaneous neuronal activity. Physiologically, CSD involves an influx of sodium and calcium ions in concentrations that overwhelm the cell membrane's transport capability. Dysregulation of electrolyte concentration and disruption of homeostasis then spread to other cortical regions.\nIncidence of migraines may increase over time, evolving from episodic migraine to chronic migraine. Overuse of acute pain medications may hasten this process of chronification, and is a risk factor in developing medication overuse headache.\nDiagnosis.\nThe diagnosis of a migraine is based on signs and symptoms. A headache calendar is a useful diagnostic tool for tracking the date, duration, and symptoms of headaches. Migraine can be classified according to whether the patient experiences an aura (MA) or not (MO) and frequency of headaches (episodic or chronic). Neuroimaging tests are not necessary to diagnose migraine, but may be used to find other causes of headaches in those whose examination and history do not confirm a migraine diagnosis. It is believed that a substantial number of people with the condition remain undiagnosed.\nThe diagnosis of migraine without aura, according to the International Headache Society, can be made according to the \"5, 4, 3, 2, 1 criteria\", which is as follows:\nIf someone experiences two of the following: photophobia, nausea, or inability to work or study for a day, the diagnosis is more likely. In those with four out of five of the following: pulsating headache, duration of 4\u201372 hours, pain on one side of the head, nausea, or symptoms that interfere with the person's life, the probability that this is a migraine attack is 92%. In those with fewer than three of these symptoms, the probability is 17%.\nClassification.\nMigraine was first comprehensively classified in 1988, when the International Headache Society (IHS) began its classification of headache disorders.\nThe IHS updated its classification of headaches in 2004. A third version was published in 2018. According to this classification, migraine is a primary headache disorder along with tension-type headaches and cluster headaches.\nMigraine is divided into six subclasses (some of which include further subdivisions):\nAbdominal migraine.\nAbdominal migraine is most frequently diagnosed in children, but occasionally in adults. Diagnostic criteria for abdominal migraine are outlined by both the Rome IV and ICHD III classification systems. Criteria include repeated, acute, paroxysmal attacks of abdominal pain that may be associated with nausea and vomiting. Attacks last for at least 1 hour and interfere with normal life. Average attack duration has been reported as 17 hours.\nAbdominal migraine often occurs in people with either a personal or family history of typical migraine, and children may develop typical migraine later in life. Abdominal migraine, migraine, and cyclical vomiting syndrome share common symptoms.\nDifferential diagnosis.\nOther conditions that can cause similar symptoms to a migraine headache include temporal arteritis, cluster headaches, acute glaucoma, meningitis and subarachnoid hemorrhage. Temporal arteritis typically occurs in people over 50 years old and presents with tenderness over the temple. Cluster headache presents with one-sided nose stuffiness, tears and severe pain around the orbits. Acute glaucoma is associated with vision problems. Meningitis associated with fever. Subarachnoid hemorrhage is associated with a very fast onset. Tension headaches typically occur on both sides, are not pounding, and are less disabling.\nThose with stable headaches that meet criteria for migraine should not receive neuroimaging to look for other intracranial disease.\nManagement.\nManagement of migraine includes both prevention of migraine attacks and acute treatment. Preventive (prophylactic) treatment can be given in the absence of a headache to reduce the frequency and severity of future attacks. Acute (abortive) treatment attempts to diminish or reverse the progression of a headache that has already started. Measures for reducing and avoiding triggers may also be beneficial. Headache tracking, using a headache diary or smartphone app, is a standard self-management tool used to monitor migraineurs' frequency of headache occurrence, associated symptoms or triggers, and effects of treatments.\nA migraine management plan often includes lifestyle modifications to cope with migraine triggers and reduce the impact of comorbidities. \nRecommended lifestyle modifications promote maintaining a consistent lifestyle, through regular sleep patterns, regular eating, staying hydrated, managing stress, engaging in moderate exercise, and maintaining a healthy body weight. Avoiding dietary triggers and caffeine overuse may also be recommended lifestyle modifications. Data suggests that sleep modification may be particularly helpful in reducing migraine frequency for adults with chronic migraines.\nBehavioral techniques that have been utilized in the treatment of migraines include Cognitive Behavioral Therapy (CBT), relaxation training, biofeedback, Acceptance and Commitment Therapy (ACT), as well as mindfulness-based therapies. A 2024 systematic literature review and meta analysis found evidence that treatments such as CBT, relaxation training, ACT, and mindfulness-based therapies can reduce migraine frequency both on their own and in combination with other treatment options. In addition, it was found that relaxation therapy aided in the lessening of migraine frequency when compared to education by itself. Similarly, for children and adolescents, CBT and biofeedback strategies are effective in decreasing of frequency and intensity of migraines. These techniques often include relaxation methods and promotion of long-term management without medication side effects, which is emphasized for younger individuals.\nA variety of possible diets have been proposed, including ketogenic diet, Mediterranean diet, DASH diet, and high intakes of fruits, vegetables, legumes, and oil seeds. Further research is needed to examine whether and when dietary interventions are beneficial to migraineurs. Interventions such as transcranial magnetic stimulation and transcutaneous supraorbital nerve stimulation require further research.\nAcute treatments are most effective when administered early in an attack. \nInitial recommended treatment for acute mild to moderate attacks is with over-the-counter (OTC) medications such as ibuprofen (Advil, Motrin) and paracetamol (acetaminophen, Tylenol) for pain. Triptans are recommended as a first-line therapy for moderate to severe attacks. The approval of CGRP inhibitors (gepants) is seen as a major advance in migraine treatment. According to the American Headache Society, CGRP targeting therapies are a first-line option for migraine prevention. Anti-nausea medications are used as a second-line treatment for migraine-related nausea. Ergotamines may be used by those experiencing headaches that do not respond to over-the-counter pain medications. Opioids should not be prescribed, as higher doses of opioids are linked to medication overuse headache (MOH) and increased risk of progression from episodic to chronic migraines.\nSystematic review and network meta analysis comparing the effectiveness of medications for acute migraine attacks in adults suggest that triptans, ditans, and gepants are all associated with reduced pain after 2 hours, with triptans being the most successful in reducing pain. Gepants were the least likely to involve adverse events, with some triptans having a higher risk than gepants, and ditans having the highest risk among all treatments.\nPreventive medications may be recommended for those experiencing frequent or severe migraines. Preventive medications include beta blockers, topiramate, and calcitonin gene related peptides (CGRP) inhibitors like erenumab and galcanezumab, which have demonstrated significant efficacy in clinical studies. Prokinetic antiemetics are used as adjunctives for patients with nausea and/or vomiting. Corticosteroids such as dexamethasone have been used to treat patients with status migrainosus, severe baseline disability, or refractory or recurrent headaches.\nPrognosis.\n\"Migraine exists on a continuum of different attack frequencies and associated levels of disability.\" For those with occasional, episodic migraine, a \"proper combination of drugs for prevention and treatment of migraine attacks\" can limit the disease's impact on patients' personal and professional lives. Fewer than half of people with migraine seek medical care. Severe migraine ranks in the highest category of disability, according to the World Health Organization, which uses metrics to determine disability burden, and the bulk of disability burden is due to chronic (as opposed to episodic) migraine.\nRepeated experiences of pain, including migraine pain, cause functional and structural changes in the brain It is possible for migraine to progress from an occasional inconvenience to a life-changing, chronic disorder. This \"chronification\" affects 3% of migraineurs in a given year, such that 8% of migraineurs have chronic migraine in any given year. Brain imagery reveals that the electrophysiological changes seen during an attack become permanent in people with chronic migraine; \"thus, from an electrophysiological point of view, chronic migraine indeed resembles a never-ending migraine attack.\"\nFactors such as genetic predisposition and hormones complicate the risk profile of those with migraine. There are significant differences between women who do and do not experience aura in terms of symptoms, mechanisms, and treatment. \nMigraine with aura is associated with an increased risk of ischemic stroke, myocardial infarction, coronary artery disease, and coronary artery dissection (SCAD). This may reflect shared underlying mechanisms of migraine with aura and cardiovascular disease. Women who experience migraine with aura and use estrogen-containing oral contraceptives have a higher risk of ischemic stroke.\nIn contrast, migraine generally, and migraine without aura, do not appear be related to increased risk of stroke or heart disease. Preventative therapy, particularly for those with migraine with aura, may prevent associated strokes. \nPeople with migraine, particularly women, may develop higher than average numbers of white matter brain lesions of unclear significance.\nEpidemiology.\nMigraine is common, with around 33% of women and 18% of men affected at some point in their lifetime. Onset can be at any age, but prevalence rises sharply around puberty, and remains high until declining after age 50. Before puberty, boys and girls are equally impacted, with around 5% of children experiencing migraine attacks. From puberty onwards, women experience migraine attacks at greater rates than men. From age 30 to 50, up to 4 times as many women experience migraine attacks as men; this is most pronounced in migraine without aura.\nAccording to the Global Burden of Disease 2021 database approximately 14% (1.16 billion) of people worldwide are affected by migraine. In the United States, about 6% of men and 18% of women experience a migraine attack in a given year, with a lifetime risk of about 18% and 43%, respectively. In Europe, migraine affects 12\u201328% of people at some point in their lives, with about 6\u201315% of adult men and 14\u201335% of adult women getting at least one attack yearly. Rates of migraine are slightly lower in Asia and Africa than in Western countries. Chronic migraine occurs in approximately 1.4\u20132.2% of the population.\nEconomic impact.\nMigraine is a significant source of both medical costs and lost productivity. It has been estimated that migraine is the most costly neurological disorder in the European Community, costing more than per year. In the United States, direct costs have been estimated at , while indirect costs\u00a0\u2013 such as missed or decreased ability to work\u00a0\u2013 is estimated at . Nearly a tenth of the direct cost is due to the cost of triptans. In those who do attend work during a migraine attack, effectiveness is decreased by around a third. Negative effects also frequently occur for a person's family.\nHistory.\nAn early description consistent with migraine is contained in the Ebers Papyrus, written around 1500\u00a0BCE in ancient Egypt.\nThe word \"migraine\" is from the Greek \u1f21\u03bc\u03b9\u03ba\u03c1\u1fb1\u03bd\u03af\u1fb1 (\"h\u0113mikr\u0101n\u00ed\u0101\"), 'pain in half of the head', from \u1f21\u03bc\u03b9- (\"h\u0113mi-\"), 'half' and \u03ba\u03c1\u1fb1\u03bd\u03af\u03bf\u03bd (\"kr\u0101n\u00edon\"), 'skull'.\nIn 200 BCE, writings from the Hippocratic school of medicine described the visual aura that can precede the headache and a partial relief occurring through vomiting.\nA second-century description by Aretaeus of Cappadocia divided headaches into three types: cephalalgia, cephalea, and heterocrania. Galen of Pergamon used the term hemicrania (half-head), from which the word migraine was eventually derived. Galen also proposed that the pain arose from the meninges and blood vessels of the head. Migraine was first divided into the two now used types\u00a0\u2013 migraine with aura (\"migraine ophthalmique\") and migraine without aura (\"migraine vulgaire\") in 1887 by Louis Hyacinthe Thomas, a French librarian. The mystical visions of Hildegard von Bingen, which she described as \"reflections of the living light\", are consistent with the visual aura experienced during migraine attacks.\nTrepanation, the deliberate drilling of holes into a skull, was practiced as early as 7,000\u00a0BCE. While sometimes people survived, many would have died from the procedure due to infection. It was believed to work via \"letting evil spirits escape\". William Harvey recommended trepanation as a treatment for migraine in the 17th century. The association between trepanation and headaches in ancient history may simply be a myth or unfounded speculation that originated several centuries later. In 1913, the world-famous American physician William Osler misinterpreted the French anthropologist and physician Paul Broca's words about a set of children's skulls from the Neolithic age that he found during the 1870s. These skulls presented no evident signs of fractures that could justify this complex surgery for mere medical reasons. Trepanation was probably born of superstitions, to remove \"confined demons\" inside the head, or to create healing or fortune talismans with the bone fragments removed from the skulls of the patients. However, Osler wanted to make Broca's theory more palatable to his modern audiences, and explained that trepanation procedures were used for mild conditions such as \"infantile convulsions headache and various cerebral diseases believed to be caused by confined demons.\"\nWhile many treatments for migraine have been attempted, it was not until 1868 that use of a substance that eventually turned out to be effective began. This substance was the fungus ergot from which ergotamine was isolated in 1918 and first used to treat migraine in 1925. Methysergide was developed in 1959 and the first triptan, sumatriptan, was developed in 1988. During the 20th century, with better study design, effective preventive measures were found and confirmed.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n "}
{"id": "21036", "revid": "869651799", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21036", "title": "Microeconomic", "text": ""}
{"id": "21037", "revid": "49974167", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21037", "title": "Meet the Feebles", "text": "1989 film by Peter Jackson\nMeet the Feebles (also known as Frogs of War in New Zealand as the film's English fake working title) is a 1989 New Zealand adult puppet musical black comedy film directed by Peter Jackson, and written by Jackson, Fran Walsh, Stephen Sinclair, and Danny Mulheron (who also performed the body of lead character Heidi the Hippo). The plot follows a stage troupe of anthropomorphic animals in a perverse comic satire. In contrast to the positive innocence and na\u00efve folly of The Muppets, the Feebles largely present negativity, vice, and other misanthropic characteristics.\nThe film is the first Jackson co-wrote with his future partner Fran Walsh, with the two collaborating on all his subsequent films. The film also marked the beginning of Jackson's collaborations with Richard Taylor and W\u0113t\u0101 Workshop, as created by Taylor and Tania Rodger, who all worked on Jackson's subsequent films.\nPlot.\nThe Feebles Variety Hour theatre troupe is rehearsing with hopes of finding success through being chosen for a syndicated television series. Star performer Heidi the hippopotamus is insulted by pornographic rat director Trevor and complains to her boss and lover Bletch, a sleazy walrus, unaware that he's having an affair with a Siamese cat named Samantha. \nRobert, a hedgehog and the troupe's newest member, arrives and immediately falls in love with a poodle named Lucille. He successfully serenades her with encouragement from Arthur, the show's worm manager.\nDuring the leadup to the show, different members of the troupe experience their own personal troubles. Sid, an elephant and animal trainer, is visited by his ex-fling Sandy, a chicken, who is filing a paternity suit against him after birthing an elephant-chicken hybrid named Seymour. After a confrontation with Samantha in which she bitterly reveals Bletch's infidelity with her, Heidi gorges on cake while flipping through her scrapbook of her fame and youth and reminisces on her first meeting with Bletch. \nHarry the rabbit is told by his duck doctor, Dr. Quack, that he caught a terminal disease after a threeway, which tabloid reporter F.W. Fly overhears and publishes in the newspaper. Wynyard, a drug-addicted frog who suffers from intense PTSD from his experiences in the Vietnam War, is desperately looking for money in order to obtain more drugs. Trevor drugs and rapes Lucille in order to entice her into being his new actress for his pornos, causing Robert to think that she's being unfaithful and dump her. Bletch, while playing golf with his henchman Barry the bulldog, initiates a confidential drug deal with a Scottish-accented warthog named Cedric.\nAfter a disastrous rehearsal, Heidi is berated by Sebastian, the show's homosexual Arctic fox director, for overeating after finding some Black Forest gateau in her cleavage, causing her to run into Bletch's office to complain to him again - only to catch him receiving oral sex from Samantha, upsetting her twice as much. \nBletch, realizing Cedric provided him borax, decides that he, along with Trevor and Barry, go to the docks and obtain the drugs themselves. Before they leave, Bletch is informed by Sebastian that the show is off as Heidi is refusing to perform, but he successfully persuades her by feigning lust for her and they briefly have sex.\nAt the docks, Bletch, Trevor and Barry obtain the drugs after killing Cedric, his whale boss Mr. Big, and several crab henchmen, but Barry is killed by a giant black widow spider in the ensuing escape. On their way back to the theater, Bletch learns of Harry's disease in the newspaper, and kills F.W. for gossiping about it. During the show, Sebastian tells Bletch that they were chosen for a syndicated series by the network. \nAs Bletch celebrates in his office, Heidi attempts to seduce him, only for him to harshly reject her, insult her and inform her that he intends to replace her with Samantha as the star. Humiliated and heartbroken, Heidi decides to commit suicide; after failing to hang herself, she prepares to kill herself using an M60 machine gun in Bletch's office. But before she can do so, Samantha enters to retrieve her purse, spots Heidi and taunts her again, causing Heidi to snap and shoot Samantha dead in response.\nMeanwhile, the show gradually goes awry: an ailing Harry vomits all over the stage, Sid is accosted by Sandy in front of the audience, an intoxicated Wynyard accidentally kills himself during his knife-throwing act and Sebastian performs a musical number about sodomy in a desperate attempt to save the show. \nHeidi goes on a violent rampage throughout the theater, killing many troupe members, including Harry and Sandy, before shooting Sid in his kneecaps. Before she can kill Lucille, Robert swoops to her rescue, saying that he still loves her, with Lucille revealing what Trevor did to her. Before Heidi can kill Bletch, he tries to calm her down by saying he still loves her, but this proves to be a ruse to make Heidi lower her guard so Trevor can kill her. Suddenly, Robert attacks Trevor, allowing Heidi to grab her gun and kill both Trevor and Bletch. Arthur regretfully informs Heidi that he has just reported her to the authorities, and Heidi, accepting her fate, decides to perform her song before she is arrested.\nA photographic postscript reveals what happened to the survivors following the massacre: Sid became a struggling horticulturalist with Seymour following his kneecap surgeries, Arthur received an OBE and retired to the countryside, Sebastian wrote an autobiography about the incident and is negotiating the film rights, Robert and Lucille got married and had two children and Heidi, after serving ten years in a female penitentiary, was rehabilitated into the community and now works at a large supermarket under a new identity.\nProduction.\nThe film was originally conceived as part of a television series and only belatedly became a feature after Japanese investors proposed expanding it; as such, the script was hastily re-written. The dialogue was recorded before shooting began. Made on an extremely low budget considering the time-consuming process of working with puppets, the film went over budget and schedule. The feature was filmed in Wellington, with the majority of the scenes being filmed on multiple constructed sets places, in an abandoned railway shed (Shed No. 12 to be exact) at the dockyards. Some scenes were filmed outside the goods shed, such as a few external and internal scenes that were filmed at The St. James Theatre. During filming, some scenes, including the Vietnam flashback, were funded by members of the film crew, and filmed secretly under the title \"Frogs of War\". The Vietnam flashback includes a game of Russian roulette as a parody of \"The Deer Hunter\". An initial application for Film Commission money was rejected by executive director Jim Booth, who a short time later became Jackson's producer. The Commission eventually granted the production two-thirds of its $750,000 budget, though relationships between the funders and the production soured and the Film Commission removed its credit from the film.\nIt is often mistakenly stated that there are no human characters in the film; the character Abi is a human. However, there are no \"real-life\" human characters in the film-- like the animal characters, Abi is a puppet. Director Jackson has a cameo as an audience member dressed as an alien from \"Bad Taste\". Every vehicle seen in the film is a variation on the Morris Minor, including a specially constructed limousine. Morris Minors also appear in Jackson's \"Bad Taste\" and \"Braindead\". By presumed coincidence, one of the characters, Harry the Hare, shares a name with the title character of James B. Hemesath's short story \"Harry the Hare\" (himself a Bugs Bunny pastiche), written for Harlan Ellison's anthology \"Again, Dangerous Visions\" in 1972.\nSoundtrack.\nThe film's music was composed by Peter Dasent. The soundtrack was released in 1991 by Q.D.K. Media.\nRelease.\nThe film was marketed in some countries with the tagline: \"From the director of \"Bad Taste\", comes a movie with no taste at all!\"\n\"Meet the Feebles\" was given its public premiere at a fantasy film festival in Hamburg, in April 1990.\nFrom then on, the film was released theatrically in Japan (7 December 1990); Portugal (February 1991); Australia (March 1991); Sweden (April 1991); Germany (May 1991); France (July 1991); United Kingdom (April 1992); and the United States (February 1995 in New York and September 1995 nationwide).\nThe film was banned in Ireland and remains banned as of 2023.\nReception.\nOn Rotten Tomatoes the film has an approval rating of 72% based on reviews from 25 critics, with an average rating of 6.5/10. The site's consensus reads \"Dark and vulgar, \"Meet the Feebles\" is a backstage comedy featuring puppets that offers proof of Peter Jackson's taste for sheer outrageousness, even if it often lapses into pure juvenilia.\"\nDuring a limited theatrical release in North America in 2002, critic James Berardinelli touched on aspects of the film which likely helped ensure it limited release in cinemas. \"The stories of these ... characters are told in a disgustingly graphic, obscenely offbeat, and caustically funny manner. \"Meet the Feebles\" is for those with a strong stomach and a seriously warped sense of humor. The film is so off the beaten track that it makes Monty Python seem mainstream.\" Janet Maslin of the \"New York Times\" gave it 2 out of 5 and wrote that it was \"Destined to stand as an unfortunate footnote to Mr. Jackson's career.\"\nLegacy.\nDespite being a commercial failure on release (grossing only NZ$80,000), the film went on to develop a cult following, gaining new fans after the success of Jackson's \"The Lord of the Rings\" trilogy. During his acceptance speech at the 2004 Academy Awards, Jackson joked that both \"Meet the Feebles\" and \"Bad Taste\" had been \"wisely overlooked by the Academy.\"\nThe titular Feebles are briefly mentioned in the seventh episode of the 2023 television series \"The Muppets Mayhem\" during a cameo by Jackson. Floyd Pepper notes the Electric Mayhem had not crossed paths with Jackson \"since that night in Wellington...when we met the Feebles,\" with Jackson remarking that two Feebles were now in witness protection, and the remainder in prison.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "21039", "revid": "14860824", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21039", "title": "Mob mentality", "text": ""}
{"id": "21040", "revid": "35288", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21040", "title": "Mafic", "text": "Silicate mineral or igneous rock that is rich in magnesium and iron\nA mafic mineral or rock is a silicate mineral or igneous rock rich in magnesium and iron. Most mafic minerals are dark in color, and common rock-forming mafic minerals include olivine, pyroxene, amphibole, and biotite. Common mafic rocks include basalt, diabase and gabbro. Mafic rocks often also contain calcium-rich varieties of plagioclase feldspar. Mafic materials can also be described as ferromagnesian.\nHistory.\nThe term \"mafic\" is a portmanteau of \"magnesium\" and \"ferric\" and was coined by Charles Whitman Cross, Joseph P. Iddings, Louis V. Pirsson, and Henry Stephens Washington in 1912. Cross' group had previously divided the major rock-forming minerals found in igneous rocks into \"salic\" minerals, such as quartz, feldspars, or feldspathoids, and \"femic\" minerals, such as olivine and pyroxene. However, micas and aluminium-rich amphiboles were excluded, while some calcium minerals containing little iron or magnesium, such as wollastonite or apatite, were included in the femic minerals. Cross and his coinvestigators later clarified that micas and aluminium amphiboles belonged to a separate category of \"alferric\" minerals. They then introduced the term \"mafic\" for ferromagnesian minerals of all types, in preference to the term \"femag\" coined by A. Johannsen in 1911, whose sound they disliked.\nMinerals.\nThe term \"mafic\" is still widely used for dark-colored ferromagnesian minerals. Modern classification schemes, such as the International Union of Geological Sciences (IUGS) classification of igneous rocks, include some light-colored ferromagnesian minerals, such as melilite, in the mafic mineral fraction. Accessory minerals, such as zircon or apatite, may also be included in the mafic mineral fraction for purposes of precise classification.\nRocks.\nWhen applied to rocks, the term \"mafic\" is used primarily as a field term to describe dark-colored igneous rocks. The term is not used as a rock classification in the IUGS classification scheme. Mafic rocks are sometimes more precisely defined as igneous rocks with a high proportion of pyroxene and olivine, so that their color index (the volume fraction of dark mafic minerals) is between 50 and 90. Most mafic volcanic rocks are more precisely classified as basalts.\nChemically, mafic rocks are sometimes defined as rocks with a silica content between 45 and 55 wt%, corresponding to the silica content of basalt in the TAS classification. Such rocks are enriched in iron, magnesium and calcium and typically dark in color. In contrast, the felsic rocks are typically light in color and enriched in aluminium and silicon along with potassium and sodium. The mafic rocks also typically have a higher density than felsic rocks. The term roughly corresponds to the older \"basic rock\" class.\nUpon eruption, mafic lava has less viscosity than felsic lava, due to the lower silica content in mafic magma. Water and other volatiles can more easily and gradually escape from mafic lava. As a result, eruptions of volcanoes made of mafic lavas are less explosive than felsic-lava eruptions.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "21041", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21041", "title": "Mineral/References", "text": ""}
{"id": "21043", "revid": "11292982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21043", "title": "Metaphysics of Quality", "text": ""}
{"id": "21045", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21045", "title": "Muslim calendar", "text": ""}
{"id": "21047", "revid": "1215656142", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21047", "title": "Military ordinariate", "text": "Catholic ecclesiastical jurisdiction providing religious services for armed forces\nA military ordinariate is an ecclesiastical jurisdiction of the Catholic Church, of the Latin or an Eastern church, responsible for the pastoral care of Catholics serving in the armed forces of a nation.\nUntil 1986, they were called \"military vicariates\" and had a status similar to that of apostolic vicariates, which are headed by a bishop who receives his authority by delegation from the Pope. The apostolic constitution \"Spirituali militum curae\" of 21 April 1986 raised their status, declaring that the bishop who heads one of them is an \"ordinary\", holding authority by virtue of his office, and not by delegation from another person in authority. It likened the military vicariates to dioceses. Each of them is headed by a bishop, who may have the personal rank of archbishop. If the bishop is a diocesan, he is likely to delegate the daily functions to an auxiliary bishop or a lower cleric.\nSome nations have military ordinariates of the Anglican Communion, Lutheranism, and Eastern Orthodoxy.\nThe personal ordinariates for Anglicans entering the Catholic Church announced on 20 October 2009 are similar in some ways to the existing military ordinariates. But the jurisdiction of military ordinariates is cumulative to that of the diocesan bishops.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "21048", "revid": "59986", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21048", "title": "Mammologist", "text": ""}
{"id": "21049", "revid": "35498457", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21049", "title": "Maxis", "text": "American video game developer\nMaxis is an American video game developer and a division of Electronic Arts (EA). The studio was founded in 1987 by Will Wright and Jeff Braun, and acquired by Electronic Arts in 1997. Maxis is best known for its simulation games, including \"The Sims\", \"Spore\" and \"SimCity\".\nHistory.\nIndependent studio (1987\u20131997).\nMaxis was founded in 1987 by Will Wright and Jeff Braun to help publish \"SimCity\" on home computers. Before then, the game was only available on a limited basis on the Commodore 64 due to few publishers showing any interest in porting a non-traditional game without definite \"win\" and \"lose\" conditions. The title went on to become one of the most popular and successful video games of all time. The \"SimCity\" series became a staple for the company and spawned multiple sequels and spin-offs. To name the company, Braun required that the name was \"from 5-7 letters, mean nothing, be easy to remember and contain an x, z, or q\"; the name \"Maxis\" was presented by Braun's father. Following the broad success of \"SimCity 2000\", Maxis moved from Orinda, California, to Walnut Creek in 1994.\nOne of the unintended successes of \"SimCity\" was recognition of the means to gamify the intersection of multiple real-world systems that could be used for planning and development, such as using \"SimCity\"-type simulations for urban planning. Around 1992, Maxis was approached by corporations and government agencies who wanted the company to use the same system simulation principles of \"SimCity\" to develop non-game simulations that they could manipulate for similar planning purposes. To support this, Maxis bought a small company, Delta Logic, and its owner John Hiles, who had been focused on more immediate business simulation software, and rebranded it as Maxis Business Simulations (MBS) for this work. Among works developed under this included \"SimRefinery\" for the Chevron Corporation, and \"SimHealth\" for the Markle Foundation. In 1994, Maxis decided to let this division go on its own; MBS rebranded itself as Thinking Tools Inc. and continued to produce similar simulation tools, but eventually closed down in 1998. Most of the information on MBS and Thinking Tools has been lost as upon being told of the company's closure, the few remaining employees burned most of the company's archives and only remnants of MBS' output exists.\nIn what \"Kotaku\" later referred to as the \"era of scattergun experimentation\", Maxis released numerous titles throughout the 1990s, including \"sim\" titles as well as some non-simulation titles, such as \"RoboSport\" (1991) and \"3D Pinball for Windows\" (1995), which was included as one of the standard system games in several Windows releases; however, these newer games were not successful. On June 1, 1995, Maxis became a public company. Heavy losses and lack of direction led Maxis to begin considering acquisition offers.\nEarly years under Electronic Arts (1997\u20132006).\nIn 1997, Maxis agreed to be acquired by Electronic Arts by means of a stock swap which valued Maxis at $125 million. In a press release, Maxis stated it agreed to the acquisition in order to take advantage of Electronic Arts' strong distribution channel. The transaction was complete on July 28, 1997, and triggered major changes at the company. Jeff Braun left, having received a sizeable amount of money during the purchase, and nearly half of the Maxis staff were laid off.\nOver 1998, Maxis was allowed to finish \"SimCity 3000\" on its own time; following this, Wright's efforts were thrown into \"The Sims\", at the time seen as a major gamble for the company, as the dollhouse game was not seen as a match for the video game market's demographics. EA backed the title on the basis of the economic potential for expansion releases. In 2000, Maxis South (Austin, Texas) was closed. \"The Sims\" was released in February 2000 to widespread success, and would become one of Maxis' core focuses until a 2006 reorganisation shifted it away from their core team. \"SimCity 4\" was released in 2003, the first title in the series to implement true 3D, as well as the first where Wright was not directly involved with work. In 2004, Maxis' longtime studios in Walnut Creek were closed, and the staff moved to EA offices in Redwood City and Emeryville.\n\"Spore\" and \"SimCity\" reboot (2006\u20132014).\nAs \"The Sims\" became a steady success, Will Wright began to focus on \"Spore\". The three years between its public announcement and its release were protracted enough to attract use of the term \"vaporware\" by some, and upon its 2008 release, found itself subject to harsh criticism and the target of a consumer protest against Electronic Arts. Despite the poor launch publicity, \"Spore\" sold 1 million units in its first month.\nWill Wright left Maxis in 2009, with Maxis going on to produce the poorly received spinoff \"Darkspore\" in 2011. During this time, Maxis.com redirected to the \"Spore\" website, then later once more to the website for \"The Sims\". At the 2012 Game Developers Conference, EA announced a new \"SimCity\" along with a new logo for the Maxis brand. Maxis became one of four primary labels at EA, replacing the \"EA Play\" brand. A Mobile focused Maxis studio was opened in Helsinki by EA in 2012. Development of \"The Sims\" continued, and Maxis branding returned in 2013 with the launch of \"\", and \"SimCity\". While Maxis were focusing on graphical improvements with the \"SimCity\" reboot, EA wanted to make the game multiplayer and always-online, in part to combat piracy. The game was subject to \"one of the most disastrous launches in history\", as the game was released in a highly buggy state, with server failures plaguing players, and the open regions swiftly filling with abandoned cities. Maxis would continue to support the game with patches, but it remained buggy even a year after launch. The reboot effectively ended the \"SimCity\" franchise, and was the last game to be developed by Maxis' core location in Emeryville.\nStudio closures and layoffs (2014\u20132019).\nIn the wake of the \"SimCity\" launch, Maxis went through a series of layoffs and studio closures, which continued throughout the late 2010s. This began with the 2014 restructure of EA Salt Lake, dissolving the Maxis group that had been headquartered there. A number of Maxis devs were migrated to the Redwood Shores studio. Maxis' principal studio in Emeryville was closed in 2015, leaving only the smaller Redwood Shores team and a newly opened mobile developer in Helsinki under the Maxis name.\nIn September 2015, EA announced that the consolidated Maxis team would work alongside the EA Mobile division under Samantha Ryan. EA indicated that the \"collaboration\" would still see most of Maxis' future products available for personal computers. The group was then reorganised under EA Worldwide Studios in 2016, with the rest of Salt Lake shut down in 2017. Redwood Shores faced further layoffs in 2018, which included 15-20 Maxis staff. Development of \"The Sims Mobile\" was relocated away from the remaining Maxis developers in 2019, with Firemonkeys taking over. This left continued support for \"The Sims 4\" as the sole Maxis-fronted project at EA.\nThe closure of Emeryville in particular\u2014as Maxis' long-lived core location\u2014was described by commentators as the end of Maxis as it had been known in the past, with only the brand name persisting.\nNew studios under the \"Maxis\" brand (2019\u2013present).\nEA announced two new studios that would bear the Maxis name over the following years \u2013 Maxis Texas in 2019 and Maxis Europe in 2021. The announcements only came in the form of job postings on the EA careers website. The Texas team was set up at the existing EA offices in Austin to work on a new IP, while the Europe studio was created specifically to support \"The Sims 4\". Unlike the Texas office, Maxis Europe is a \"distributed development team\", composed of staff working remotely.\nThe move came amid a number of job postings at the Redwood Shores studio for a new \"The Sims\" title, as well as EA CEO Andrew Wilson hinting at an online multiplayer-focused iteration of the franchise. In 2021, EA reaffirmed their commitment to long-term support for \"The Sims 4\", citing a \"shift across the entire games industry to support and nurture our communities long-term\".\nNotable games.\nMaxis is regarded for its innovative simulation games, in which there is no specific goal to the player, making its games almost endless.\n\"SimCity\" series.\n\"SimCity\", released in 1989, was Maxis' first release. The player is a mayor that may, at their leisure, take a city from a single village to a successful metropolis, laying down zones, taking care of the public services and stimulating the city's economy. The series includes six main games (\"SimCity\", \"SimCity 2000\", \"SimCity 3000\", \"SimCity 4\", \"SimCity Societies\" and \"SimCity\") and three spin-offs, ', \"SimCopter\" and \"Streets of SimCity\". \"SimCity Societies\", the fifth main release, was not produced by Maxis, but by Tilted Mill Entertainment, being described as a 'social engineering simulator' and criticized for the lack of \"SimCity\"'s traditional formula. In 2013, Maxis Emeryville released a reboot, simply titled \"SimCity\", to mixed reviews, due to technical issues at launch surrounding its mandatory online connectivity. TrackTwenty (formerly Maxis Helsinki) developed ' in 2014.\n\"The Sims\".\nMaxis' most successful series to date and one of the best-selling PC games of all time is \"The Sims\" (2000). Maxis has developed seven expansion packs for the game, as well as an online spin-off titled \"The Sims Online\". Maxis released \"The Sims 2\" in 2004, a sequel title that features a full 3D environment, as opposed to the original's dimetric engine. From 2006 to 2013, all \"The Sims\" games and expansion packs were developed by The Sims Studio, and the Maxis logo was not included on \"The Sims\" game covers until 2013, with the release of \"\". On May 6, 2013, it was announced that Maxis would be developing \"The Sims 4\", and the game was released internationally in September 2014. Maxis also developed \"The Sims Mobile\", until development was transferred to Firemonkeys in February 2019.\n\"Spore\".\n\"Spore\" was released in September 2008. Players create species starting at the single cell level, and develop them into sentient life. The goal is for them to eventually gain the intelligence to create spaceships. The \"Spore Creature Creator\" allows users to create species for later use in the game. This is one of few Maxis' games to feature goals on its plot as the player must complete five different phases and reach the space-traveling technology. There is also an ultimate goal, which is entering the galactic core, a massive black hole surrounded by a powerful and hostile cyborg species called the Grox; however, the player can stay in a single phase as long as they wish, even after completing it. The game received a critic score of 84% on Metacritic, indicating generally positive reviews from critics. Electronic Arts confirmed the production of expansion packs due to \"Spore\"'s financial success, later releasing \"Spore Galactic Adventures\" in 2009, as well as several spin-offs such as \"Darkspore\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "21051", "revid": "23551833", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21051", "title": "Aurel Stein", "text": "Hungarian-born British archaeologist (1862\u20131943)\nSir Marc Aurel Stein, \n(; 26 November 1862 \u2013 26 October 1943) was a Hungarian-born British archaeologist, primarily known for his explorations and archaeological discoveries in Central Asia. He was also a professor at Indian universities.\nStein was also an ethnographer, geographer, linguist and surveyor. His collection of books and manuscripts bought from Dunhuang caves is important for the study of the history of Central Asia and the art and literature of Buddhism. He wrote several volumes on his expeditions and discoveries which include \"Ancient Khotan\", \"Serindia\" and \"Innermost Asia\".\nEarly life.\nStein was born to N\u00e1th\u00e1n Stein and Anna Hirschler, a Jewish couple residing in Budapest in the Kingdom of Hungary, Austrian Empire. His parents and his sister retained their Jewish faith but Stein and his brother, Ernst Eduard, were baptised as Lutherans. At home the family spoke German and Hungarian, Stein graduated from a secondary school in Budapest before going on for advanced study at Universities of Vienna, Leipzig and T\u00fcbingen. He graduated in Sanskrit and Persian and received his PhD from T\u00fcbingen in 1883.\nIn 1884, he went to England to study oriental languages and archaeology. In 1886, Stein met the Indologist and philologist Rudolf Hoernl\u00e9 in Vienna at a conference of Orientalists, learning about an ancient mathematical manuscript discovered in Bakhshali (Peshawar). In 1887 Stein went to India, where he joined the University of the Punjab as Registrar. Later, between 1888 and 1899, he was the Principal of Oriental College, Lahore. During this time, under his supervision Raghunath Temple Sanskrit Manuscript Library at Jammu was established which treasures 5000 rare manuscripts.\nExpeditions.\nGenesis.\nStein was influenced by Sven Hedin's 1898 work \"Through Asia\". In June 1898, he sought the help of Hoernle and a collaboration to find and study Central Asian antiquities. Hoernle was enthusiastic as he had already deciphered the Bower Manuscript and Weber Manuscript by then, found these to be respectively the oldest known birch bark and paper manuscripts of ancient India at the time, had received more artefacts and manuscripts but was concerned about the circumstances of their discovery and their authenticity. He recommended that Stein prepare an expedition proposal and submit it to the Governments of Punjab and India. Stein sent a draft proposal to Hoernle within a month. Hoernle discussed it with Lt Governor of Punjab (British India), who expressed enthusiasm. Stein then submitted a full proposal to explore, map and study the antiquities of Central Asia as per the recommendations of Hoernle, who personally petitioned both the Government of Punjab and Government of India, lobbying for a quick approval. Within weeks, Stein's proposal was informally approved. In January 1899, Stein received the formal approval and funds for his first expedition. Stein thereafter received approval and support for additional expeditions to Chinese Turkestan, other parts of Tibet and Central Asia where the Russians and Germans were already taking interest. He made his famous expeditions with the financial support of Punjab government and the British India government.\nThe four expeditions.\nStein made four major expeditions to Central Asia\u2014in 1900\u20131901, 1906\u20131908, 1913\u20131916 and 1930. He brought to light the hidden treasure of a great civilization which by then was practically lost to the world. One of his significant finds during his first journey during 1900\u20131901 was the Taklamakan Desert oasis of Dandan Oilik where he was able to uncover a number of relics. During his third expedition in 1913\u20131916, he excavated at Khara-Khoto. Later he explored in the Pamirs, seeking the site of the now-lost Stone Tower which the 2nd century polymath Claudius Ptolemy had noted as the half-way mark of the Silk Road in his famous treatise \"Geography\".\nThe British Library's Stein collection of Chinese, Tibetan and Tangut manuscripts, Prakrit wooden tablets, and documents in Khotanese, Uyghur, Sogdian and Eastern Turkic is the result of his travels through central Asia during the 1920s and 1930s. Stein discovered manuscripts in the previously lost Tocharian languages of the Tarim Basin at Miran and other oasis towns, and recorded numerous archaeological sites, especially in Iran and Balochistan.\nWhen Stein visited Khotan he was able to render in Persian a portion of the Shahnama after he came across a local reading the Shahnama in Turki.\nDuring 1901, Stein was responsible for exposing forgeries of Islam Akhun, as well as establishing the details and the authenticity of manuscripts that had been discovered before 1896 in northwest China.\nStein's greatest discovery was made at the Mogao Caves, also known as \"Caves of the Thousand Buddhas\", near Dunhuang in 1907. It was there that he discovered a printed copy of the \"Diamond Sutra\" which is the world's oldest printed text, dating to AD 868, along with 40,000 other scrolls (all removed by gradually winning the confidence and bribing the Taoist caretaker). He took 24 cases of manuscripts and 4 cases of paintings, decorated textiles (such as the \"Miraculous Image of Liangzhou\") and relics. He was knighted for his efforts, but Chinese nationalists dubbed him a burglar and staged protests against him, although most others have seen his actions as at least advancing scholarship. His discovery inspired other French, Russian, Japanese, and Chinese treasure hunters and explorers who also took their toll on the collection. Aurel Stein discovered 5 letters written in Sogdian known as the \"Ancient Letters\" in an abandoned watchtower near Dunhuang in 1907, dating to the end of the Western Jin dynasty.\nDuring his expedition of 1906\u20131908 while surveying south of the Johnson Line in the Kunlun Mountains, Stein suffered frostbite and lost several toes on his right foot.\nWhen he was resting from his extended journeys into Central Asia, he spent most of his time living in a tent in the alpine meadow called Mohand Marg which lies at the mouth atop the Sind Valley. Years earlier, working from this idyllic spot he translated \"Rajatarangini \" from Sanskrit into English, which had then been published in 1900. A memorial stone was erected in Mohand Marg on 14 September 2017 where Stein used to pitch his tent.\nThe fourth expedition to Central Asia, however, ended in failure. Stein did not publish any account, but others have written of the frustrations and rivalries between British and American interests in China, between Harvard's Fogg Museum and the British Museum, and finally, between Paul J. Sachs and Langdon Warner, the two Harvard sponsors of the expedition.\nBetween 1940 and 1943, Aurel Stein undertook 2 expeditions to along the Ghaggar-Hakra River to find physical evidence of the Saraswati River described in the Rig Veda. While he didn't definitively establish the region's chronological archaeological sequence, his work significantly advanced Indian archaeology. Surveying from Hanumangarh to Bahawalpur, he identified approximately 100 prehistoric and historical sites, conducting exploratory excavations at some. His observations on the geographical spread of these sites proved valuable to later researchers, including Amalananda Ghosh (3 March 1910 \u2013 1981) and Katy Dalal. Notably, he documented sites such as Munda, Bhadrakali Temple, and Derwar.\nPersonal life.\nStein was a lifelong bachelor, but was always accompanied by a dog named \"Dash\" (of which there were seven). He became a British citizen in 1904. He died in Kabul on 26 October 1943 and is buried there in the Sherpur Cantonment.\nGreat Game.\nStein, as well as his rivals Sven Hedin, Sir Francis Younghusband and Nikolai Przhevalsky, were active players in the British-Russian struggle for influence in Central Asia, the so-called Great Game. Their explorations were supported by the British and Russian Empires as they filled in the remaining \"blank spots\" on the maps, providing valuable information and creating \"spheres of influence\" for archaeological exploration as they did for political influence.\nThe art objects he collected are divided between the British Museum, the British Library, the Srinagar Museum, and the National Museum, New Delhi.\nHonours.\nStein received a number of honours during his career. In 1909, he was awarded the Founder's Medal by the Royal Geographical Society 'for his extensive explorations in Central Asia, and in particular his archaeological work'. In 1909, he was awarded the first Campbell Memorial Gold Medal by the Royal Asiatic Society of Bombay. He was awarded a number of other gold medals: the Gold Medal of the Soci\u00e9t\u00e9 de G\u00e9ographie in 1923; the \"Grande M\u00e9daille d'or\" of the Royal Asiatic Society of Great Britain and Ireland in 1932; and the Gold Medal of the Society of Antiquaries of London in 1935. In 1934, he was awarded the Huxley Memorial Medal of Royal Anthropological Institute of Great Britain and Ireland.\nIn the 1910 King's Birthday Honours, he was appointed Companion of the Order of the Indian Empire (CIE) for his service as Inspector-General of Education and Archaeological Surveyor in the North-West Frontier Province. Two years later, in the 1912 Birthday Honours, he was promoted to Knight Commander of the Order of the Indian Empire (KCIE) for his service as Superintendent of the Archaeological Department, North-West Frontier Circle.\nHe was made an honorary Doctor of Letters (DLitt) by the University of Oxford in 1909. He was made an honorary Doctor of Science (DSc) by the University of Cambridge in 1910. He was made an honorary Doctor of Laws (LLD) by the University of St Andrews in 1939.\nIn 1919, Stein became a foreign member of the Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences. In 1921, he was elected Fellow of the British Academy (FBA). He was elected an International Honorary Member of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences in 1930 and an International Member of the American Philosophical Society in 1939.\nIn 1925 he became an Honorary member of the Explorers Club.\nPublications.\nA more detailed list of Stein's publications is available in \"Handbook to the Stein Collections in the UK\", pp.\u00a049\u201361.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "21052", "revid": "48643156", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21052", "title": "Mario Berlinguer", "text": "Italian politician (1891\u20131969)\nMario Berlinguer (; 29 August 1891 \u2013 5 September 1969) was an Italian lawyer and politician.\nEarly life and family.\nBorn on 29 August 1891 in Sassari, Sardinia, Kingdom of Italy, Berlinguer descended from a noble Sardinian family of Catalan origins. As many of his ancestors, he belonged to the Italian Freemasonry and was Great Master (33rd Scottish Rite Mason) of the regular lodge of Sassari, affiliated to the Grand Orient of Italy.\nPolitical career and later life.\nThe young Berlinguer was a follower of the Meridionalist activist Gaetano Salvemini. After his graduation in law, he collaborated with the newspaper \"La Nuova Sardegna\" and other Italian newspapers. Berlinguer was elected to the Italian Chamber of Deputies in 1924. The following year, he founded the clandestine newspaper \"Sardegna libera\" (Free Sardinia), which attracted him the hostility of the Italian fascist regime. His sister, Ines, was among the anti-fascist figures and was married to Stefano Siglienti.\nAfter the armistice with Italy (September 1943), he joined the Action Party. For the latter, Berlinguer was a member of the second Badoglio government formed by Pietro Badoglio in southern Italy; as Deputy High Commissioner in charge of prosecuting Fascist crimes, on August 22, 1944, he submitted a request to the Senate for the records of the De Bono trial, in order to reopen the case concerning the assassination of Giacomo Matteotti.\nIn 1945, Berlinguer was named to the Consulta Nazionale and collaborated to the elaboration of the special regional status for Sardinia. He was a deputy for the Italian Socialist Party from 1948 to 1953. He was the father of Giovanni and Enrico Berlinguer, both of whom were outstanding members of the Italian Communist Party. He died in Rome on 5 September 1969 at the age of 78.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "21053", "revid": "16185737", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21053", "title": "Michele Columbu", "text": "Italian politician and writer\nMichele Columbu (8 February 1914 \u2013 10 July 2012) was an Italian politician and writer from Ollolai, Sardinia.\nFor decades, between World War II and the 1970s he was the leader of the Sardinian Action Party (PSd'Az), a Sardinian nationalist party calling for detachment from Italy and fiercely contesting the presence of NATO military bases in Sardinia. He was elected into the European Parliament in 1984.\nHe wrote a collection of short stories, \"L'aurora \u00e8 lontana\" (1968), and the essay collection \"Senza un perch\u00e9\".\nBiography.\nIn 1948, he was elected town councilor of his town, and he also became Mayor in the 1960s. In April 1964, he led the \u201cmarch on Cagliari,\u201d walking 500 km across Sardinia to demand jobs and development for Work (human activity) inland and mountain areas.\nFrom 1972 to 1976, he was an independent Legislator elected on the Italian Communist Party list, following an electoral agreement between the PSD'Az and the PCI. He also served as vice-chairman of the Parliamentary Committee on Agriculture and Forestry, representing the mixed group and the autonomous regions of which he was a member. He ran again in the 1976 elections but was not re-elected by a handful of votes. In 1980, he successfully ran for the Cagliari City Council, bringing the Sardinian Action Party to 4.1% of the city's votes. He was mayor of the Sardinian capital from August 12 to 19, 1980.\nHe was elected to the European Parliament in the 1984 elections on the Federalism list, formed by an agreement between the PSd'Az and the Valdostan Union. He was a member of the Committee on Regional Policy and Territorial Planning, the Committee on Institutional Affairs, and the Committee on Environmental Protection, Public Health, and Consumer protection.\nIn 1984, he also became a regional councilor but resigned shortly afterwards due to the incompatibility of this position with that of MEP. He was secretary of the Sardinian Action Party from 1974 to 1979 and then president from 1979 until 1991, when he retired from Politics for reasons of age and health.\nHe also wrote numerous political essays and a collection of short stories entitled \u201cL'aurora \u00e8 lontana\u201d (The Dawn is Far Away). He died on the night of July 10, 2012, at the age of 98.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "21056", "revid": "6326132", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21056", "title": "Moral equivalence", "text": "Term used in political debates\nMoral equivalence is a term used in political debate, usually to deny that a moral comparison can be made of two sides in a conflict, or in the actions or tactics of two sides.\nThe term had some currency in polemic debates about the Cold War. \"Moral equivalence\" began to be used as a polemic \"term-of-retort\" to \"moral relativism\", which had been gaining use as an indictment against political foreign policy that appeared to use only a situation-based application of widely held ethical standards.\nInternational conflicts are sometimes viewed similarly, and interested parties periodically urge both sides to conduct a ceasefire and negotiate their differences. However these negotiations may prove difficult in that both parties in a conflict believe that they are morally superior to the other, and are unwilling to negotiate on basis of moral equivalence.\nCold War.\nIn the Cold War context, the term was and is most commonly used by anticommunists as an accusation of formal fallacy for leftist criticisms of United States foreign policy and military conduct.\nMany such people believed in the idea that the United States was intrinsically benevolent and that the extension of its power, influence, and hegemony was an extension of benevolence and would bring freedom to those people subject to that hegemony. Therefore, those who opposed the United States were by definition evil, trying to deny its benevolence to people. The Soviet Union and its allies, in contrast, practiced a totalitarian ideology. A territory under US hegemony thus would be freed from possibly being in the camp of the totalitarian power and would help to weaken it. Thus, all means were justified in keeping territories away from Soviet influence in this way. That extended to countries not under Soviet influence but instead said to be sympathetic at all in any way with it. Therefore, Chile under Salvador Allende was not under Soviet domination, but removing him would help weaken the Soviet Union by removing a government ruled with the help of the Communist Party. The big picture, they would say, justified the tortures carried out by the Augusto Pinochet dictatorship, as it served to weaken the totalitarian communist camp and in time bring about the freedom of those under its domination.\nSome of those who criticized US foreign policy at the time contended that US power in the Cold War was used only to pursue an economically driven agenda of capitalism. They claim that the underlying economic motivation eroded any claims of moral superiority, leaving the hostile acts (in Korea, Hungary, Cuba, Vietnam, Afghanistan, Nicaragua) to stand on their own. In contrast, those who justified US interventions in the Cold War period always cast these as being motivated by the need to contain totalitarianism and thus fulfilled a higher moral imperative.\nAn early popularizer of the expression was Jeane Kirkpatrick, the US ambassador to the United Nations during the Reagan administration. Kirkpatrick published the article \"The Myth of Moral Equivalence\" in 1986, which sharply criticized those who she alleged were claiming that there was \"no moral difference\" between the Soviet Union and democratic states. In fact, very few critics of US policies during the Cold War argued that there was a moral equivalence between the two sides. Communists, for instance, argued that the Soviet Union was morally superior to its adversaries. Kirkpatrick herself was one of the most outspoken voices calling for the US to support authoritarian military regimes in Central America that were responsible for major human rights violations. When four US churchwomen were raped and murdered by government soldiers in El Salvador, Kirkpatrick downplayed the gravity of the crime and claimed that \"the nuns were not just nuns, they were political activists.\" According to Congressman Robert Torricelli, Reagan administration officials, including Kirkpatrick, deliberately suppressed information about government abuses in El Salvador: \"While the Reagan Administration was certifying human rights progress in El Salvador they knew the terrible truth that the Salvadoran military was engaged in a widespread campaign of terror and torture.\"\nLeftist critics usually argued that the United States itself created a \"moral equivalence\" when some of its actions, such as President Ronald Reagan's support for the \"Contra\" insurgency against the Sandinista government in Nicaragua, put it on the same level of immorality as the Soviet Union.\nMoral equivalence has featured in debates over NATO expansion, the overthrow of rogue states, the invasion of Iraq, and the war on terror. Concepts of moral hierarchy have been applied to foreign policy challenges such as Islamic fundamentalists, anti-Israel powers, Russia, China, drug traffickers, and Serbian nationalists.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "21058", "revid": "10981247", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21058", "title": "Motel", "text": "Hotel catering to motorists\nA motel, also known as a motor hotel, motor inn or motor lodge, is a hotel designed for motorists, usually having each room entered directly from the parking area for motor vehicles rather than through a central lobby. Entering dictionaries after World War II, the word \"motel\", coined as a portmanteau of \"motor hotel\", originates from the defunct lodging compound establishment, The Milestone Mo-Tel in San Luis Obispo, California (later renamed as \"Motel Inn\"), which was built in 1925. The term referred to a type of hotel consisting of a single building of connected rooms whose doors faced a parking lot and in some circumstances, a common area or a series of small cabins with common parking. Motels are often individually owned, though motel chains do exist.\nAs large highway systems began to be developed in the 1920s, long-distance road journeys became more common, and the need for inexpensive, easily accessible overnight accommodation sites close to the main routes led to the growth of the motel concept. Motels peaked in popularity in the 1960s with rising car travel, only to decline in response to competition from the newer chain hotels that became commonplace at highway interchanges as traffic was bypassed onto newly constructed freeways. Several historic motels are listed on the US National Register of Historic Places.\nArchitecture.\nMotels differ from hotels in their location along highways, as opposed to the urban cores favored by hotels, and their orientation to the outside (in contrast to hotels, whose doors typically face an interior hallway). Motels almost by definition include a parking lot, while older hotels were not usually built with automobile parking in mind.\nBecause of their low-rise construction, the number of rooms which would fit on any given amount of land was low compared to the high-rise urban hotels which had grown around train stations. This was not an issue in an era where the major highways became the main street in every town along the way and inexpensive land at the edge of town could be developed with motels, car dealerships, fuel stations, lumber yards, amusement parks, roadside diners, drive-in restaurants, theaters, and countless other small roadside businesses. The automobile brought mobility and the motel could appear anywhere on the vast network of two-lane highways.\nLayout.\nMotels are typically constructed in an I-, L-, or U-shaped layout that includes guest rooms; an attached manager's office; a small reception; and in some cases, a small diner and a swimming pool. A motel was typically single-story with rooms opening directly onto a parking lot, making it easy to unload suitcases from a vehicle. A second story, if present, would face onto a balcony served by multiple stairwells.\nThe post-war motels, especially in the early 1950s to late 1960s, sought more visual distinction, often featuring eye-catching colorful neon signs which employed themes from popular culture, ranging from Western imagery of cowboys and Indians to contemporary images of spaceships and atomic era iconography. U.S. Route 66 is the most popular example of the \"neon era\". Many of these signs remain in use to this day.\nRoom types.\nIn some motels, a handful of rooms would be larger and contain kitchenettes or apartment-like amenities; these rooms were marketed at a higher price as \"efficiencies\" as their occupants could prepare food themselves instead of incurring the cost of eating all meals in restaurants. Rooms with connecting doors (so that two standard rooms could be combined into one larger room) also commonly appeared in both hotels and motels. A few motels (particularly in Niagara Falls, Ontario, where a motel strip extending from Lundy's Lane to the falls has long been marketed to newlyweds) would offer \"honeymoon suites\" with extra amenities such as whirlpool baths.\nHistory.\nThe first campgrounds for automobile tourists were constructed in the late 1910s. Before that, tourists who couldn't afford to stay in a hotel either slept in their cars or pitched their tents in fields alongside the road. These were called auto camps. The modern campgrounds of the 1920s and 1930s provided running water, picnic grounds, and restroom facilities.\nAuto camps and courts.\nAuto camps predated motels by a few years, established in the 1920s as primitive municipal camp sites where travelers pitched their own tents. As demand increased, for-profit commercial camps gradually displaced public campgrounds.\nUntil the first travel trailers became available in the 1930s, auto tourists adapted their cars by adding beds, makeshift kitchens and roof decks. The next step up from the travel trailer was the cabin camp, a primitive but permanent group of structures. During the Great Depression, landholders whose property fronted onto highways built cabins to convert unprofitable land to income; some opened tourist homes. The (usually single-story) buildings for a roadside motel or cabin court were quick and simple to construct, with plans and instructions readily available in how-to and builder's magazines.\nExpansion of highway networks largely continued unabated through the depression as governments attempted to create employment, but the roadside cabin camps were primitive, basically just auto camps with small cabins instead of tents.\nThe 1935 City Directory for San Diego, California, lists \"motel\"-type accommodations under tourist camps. One initially could stay in the Depression-era cabin camps for less than a dollar per night, but small comforts were few and far between.\nTravelers in search of modern amenities soon would find them at cottage courts and tourist courts. The price was higher, but the cabins had electricity, indoor bathrooms, and occasionally a private garage or carport. They were arranged in attractive clusters or a U-shape. Often, these camps were part of a larger complex containing a filling station, a caf\u00e9, and sometimes a convenience store. Facilities like the Rising Sun Auto Camp in Glacier National Park and Blue Bonnet Court in Texas were \"mom-and-pop\" facilities on the outskirts of towns that were as quirky as their owners. Auto camps continued in popularity through the Depression years and after World War II, their popularity finally starting to diminish with increasing land costs and changes in consumer demands.\nIn contrast, though they remained small independent operations, motels quickly adopted a more homogenized appearance and were designed from the start to cater purely to motorists.\nTourist homes.\nIn town, tourist homes were private residences advertising rooms for auto travelers. Unlike boarding houses, guests at tourist homes were usually just passing through. In the southwestern United States, a handful of tourist homes were opened by African Americans as early as the Great Depression due to the lack of food or lodging for travelers of color in the Jim Crow conditions of the era.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;There were things money couldn't buy on Route 66. Between Chicago and Los Angeles you couldn't rent a room if you were tired after a long drive. You couldn't sit down in a restaurant or diner or buy a meal no matter how much money you had. You couldn't find a place to answer the call of nature even with a pocketful of money...if you were a person of color traveling on Route 66 in the 1940s and '50s.\u2014\u200a\n\"The Negro Motorist Green Book\" (1936\u201364) listed lodgings, restaurants, fuel stations, liquor stores, and barber and beauty salons without racial restrictions; the smaller \"Directory of Negro Hotels and Guest Houses in the United States\" (1939, U.S. Travel Bureau) specialized in accommodations. Segregation of U.S. tourist accommodation would legally be ended by the Civil Rights Act of 1964 and by a court ruling in \"Heart of Atlanta Motel v. United States\" affirming that Congress' powers over interstate commerce extend to regulation of local incidents (such as racial discrimination in a motel serving interstate travelers) which might substantially and harmfully affect that commerce.\nEarly motels.\nThe term \"motel\" originated from a lodging establishment called \"Milestone Mo-Tel\" in San Luis Obispo, California, which was constructed in 1925 by Arthur Heineman. In conceiving of a name for his hotel, Heineman combined the two words \"motor hotel\" into one word as \"mo-tel\", after he found that he could not fit the words \"Milestone Motor Hotel\" on the rooftop. Therefore, the word \"motel\" and literally the first motel was born. Many other similar businesses followed in its footsteps and started building their own auto camps, as well as calling themselves \"motels\". Later, as a result of failing to obtain a registered trademark for the word \"Mo-Tel\" or \"motel\", Milestone Mo-Tel was renamed simply as \"Motel Inn\".\nCombining the individual cabins of the tourist court under a single roof yielded the motor court or motor hotel. A handful of motor courts were beginning to call themselves motels, a term coined in 1926. Many of these early motels are still popular and are in operation, as in the case of the 3V Tourist Court in St. Francisville, Louisiana, built in 1938.\nDuring the Great Depression, those still traveling (including business travelers and traveling salespeople) were under pressure to manage travel costs by driving instead of taking trains and staying in the new roadside motels and courts instead of more costly established downtown hotels where bell captains, porters, and other personnel would all expect a tip for service.\nIn the 1940s, most construction ground to a near-halt as workers, fuel, rubber, and transport were pulled away from civilian use for the war effort. What little construction did take place was typically near military bases where every habitable cabin was pressed into service to house soldiers and their families.\nThe post-war 1950s ushered in a building boom on a massive scale. By 1947, approximately 22,000 motor courts were in operation in the U.S. alone; a typical 50-room motel in that era cost $3000 per room in initial construction costs, compared to $12,000 per room for metropolitan city hotel construction. By 1950 there were 50,000 motels serving half of the 22 million U.S. vacationers; a year later motels surpassed hotels in consumer demand. The industry peaked in 1964 with 61,000 properties and fell to 16,000 properties by 2012.\nMany motels began advertising on colorful neon signs that they had \"air cooling\" (an early term for \"air conditioning\") during the hot summers or were \"heated by steam\" during the cold winters. A handful used novelty architecture such as wigwams or teepees.\nExpansion.\nThe 1950s and 1960s was the pinnacle of the motel industry in the United States and Canada. As older mom-and-pop motor hotels began adding newer amenities such as swimming pools or color TV (a luxury in the 1960s), motels were built in wild and impressive designs. In-room gimmicks such as the coin-operated Magic Fingers vibrating bed were briefly popular; introduced in 1958, these were largely removed in the 1970s due to vandalism of the coin boxes. The American Hotel Association (which had briefly offered a Universal Credit Card in 1953 as forerunner to the modern American Express card) became the American Hotel &amp; Motel Association in 1963.\nAs many motels vied for their place on busy highways, the beach-front motel instantly became a success. In major beach-front cities such as Jacksonville, Florida, Miami, Florida, and Ocean City, Maryland, rows of colorful motels such as the Castaways, in all shapes and sizes, became commonplace.\nGuidebooks.\nThe original motels were small, locally owned businesses which grew around two-lane highways which were main street in every town along the way. As independents, the quality of accommodation varied widely from one lodge to another; while a minority of these properties were inspected or rated by the American Automobile Association and Canadian Automobile Association (which have published maps and tour book directories of restaurants and rooms since 1917), no consistent standard stood behind the \"sanitized for your protection\" banner. There was no real access to national advertising for local motels and no nationwide network to facilitate reservation of a room in a distant city.\nThe main roads into major towns therefore became a sea of orange or red neon proclaiming VACANCY (and later COLOR TV, air conditioning, or a swimming pool) as competing operators vied for precious visibility on crowded highways. Other venues for advertising were local tourist bureaus and postcards provided for free use by clients.\nA rating in the \"Directory of Motor Courts and Cottages by the American Automobile Association\" was just one of many credentials eagerly sought by independent motels of the era. Regional guides (such as \"Official Florida Guide by A. Lowell Hunt\" or \"Approved Travelers Motor Courts\") and the food/lodging guidebooks published by restaurant reviewer Duncan Hines (\"Adventures in Good Eating\", 1936 and \"Lodging for a Night\", 1938) were also valued endorsements.\nReferral chains.\nThe referral chain in lodging originated in the early 1930s, originally serving to promote cabins and tourist courts. A predecessor of the modern \"franchise chain\" model, a referral chain was a group of independent motel owners in which each member lodge would voluntarily meet a set of standards and each property would promote the others. Each property would proudly display the group's name alongside its own.\nUnited Motor Courts, founded in 1933 by a group of motel owners in the southwestern U.S., published a guidebook until the early 1950s. A splinter of this now-defunct group, Quality Courts, began as a referral chain in 1941, but was converted to a franchised operation (Quality Inn) in the 1960s. Budget Host and Best Value Inn are also referral chains.\nBest Western (1946) was a similar referral chain of independent western U.S. motels. It remains in operation as a member-owned chain, although the modern Best Western operation shares many of the characteristics (such as centralized purchasing and reservation systems) of the later franchise systems.\nOwnership chains.\nThe earliest motel chains, proprietary brands for multiple properties built with common architecture, were born in the 1930s. The first of these were ownership chains, in which a small group of people owned and operated all of the motels under one common brand.\nAlamo Plaza Hotel Courts, founded 1929 in East Waco, Texas, was the first such chain with seven motor courts by 1936 and more than twenty by 1955. With Simmons furniture, Beautyrest mattresses on every bed, and telephones in every room, the Alamo Plaza rooms were marketed as \"tourist apartments\" under a slogan of \"Catering to those who care.\"\nIn 1935, building contractor Scott King opened King's Motor Court in San Diego, California, renaming the original property Travelodge in 1939 after having built two dozen more simple motel-style properties in five years on behalf of various investors. He incorporated and expanded the entire chain under the TraveLodge banner after 1946.\nIn 1937, Harlan Sanders opened a motel and restaurant as Sanders Court and Caf\u00e9 alongside a fuel station in Corbin, Kentucky; a second location was opened in Asheville, North Carolina, but expansion as a motel chain was not pursued further.\nFranchise chains.\nIn 1951, residential developer Kemmons Wilson returned to Memphis, Tennessee disillusioned by motels encountered on a family road trip to Washington, D.C. In each city, rooms varied from well-kept to filthy, few had a swimming pool, no on-site restaurant meant a few miles driving to buy dinner, and (while the room itself was $8 to $10) motor courts charged $2 extra per child, substantially increasing costs of a family vacation. He would build his own motel at 4941 Summer Avenue (U.S. 70) on the main highway (U.S.\u00a070) from Memphis to Nashville, adopting a name from a 1942 musical film \"Holiday Inn\" about a fictional lodge only open on public holidays. Every new Holiday Inn would have TV, air conditioning, a restaurant, and a pool; all would meet a long list of standards in order to have a guest in Memphis to have the same experience as someone in Daytona Beach, Florida or Akron, Ohio. Originally a motel chain, Holiday Inn was first to deploy an IBM-designed national room reservations system in 1965 and opened its 1000th location by 1968.\nIn 1954 a 60-room motor hotel in Flagstaff, Arizona, opened as the first Ramada (Spanish for \"a shaded resting place\"). The Twin Bridges Motor Hotel, established in 1957 near Washington, D.C. as a member of Quality Courts, became the first Marriott in 1959, expanding from motel to hotel in 1962.\nFor individual motel owners, a franchise chain provided an automated central reservation system and a nationally recognized brand which assured consumers that rooms and amenities met a consistent minimum standard. This came at a cost; franchise fees, marketing fees, reservation fees, and royalty fees were not reduced during times of economic recession, leaving most of the business risk with the franchisee while franchise corporations profited. Some franchise contracts restricted the franchisee's ability to sell the business as a going concern or leave the franchise group without penalty.\nFor the chain, the franchise model allowed a higher level of product standardization and quality control than was possible as a referral chain model while allowing expansion beyond the maximum practical size of a tightly held ownership chain.\nIn some cases, loosely knit ownership chains (such as Travelodge) and referral chains (such as Quality Courts, founded in 1939 by seven motel operators as a non-profit referral system) were converted to franchise systems.\nQuality Courts (1939) and The Best Western Motels (1946) were both originally referral chains and largely marketed together (as Quality Courts were predominantly east of the Mississippi River) until the 1960s. Both built national supply chain and reservation systems while aggressively removing properties not meeting minimum standards. In 1963, their paths diverged. Quality Courts became Quality Inn, abandoning its former co-operative structure to become a for-profit corporation, use shareholder capital to build entirely company-owned locations, and require its members to become franchisees, while Best Western retained its original member-owned status as a marketing co-operative.\nFreeway era.\nWith the introduction of chains, independent motels started to decline. The emergence of freeways bypassing existing highways (such as the Interstate Highway System in the U.S.) caused older motels away from the new roads to lose clientele to motel chains built along the new road's offramps.\nSome entire roadside towns were abandoned. Amboy, California (population 700) had grown as a Route 66 rest stop and would decline with the highway as the opening of Interstate 40 in 1973 bypassed the village entirely. The ghost town and its 1938 Roy's Motel and Caf\u00e9 were allowed to decay for years and used by film makers in a weathered and deteriorated state.\nEven the original 1952 Holiday Inn Hotel Courts in Memphis closed by 1973 and was eventually demolished, as I-40 bypassed U.S. 70 and the chain repositioned itself as a mid-price hotel brand. The Twin Bridges Marriott was demolished for parkland in 1990.\nMany independent 1950s-era motels would remain in operation, often sold to new owners or renamed, but continued their steady decline as clients were lost to the chains. Often the building's design, as traditionally little more than a long row of individual bedrooms with outside corridors and no kitchen or dining hall, left it ill-suited to any other purpose.\nMarket segmentation.\nIn the 1970s and 1980s, independent motels were losing ground to chains such as Motel 6 and Ramada, existing roadside locations were increasingly bypassed by freeways, and the development of the motel chain led to a blurring of motel and hotel.\nWhile family-owned motels with as few as five rooms could still be found, especially along older highways, these were forced to compete with a proliferation of Economy Limited Service chains. ELS hotels typically do not offer cooked food or mixed drinks; they may offer a very limited selection of continental breakfast foods but have no restaurant, bar, or room service.\nJourney's End Corporation (founded 1978 in Belleville, Ontario) built two-story hotel buildings with no on-site amenities to compete directly in price with existing motels. Rooms were comparable to a good hotel but there was no pool, restaurant, health club, or conference center. There was no room service and generic architectural designs varied little between cities. The chain targeted \"budget-minded business travelers looking for something between the full-service luxury hotels and the clean-but-plain roadside inns\", but largely drew individual travelers from small towns who traditionally supported small roadside motels.\nInternational chains quickly followed this same pattern. Choice Hotels created Comfort Inn as an economy limited service brand in 1982. New limited-service brands from existing franchisors provided market segmentation; by using a different trademark and branding, major hotel chains could build new limited-service properties near airports and freeways without undermining their existing mid-price brands. Creation of new brands also allowed chains to circumvent the contractual minimum distance protections between individual hoteliers in the same chain. Franchisors placed multiple properties under different brands at the same motorway exit, leading to a decline in revenue for individual franchisees. An influx of newly concocted brands became a key factor in a boom in new construction which ultimately led to market saturation.\nBy the 1990s, Motel 6 and Super 8 were built with inside corridors (so were nominally hotels) while other former motel brands (including Ramada and Holiday Inn) had become mid-price hotel chains. Some individual franchisees built new hotels with modern amenities alongside or in place of their former Holiday Inn motels; by 2010 a mid-range hotel with an indoor pool was the standard required to remain a Holiday Inn.\nDecline.\nIn many once-prime locations, independent motels which thrived in the 1950s and 1960s were being squeezed out by the 1980s as they were forced to compete with growing chains with a much larger number of rooms at each property. Many were left stranded on former two-lane main highways which had been bypassed by motorways or declined as original owners retired and subsequent proprietors neglected the maintenance of buildings and rooms. As these were low-end properties even in their heyday, most are now showing their age.\nIn Canada, the pattern was most visible in the densely populated Windsor-Quebec Corridor, particularly the urban locations like Toronto's Kingston Road motel strip once bypassed by the completed Highway 401, and the section of Highway 7 between Modeland Road and Airport Road known as the \"Golden Mile\" for its plethora of motels and restaurants (as well as points of interest such as the Sarnia Airport and Hiawatha Racetrack and Waterpark) which was bypassed by Highway 402. The decline of motels was also found at awkward rural locations formerly on the main road. Many remote stretches of the Trans-Canada Highway remain unbypassed by motorway and some independent motels survive.\nIn the U.S., the Interstate Highway System was bypassing U.S. Highways nationwide. The best-known example was the complete removal of Route 66 from the U.S. highway system in 1985 after it was bypassed (mostly by Interstate 40). U.S.\u00a066 was particularly problematic as the old route number was often moved to the new road as soon as the bypasses were constructed, while Highway Beautification Act restrictions left existing properties with no means to obtain signage on the newly constructed Interstate. Some motels were demolished, converted to private residences, or used as storage space while others have been left to slowly fall apart.\nIn many towns, maintenance and renovation of existing properties would stop as soon as word was out that an existing highway was the target of a proposed bypass; this decline would only accelerate after the new road opened. Attempts by owners to compete for the few remaining clients on a bypassed road by lowering prices typically only worsened the decline by leaving no funds to invest in improving or properly maintaining the property; accepting clients who would have been formerly turned away also led to crime problems in cities.\nBy 1976 the term \"cockroach motel\" was well-established; a slogan for Black Flag's trademark \"Roach Motel\" bug traps would be paraphrased as \"they check in, but they don't check out\" to refer to these declining properties.\nIn declining urban areas (like Kingston Road in Toronto, or some of the districts along Van Buren Street in Phoenix, largely bypassed as a through route to California by Interstate 10), the remaining low-end motels from the two-lane highway era are often seen as seedy places for the homeless, prostitution, and drugs as vacant rooms in now-bypassed areas are often rented (and in some cases acquired outright) by social-service agencies to house refugees, abuse victims, and families awaiting social housing. Conversely, some areas which were merely roadside suburbs in the 1950s are now valuable urban land on which original structures are being removed through gentrification and the land used for other purposes. Toronto's Lake Shore Boulevard strip in Etobicoke was bulldozed to make way for condominiums.\nIn some cases, historic properties have been allowed to slowly decay. The Motel Inn of San Luis Obispo, which (as the Milestone Motor Hotel) was the first to use the \"motel\" name, sits incomplete with what is still standing left boarded up and fenced off at the side of U.S. Route 101; a 2002 restoration proposal never came to fruition.\nAlamo Plaza Hotel Courts, the first motel chain, was sold off in pieces as the original owners retired. Most of its former locations on the U.S. highway system have declined beyond repair or were demolished. One 1941 property on U.S. Route 190 in Baton Rouge remains open with its Alamo Plaza Restaurant now gone, its pool filled in, its original color scheme painted over, its front desk behind bulletproof glass, and its rooms infested with roaches and other vermin. A magnet for criminal activity, police are summoned daily. Other Alamo sites in Chattanooga, Memphis, and Dallas have simply been demolished.\nThe American Hotel and Motel Association removed 'motel' from its name in 2000, becoming the American Hotel and Lodging Association. The association felt that the term 'lodging' more accurately reflects the large variety of different style hotels, including luxury and boutique hotels, suites, inns, budget, and extended stay hotels.\nModernization.\nIn the late 20th century, a majority of motels in the United States came under the ownership of people of Indian descent, particularly Gujaratis as the original \"mom and pop\" owners retired from the motel industry and sold their properties. However, some families still kept their motels, and to this day, one can find a motel owned by the same family who built and ran it originally (e.g. the Maples Motel in Sandusky, Ohio) with a subsequent generation continuing the family business.\nMany low-end independent motels have had to adapt in order to remain competitive with Economy Limited Service franchise chains that continue to gain market share. For instance, motels that once touted color television as a luxury now come standard with numerous amenities comparable to economy limited service hotels, including flatscreen television, pay-per-view or in-room movies, microwave ovens, minibar fridges, and wireless Internet. Similar to modern hotels, motel rooms are now required to be reserved online using credit cards so guests cannot remain anonymous, and secured against intruders with key cards which expire as soon as a client checks out. Long-time independent motels which join existing low-end chains to remain viable are known as \"conversion\" franchises; these do not use the standardized architecture which originally defined many franchise brands.\nWhile many former motel chains left the low-end of the market to franchise mid-range hotels, a handful of national franchise brands (Econo Lodge, Travelodge, Knights Inn and Magnuson Hotels lowest tier M-Star) remain available to owners of existing motels with the original drive-up-to-room motor court architecture.\nDue to the negative stigma associated with \"motel\", many surviving motel establishments which retain their original layout have since rebranded to \"hotel\", \"inn\", or \"lodge\".\nRevitalization and preservation.\nIn the early to mid 2000s, much original 1950s roadside infrastructure on now-bypassed U.S. highways had fallen into decline or was being razed for development. The National Trust for Historic Preservation named the Wildwoods Shore motel district in New Jersey in its 2006 list of America's Most Endangered Historic Places and included the Historic Route 66 Motels from Illinois to California on its 2007 list.\nPreservationists have sought to list endangered properties on various federal or state historic registries, although in many cases a historic listing gives a building little or no protection from alteration or demolition.\nThe Oakleigh Motel in Oakleigh, Victoria, Australia, constructed using Googie architecture during the 1956 Summer Olympics as one of the first motels in the state, was added to the Victorian Heritage Register in 2009. The building was gutted by developers in 2010 for a row house development; only the outer shell remains original.\nThe Aztec Motel in Albuquerque, New Mexico (built in 1932) was listed on the National Register of Historic Places in 1993 and listed on the New Mexico State Register of Cultural Properties as the oldest continuously operating U.S. Route 66 motel in New Mexico. It was demolished in 2011. While listing the Coral Court Motel near St. Louis, Missouri, on the National Register of Historic Places failed to prevent a 1995 demolition, one of the cabins survives as part of an exhibit at the National Museum of Transportation after being painstakingly dismantled by volunteers for relocation.\nU.S. Route 66.\nThe plight of Route 66, whose removal from the United States Highway System in 1985 turned places like Glenrio, Texas and Amboy, California into overnight ghost towns, has captured public attention. Route 66 associations, built on the model of Angel Delgadillo's first 1987 association in Seligman, Arizona, have advocated preservation and restoration of the motels, businesses, and roadside infrastructure of the neon era. In 1999, the National Route 66 Preservation Bill allocated $10 million in matching fund grants for private restoration and preservation of historic properties along the route. The road popularized through John Steinbeck's \"The Grapes of Wrath\" and Bobby Troup's \"(Get Your Kicks On) Route 66\" was marketed not as transportation infrastructure but as a tourism destination in its own right.\nTo many small towns bypassed by Interstate highways, embracing 1950s nostalgia and historic restoration brings in badly needed tourism dollars to restore sagging local economies. Many vintage motels, some dating to the cabin court era of the 1930s, have been renovated, restored, and added to the U.S. National Register of Historic Places or to local and state listings. While a handful were repurposed as either low-income housing, boutique hotels, apartments, or commercial/office space, many were simply restored as motels.\nWhile some modern amenities (such as wi-fi or flatscreen TV) may appear in the newly restored rooms, exterior architecture and neon highway signage is meticulously restored to original designs. By 2012, Route 66 travelers were spending $38 million/year visiting historic places and museums in communities on the former highway, with $94 million annually invested in heritage preservation; \"The Motels of Route 66\" was announced as an upcoming documentary film.\nInternational variations.\nThe early motels were built in the southwestern United States as a replacement for the tourist camps and tourist cabins which had grown around the U.S. highway system. In Australia and New Zealand, motels have followed largely the same path of development as in Canada and the United States. The first Australian motels include the West End Motel in Ballina, New South Wales (1937) and the Penzance Motel in Eagle Hawk, Tasmania (1939).\nMotels gained international popularity in countries such as Thailand, Germany, and Japan but in some countries the term \"motel\" now connotes either a low-end hotel (such as Hotel Formule 1 in Europe) or a no-tell motel.\nCanada.\nAs in the U.S., the initial 1930s roadside accommodations were primitive tourist camps, with over a hundred campgrounds listed in Ontario alone on one 1930 provincial road map. While most of these provided access to the most basic of amenities (like picnic tables, playgrounds, toilet facilities and supplies), fewer than a quarter offered cottages in the pre-Depression era, and the vast majority required travelers bring their own tents. In Canada's climate, these sites were effectively unusable outside the high season.\nBecause cabins and camps were ill-suited to a Canadian winter, the number and variety of motels grew dramatically after World War II, peaking just before freeways such as Ontario Highway 401 opened in the 1960s. Due to Canada's climate and short tourist season, which begins at Victoria Day and continued until Labour Day or Thanksgiving, any outdoor swimming pool would be usable for little more than two months of the year and independent motels would operate at a loss or close during the off-season.\nBy the 1980s, motels were losing ground rapidly to franchises such as Journey's End Corporation and the U.S.-based chains. The section of Highway 7 between Modeland Road and Airport Road, known as the \"Golden Mile\" for its plethora of motels and restaurants was bypassed once Highway 402 was completed in 1982, however the Golden Mile still retains points of interest such as the Sarnia Airport and Hiawatha Racetrack and Waterpark.\nMuch of Canada's population is crowded into a few small southern regions. While the Windsor-Qu\u00e9bec corridor was bypassed by motorways relatively early, in more sparsely populated regions (including much of Northern Ontario) thousands of kilometers of mostly two-lane Trans-Canada Highway remain undisturbed as the road makes its lengthy journey westward through tiny, distant and isolated communities.\nEurope.\nThe original concept of a motel as a motorist's hotel which grew up around the highways of the 1920s is of American origin. The term appears to have initially had the same meaning in other countries but has since been used in many places to refer either to a budget-priced hotel with limited amenities or a love hotel, depending on the country and language. The division between motel and hotel, like elsewhere, has been blurred, so many of these are low-end hotels.\nIn France, motel-style chain accommodations of up to three stories (with exterior hallways and stairwells) usually reach the \"one-star\" rank in France's national tourism agency classification of tourist hotels. The Louvre H\u00f4tels chain operates Premi\u00e8re Classe (1 star) as a market segmentation brand in this range, using other \"marques\" for higher or mid-range hotels. The use of \"motel\" to identify any budget-priced roadhouse hotel (\"Rasthaus\", \"Rastst\u00e4tte\") also exists in the German language; some French chains operating in Germany (such as Accor's Hotel Formule 1) offer automated registration and small, Spartan rooms at reduced cost.\nIn Portuguese, \"motel\" (plural: \"mot\u00e9is\") commonly refers not to the original drive-up accommodation house for motorists but to an \"adult motel\" or love hotel with amenities such as whirlpool baths, in-room pornography, candles and oversize or non-standard-shaped beds in various honeymoon-suite styles. These rooms are available for as little as four hours, and minors are excluded from these establishments. (The Portuguese-language term \"rotel\" had brief usage in 1970s Rio de Janeiro, Brazil for a similar concept, ro- for rooms through which clients rotate in a matter of hours instead of overnight.)\nA similar association of \"motel\" to short-stay hotels with reserved parking and luxury rooms which can be rented by couples for a few hours has begun to appear in Italy, where the market segment has shown significant growth since the 1990s and become highly competitive.\nLatin America.\nIn Latin America, a \"motel\" (in Mexico, \"Motel de paso\") is an establishment often associated with extramarital encounters and rented typically for a few hours (15 minutes to 12 hours). In Ecuador, any establishment with the title \"Motel\" is related to extramarital encounters; in Argentina and Peru these hotels for couples are called \"telo\" (from \"hotel\") and offered for anything from a few hours to overnight, with d\u00e9cor based on amenities such as dim lights, a whirlpool and a king-size bed.\nIn the Dominican Republic, \"cabins\" (named for their cabin-like shape) have all these amenities (such as a whirlpool bath, oversize bed and HDTV) but generally do not have windows, and have private parking for each room individually. Registration is handled not in a conventional manner but, upon entering the room, by delivering a bill with the registration through a small window that does not allow eye contact to ensure greater discretion.\nThe connotations of \"motel\" as adult motel or love hotel in both the Spanish and Portuguese languages can be awkward for U.S.-based chains accustomed to using the term in its original meaning, although this issue is diminishing as chains (such as Super 8 Motels) increasingly drop the word \"motel\" from their corporate identities at home.\nCrime and illicit activity.\nMany auto camps were used as havens and hide-outs for criminals of the 1920s; Bonnie and Clyde had a shootout in the infamous Red Crown Tourist Court near Kansas City on July 20, 1933. Courtney Ryley Cooper's 1940 \"American Magazine\" article \"Camps of Crime\" attributed to J. Edgar Hoover a denunciation of tourist courts as bases of operation for gangs of desperadoes, claiming that \"a large number of roadside cottage groups appear to be not tourist camps but assignation camps\" and alleging that \"marijuana sellers have been found around such places.\"\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;There is today a new home of crime in America, a new home of disease, bribery, corruption, crookedness, rape, white slavery, thievery and murder. There are few major cases in the FBI involving an extended pursuit in which the roadside crime-nest is not responsible for some form of easy lawlessness, for providing convenient hide-outs, for concealing criminals through loose registration regulations... a majority of the 35,000 tourist camps in the U.S. threaten the peace and welfare of the communities upon which these camps have fastened themselves and all of us who form the motoring public. Many of them are not only hide-outs and meeting places, but actual bases of operations from which gangs of desperadoes prey upon the surrounding territory... The files of the FBI are loaded with instances of gangsters who have hidden out in unregulated tourist camps, while officers combed the country for them. There is no regular checking of the registers by detectives \u2014 often there are no registers at all, or merely ledgers filled with indiscriminate scrawls and an endless repetition of 'John Smith and wife'... Hence the terse order that goes out daily to law-enforcement agencies when criminals are on the loose: 'KEEP CLOSE WATCH ON TOURIST CAMPS!'\nUltimately, efforts to curb the unconstrained growth of tourist courts were futile as motor courts (as motels were called in the 1930s and 1940s) grew in number and popularity.\nMotels have served as a haven for fugitives in the past as the anonymity and a simple registration process helped fugitives to remain ahead of the law. Several changes have reduced the capacity of motels to serve this purpose. In many jurisdictions, regulations now require motel operators to obtain ID from clients and meet specific record-keeping requirements. Credit card transactions, which in the past were more easily approved and took days to report, are now approved or declined on the spot and are instantly recorded in a database, thereby allowing law enforcement access to this information.\nMotels which allow a room to be rented inexpensively for less than one full night's stay or which allow a couple not wishing to be seen together publicly to enter a room without passing through the office or lobby area have been nicknamed \"no-tell motels\" due to their long association with adultery. Even where rooms were rented overnight to middle-class travelers (and not locals or extended-stay clients) there have been ongoing problems with theft of motel property by travelers; everything from waterbeds to television sets to bedspreads and pillows have routinely gone missing in what one 1970s Associated Press report labelled \"highway robbery\".\nThe least costly motels sometimes serve as temporary housing for people who are not able to afford an apartment or have recently lost their home. Motels catering to long-term stays occasionally have kitchenettes or efficiencies, or a motel room with a kitchen. While conventional apartments are more cost-effective with better amenities, tenants unable to pay first and last month's rent or undesirable due to unemployment, criminal records or credit problems do seek low-end residential motels because of a lack of viable short-term options.\nMotels in low-income areas are often plagued with drug activity, street prostitution or other crime. Some correctional officials temporarily place newly paroled convicts into motels if upon release they have nowhere to stay. These motels have daily to monthly rates.\nAccording to the Center for Problem-Oriented Policing, &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;In the 1930s and 1940s, individually owned and operated motels offered travelers an eclectic, economical array of relatively safe lodging options. In the 1950s, corporations such as Holiday Inn and Howard Johnson's sought to capitalize on the growing national travel market by offering consumers brand-name, standardized lodging. The interstate highways built in the 1950s and 1960s favored the chains by essentially re-routing motorists away from the older, independent establishments, many of which were located along ageing roads that ran parallel to\u2014but were difficult to access from\u2014the new interstates. In some cases, major motel chains built their properties right at the interstate exits; motorists seeking independent motels had to bypass the chains and venture farther from the interstate to find them. The smaller, non-chain motels had difficulty competing with the large national chains under these circumstances. To survive economically, they began catering to the lower end of the market; some turned into adult motels, while others served as housing for low-income people. Unable to afford upkeep, many of the formerly quaint motels deteriorated and became havens for crime and disorder.\nThe annual number of calls for service to police departments per room (\"CFS/room\") as a metric has been used to identify motels with poor surveillance of visitors, inadequate staff or management unwilling to pro-actively exclude known or likely problem tenants. Motels with poor security in bad neighborhoods attract disturbances (including guests who will not leave or pay), robbery, auto theft and theft from rooms or vehicles, vandalism, public intoxication and alcoholism, drug dealing or clandestine methamphetamine laboratories, fighting, street gang activity, pimping and street prostitution or sexual assaults.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAs severe unlawful conduct issues impact the neighborhood as a whole, some municipalities have adopted a nuisance abatement strategy of using public health and fire safety violations or taxation laws as pretexts to shut down bad motels. City bylaws such as Seattle's \"Chronic Nuisance Properties\" ordinance have also been used to penalize owners or shut down a business entirely.\nIn popular culture.\nThe Bates Motel is an important part of \"Psycho\", a 1959 novel by Robert Bloch, and Alfred Hitchcock's 1960 film adaptation. \"Psycho II\", \"Psycho III\" and \"\", sequels to the film, also feature the motel, as does Gus Van Sant's 1998 remake of the original film. A comedic 1987 television movie \"Bates Motel\" and the 2013 television series \"Bates Motel\", a prequel to the films, both use the name of the motel as a title. In the 2010 Halloween TV special \"Scared Shrekless\", Puss in Boots tells a cautionary tale about the \"Boots Motel\".\nThe scenario of an isolated motel being operated by a serial killer, whose guests subsequently become victims, has been exploited in a number of other horror films, notably \"Motel Hell\" (1980) and \"Mountaintop Motel Massacre\" (1986). More recently, the genre has been revived with such films as \"Mayhem Motel\" (2001), \"Murder Inn\" (2005), \"Vacancy\" (2007), and its direct-to-video prequel, \"\" (2009).\nSeveral of these horror films also incorporate the sub-theme of voyeurism, whereby the motel owner spies on (or even films) the sexual exploits of the guests. This plays on the long-established connotations of motels and illicit sexual activity, which has itself formed the basis for numerous other films, variously representing the thriller, comedy, teen film, and sexploitation genres. Stephen C. Apostolof's \"Motel Confidential\" (1967) and the porn film \"Motel for Lovers\" (1970) were two notable early examples. More recent manifestations include \"Paradise Motel\" (1985), \"Talking Walls\" (1987), \"Desire and Hell at Sunset Motel\" (1991), and the Korean films \"Motel Cactus\" (1997) and \"The Motel\" (2005).\nIn countless other films and TV series, the motel\u2014invariably depicted as an isolated, run-down, and seedy establishment\u2014has served as the setting for sordid events often involving equally sordid characters. Examples include \"Pink Motel\" (1982), \"Motel Blue 19\" (1993), \"Backroad Motel\" (2001), \"Stateline Motel\" (2003), \"Niagara Motel\" (2006), and \"Motel 5150\" (2008).\nIn the film \"Sparkle Lite Motel\" (2006) and the TV miniseries \"The Lost Room\" (2006), the motel made forays into the realms of science fiction. In the Pixar animation \"Cars\" (2006), a clientele of solely anthropomorphic vehicles requires all hotels be motels where clients drive directly to their rooms; allusions to real Route 66 motels on the U.S. National Register of Historic Places abound in the film. The Cozy Cone Motel design is the Wigwam Motel on U.S. Route 66 in Arizona with the neon \"100% Refrigerated Air\" slogan of Tucumcari, New Mexico's Blue Swallow Motel; the Wheel Well Motel's name alludes to the restored stone-cabin Wagon Wheel Motel in Cuba, Missouri. A long-defunct \"Glenn Rio Motel\" recalls Route 66 ghost town Glenrio, New Mexico and Texas, now a national historic district on the state line. Glenrio once boasted the \"First Motel in Texas\" (as seen when arriving from New Mexico) or \"Last Motel in Texas\" (the same motel, its signage viewed from the opposite side).\nIn computer gaming, \"Murder Motel\" was an online text game by Sean D. Wagle, hosted on various dial-up bulletin board systems (1980s, originally Color64, ported to various other platforms). The object was for each player to attempt to brutally kill all fellow guests in each room of a motel using a variety of weapons.\nIn theatre, the seedy motel room has been the setting for two-hander plays such as \"Same Time, Next Year\" (1975) and \"Bug\" (2006). Both were later adapted as films. Broadway musicals have also paid homage to the lowbrow reputation of motel culture, demonstrated by songs such as \"The No-Tel Motel\" from \"Prettybelle\" and \"At the Bed-D-by Motel\" from \"Lolita, My Love\".\nThe British soap opera \"Crossroads\" was set in a motel in the English Midlands which was originally based on American-style motels with chalets but later was transformed into a luxury country hotel.\nA run-down motel was used as the relocated residence of the unfortunate Rose family in the Emmy Award-winning series Schitt's Creek. As the show progressed, Johnny Rose and Stevie Budd venture into turning old motels into authentic boutique motels. In one episode, a presidential suite is seen complete with era-correct furniture.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "21059", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21059", "title": "Constructivism (philosophy of mathematics)", "text": "Mathematical viewpoint that existence proofs must be constructive\nIn the philosophy of mathematics, constructivism asserts that it is necessary to find (or \"construct\") a specific example of a mathematical object in order to prove that an example exists. Contrastingly, in classical mathematics, one can prove the existence of a mathematical object without \"finding\" that object explicitly, by assuming its non-existence and then deriving a contradiction from that assumption. Such a proof by contradiction might be called non-constructive, and a constructivist might reject it. The constructive viewpoint involves a verificational interpretation of the existential quantifier, which is at odds with its classical interpretation.\nThere are many forms of constructivism. These include the program of intuitionism founded by Brouwer, the finitism of Hilbert and Bernays, the constructive recursive mathematics of Shanin and Markov, and Bishop's program of constructive analysis. Constructivism also includes the study of constructive set theories such as CZF and the study of topos theory.\nConstructivism is often identified with intuitionism, although intuitionism is only one constructivist program. Intuitionism maintains that the foundations of mathematics lie in the individual mathematician's intuition, thereby making mathematics into an intrinsically subjective activity. Other forms of constructivism are not based on this viewpoint of intuition, and are compatible with an objective viewpoint on mathematics.\nConstructive mathematics.\nMuch constructive mathematics uses intuitionistic logic, which is essentially classical logic without the law of the excluded middle. This law states that, for any proposition, either that proposition is true or its negation is. This is not to say that the law of the excluded middle is denied entirely; special cases of the law will be provable. It is just that the general law is not assumed as an axiom. The law of non-contradiction (which states that contradictory statements cannot both be true at the same time) is still valid.\nFor instance, in Heyting arithmetic, one can prove that for any proposition \"p\" that \"does not contain quantifiers\", formula_1 is a theorem (where \"x\", \"y\", \"z\" ... are the free variables in the proposition \"p\"). In this sense, propositions restricted to the finite are still regarded as being either true or false, as they are in classical mathematics, but this bivalence does not extend to propositions that refer to infinite collections.\nIn fact, L. E. J. Brouwer, founder of the intuitionist school, viewed the law of the excluded middle as abstracted from finite experience, and then applied to the infinite without justification. For instance, Goldbach's conjecture is the assertion that every even number greater than 2 is the sum of two prime numbers. It is possible to test for any particular even number whether it is the sum of two primes (for instance by exhaustive search), so any one of them is either the sum of two primes or it is not. And so far, every one thus tested has in fact been the sum of two primes.\nBut there is no known proof that all of them are so, nor any known proof that not all of them are so; nor is it even known whether \"either\" a proof \"or\" a disproof of Goldbach's conjecture must exist (the conjecture may be \"undecidable\" in traditional ZF set theory). Thus to Brouwer, we are not justified in asserting \"either Goldbach's conjecture is true, or it is not.\" And while the conjecture may one day be solved, the argument applies to similar unsolved problems. To Brouwer, the law of the excluded middle is tantamount to assuming that \"every\" mathematical problem has a solution.\nWith the omission of the law of the excluded middle as an axiom, the remaining logical system has an existence property that classical logic does not have: whenever formula_2 is proven constructively, then in fact formula_3 is proven constructively for (at least) one particular formula_4, often called a witness. Thus the proof of the existence of a mathematical object is tied to the possibility of its construction.\nExample from real analysis.\nIn classical real analysis, one way to define a real number is as an equivalence class of Cauchy sequences of rational numbers.\nIn constructive mathematics, one way to construct a real number is as a function \"\u0192\" that takes a positive integer formula_5 and outputs a rational \"\u0192\"(\"n\"), together with a function \"g\" that takes a positive integer \"n\" and outputs a positive integer \"g\"(\"n\") such that\nformula_6\nso that as \"n\" increases, the values of \"\u0192\"(\"n\") get closer and closer together. We can use \"\u0192\" and \"g\" together to compute as close a rational approximation as we like to the real number they represent.\nUnder this definition, a simple representation of the real number \"e\" is:\nformula_7\nThis definition corresponds to the classical definition using Cauchy sequences, except with a constructive twist: for a classical Cauchy sequence, it is required that, for any given distance, there exists (in a classical sense) a member in the sequence after which all members are closer together than that distance. In the constructive version, it is required that, for any given distance, it is possible to actually specify a point in the sequence where this happens (this required specification is often called the modulus of convergence). In fact, the standard constructive interpretation of the mathematical statement\nformula_8\nis precisely the existence of the function computing the modulus of convergence. Thus the difference between the two definitions of real numbers can be thought of as the difference in the interpretation of the statement \"for all... there exists...\"\nThis then opens the question as to what sort of function from a countable set to a countable set, such as \"f\" and \"g\" above, can actually be constructed. Different versions of constructivism diverge on this point. Constructions can be defined as broadly as free choice sequences, which is the intuitionistic view, or as narrowly as algorithms (or more technically, the computable functions), or even left unspecified. If, for instance, the algorithmic view is taken, then the reals as constructed here are essentially what classically would be called the computable numbers.\nCardinality.\nTo take the algorithmic interpretation above would seem at odds with classical notions of cardinality. By enumerating algorithms, we can show that the computable numbers are classically countable. And yet Cantor's diagonal argument here shows that real numbers have uncountable cardinality. To identify the real numbers with the computable numbers would then be a contradiction. Furthermore, the diagonal argument seems perfectly constructive. \nIndeed Cantor's diagonal argument can be presented constructively, in the sense that given a bijection between the natural numbers and real numbers, one constructs a real number not in the functions range, and thereby establishes a contradiction. One can enumerate algorithms to construct a function \"T\", about which we initially assume that it is a function from the natural numbers onto the reals. But, to each algorithm, there may or may not correspond a real number, as the algorithm may fail to satisfy the constraints, or even be non-terminating (\"T\" is a partial function), so this fails to produce the required bijection. In short, one who takes the view that real numbers are (individually) effectively computable interprets Cantor's result as showing that the real numbers (collectively) are not recursively enumerable.\nStill, one might expect that since \"T\" is a partial function from the natural numbers onto the real numbers, that therefore the real numbers are \"no more than\" countable. And, since every natural number can be trivially represented as a real number, therefore the real numbers are \"no less than\" countable. They are, therefore \"exactly\" countable. However this reasoning is not constructive, as it still does not construct the required bijection. The classical theorem proving the existence of a bijection in such circumstances, namely the Cantor\u2013Bernstein\u2013Schroeder theorem, is non-constructive. It has recently been shown that the Cantor\u2013Bernstein\u2013Schroeder theorem implies the law of the excluded middle, hence there can be no constructive proof of the theorem.\nAxiom of choice.\nThe status of the axiom of choice in constructive mathematics is complicated by the different approaches of different constructivist programs. One trivial meaning of \"constructive\", used informally by mathematicians, is \"provable in ZF set theory without the axiom of choice.\" However, proponents of more limited forms of constructive mathematics would assert that ZF itself is not a constructive system.\nIn intuitionistic theories of type theory (especially higher-type arithmetic), many forms of the axiom of choice are permitted. For example, the axiom AC11 can be paraphrased to say that for any relation \"R\" on the set of real numbers, if you have proved that for each real number \"x\" there is a real number \"y\" such that \"R\"(\"x\",\"y\") holds, then there is actually a function \"F\" such that \"R\"(\"x\",\"F\"(\"x\")) holds for all real numbers. Similar choice principles are accepted for all finite types. The motivation for accepting these seemingly nonconstructive principles is the intuitionistic understanding of the proof that \"for each real number \"x\" there is a real number \"y\" such that \"R\"(\"x\",\"y\") holds\". According to the BHK interpretation, this proof itself is essentially the function \"F\" that is desired. The choice principles that intuitionists accept do not imply the law of the excluded middle.\nHowever, in certain axiom systems for constructive set theory, the axiom of choice does imply the law of the excluded middle (in the presence of other axioms), as shown by the Diaconescu-Goodman-Myhill theorem. Some constructive set theories include weaker forms of the axiom of choice, such as the axiom of dependent choice in Myhill's set theory.\nMeasure theory.\nClassical measure theory is fundamentally non-constructive, since the classical definition of Lebesgue measure does not describe any way how to compute the measure of a set or the integral of a function. In fact, if one thinks of a function just as a rule that \"inputs a real number and outputs a real number\" then there cannot be any algorithm to compute the integral of a function, since any algorithm would only be able to call finitely many values of the function at a time, and finitely many values are not enough to compute the integral to any nontrivial accuracy. The solution to this conundrum, carried out first in , is to consider only functions that are written as the pointwise limit of continuous functions (with known modulus of continuity), with information about the rate of convergence. An advantage of constructivizing measure theory is that if one can prove that a set is constructively of full measure, then there is an algorithm for finding a point in that set (again see ).\nThe place of constructivism in mathematics.\nTraditionally, some mathematicians have been suspicious, if not antagonistic, towards mathematical constructivism, largely because of limitations they believed it to pose for constructive analysis.\nThese views were forcefully expressed by David Hilbert in 1928, when he wrote in \"Grundlagen der Mathematik\", \"Taking the principle of excluded middle from the mathematician would be the same, say, as proscribing the telescope to the astronomer or to the boxer the use of his fists\".\nErrett Bishop, in his 1967 work \"Foundations of Constructive Analysis\", worked to dispel these fears by developing a great deal of traditional analysis in a constructive framework.\nEven though most mathematicians do not accept the constructivist's thesis that only mathematics done based on constructive methods is sound, constructive methods are increasingly of interest on non-ideological grounds. For example, constructive proofs in analysis may ensure witness extraction, in such a way that working within the constraints of the constructive methods may make finding witnesses to theories easier than using classical methods. Applications for constructive mathematics have also been found in typed lambda calculi, topos theory and categorical logic, which are notable subjects in foundational mathematics and computer science. In algebra, for such entities as topoi and Hopf algebras, the structure supports an internal language that is a constructive theory; working within the constraints of that language is often more intuitive and flexible than working externally by such means as reasoning about the set of possible concrete algebras and their homomorphisms.\nPhysicist Lee Smolin writes in \"Three Roads to Quantum Gravity\" that topos theory is \"the right form of logic for cosmology\" (page 30) and \"In its first forms it was called 'intuitionistic logic'\" (page 31). \"In this kind of logic, the statements an observer can make about the universe are divided into at least three groups: those that we can judge to be true, those that we can judge to be false and those whose truth we cannot decide upon at the present time\" (page 28).\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "21060", "revid": "28481209", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21060", "title": "Magdalena of Saxony", "text": "Magdalena of Saxony (7 March 1507 \u2013 25 January 1534) was Margravine of Brandenburg, as well as Electoral Princess of Brandenburg.\nShe was the daughter of George \"the Bearded\", Duke of Saxony and his wife Barbara. Magdalena's maternal grandparents were Casimir IV of Poland and Elisabeth of Austria, daughter of Albert II of Germany.\nShe was a granddaughter of the Elisabeth aforementioned, mother of the Jagiellonians, queen of Poland, who had claimed the Duchy of Luxembourg in 1460s as being the younger daughter of the last Luxembourg heiress Elisabeth of Luxembourg, Queen of Bohemia. Though by no means an heiress of her grandmother, she was intended to wed the heir of her grandmother's older sister. Joachim (1505\u20131571), the future elector of Brandenburg, was the eldest son and heir of their current claimant of Luxembourg, Joachim I, Elector of Brandenburg (1484\u20131535), the eldest son and heir of Margaret of Thuringia (1449\u20131501), Dowager Electress of Brandenburg, herself the eldest daughter and heiress of Anna, Duchess of Luxembourg and William of Saxony, Landgrave of Thuringia.\nMagdalena was thus married, at Dresden, on 6 November 1524, to her second cousin's son Joachim II Hector, the future Elector of Brandenburg. Their son was John George, another future Elector of Brandenburg. After Magdalena's death which occurred well before Joachim ascended the electorate, Joachim II Hector married Hedwig Jagiellon, daughter of King Sigismund I of Poland.\nMagdalena and Joachim II Hector had issue:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "21061", "revid": "51017605", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21061", "title": "Mica", "text": "Group of phyllosilicate minerals\nMicas ( ) are a group of silicate minerals whose outstanding physical characteristic is that individual mica crystals can easily be split into fragile elastic plates. This characteristic is described as \"perfect basal cleavage\". Mica is common in igneous and metamorphic rock and is occasionally found as small flakes in sedimentary rock. It is particularly prominent in many granites, pegmatites, and schists, and \"books\" (large individual crystals) of mica several feet across have been found in some pegmatites.\nMicas are used in products such as drywalls, paints, and fillers, especially in parts for automobiles, roofing, and in electronics. The mineral is used in cosmetics and food to add \"shimmer\" or \"frost\".\nProperties and structure.\nThe mica group comprises 37 phyllosilicate minerals. All crystallize in the monoclinic system, with a tendency towards pseudohexagonal crystals, and are similar in structure but vary in chemical composition. Micas are translucent to opaque with a distinct vitreous or pearly luster, and different mica minerals display colors ranging from white to green or red to black. Deposits of mica tend to have a flaky or platy appearance.\nThe crystal structure of mica is described as \"TOT-c\", meaning that it is composed of parallel \"TOT\" layers weakly bonded to each other by cations (\"c\"). The \"TOT\" layers in turn consist of two tetrahedral sheets (\"T\") strongly bonded to the two faces of a single octahedral sheet (\"O\"). The relatively weak ionic bonding between \"TOT\" layers gives mica its perfect basal cleavage.\nThe tetrahedral sheets consist of silica tetrahedra, each silicon ion surrounded by four oxygen ions. In most micas, one in four silicon ions is replaced by an aluminium ion, while aluminium ions replace half the silicon ions in brittle micas. The tetrahedra share three of their four oxygen ions with neighbouring tetrahedra to produce a hexagonal sheet. The remaining oxygen ion (the \"apical\" oxygen ion) is available to bond with the octahedral sheet.\nThe octahedral sheet can be dioctahedral or trioctahedral. A trioctahedral sheet has the structure of a sheet of the mineral brucite, with magnesium or ferrous iron being the most common cation. A dioctahedral sheet has the structure and (typically) the composition of a gibbsite sheet, with aluminium being the cation. Apical oxygens take the place of some of the hydroxyl ions that would be present in a brucite or gibbsite sheet, bonding the tetrahedral sheets tightly to the octahedral sheet.\nTetrahedral sheets have a strong negative charge since their bulk composition is . The octahedral sheet has a positive charge, since its bulk composition is (for a dioctahedral sheet with the apical sites vacant) or (for a trioctahedral site with the apical sites vacant; M represents a divalent ion such as ferrous iron or magnesium) The combined TOT layer has a residual negative charge, since its bulk composition is or . The remaining negative charge of the TOT layer is neutralized by the interlayer cations (typically sodium, potassium, or calcium ions).\nBecause the hexagons in the T and O sheets are slightly different in size, the sheets are slightly distorted when they bond into a TOT layer. This breaks the hexagonal symmetry and reduces it to monoclinic symmetry. However, the original hexahedral symmetry is discernible in the pseudohexagonal character of mica crystals. The short-range order of K+ ions on cleaved muscovite mica has been resolved.\nClassification.\nChemically, micas can be given the general formula\n\"X\"2\"Y\"4\u20136\"Z\"8O20(OH, F)4,\nin which\n\"X\" is K, Na, or Ca or less commonly Ba, Rb, or Cs;\n\"Y\" is Al, Mg, or Fe or less commonly Mn, Cr, Ti, Li, etc.;\n\"Z\" is chiefly Si or Al, but also may include Fe3+ or Ti.\nStructurally, micas can be classed as dioctahedral (\"Y\" = 4) and trioctahedral (\"Y\" = 6). If the \"X\" ion is K or Na, the mica is a \"common\" mica, whereas if the \"X\" ion is Ca, the mica is classed as a \"brittle\" mica.\nDioctahedral micas.\nBrittle micas:\nTrioctahedral micas.\nCommon micas:\nBrittle micas:\nInterlayer-deficient micas.\nVery fine-grained micas, which typically show more variation in ion and water content, are informally termed \"clay micas\". They include:\nSericite is the name given to very fine, ragged grains and aggregates of white (colorless) micas.\nOccurrence and production.\nMica is widely distributed and occurs in igneous, metamorphic and sedimentary regimes. Large crystals of mica used for various applications are typically mined from granitic pegmatites.\nThe largest documented single crystal of mica (phlogopite) was found in Lacey Mine, Ontario, Canada; it measured and weighed about . Similar-sized crystals were also found in Karelia, Russia.\nScrap and flake mica is produced all over the world. In 2010, the major producers were Russia (100,000 tonnes), Finland (68,000 t), the United States (53,000 t), South Korea (50,000 t), France (20,000 t) and Canada (15,000 t). The total global production was 350,000 t, although no reliable data were available for China. Most sheet mica was produced in India (3,500 t) and Russia (1,500 t). Flake mica comes from several sources: the metamorphic rock called schist as a byproduct of processing feldspar and kaolin resources, from placer deposits, and pegmatites. Sheet mica is considerably less abundant than flake and scrap mica, and is occasionally recovered from mining scrap and flake mica. The most important sources of sheet mica are pegmatite deposits. Sheet mica prices vary with grade and can range from less than $1 per kilogram for low-quality mica to more than $2,000 per kilogram for the highest quality.\nIn Madagascar and India, it is also mined artisanally\nUses.\nThe commercially important micas are muscovite and phlogopite, which are used in a variety of applications.\nUseful properties.\nMica's value is based on its unique physical properties: the crystalline structure of mica forms layers that can be split or delaminated into thin sheets usually causing foliation in rocks. These sheets are chemically inert, dielectric, elastic, flexible, hydrophilic, insulating, lightweight, platy, reflective, refractive, resilient, and range in opacity from transparent to opaque. Mica is stable when exposed to electricity, light, moisture, and extreme temperatures. It has superior electrical properties as an insulator and as a dielectric, and can support an electrostatic field while dissipating minimal energy in the form of heat; it can be split very thin (0.025 to 0.125 millimeters or thinner) while maintaining its electrical properties, has a high dielectric breakdown, is thermally stable to , and is resistant to corona discharge. Muscovite, the principal mica used by the electrical industry, is used in capacitors that are ideal for high frequency and radio frequency. Phlogopite mica remains stable at higher temperatures (to ) and is used in applications in which a combination of high-heat stability and electrical properties is required. Muscovite and phlogopite are used in sheet and ground forms.\nGround mica.\nThe leading use of dry-ground mica in the US is in the joint compound for filling and finishing seams and blemishes in gypsum wallboard (drywall). The mica acts as a filler and extender, provides a smooth consistency, improves the workability of the compound, and provides resistance to cracking. In 2008, joint compounds accounted for 54% of dry-ground mica consumption. In the paint industry, ground mica is used as a pigment extender that also facilitates suspension, reduces chalking, prevents shrinking and shearing of the paint film, increases the resistance of the paint film to water penetration and weathering and brightens the tone of colored pigments. Mica also promotes paint adhesion in aqueous and oleoresinous formulations. Consumption of dry-ground mica in paint, the second-ranked use, accounted for 22% of the dry-ground mica used in 2008.\nGround mica is used in the well-drilling industry as an additive to drilling fluids. The coarsely ground mica flakes help prevent the loss of circulation by sealing porous sections of the drill hole. Well-drilling muds accounted for 15% of dry-ground mica use in 2008. The plastics industry used dry-ground mica as an extender and filler, especially in parts for automobiles as lightweight insulation to suppress sound and vibration. Mica is used in plastic automobiles fascia and fenders as a reinforcing material, providing improved mechanical properties and increased dimensional stability, stiffness, and strength. Mica-reinforced plastics also have high-heat dimensional stability, reduced warpage, and the best surface properties of any filled plastic composite. In 2008, consumption of dry-ground mica in plastic applications accounted for 2% of the market. The rubber industry used ground mica as an inert filler and mold release compound in the manufacture of molded rubber products such as tires and roofing. The platy texture acts as an anti-blocking, anti-sticking agent. Rubber mold lubricant accounted for 1.5% of the dry-ground mica used in 2008. As a rubber additive, mica reduces gas permeation and improves resiliency.\nDry-ground mica is used in the production of rolled roofing and asphalt shingles, where it serves as a surface coating to prevent sticking of adjacent surfaces. The coating is not absorbed by freshly manufactured roofing because mica's platy structure is unaffected by the acid in asphalt or by weather conditions. Mica is used in decorative coatings on wallpaper, concrete, stucco, and tile surfaces. It also is used as an ingredient in flux coatings on welding rods, in some special greases, and as coatings for core and mold release compounds, facing agents, and mold washes in foundry applications. Dry-ground phlogopite mica is used in automotive brake linings and clutch plates to reduce noise and vibration (asbestos substitute); as sound-absorbing insulation for coatings and polymer systems; in reinforcing additives for polymers to increase strength and stiffness and to improve stability to heat, chemicals, and ultraviolet (UV) radiation; in heat shields and temperature insulation; in industrial coating additive to decrease the permeability of moisture and hydrocarbons; and in polar polymer formulations to increase the strength of epoxies, nylons, and polyesters.\nPaints and cosmetics.\nWet-ground mica, which retains the brilliance of its cleavage faces, is used primarily in pearlescent paints by the automotive industry. Many metallic-looking pigments are composed of a substrate of mica coated with another mineral, usually titanium dioxide (TiO2). The resultant pigment produces a reflective color depending on the thickness of the coating. These products are used to produce automobile paint, shimmery plastic containers, and high-quality inks used in advertising and security applications. In the cosmetics industry, its reflective and refractive properties make mica an important ingredient in blushes, eye liner, eye shadow, foundation, hair and body glitter, lipstick, lip gloss, mascara, moisturizing lotions, and nail polish. Some brands of toothpaste include powdered white mica. This acts as a mild abrasive to aid the polishing of the tooth surface and also adds a cosmetically pleasing, glittery shimmer to the paste. Mica is added to latex balloons to provide a colored shiny surface.\nBuilt-up mica.\nMuscovite and phlogopite splittings can be fabricated into various built-up mica products, also known as \"micanite\". Produced by mechanized or hand setting of overlapping splittings and alternate layers of binders and splittings, built-up mica is used primarily as an electrical insulation material. Mica insulation is used in high-temperature and fire-resistant power cables in aluminium plants, blast furnaces, critical wiring circuits (for example, defence systems, fire and security alarm systems, and surveillance systems), heaters and boilers, lumber kilns, metal smelters, and tanks and furnace wiring. Specific high-temperature mica-insulated wire and cable are rated to work for up to 15 minutes in molten aluminium, glass, and steel. Major products are bonding materials; flexible, heater, molding, and segment plates; mica paper; and tape.\nFlexible plate is used in electric motor and generator armatures, field coil insulation, and magnet and commutator core insulation. Mica consumption in flexible plates was about 21 tonnes in 2008 in the US. A heater plate is used where high-temperature insulation is required. The molding plate is sheet mica from which V-rings are cut and stamped for use in insulating the copper segments from the steel shaft ends of a commutator. The molding plate is also fabricated into tubes and rings for insulation in armatures, motor starters, and transformers. Segment plate acts as insulation between the copper commutator segments of direct-current universal motors and generators. Phlogopite built-up mica is preferred because it wears at the same rate as the copper segments. Although muscovite has a greater resistance to wear, it causes uneven ridges that may interfere with the operation of a motor or generator. Consumption of segment plates was about 149 t in 2008 in the US. Some types of built-up mica have bonded splittings reinforced with cloth, glass, linen, muslin, plastic, silk, or special paper. These products are very flexible and are produced in wide, continuous sheets that are either shipped, rolled, or cut into ribbons or tapes, or trimmed to specified dimensions. Built-up mica products may also be corrugated or reinforced by multiple layering. In 2008, about 351 t of built-up mica was consumed in the US, mostly for molding plates (19%) and segment plates (42%).\nSheet mica.\nSheet mica is a versatile and durable material widely used in electrical and thermal insulation applications. It exhibits excellent electrical properties, heat resistance, and chemical stability.\nTechnical grade sheet mica is used in electrical components, electronics, atomic force microscopy and as window sheets. Other uses include diaphragms for oxygen-breathing equipment, marker dials for navigation compasses, optical filters, pyrometers, thermal regulators, stove and kerosene heater windows, radiation aperture covers for microwave ovens, and micathermic heater elements. Mica is birefringent and is therefore commonly used to make quarter and half wave plates. Specialized applications for sheet mica are found in aerospace components in air-, ground-, and sea-launched missile systems, laser devices, medical electronics and radar systems. Mica is mechanically stable in micrometer-thin sheets which are relatively transparent to radiation (such as alpha particles) while being impervious to most gases. It is therefore used as a window on radiation detectors such as Geiger\u2013M\u00fcller tubes.\nIn 2008, mica splittings represented the largest part of the sheet mica industry in the United States. Consumption of muscovite and phlogopite splittings was about 308 t in 2008. Muscovite splittings from India accounted for essentially all US consumption. The remainder was primarily imported from Madagascar.\nSmall squared pieces of sheet mica are also used in the traditional Japanese \"K\u014dd\u014d\" ceremony to burn incense: A burning piece of coal is placed inside a cone made of white ash. The sheet of mica is placed on top, acting as a separator between the heat source and the incense, to spread the fragrance without burning it.\nElectrical and electronic.\nSheet mica is used principally in the electronic and electrical industries. Its usefulness in these applications is derived from its unique electrical and thermal properties and its mechanical properties, which allow it to be cut, punched, stamped, and machined to close tolerances. Specifically, mica is unusual in that it is a good electrical insulator at the same time as being a good thermal conductor. The leading use of block mica is as an electrical insulator in electronic equipment. High-quality block mica is processed to line the gauge glasses of high-pressure steam boilers because of its flexibility, transparency, and resistance to heat and chemical attack. Only high-quality muscovite film mica, which is variously called India ruby mica or ruby muscovite mica, is used as a dielectric in capacitors. The highest quality mica film is used to manufacture capacitors for calibration standards. The next lower grade is used in transmitting capacitors. Receiving capacitors use a slightly lower grade of high-quality muscovite.\nMica sheets are used to provide structure for heating wire (such as in Kanthal or Nichrome) in heating elements and can withstand up to .\nSingle-ended self-starting lamps are insulated with a mica disc and contained in a borosilicate glass gas discharge tube (arc tube) and a metal cap. They include the sodium-vapor lamp that is the gas-discharge lamp in street lighting.\nAtomic force microscopy.\nAnother use of mica is as a substrate in the production of ultra-flat, thin-film surfaces, e.g. gold surfaces. Although the deposited film surface is still rough due to deposition kinetics, the back side of the film at the mica-film interface is ultra-flat once the film is removed from the substrate. Freshly-cleaved mica surfaces have been used as clean imaging substrates in atomic force microscopy, enabling for example the imaging of bismuth films, plasma glycoproteins, membrane bilayers, and DNA molecules.\nPeepholes.\nThin transparent sheets of mica were used for peepholes in boilers, lanterns, stoves, and kerosene heaters because they were less likely to shatter than glass when exposed to extreme temperature gradients. Such peepholes were also fitted in horse-drawn carriages and early 20th-century cars, where they were called \"isinglass curtains\".\nEtymology.\nThe word \"https://\" is derived from the Latin word ', meaning \"a crumb\", and probably influenced by ', to glitter.\nEarly history.\nHuman use of mica dates back to prehistoric times. Mica was known to ancient Indian, Egyptian, Greek, Roman, and Chinese civilizations, as well as the Aztec civilization of the New World.\nThe earliest use of mica has been found in cave paintings created during the Upper Paleolithic period (40,000 BC to 10,000 BC). The first hues were red (iron oxide, hematite, or red ochre) and black (manganese dioxide, pyrolusite), though black from juniper or pine carbons has also been discovered. White from kaolin or mica was used occasionally.\nA few kilometers northeast of Mexico City stands the ancient site of Teotihuacan. Mica was found in the noble palace complex \"Viking Group\" during an excavation led by Pedro Armillas between 1942 and 1944. Later, a second deposit was located in the Xalla Complex, another palatial structure east of Street of the Dead. There is a claim mica was found within the Pyramid of the Sun, which originates from Peter Tompkins in his book \"Mysteries of the Mexican Pyramids\", but this is not yet proven.\nNatural mica was and still is used by the Taos and Picuris Pueblos Indians in north-central New Mexico to make pottery. The pottery is made from weathered Precambrian mica schist and has flecks of mica throughout the vessels. Tewa Pueblo Pottery is made by coating the clay with mica to provide a dense, glittery micaceous finish over the entire object.\nMica flakes (called \"abrak\" in Urdu and written as \u0627\u0628\u0631\u06a9) are also used in Pakistan to embellish women's summer clothes, especially \"dupattas\" (long light-weight scarves, often colorful and matching the dress). Thin mica flakes are added to a hot starch water solution, and the \"dupatta\" is dipped in this water mixture for 3\u20135 minutes. Then it is hung to air dry.\nMica powder.\nThroughout the ages, fine powders of mica have been used for various purposes, including decorations. Powdered mica glitter is used to decorate traditional water clay pots in India, Pakistan and Bangladesh; it is also used on traditional Pueblo pottery, though not restricted to use on water pots in this case. The \"gulal\" and \"abir\" (colored powders) used by North Indian Hindus during the festive season of Holi contain fine crystals of mica to create a sparkling effect. The majestic Padmanabhapuram Palace, from Trivandrum in India, has colored mica windows.\nMica powder is also used as a decoration in traditional Japanese woodblock printmaking, as when applied to wet ink with gelatin as thickener using \"kirazuri\" technique and allowed to dry, it sparkles and reflects light. Earlier examples are found among paper decorations, with the height as the Nishi Honganji 36 Poets Collection, codices of illuminated manuscripts in and after ACE 1112. For metallic glitter, \"Ukiyo-e\" prints employed very thick solution either with or without color pigments stencilled on hairpins, sword blades or fish scales on .\nThe soil around Nishio in central Japan is rich in mica deposits, which were already mined in the Nara period. Yatsuomote ware is a type of local Japanese pottery from there. After an incident at Mount Yatsuomote a small bell was offered to soothe the \"kami\". Kat\u014d Kumaz\u014d started a local tradition where small ceramic zodiac bells (\u304d\u3089\u3089\u9234) were made out of local mica kneaded into the clay, and after burning in the kiln the bell would make a pleasing sound when rung.\nMedicine.\nAyurveda, the Hindu system of ancient medicine prevalent in India, includes the purification and processing of mica in preparing Abhraka bhasma, which is claimed as a treatment for diseases of the respiratory and digestive tracts.\nHealth impact.\nMica dust in the workplace is regarded as a hazardous substance for respiratory exposure above certain concentrations.\nUnited States.\nThe Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) has set the legal limit (permissible exposure limit) for mica exposure in the workplace as 20 million parts per cubic foot (706,720,000 parts per cubic meter) over an 8-hour workday. The National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH) has set a recommended exposure limit (REL) of 3\u00a0mg/m3 respiratory exposure over an 8-hour workday. At levels of 1,500\u00a0mg/m3, mica is immediately dangerous to life and health.\nIreland.\nThe Irish defective block crisis relates to mica in construction blocks.\nSubstitutes.\nSome lightweight aggregates, such as diatomite, perlite, and vermiculite, may be substituted for ground mica when used as filler. Ground synthetic \"fluorophlogopite\", a fluorine-rich mica, may replace natural ground mica for uses that require thermal and electrical properties of mica. Many materials can be substituted for mica in numerous electrical, electronic, and insulation uses. Substitutes include acrylate polymers, cellulose acetate, fiberglass, fishpaper, nylon, phenolics, polycarbonate, polyester, styrene, vinyl-PVC, and vulcanized fiber. Mica paper made from scrap mica can be substituted for sheet mica in electrical and insulation applications.\nIn popular culture.\nHerman Melville mentions isinglass mica and isinglass dried fish bladder uses in Chapter 68 of \"Moby Dick\", comparing whale skin and blubber's appearance to mica's. In the musical \"Oklahoma!\", the song \"The Surrey With the Fringe on Top\" describes the surrey as having \"isinglass curtains you can roll right down\" as mica, though totally inflexible, was commonly used for windows in vehicle side screens. \nMentioned in \"The Book of Life\" by Deborah Harkness, \"her scales fell like isinglass\", in reference to the scales of a fire drake named Corra, and in Mark Twain's \"\" where he describes a furnace door which \"framed a small square of isinglass...\" (chapter seven). It is also mentioned in the first paragraph of Willa Cather\u2019s The Song of the Lark: \u201cthe isinglass sides of the hard-coal burner were aglow.\u201d\nIsinglass is also written about in \"Little Town on the Prairie (Little House on the Prairie series book 7, Chapter 17: The Sociable)\" by Laura Ingalls Wilder, \"...a tall, shining heater with isinglass windows stood at its center, the chairs around the walls were all of polished woods...\", in describing a room that the 'sociable' was being held in.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "21062", "revid": "50863164", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21062", "title": "Muscovite", "text": "Phyllosilicate mineral in the dioctahedral mica group\nMuscovite (also known as common mica, isinglass, or potash mica) is a hydrated phyllosilicate mineral of aluminium and potassium with formula KAl2(AlSi3O10)(F,OH)2, or (KF)2(Al2O3)3(SiO2)6(H2O). It has a highly perfect basal cleavage yielding remarkably thin laminae (sheets) which are often highly elastic. Sheets of muscovite have been found in Nellore, India.\nMuscovite has a Mohs hardness of 2\u20132.25 parallel to the [001] face, 4 perpendicular to the [001] and a specific gravity of 2.76\u20133. It can be colorless or tinted through grays, violet or red, and can be transparent or translucent. It is anisotropic and has high birefringence. Its crystal system is monoclinic. The green, chromium-rich variety is called fuchsite; mariposite is also a chromium-rich type of muscovite.\nMuscovite is the most common mica, found in granites, pegmatites, gneisses, and schists, and as a contact metamorphic rock or as a secondary mineral resulting from the alteration of topaz, feldspar, kyanite, etc. It is characteristic of peraluminous rock, in which the content of aluminum is relatively high. In pegmatites, it is often found in immense sheets that are commercially valuable. Muscovite is in demand for the manufacture of fireproofing and insulating materials and to some extent as a lubricant.\nNaming.\nThe name muscovite comes from \"Muscovy-glass\", a name given to the mineral in Elizabethan England due to its use in medieval Russia (Muscovy) as a cheaper alternative to glass in windows. This usage became widely known in England during the sixteenth century with its first mention appearing in letters by George Turberville, the secretary of England's ambassador to the Russian tsar Ivan the Terrible, in 1568.\nDistinguishing characteristics.\nMicas are distinguished from other minerals by their pseudohexagonal crystal shape and their perfect cleavage, which allows the crystals to be pulled apart into very thin elastic sheets. Pyrophyllite, and talc are softer than micas and have a greasy feel, while chlorite is green in color and its cleavage sheets are inelastic. The other common mica mineral, biotite, is almost always much darker in color than muscovite. Paragonite can be difficult to distinguish from muscovite but is much less common, though it is likely mistaken for muscovite often enough that it may be more common that is generally appreciated. Muscovite mica from Brazil is red due to manganese(3+).\nComposition and structure.\nLike all mica minerals, muscovite is a phyllosilicate (sheet silicate) mineral with a \"TOT-c\" structure. In other words, a crystal of muscovite consists of layers (\"TOT\") bonded to each other by potassium cations (\"c\").\nEach layer is composed of three sheets. The outer sheets ('T' or tetrahedral sheets) consist of silicon-oxygen tetrahedra and aluminium-oxygen tetrahedra, with three of the oxygen anions of each tetrahedron shared with neighboring tetrahedra to form a hexagonal sheet. The fourth oxygen anion in each tetrahedral sheet is called an \"apical\" oxygen anion. There are three silicon cations for each aluminium cation but the arrangement of aluminium and silicon cations is largely disordered.\nThe middle octahedral (\"O\") sheet consists of aluminium cations that are each surrounded by six oxygen or hydroxide anions forming an octahedron, with the octahedrons sharing anions to form a hexagonal sheet similar to the tetrahedral sheets. The apical oxygen anions of the outer \"T\" sheets face inwards and are shared by the octahedral sheet, binding the sheets firmly together. The relatively strong binding between oxygen anions and aluminium and silicon cations within a layer, compared with the weaker binding of potassium cations between layers, gives muscovite its perfect basal cleavage.\nIn muscovite, alternate layers are slightly offset from each other, so that the structure repeats every two layers. This is called the 1\"M\" polytype of the general mica structure.\nThe formula for muscovite is typically given as , but it is common for small amounts of other elements to substitute for the main constituents. Alkali metals such as sodium, rubidium, and caesium substitute for potassium; magnesium, iron, lithium, chromium, titanium, or vanadium can substitute for aluminium in the octahedral sheet; fluorine or chlorine can substitute for hydroxide; and the ratio of aluminium to silicon in the tetrahedral sheets can change to maintain charge balance where necessary (as when magnesium cations, with a charge of +2, substitute for aluminium ions, with a charge of +3).\nUp to 10% of the potassium may be replaced by sodium, and up to 20% of the hydroxide by fluorine. Chlorine rarely replaces more than 1% of the hydroxide. Muscovite in which the mole fraction of silicon is greater than aluminium, and magnesium or iron replaces some of the aluminium to maintain charge balance, is called phengite.\nChromium-rich and vanadium-rich muscovite are known respectively as fuchsite and roscoelite.\nUses.\nMuscovite can be cleaved into very thin transparent sheets that can substitute for glass, particularly for high-temperature applications such as industrial furnace or oven windows. It is also used in the manufacture of a wide variety of electronics and as a filler in paints, plastic, and wallboard. It lends a silky luster to wallpaper. It is also used in tire manufacture as a mold release agent, in drilling mud, and in various cosmetics for its luster.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "21063", "revid": "50", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21063", "title": "Mothman prophecies", "text": ""}
{"id": "21064", "revid": "4302594", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21064", "title": "Book of Mosiah", "text": "Book of the Book of Mormon\nThe Book of Mosiah (), published and probably written by Joseph Smith in the early 19th century, is one of the books which make up the Book of Mormon. The title refers to Mosiah II, a king of the Nephites at Zarahemla. The work is set between c.\u2009130 BC and 91\u00a0BC, except for a flashback into the Record of Zeniff, which starts at c.\u00a0200\u00a0BC, according to footnotes. Aside from stating that it was abridged by Mormon, the text says nothing about its authorship. Mosiah is twenty-nine chapters long.\nBackground.\nRoyal Skousen, a professor of linguistics at Brigham Young University, said contextual evidence indicated that the beginning of the original Book of Mosiah was probably lost in the 116 pages of the Book of Mormon manuscript lost by Martin Harris, meaning what is now known as the first chapter of Mosiah was originally the third chapter.\nAccording to original research by John Sawyer and John W. Welch, the term \"mosiah\" was an ancient Hebrew term. The key meaning of the word \"mosiah\" was \"savior\".\nNarrative.\nKing Benjamin instructs his sons.\nKing Benjamin had three sons, who were named Mosiah, Helorum, and Helaman. The king made sure they received a good education which focused on the Egyptian language. They studied the plates of Nephi and the prophesies recorded on them. He also had them learn the writings on the plates of brass which were taken from Laban, which were the only way the Nephites knew the commandments of God given to Moses. Benjamin tells his sons that the plates are the only thing keeping the Nephites from dwindling in unbelief like the Lamanites.\nThen came the time when King Benjamin had to decide which of his three sons would receive his kingdom. He settled on Mosiah, and told his son to gather the people together at the temple so he could make the announcement. But that would be just a formality. Benjamin gave his son the actual reins of power immediately. Additionally, he passed on to Mosiah the plates of Nephi, and the brass plates, and the sword of Laban, and the Liahona.\nKing Benjamin speaks and appoints an heir.\nKing Benjamin's discourse in chapters two through five is considered by many readers to be a significant piece of the Book of Mormon. The king spoke of his life in service to the people, and how he even labored with his own hands that the people would not be unduly burdened with taxes. Yet he does not bring this up to boast, only to affirm that he has really been in the service of God. The King served God by serving his fellow human beings. He brings this to their mind as an example. If he, their king, labored to serve the people, then the people ought to labor to serve one another. And if he, their earthly king, merits any thanks from the people, how much more does God their heavenly king merit thanks from them. Yet if the people served God with all their power, they would remain in reality unprofitable servants, because God causes them to exist from instant to instant. The only thing God really requires from them in payment for creating the people and keeping them alive is for them to keep his commandments. He speaks of an angelic visitation and prophecies of Jesus Christ, his birth, identifying his mother as being named Mary, his ministry and miracles, his suffering, death and resurrection. He speaks of Jesus as being the judge, of his atonement as the means to overcome sin and the tendencies of the natural man in order to become a holy person. He emphasizes the importance to have faith in Jesus and to repent in order to become a child of Jesus Christ through His atonement.\nHe also decrees that his son, Mosiah is the new king. He is the second king Mosiah, as his grandfather (King Benjamin's father) was also King Mosiah.\nAn expedition to the land of Nephi and a story within a story.\nThe book changes time narration as it reflects on events that were past but are now being unfolded. The Nephites wanted to know what had happened to some of them who had taken a trip back to the land of Nephi in an attempt to reclaim it. Mosiah sends a small group on an expedition to find out (chapter 7). Some of this small group is met by guards and taken to prison and then brought before a king named Limhi. Limhi tells this group their story and shows the Record of Zeniff, who was the leader of the first group to try to reclaim the land of Nephi. This story within a story encompasses chapters 9 through 22.\nZeniff, whose original mission was to spy on the Lamanites, saw the good among them and desired that they not be destroyed. This led to a conflict in his party which ended in bloodshed. He and those who were not killed in the conflict, returned to Zarahemla. He became over-zealous to inherit the land of his fathers so he gathered others, and they went to take the land, but they were struck with famine because they were slow to remember God. Eventually, they come to a city, and Zeniff and four of his men went to the king. He made a deal with the king of the Lamanites to have a piece of the land of Nephi. He becomes king of this Nephite colony. They had some altercations with the Lamanites, but prevailed at that time.\nZeniff dies and passes rule to his son Noah. Noah is a wicked king. He is one of the more favorite villains among Book of Mormon readers. He collects exorbitant taxes from his people to build a palace and he and his ministers live a life of comfort, ease and self-indulgence. His wicked ways lead the whole colony into wickedness.\nEvil King Noah and the preaching of righteous Abinadi.\nThen along comes a man named Abinadi. He is a holy man, a prophet, and he begins to preach that they must repent. He speaks against King Noah and prophecies that he will be killed if he does not repent. Abinadi is arrested and brought before King Noah where he gives what is considered a very important discourse in the Book of Mormon (chapters 12\u201316). Abinadi asks the ministers what they preach, and they respond that they preach the Law of Moses. Abinadi then tells them that they ought to teach the Law of Moses, but rebukes them for not obeying it themselves, including the Ten Commandments, which he quotes to them. Abinadi then continues to explain that the Law of Moses is a teaching method to prepare people for the coming of Jesus Christ. He speaks of the atonement, faith, repentance and redemption through Jesus. He quotes Isaiah 53 and explains the seed of Christ, the resurrection, and that little children who die are saved in Christ.\nKing Noah and his priests are angered by this and sentence him to death by fire.\nOne of King Noah's priests named Alma is stirred by Abinadi's words and pleas on his behalf. He too is accused, and he flees. Alma hides and writes down the words of Abinadi. After a period of sore repentance, Alma begins to preach the words of Abinadi and the doctrine of Christ to the people in secret. He gains a sizable following and in chapter 18, Alma begins to baptize those who have accepted Christ. The Lord tells Alma that King Noah has discovered them and will be coming after them. He and his followers flee the land.\nThe Lamanites attack King Noah and his people and they begin to run. King Noah tells his priests and others to leave their wives and children so they can escape from the Lamanites. Those that follow this command are later angered at themselves and King Noah for leaving their families. The group sentences King Noah to death by fire. They then turn on the priests of Noah who flee before the people, later becoming the Amulonites. King Noah's son Limhi rules, but becomes a tributary monarch to the king of the Lamanites.\nAll Nephite peoples gather to Zarahemla and the church is organized.\nAlthough this is not an exhaustive explanation, this is more or less the state found by the small expedition sent by King Mosiah. By the end of chapter 25, both the people of King Limhi, and the people of Alma have been guided by the Lord away from the Lamanites and to the land of Zarahemla. King Mosiah appoints Alma to organize the church. King Limhi and his people are baptized and join the church.\nAlso, King Mosiah by the aid of God translates a set of records which were found by Limhi's people. They tell of a people commonly called the Jaredites. A portion of the record was inserted in the Book of Mormon as the Book of Ether. King Mosiah's grandfather, also named Mosiah, had also translated some writings found on a large stone which touched upon the Jaredites.\nConversion of Alma the Younger and the Sons of Mosiah.\nThere are problems in the church as a group of the younger \"rising generation\" do not believe in the teachings. They persuade others to follow after them and not believe in Jesus and the teachings of the church. Alma receives direction from the Lord on the matter and is told that excommunicating those who will not repent is the most severe punishment the church can bestow. The secular government will deal with breaches in the law. King Mosiah makes it illegal to persecute the believers.\nAmong those who do not believe are a son of Alma who also shares the name Alma (but he is usually differentiated as \"Alma the Younger\"), and King's Mosiah's own sons. One day while they are out and about doing their destructive work, an angel comes to them and tells them to no longer seek to destroy the church. This sight causes them great fear and Alma the Younger faints. He is in an unconscious state for two days and two nights and his father prays for him. When he comes to, he speaks of having waded through much tribulation and finding redemption through Christ. He speaks in much more detail about this experience in the Book of Alma, chapter 36. The experience causes himself and his associates (King Mosiah's sons) to become converted to the Lord and to build up his church.\nMosiah's sons approach Mosiah and tell him that they want to leave Zarahemla to go to the Lamanites and preach to them. This worries Mosiah, but he asks God who assures him that they will be protected and that they will also do much good there. Their journeys and preaching are described later in the Book of Alma beginning with chapter 17.\nA new government.\nKing Mosiah has a desire to set the affairs of the kingdom in order, as he is getting on in years. Since his sons have gone to the land of the Lamanites to preach, he has no heir to receive the throne. He proposes to his people therefore that they abolish the monarchy and instead organize a republic. He explains that kings who rule righteously are desirable, but once a wicked king comes to power, he spreads evil to his subjects, and it is difficult to remove a wicked king from power. He outlines a system of what are known as \"judges\" who are popularly elected at different levels of power. The people accept this system, and the elections are held, and Alma the younger becomes the first \"chief judge\" a title designating the head of the government. He also receives the office of \"high priest\" of the church, making him the leader of the church as well.\nAt the end of the Book of Mosiah, Alma (the elder) and Mosiah both pass away.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "21065", "revid": "49566734", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21065", "title": "Angel Moroni", "text": "Angel in Latter Day Saint Theology who visited Joseph Smith\nThe angel Moroni () is an angel whom Joseph Smith, founder of the Latter Day Saint movement, reported as having visited him on numerous occasions, beginning on September 21, 1823. According to Smith, the angel Moroni was the guardian of the golden plates buried near his home in western New York, which Latter Day Saints believe were the source of the Book of Mormon. An important figure in the theology of the Latter Day Saint movement, Moroni is featured prominently in its architecture and art. Besides Smith, the Three Witnesses and several other witnesses also reported that they saw Moroni in visions in 1829.\nMoroni is thought by Latter Day Saints to be the same person as a Book of Mormon prophet-warrior named Moroni, who was the last to write in the golden plates. According to the Book of Mormon, the angel Moroni was a pre-Columbian warrior who buried the golden plates. After he died, he became an angel who was tasked with directing Smith to their location in the 1820s. According to Smith, he then returned the golden plates to Moroni after they were translated and, as of 1838, Moroni still had the plates in his possession.\nAngel's name and identity.\nInitially, when talking about his receipt of the golden plates, Smith referred only to \"an angel\" without identifying its name. Thus, in an 1831 letter from Lucy Mack Smith to her brother, she discusses Moroni as the person who buried the plates, but does not identify him as the unnamed \"holy angel\" that gave Smith the means to translate the golden plates. In Smith's 1832 (second hand, but officially authorized) history, he said he was visited by \"an angel of the Lord\", who mentioned the Book of Mormon prophet \"Moroni\" as the last engraver of the golden plates; however, that account did not mention whether or not the angel was referring to \"himself\" as Moroni.\nSmith identified the angel \"as\" Moroni in 1835, while preparing the first edition of the Doctrine and Covenants, in which he indicated a number of angels who would come to the earth after the Second Coming and drink sacramental wine with himself and Oliver Cowdery. Among those angels, the revelation listed \"Moroni, whom I have sent unto you to reveal the book of Mormon, containing the fulness of my everlasting gospel; to whom I have committed the keys of the record of the stick of Ephraim\". Around this time, Cowdery was writing a history of Smith in which he identified the angel as the prophet Moroni from the Book of Mormon. In July 1838, Smith wrote an article for the church periodical \"Elders' Journal\", in the form of questions and answers, that stated the following:\nQuestion 4th. How, and where did you obtain the book of Mormon?Answer. Moroni, the person who deposited the plates, from whence the book of Mormon was translated, in a hill in Manchester, Ontario County, New York, as a resurrected being, appeared unto me, and told me where they were; and gave me directions how to obtain them.\nHowever, on May 2, 1838, a few months before Smith's statement in \"Elders' Journal\", Smith began dictating a church history that included a more detailed account of his visits from the angel. In this text, Smith's scribe erroneously identified the angel as \"Nephi\", which is the name of the Book of Mormon's first narrator. Smith's 1838 identification as \"Nephi\" was left unchanged when the 1838 history was published in 1842 in \"Times and Seasons\", which Smith edited himself, and in \"Millennial Star\". In the latter, an editorial referred to the 1823 vision and praised \"the glorious ministry and message of the angel Nephi\". In 1851, after Smith's death (1844), the identification as \"Nephi\" was repeated when the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (LDS Church) published its first edition of the Pearl of Great Price. It was also repeated in 1853 when Smith's mother Lucy Mack Smith published a history of her son.\nAs a further complication, Mary Whitmer, mother to one of the Three Witnesses and four of the Eight Witnesses, said she had a vision of the golden plates, shown to her by an angel whom she always called \"Brother Nephi\", but never clarified or indicated whether she believed this was the same angel that Smith and others later reported as Moroni.\nNevertheless, based on Smith's other statements that the angel was \"Moroni\", and based on both prior and later publications, most Latter Day Saints view Smith's 1838 identification of the angel as Nephi as a mistake on the part of the transcriber. In the version of Smith's 1838 history published by the LDS Church, as well as the portion canonized by that denomination as the Pearl of Great Price, the name \"Nephi\" has been changed by editors to read \"Moroni\". The Community of Christ publishes the original story, including the identification of \"Nephi\", but indicates \"Moroni\" in a footnote.\nTheorized origin of the name.\nCommenting on the name of the angel Moroni, Grant H. Palmer speculates that Smith had read of the city Moroni on the island Comoros from either a map or tales of Captain William Kidd, popular at the time. According to Latter-day Saint scholar Hugh Nibley, the use of \"mor\" in the Book of Mormon is an Egyptian word, and means \"beloved, good, everything nice and desirable.\"\nDescription.\nIn one of Smith's histories, he described him as an \"angel of light\" who \"had on a loose robe of most exquisite whiteness. It was a whiteness beyond anything earthly I had ever seen .\u2026 His hands were naked and his arms also a little above the wrists .\u2026 Not only was his robe exceedingly white but his whole person was glorious beyond description\". According to Smith's sister Katharine, the angel \"was dressed in white raiment, of whiteness beyond anything Joseph had ever seen in his life, and had a girdle about his waist. He saw his hands and wrists, and they were pure and white\".\nAppearances to Joseph Smith and others.\nSmith said that on the night of September 21, 1823, Moroni appeared to him and told him about the golden plates that were buried in a stone box a few miles from Smith's home. Smith said that the same angel visited him various times over the course of the next six years; Smith also said that the angel visited him to retrieve the golden plates after Smith had finished translating a portion of the writing on the plates into the Book of Mormon.\nIn addition to Smith, several other early Mormons said they had visions where they saw the angel Moroni. Three Witnesses said they saw the angel in 1829: Oliver Cowdery, David Whitmer, and Martin Harris. Other early Mormons who may have said they saw Moroni include:\nMary Whitmer may also have seen Moroni, although she referred to the angel she saw as \"Brother Nephi\".\nMortal life of Moroni the prophet.\nAccording to the Book of Mormon, Moroni was the son of Mormon, the prophet for whom the Book of Mormon is named. Moroni may have been named after Captain Moroni, an earlier Book of Mormon figure. Before Mormon's death in battle, he passed the golden plates to Moroni. Moroni then finished writing on the plates and concluded the record, presumably burying them in the hill Cumorah in western New York. He is the namesake of the Book of Moroni in the Book of Mormon.\nTheological significance.\nBecause of his instrumentality in the restoration of the gospel, Moroni is commonly identified by Latter Day Saints as the angel mentioned in , \"having the everlasting gospel to preach unto them that dwell on the earth, and to every nation, and kindred, and tongue, and people.\"\nThe image of the angel Moroni blowing a trumpet is commonly used as an unofficial symbol of the LDS Church. Moroni appears on the cover of some editions of the Book of Mormon. Statues of the angel stand atop many LDS temples, with most statues facing east.\nIn 2007, the LDS Church stated that an image of the angel Moroni in an advertisement violated one of the church's registered trademarks.\nSculptors.\nThe Nauvoo Temple was the first Latter Day Saint temple to be crowned with a figure of an angel. This angel, not officially identified as Moroni, was a metal weathervane with gold leaf on the trumpet. It was designed by William Weeks (architect of the Nauvoo temple) and installed in January 1846. This figure was positioned in a flying horizontal position holding an open book in one hand and a trumpet in the other.\nCyrus Dallin sculpted the first angel which was identified as Moroni. This angel was placed on the Salt Lake Temple during the capstone ceremony on April 6, 1892, one year to the day before the temple was dedicated. Dallin's design is a dignified, neoclassical angel in robe and cap, standing upright with a trumpet in hand. It stands 3.8 meters high, was molded in hammered copper from the plaster original, and was covered with 22-karat gold leaf. On March 18, 2020, the trumpet held by the statue of Angel Moroni on the Salt Lake Temple fell to the ground as a result of a 5.7 magnitude earthquake. \nTorleif S. Knaphus fashioned a replica of the Dallin angel in the 1930s, but the casting of his angel wasn't placed on a temple until many years later. In 1983, castings of this angel were placed on the Idaho Falls Temple (8th operating temple) and the Atlanta Temple (21st operating temple).\nMillard F. Malin's angel, which was placed on the Los Angeles Temple in 1953, is known as the second Angel Moroni statue. His angel was cast in aluminum, stands 4.7 meters high, and weighs 953 kilograms. It has Native American features, wears a Mayan style cloak, and holds the gold plates in its left hand.\nAvard Fairbanks sculpted the third Angel Moroni statue, which was placed on the Washington D.C. Temple, dedicated in 1974. This angel was created as a one-meter model which was sent to Italy where it was enlarged, cast in bronze, and gilded. The finished statue is 5.5 meters high and weighs over . The Seattle Washington, Jordan River Utah, and M\u00e9xico City M\u00e9xico temples each have a 4.6 meter casting of this statue.\nKarl Quilter sculpted his first Angel Moroni in 1978. Two sizes were made, one three meters high, the other just over two meters. These statues were designed to reduce the cost and weight of the previous Angel Moroni statues, in order to become a standard part of the temple architecture. The Quilter angels are made of fiberglass and covered with gold leaf. In 1998, with the construction of many new smaller temples, Quilter was commissioned to create a new angel. This angel was similar in design to his previous angels, but he gave Moroni a slightly larger build, with his left hand opened and his body turned slightly to show more action. The Bern Switzerland Temple's Angel Moroni is patterned after Quilter's 1998 design. Quilter's Angel Moroni is now on over one hundred temples around the world.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
