{"id": "23433", "revid": "49380818", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23433", "title": "Demographics of Peru", "text": " \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThis is a demography of the population of Peru including population density, ethnicity, religious affiliations and other aspects of the population.\nPeru is a multiethnic country, which means that it is home to people of many different historical backgrounds. Therefore, it is a multicultural country as well. Since it is a multiethnic society, Peruvian people usually treat their nationality as a citizenship instead of an ethnicity. The Peruvian census does not contain information about ethnicity so only rough estimates are available.\nPopulation size and structure.\nAccording to the total population was in , compared to only 7,728,000 in 1950. The proportion of children below the age of 15 in 2010 was 27.9%, 65.3% were between 15 and 65 years of age, while 6.8% were 65 years or older.\n&lt;includeonly&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chart/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;/includeonly&gt;\n&lt;includeonly&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chart/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;/includeonly&gt;\n&lt;includeonly&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chart/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;/includeonly&gt;\nStructure of the population.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Hidden begin/styles.css\"/&gt;Population Estimates by Sex and Age Group (01.VII.2013) (Estimates based on the 2007 Population Census.):\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Hidden begin/styles.css\"/&gt;Population Estimates by Sex and Age Group (30.VI.2021) (Source: INEI \u2013 National population estimates and projections.):\nMetropolitan areas.\nThe metropolitan areas of Peru have been formed from the urban growth of Peruvian cities more populated and they are formed by the integration of two or more municipalities. The most populated Peruvian metropolises by districts are: Lima, Trujillo, Chiclayo and Arequipa.\nVital statistics.\nRegistered births and deaths.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"template:sticky header/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Sort under/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Table alignment/tables.css\" /&gt;\nUN estimates.\nRegistration of vital events in Peru is not complete. The Population Departement of the United Nations prepared the following estimates.\nDemographic and Health Surveys.\nTotal Fertility Rate (TFR) (Wanted Fertility Rate) and Crude Birth Rate (CBR):\nLife expectancy.\nSource: \"UN World Population Prospects\"\nEthnic groups.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Pie chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\nPeru is a multiethnic country formed by the amalgamation of different cultures and ethnicities over thousands of years.\nAmerindians inhabited the land for over ten millennia before the Spanish conquest in the 16th century; their cultures and influence represent the foundation of today's Peru.\nAs a result of European contact and conquest, the population of the area now known as Peru decreased from an estimated 9 million in the 1520s to around 600,00 in 1620. This happened mostly because of the unintended spread of germs and infectious diseases. In fact, the spread of smallpox greatly weakened the Inca empire, even before the Spanish arrival. The Amerindians did not have as much natural immunity to the disease as did the Europeans. For this reason, several Amerindian populations were decimated. Furthermore, the disease killed Inca ruler Wayna Capac, triggering a civil war in the Inca empire that preceded the conquest efforts the Spaniards. Thus, the conquest was facilitated by the weakness of the Inca empire which was recovering from both a civil war and epidemics of unknown diseases.\nHowever, other reasons for the decrease of Amerindian population include violence during the conquest followed by the breakdown of the Inca social system and famine. The Amerindian population suffered further decrease as the Spanish exploited an Inca communal labor system called mita for mining purposes, thus killing thousands in forced labor.\nSpaniards arrived in large numbers under colonial rule. After independence, there has been a gradual European immigration from Austria, England, Scotland, France, Germany, Italy, Croatia and Spain. Polynesians also came to the country lured to work in the Guano islands during the boom years of this commodity around the 1860s. Chinese arrived in the 1850s as a replacement for slave workers in the sugar plantations of the north coast and have since become a major influence in Peruvian society. Other immigrant groups include Arabs (namely from Levant/West Asian countries), South Asians, Japanese, Americans and Colombians.\nSince 2014, Peru has experienced a massive rise in the immigrant population from nearby Venezuela. In May 2023, the estimated population of Venezuelans in Peru is 1,600,000, being the second most popular destination for Venezuelans after Colombia. \nMestizos compose about 60% of the total population. The term traditionally denotes Amerindian (mostly Quechua ancestry) and European ancestry (mostly Spaniard ancestry). This term, was part of the caste classification during colonial times, whereby people of exclusive Spanish descent but born in the colonies were called criollos, people of mixed Amerindian and Spanish descent were called mestizos, those of African and Spanish descent were called mullatoes, and those of Amerindian and African descent were called Zambos. Most mestizos are urban dwellers and show stronger European inheritance in regions like Lima Region, La Libertad Region, Callao Region, San Mart\u00edn Region, Cajamarca Region, Piura Region, Amazonas Region, Lambayeque Region, and Arequipa Region.\nAmerindians constitute around 25% of the total population. The two major indigenous or ethnic groups are the Quechuas (belonging to various cultural subgroups), followed by the Aymaras, mostly found in the extreme southern Andes. A large proportion of the indigenous population who live in the Andean highlands still speak Quechua and have vibrant cultural traditions, some of which were part of the Inca Empire. Dozens of indigenous cultures are also dispersed throughout the country beyond the Andes Mountains in the Amazon basin. This region is rapidly becoming urbanized. Important urban centers include Iquitos, Nauta, Puerto Maldonado, Pucallpa and Yurimaguas. This region is home to numerous indigenous peoples, though they do not constitute a large proportion of the total population. Examples of indigenous peoples residing in eastern Peru include the Shipibo, Urarina, Cocama, and Aguaruna, to name just a few.\nEuropean descendants constitute around 6% of the total population. They are descendants of the Spanish conquerors and other Europeans such as Germans, Italians, British, French, and Croatians (see also Croats) who arrived in the 19th and 20th centuries. The majority of them live also in the largest cities (like mestizos), usually in the North and Center of Peru: Lima, Trujillo, Chiclayo, Piura, and through all the highlands of Northwest, like Amazonas, Cajamarca and San Martin. A Southern city with a significant white population is Arequipa.\nThere is also a presence of Asian Peruvians, who are primarily of Chinese and Japanese origin, constituting less than 1% of the population. Peru has the second largest population of people of Japanese descent in Latin America after Brazil and the largest population of Chinese descent in Latin America. Historic communities inhabited by people of Chinese descent are found throughout the Peruvian upper Amazon, including cities such as Yurimaguas, Nauta, Iquitos and the north central coast (Lambayeque and Trujillo). In contrast to the Japanese community in Peru, the Chinese appear to have intermarried much more since they came to work in the rice fields during the Viceroyalty and to replace the African slaves, during the abolition of slavery itself. Other Asian communities include small numbers of West Asian/Arab Peruvians, mostly of Lebanese and Syrian origin, and Palestinians, as well a small community of South Asians, namely of Hindustani and Pakistani background. There have been several notable Peruvian politicians of Asian heritage, notable past president (Alberto Fujimori), who is of Japanese origin, as well as Omar Chehade, of Lebanese heritage and served as the Second Vice President of Peru from 2011 to 2012.\nThe remaining is constituted by Afro-Peruvians, a legacy of Peru's history as an importer of slaves during the colonial period. Today mulattos (mixed African and European) and zambos (mixed African and Amerindian) also constitute an important part of the population, especially in Piura, Tumbes, Lambayeque, Lima and Ica regions. The Afro-Peruvian population is concentrated mostly in coastal cities south of Lima, such as those found in the Ica Region, in cities like Ca\u00f1ete, Chincha, Ica, Nazca and Acar\u00ed in the Arequipa Region. Another large but poorly promoted segment of Afro-Peruvian presence is in the \"Yunga\" regions (west and just below the Andean chain of northern Peru), (i.e., Piura and Lambayeque), where sugarcane, lemon, and mango production are still of importance. Important communities are found all over the Morrop\u00f3n Province, such as in the city of Chulucanas. One of them is Yapatera, a community in the same city, as well as smaller farming communities like Pabur or La Matanza and even in the mountainous region near Canchaque. Further south, the colonial city of Za\u00f1a or farming towns like and Tuman in Lambayeque are also important regions with Afro-Peruvian presence.\nSocioeconomic and cultural indicators are increasingly important as identifiers. For example, Peruvians of Amerindian descent who have adopted aspects of Hispanic culture also are beginning to consider themselves \"mestizo\". With economic development, access to education, intermarriage, and large-scale migration from rural to urban areas, a more homogeneous national culture is developing, mainly along the relatively more prosperous coast.\nThe Lima-Callao Metropolitan area is home to over 11 million residents, being one of South America's largest urban areas as well as one of the five megacities in the continent.\nLanguage.\nAccording to the Peruvian Constitution of 1993, Peru's official languages are Spanish, Quechua, Aymara, and other indigenous languages in areas where they predominate. Today, Spanish is spoken by some 83.9% of the population. It is used by the government and the media and in education and commerce. Amerindians who live in the Andean highlands speak Quechua and Aymara and are ethnically distinct from the diverse indigenous groups who live on the eastern side of the Andes and in the tropical lowlands adjacent to the Amazon basin.\nPeru's distinct geographical regions are mirrored in a socioeconomic divide between the coast's Hispanic mestizo culture and the more diverse, traditional Andean cultures of the mountains and highlands. The indigenous populations east of the Andes speak various languages and dialects. Some of these groups still adhere to traditional customs, while others have been almost completely assimilated into the Hispanic mestizo culture.\nAccording to official sources, the use of Spanish has increased while the knowledge and use of indigenous languages have decreased considerably during the last four decades (1960\u20132000). At the beginning of the 1960s some 39% of the total Peruvian population were registered as speakers of indigenous languages, but by the 1990s the figures show a considerable decline in the use of Quechua, Aymara, and other indigenous languages, when only 28% is registered as Quechua-speaking (16% of whom are reported to be bilingual in Spanish) and Spanish-speakers increased to 72%.\nFor 2017, government figures place Spanish as being spoken by 82.6% of the population, but among Amerindian languages, another decrease is registered. Of the indigenous languages, Quechua remains the most spoken, and even today is used by some 13.9% of the total Peruvian population or a third of Peru's total indigenous population. The number of speakers of Aymara and other indigenous languages is placed at 2.5%, and those of foreign languages at 0.2%.\nThe drastic decline in use and knowledge of indigenous languages is largely attributed to recent demographic factors. The urbanization and assimilation of Peru's Amerindian plurality into the Hispanic mestizo culture, as well as new socioeconomic factors associated with class structure, have given privilege to the use of Spanish at the expense of the Amerindian languages which were spoken by the majority of the population less than a century ago.\nThe major obstacle to a more widespread use of Quechua is the fact that multiple varieties of this language exist. Quechua, along with Aymara and the minor indigenous languages, was originally and remains essentially an oral language. As a result, there is a lack of modern media which use it, such as books, newspapers, software, magazines, and technical journals. However, non-governmental organizations, as well as state-sponsored groups, are involved in projects to edit and translate major works into Quechua; for instance, in late 2005 a version of Don Quixote was presented in the language. There has also been an increasing and organized effort to teach Quechua in public schools in the areas where it is spoken.\nThe percentage of native speakers of Quechua who are illiterate was decreasing as of 2008, as 86.87% of the Peruvian population is literate. More encouraging, nationwide literacy rate of youth aged 15 to 24 years is high and considered an achievement in Peruvian educational standards.\nAs part of the recent push in Peru to recognize and integrate indigenous people into national life, the government of Pedro Pablo Kuczynski supported the use of indigenous languages in Peru, with the state-run TV station starting to broadcast in December 2016 a daily news program in Quechua and in April 2017 one in Aymara. The President's state-of-the-union address was simultaneously translated into Quechua in July 2017. As of 2016[ [update]], government figures show about 4 million (13 percent) of the population speak Quechua fluently, while up to 10 million \u2013 around a third of the population \u2013 understand some of the language.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23434", "revid": "41307770", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23434", "title": "Politics of Peru", "text": "Political Systems of Peru \nThe politics of the Republic of Peru takes place in a framework of a unitary semi-presidential representative democratic republic, whereby the President of Peru is both head of state and head of government, and of a pluriform multi-party system. Executive power is exercised by the President and the Government. Legislative power is vested in both the Government and the Congress. The Judiciary is independent of the executive and the legislature. The Economist Intelligence Unit rated Peru a \"hybrid regime\" in . \nTraditionally weak political parties saw their support collapse further in Peru since 2000, paving the way for the rise of personalist leaderships. The political parties in the congress of Peru are, according to political scientist Luc\u00eda Dammert, \"agglomerations of individual and group interests more than solid and representative parties\".\nThe historian Antonio Zapata describes Peru as a \"right-wing country\"; the only left-wing government in contemporary history until the election of Pedro Castillo in 2021 was that of Juan Velasco Alvarado (1968-1975), author of an agrarian reform and the nationalization of strategic sectors. Peru is also one of the most socially conservative nations in Latin America. \nCurrently, almost all major media and political parties in the country are in favour of economic liberalism. Those opposed to the neoliberal \"status quo\" or involved in left-wing politics are often targeted with fear mongering attacks called \"terruqueos\", where individuals or groups are associated with terrorists involved with the internal conflict in Peru.\nHistory.\nThe weakness of political parties in Peruvian politics has been recognized throughout the nation's history, with competing leaders fighting for power following the collapse of the Spanish Empire's Viceroyalty of Peru. The Peruvian War of Independence saw aristocrats with land and wealthy merchants cooperate to fight the Spanish Empire, though the aristocrats would later obtain greater power and lead an oligarchy headed by \"caudillos\" that defended the existing feudalist \"haciendas\". During the time of the Chincha Islands War, guano extraction in Peru led to the rise of an even wealthier aristocracy that established a plutocracy. Anarchist politician Manuel Gonz\u00e1lez Prada accurately detailed that parties in Peru shortly after the War of the Pacific were controlled by a wealthy oligarchy that used candidate-based political parties to control economic interests; a practice that continues to the present day. This oligarchy was supported by the Catholic Church, which would ignore inequalities in Peru and instead assist governments with appeasing the impoverished majority. At this time, the armed forces of Peru were seen by the public as ensuring territorial sovereignty and order, granting military leaders the ability to blame political parties and justify coup d'\u00e9tats against established leaders of the nation who were facing socioeconomic difficulties. This led to a pattern throughout Peru's political history of an elected leader drafting and proposing a policy while the military would later overthrow the said leader, adopting and implementing the elected official's proposals. Combatting ideologies of \"indigenismo\" of the majority and the elite holding Europhile values would also arise at the end of the nineteenth century and into the twentieth century.\nFollowing industrialization and World War I, economic expansion in Peru resulted with rural groups demanding more interaction with the wealthy urban areas and embracing \"indigenismo\". Labor and student movements \u2013 especially the anarcho-syndicalist Peruvian Regional Workers' Federation \u2013 would arise at this time while nearly overtaking the existing oligarchical structure, though the coup and subsequent dictatorship of Augusto B. Legu\u00eda for the next decade would quash hopes for further progress. During the Legu\u00eda dictatorship emerged two political thinkers inspired by Gonz\u00e1lez Prada; Jos\u00e9 Carlos Mari\u00e1tegui and V\u00edctor Ra\u00fal Haya de la Torre. In 1924 from Mexico, university reform leaders in Peru who had been forced into exile by the government founded the American People's Revolutionary Alliance, which had a major influence on the country's political life. APRA is thus largely a political expression of the university reform and workers' struggles of the years 1918\u20131920. The movement draws its influences from the Mexican Revolution and its 1917 Constitution \u2013 particularly on issues of agrarianism and indigenism \u2013 and to a lesser extent from the Russian Revolution. Its leader, Haya de la Torre, declares that APRA as a \"Marxist interpretation of the American reality\", it nevertheless moves away from it on the question of class struggle and on the importance given to the struggle for the political unity of Latin America. In 1928, the Peruvian Socialist Party was founded, notably under the leadership of Jos\u00e9 Carlos Mari\u00e1tegui, himself a spectator of the European socialist movements who maintained relationships with the Communist Party of Italy, including the leadership of Palmiro Togliatti and Antonio Gramsci. Shortly afterwards in 1929, the party created the General Confederation of Workers. Following the assassination of President Luis Miguel S\u00e1nchez Cerro in 1933 by an Aprista, APRA was persecuted in Peru. Persecution of APRA persisted until about 1956 when it became allied with the elite in Peru.\nFollowing World War II, the military's ideology began to distance itself from the wealthy elite when the Center of High Military Studies began to promote studies of Manuel Gonz\u00e1lez Prada and Jos\u00e9 Carlos Mari\u00e1tegui, creating officers that viewed the elite as sacrificing national sovereignty in order to acquire foreign capital and resulted with an undeveloped, reliant nation. Thus in 1963, Fernando Bela\u00fande Terry was elected president and proposed the first pro-worker and peasant policies for Peru. Bela\u00fande's administration was tolerant of the political left, and a variety of Marxist parties expanded during his time in office.\nBela\u00fande was overthrown by General Juan Velasco Alvarado in 1968, who implemented Bela\u00fande's policies in his own unique manner. The Shining Path guerilla group emerged in 1968 led by Abimael Guzm\u00e1n, beginning the internal conflict in Peru between the state and Shining Path forces. \nThe 1979 Constitution established universal suffrage in Peru and resulted in the return of democracy at the national level.133\nDuring the Lost Decade of the 1980s and internal conflict, political parties became weaker once again. Angered by President Alan Garc\u00eda's inability to combat the crises in the nation, the armed forces began planning a coup to establish a neoliberal government in the late 1980s with Plan Verde. Peruvians shifted their support for authoritarian leader Alberto Fujimori, who was supported by the military following his win in the 1990 Peruvian general election.\nFujimori essentially adopted the policies outlined in the military's Plan Verde and turned Peru into a neoliberal nation. Fujimori's civil-military government established sentiments in Peru that politics were slower than brute military force while governing. The 1979 Constitution was changed after the Fujimori's self-coup where the president dissolved the Congress and established the new 1993 Constitution. One of the changes to the 1979 Constitution was the possibility of the president's immediate re-election (Article 112) which made possible the re-election of Fujimori in the following years. After Fujimori's resignation, the transitional government of Valent\u00edn Paniagua changed Article 112 and called for new elections in 2001 where Alejandro Toledo was elected.\nHowever, following the fall of the Fujimori government, Peru still lacked strong political parties, leaving the nation vulnerable to populist outsider politicians lacking experience. Regional parties then grew to become more popular as foreign investment increased during the 21st century, though their service to the elites sowed public distrust. On 28 July 2021, left-wing candidate Pedro Castillo was sworn in as the new President of Peru after a narrow win in a tightly contested run-off election. On 7 December 2022, the congress removed President Castillo from office. He was replaced by Vice President Dina Boluarte, the country's first female president. On 10 October 2025, Peru\u2019s congress removed President Dina Boluarte from office and Jose Jeri was sworn in as Peru\u2019s interim president.\nAllegations of corruption in politics.\nExceptionally many Presidents of Peru have been ousted from office or imprisoned on allegations of corruption over the past three decades. Alberto Fujimori is serving a 25-year sentence in prison for commanding death squads that killed civilians in a counterinsurgency campaign during his tenure (1990-2000). He was later also found guilty of corruption. Former president Alan Garc\u00eda (1985-1990 and 2006\u20132011) committed suicide in April 2019 when Peruvian police arrived to arrest him over allegations he participated in Odebrecht bribery scheme. Former president Alejandro Toledo is accused of allegedly receiving bribe from Brazilian construction firm Odebrecht during his government (2001-2006). Former president Ollanta Humala (2011-2016) is also under investigation for allegedly receiving bribe from Odebrecht during his presidential election campaign. Humala's successor Pedro Pablo Kuczynski (2016-2018) remains under house arrest while prosecutors investigate him for favoring contracts with Odebrecht. Former president Mart\u00edn Vizcarra (2018-2020) was ousted by Congress after media reports alleged he had received bribes while he was a regional governor years earlier.\nExecutive branch.\nUnder the current constitution, the president is the head of state and government. The president is elected for a five-year term and may not immediately be re-elected. All citizens above the age of eighteen are entitled and in fact compelled to vote. The first and second vice presidents also are popularly elected but have no constitutional functions unless the president is unable to discharge his duties.\nThe President appoints the Prime Minister \"(Primer Ministro)\" and the Council of Ministers \"(Consejo de Ministros,\" or Cabinet), which is individually and collectively responsible both to the president and the legislature. All presidential decree laws or draft bills sent to Congress must be approved by the Council of Ministers.\nLegislative branch.\nThe legislative branch consists of a unicameral Congress () of 130 members. elected for a five-year term by proportional representation In addition to passing laws, Congress ratifies treaties, authorizes government loans, and approves the government budget. The president has the power to block legislation with which the executive branch does not agree.\nPolitical parties and elections.\nLike other Latin American nations, political parties in Peru since its revolutionary period have been weak and centered around a candidate instead of policy, with parties selecting a candidate with the most wealth that they can bring to support the organization. The lack of popular political parties led to the rise of populist authoritarian leaders. With the growth of media and a large informal population, Peru has continued to ignore the need for political parties. Political parties exist mainly through conflict, holding a goal to damage opposing parties while ignoring policy.\nJudicial branch.\nThe judicial branch of government is headed by a 16-member Supreme Court seated in Lima. The National Council of the Judiciary appoints judges to this court.\nThe Constitutional Court \"(Tribunal Constitucional)\" interprets the constitution on matters of individual rights. Superior courts in regional capitals review appeals from decisions by lower courts. Courts of first instance are located in provincial capitals and are divided into civil, penal, and special chambers. The judiciary has created several temporary specialized courts in an attempt to reduce the large backlog of cases pending final court action.\nPeru's legal system is based on civil law system. Peru has not accepted compulsory ICJ jurisdiction. In 1996 a human rights ombudsman's office \"(defensor del pueblo)\" was created to address human rights issues.\nAdministrative divisions.\nPeru's territory, according to the Regionalization Law which was passed on 18 November 2002, is divided into 25 regions (regiones). These regions are subdivided into provinces, which are composed of districts. There are a total of 180 provinces and 1747 districts in Peru.\nLima Province is not part of any political region.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nOrganizations.\nArmed groups.\nLeftist guerrilla groups include Shining Path, the T\u00fapac Amaru Revolutionary Movement (MRTA). Both Shining Path and MRTA are considered terrorist organizations.\nRegional groups.\nRegional groups representing peasant and indigenous groups exist in the outlying provinces, often working to promote autonomy. Groups promoting autonomy agreements with larger states possibly existed since the Inca Empire and such sentiments of independence have continued among local communities to current times.\nNon-governmental organizations (NGOs).\nIn the early 1970s and 1980s, many grassroots organizations emerged in Peru. They were concerned with the problems of local people and poverty reduction. Organizations such as Solaris Peru, Traperos de Emus San Agustin, APRODE PERU, C\u00e1ritas del Per\u00fa, and the American organization CARE, with their Peruvian location, fought to address poverty in their communities with different approaches, depending on the organization. In 2000, these organizations played an important role in the decentralization process. Their hope was that power would be clearly divided between national and local governments, and the latter would be able to address social justice and the concerns of local people better than the national government could. Some NGO members even became part of local governments. There is a debate about the extent to which this engagement in politics contributes to the attainment of their original goals.\nInternational policy.\nPeru or Peruvian organizations participate in the following international organizations:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23435", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23435", "title": "Economy of Peru", "text": "The economy of Peru is an emerging, mixed economy characterized by a high level of foreign trade and an upper middle income economy as classified by the World Bank. Peru has the forty-seventh largest economy in the world by total GDP and currently experiences a high human development index. The country was one of the world's fastest-growing economies in 2012, with a GDP growth rate of 6.3%. The economy was expected to increase 9.3% in 2021, in a rebound from the COVID-19 pandemic in Peru. Peru has signed a number of free trade agreements with its main trade partners. China became the nation's largest trading partner following the China\u2013Peru Free Trade Agreement signed on 28 April 2009. Additional free trade agreements have been signed with the United States in 2006, Japan in 2011 and the European Union in 2012. Trade and industry are centralized in Lima while agricultural exports have led to regional development within the nation.\nPeru's economy is dependent on commodity exports, making it vulnerable to price volatility in international markets. The Government of Peru has historically shown limited involvement in the public sector, as the economy has often relied on commodity booms. The extraction of these commodities has led to conflicts within the country due to their environmental and social impacts.\nFollowing the independence of Peru from the Spanish Empire, the economic elite focused their power on the coastal regions through \"centralismo\", while the rural provinces were governed by existing serfdom practices by \"hacienda\" landowners. This model essentially continued until 1968 when General Juan Velasco Alvarado took power, leading a dictatorship that increased social spending and removing the power of landowners, which resulted with a power vacuum in the 1970s that saw the rise of communist guerilla group Shining Path. Beginning in the 1980s, Peru faced economic difficulties as a result of the early 1980s recession and the internal conflict in Peru during its Lost Decade. The government of Alan Garc\u00eda enacted price controls that resulted in hyperinflation. In response, the armed forces of Peru drafted Plan Verde, an operation to create a neoliberal, open market economy. This was reportedly executed by the government of Alberto Fujimori, beside prescriptions from economist Hernando de Soto, during a period known as \"Fujishock\". During this shock, price controls were discontinued, the privatization of state-run organizations occurred and the promotion of foreign investments happened through the removal of regulations. The economic measures of the Fujimori administration made the country macro-economically stable.\nDevelopment in Peru increased following the 2000s commodities boom while government finances, poverty reduction and progress in social sectors improved. The nation has more recently adopted the Lima Consensus, an economic ideology of neoliberalism, deregulation and free market policies that has made foreign portfolio investment in Peru attractive. Inflation in 2012 was the lowest in Latin America at 1.8%, with the most recent annual rate standing at 1.9% in 2020. Though statistical poverty has decreased significantly \u2013 from nearly 60% in 2004 to 20.5% in 2018.\nPeruvian economic performance has been tied to exports, which provide hard currency to finance imports and external debt payments, though in recent decades the economy has begun to diversify. Peru's main exports are copper, gold, zinc, textiles, chemicals, pharmaceuticals, manufactures, machinery, services and fish meal. The country's major trade partners are the United States, China, Brazil, the European Union and Chile. Although exports have provided substantial revenue, self-sustained growth and a more egalitarian distribution of income have proven elusive. Services account for 59.9% of Peruvian gross domestic product, followed by industry (32.7%) and agriculture (7.6%). Recent economic growth has been fueled by macroeconomic stability, improved terms of trade, as well as rising investment and consumption.\nHistory.\nInca Empire.\nThe Tahuantinsuyo (the \"Realm of the Four Parts\"), popularly known as the Inca Empire, was the largest civilization that emerged from the highlands of Peru in the early 13th century. The Spanish conquered the last Inca stronghold in 1572.\nThe Inca Empire employed central planning. Writing about the Inca tax system, Spanish chronicler Pedro Cieza de Le\u00f3n said \"the system the Incas employed was so good that the people did not feel it, and prospered ... [A]ll this was accomplished in such orderly fashion that neither did the natives fail to pay what they owed and were assessed, nor did those who collected these tributes venture to take one grain of corn in excess\". Officials would travel to cities and provinces where they would be provided quipus storing data, with Inca territories contributing what was possible; whether it be labor (\"mit'a\"), textiles, food, weapons or construction materials. Regarding labor, provinces would provide men to be employed by the empire who required to be married so their wives could maintain home life. Citizens were not exposed to overwork as individuals who became ill would be returned and replaced by their home province while many days of a month were dedicated to recreation and feasts.\nViceroyalty of Peru.\nThe economy of the Viceroyalty of Peru largely depended on the export of silver. The huge amounts of silver exported from the Viceroyalty of Peru and Mexico deeply affected Europe, where some scholars believe it caused the so-called price revolution. Silver mining was carried out using contract and free wage labourers, as well as the \"encomienda\" system of slavery. The \"encomienda\" has been described as constituting genocide. Under the Spanish system, Cieza de Le\u00f3n wrote that \"with the disorder and greed of the Spaniards, the number of the people has fallen off to such a degree that most of them have disappeared, and they will be wiped out completely as a result of the covetousness and greed\". Afro-Peruvians also appeared as a result of slavery in colonial Spanish America. Silver production peaked in 1610.\nPrussian explorer Alexander von Humboldt first encountered guano in 1802 and started fertilizer research Callao in Peru, with his findings being reported throughout Europe.\n19th century.\nGuano Era.\nAfter winning independence from Spain on 28 July 1821, Peru was financially strapped. Additionally, the economy suffered from the collapse of the silver mines. However, the guano trade with Europe, beginning in the 1840s, flooded Peru with European investments and money. In 1840, Peruvian politician and entrepreneur Francisco Quir\u00f3s y Ampudia commercialized guano exports in a deal with French businessmen and the Peruvian government, abolishing existing claims to Peruvian guano. Guano was essentially nationalized and became Peru's largest revenue source. Despite the near exhaustion of guano, Peru achieved its greatest ever export of guano in 1870, with more than 700,000 tonnes (770,000 short tons).\nWar of the Pacific.\nChile was devastated by the Long Depression economic crisis of the 1870s and began looking for a replacement for its silver, copper and wheat exports. It has been argued that Chile's economic situation and the prospect of new wealth in nitrates were the true reasons for the Chilean elite to go to war against Peru and Bolivia, with most historians agreeing that the Chilean government's expansionist foreign policy and its ambitions to control Atacama's mineral wealth led to the conflict .\nChile won the war and with the Treaty of Anc\u00f3n of 1884, the War of the Pacific ended. Chile obtained half of Peru's guano income from the 1880s and its guano islands, with Chile taking control over the most valuable nitrogen resources in the world. Chile's national treasury would increase 900% from 1879 to 1902 due to the newly acquired lands. Meanwhile, Peru's reliance on commodity exports \u2013 which continued through its history \u2013 resulted the bankruptcy of its economy. Peru would go on to approve the Grace Contract, which granted ownership of Peru's railroads to holders of sovereign debt, with the Peruvian government not issuing new sovereign debt until 1906.\n20th century.\nAmazon rubber boom.\nInto the twentieth century, Anglo-Peruvian Amazon Rubber Co in Iquitos began to market rubber internationally. The rubber boom brought regions of Amazonia into the international market. The Government of Peru ceded to the Anglo-Peruvian Amazon Rubber Co the Amazon territories north of Loreto, after the company's founder Julio C\u00e9sar Arana purchased the land. During the rubber boom the Putumayo Genocide was committed by Anglo-Peruvian Amazon Rubber Co. Between 40,000 and 250,000 indigenous peoples were killed, with many being sent to labor camps; ninety percent of the affected Amazonian populations were annihilated.\nWorld War I and II eras.\nIn the early 1910s, Peru enjoyed a growing economy due to mining and crop production, with a working class developing at the time. Following the outbreak of World War I, international markets became turbulent and Peru experienced a recession and a series of coups occurred through the mid and late-1910s. Augusto B. Legu\u00eda, a member of Peru's oligarchy, then took power through a coup and essentially assumed dictatorial powers, writing a new constitution; Legu\u00eda would often ignore the constitution through his acts, however. V\u00edctor Ra\u00fal Haya de la Torre founded the American Popular Revolutionary Alliance (APRA) calling for reforms, though Legu\u00eda quickly banned the party. Legu\u00eda increased spending to modernize Peru, though this also raised national debt and with the addition of the Great Depression in 1929, he was overthrown soon-after in 1930 by Luis Miguel S\u00e1nchez Cerro.\nS\u00e1nchez announced a debt moratorium on US$180\u00a0million and Peru was banned from markets in the United States as a result. The S\u00e1nchez government also continued the repression of APRA, resulting in an Aprista party member assassinating S\u00e1nchez. \u00d3scar R. Benavides was chosen by the constituent assembly to finish S\u00e1nchez's term and intensified persecution of left-wing groups, resulting in increased support for the Peruvian Communist Party (PCP) among indigenous and labor groups. As Peru's economy grew, a banker in Lima, Manuel Prado Ugarteche, was elected into the presidency in the 1939 Peruvian general election.\nPresident Prado adopted a softer tone on APRA while Aprista leader Haya de la Torre also espoused more moderate policy and support for foreign markets. APRA was made a legal party in 1945 and in Jos\u00e9 Luis Bustamante y Rivero was elected the same year, making an Aprista politician the Minister of the Economy. Subsequently, the Bustamante greatly increased economic interventionism to include price controls and a foreign exchange controls, which appeared beside a slowing economy, resulting in increased inflation.\nMilitary \"juntas\" and first Bela\u00fande government.\nOver the next two decades, military \"juntas\" controlled Peru. On 29 October 1948, General Manuel A. Odr\u00eda led a successful military coup against Bustamante and assumes the presidency until 1956. Odr\u00eda's government experienced a growing economy due to a commodity boom, though many of the government's investments remained in coastal cities while unrest increased among interior and Andean regions that remained impoverished. Haya de la Torre \u2013 whose APRA party had drifted even more to right-wing politics at this time \u2013 won the 1962 Peruvian general election against Fernando Bela\u00fande, founder of the right-wing Popular Action, though Haya de la Torre was unable to take office due to a military coup opposed to APRA.\nAfter a brief military government, Bela\u00fande won the 1963 Peruvian general election, with his government making modest improvements by increasing industrialization and constructing highways into the Andes. Bela\u00fande held a doctrine called \"The Conquest of Peru by Peruvians\", which promoted the exploitation of resources in the Amazon and other outlying areas of Peru through conquest. In one 1964 incident called the , the Bela\u00fande administration targeted the Mats\u00e9s after two loggers were killed, with the Peruvian armed forces and American fighter planes dropping napalm on the indigenous groups armed with bows and arrows, killing hundreds. Bela\u00fande's economic measures were received with disapproval from rural and peasant Peruvians. His government's reliance on resource exports, especially with the fishing industry, resulted in increased inflation and a growing deficit. Amid this conflict, general Juan Velasco Alvarado overthrows the Bela\u00fande in the 1968 Peruvian coup d'\u00e9tat .\nRevolutionary Government of the Armed Forces.\nVelasco established the Revolutionary Government of the Armed Forces and it adopted a state capitalism economic policy amid a period of economic expansion. The government immediately instituted land reform initiatives, establishing one of the most ambitious land tenure projects in the history of Latin America. The land reform projects removed the traditional \"hacienda\" system that resembled landowners imposing a serfdom on peasants and replaced it with agricultural cooperatives called Agricultural Social-Interest Societies (SAIS). The Velasco government took a structural approach; it invested in infrastructure and began a widespread nationalization campaign of key economic production sectors, education and the media. A fixed exchange rate system was adopted and the national debt began to increase dramatically. A combination of debt, inflation and the 1973 oil crisis induced an economic crisis in the Velasco government, with General Francisco Morales-Berm\u00fadez overthrowing Velasco in the Tacnazo.\nBerm\u00fadez in name led the Second Revolutionary Government of the Armed Forces, with his government introducing austerity measures and removing state capitalist systems. This government began monetary adjustment and started with negotiations on foreign debt. However, corruption scandals and widespread protests broke out and the military government agreed to transition Peru back into a democratic political system.\nThe Lost Decade.\nIn 1980, after twelve years of military rule, Fernando Bela\u00fande Terry was elected president for a second time. On the day of the election, Shining Path launched its armed struggle in Chuschi with a ballot burning incident, essentially beginning the internal conflict in Peru. Bela\u00fande's used a floating exchange rate and used populist policies, primarily relying on key exports. His government continued to reverse Velasco's existing policies and some economic liberalization. However, Bela\u00fande's government could not develop a monetary policy, failed at managing state-run entities and faced a growing external debt, leaving Peru in a vulnerable state.\nAlan Garc\u00eda was elected president in the 1985 Peruvian general election and the first Aprista president in over sixty years. His administration adopted a neo-structuralist economic policy, with the government funding the private sector to enhance economic performance, increasing welfare spending and instituting price controls; this resulted with temporary economic growth, though Peru's national debt grew dramatically. By 1989, inflation reached almost 3,000 percent and 7,000 percent in 1990, with Peru experiencing a GDP loss of twenty-four percent in the last three years of Garc\u00eda's tenure. With the growing economic crisis and the terrorist Shining Path gaining territory in an armed conflict with the Peruvian government, the idea of a leader with a \"heavy hand\" became more attractive to Peruvians according to Guti\u00e9rrez San\u00edn and Sch\u00f6nw\u00e4lder.\nThe Peruvian armed forces grew frustrated with the inability of the Garc\u00eda administration to handle the nation's crises and began to draft a plan to overthrow his government. According to Peruvian sociologist and political analyst Fernando Rospigliosi, Peru's business elites held relationships with the military planners, with Rospigliosi writing that businesses \"probably provided the economic ideas which [the military] agreed with, the necessity of a liberal economic program as well as the installment of an authoritarian government which would impose order\". Thus, Plan Verde was drafted at the end of the Garc\u00eda presidency; the objectives evolved into establishing a civilian-military government with a neoliberal economic policy.\nFujimori government.\nDuring his campaigning for the 1990 election, Alberto Fujimori expressed concern against the proposed neoliberal policies of his opponent Mario Vargas Llosa. Peruvian magazine \"Oiga\" reported that following the election, the armed forces were unsure of Fujimori's willingness to fulfill their objectives outlined in Plan Verde and it was reported that the meeting held a negotiatory meeting with him to ensure that Fujimori followed their direction. After taking office, Fujimori abandoned the economic platform he promoted during his campaign, adopting more aggressive neoliberal policies than those espoused by Vargas Llosa, his competitor in the election. Fujimori would go on to adopt many of the policies outlined in Plan Verde. Fujimori ultimately served as president from 28 July 1990 to 17 November 2000.\nFujimori is often credited with defeating the Shining Path terrorist group in Peru and restoring its macroeconomic stability. Fujimori's economic policy was largely adopted from the advice of Peruvian economist Hernando de Soto, who prescribed economic guidelines \u2013 including the loosening of economic regulation, the introduction of austerity measures and the use of neoliberal policies \u2013 that were ultimately adopted by the Fujimori administration and established in the 1993 Constitution of Peru. Although economic statistics show improved economic data in Peru in recent decades, the wealth earned between 1990 and 2020 was not distributed throughout the country; living standards showed disparities between the more-developed capital city of Lima and similar coastal regions while rural provinces remained impoverished.\n21st century.\nLima Consensus.\nInitially established by the Fujimori administration, the Lima Consensus focused on deregulation and privatization with the goal of establishing a neoliberal economy, all while limiting the involvement of the government in the public sector. As the Washington Consensus lost popularity in the 2000s, a more defined Lima Consensus began to emerge in Peru as the economy simultaneously improved during the 2000s commodities boom. While Latin American governments invested into social programs for education, healthcare and poverty programs in the early 21st century, Peru under the Consensus chose to cut social programs. President Alejandro Toledo continued to promote the decentralization of Peru, while the former social democrat Alan Garc\u00eda took implementation of the consensus even further, adopting policies similar to Augusto Pinochet. Keiko Fujimori, the daughter of Alberto Fujimori, has been a major proponent for the Lima Consensus, using the support of neoliberal economist Hernando de Soto to support her position during her elections. This lack of state intervention as promoted by the Consensus has resulted with a weak government with poor performance, with many Peruvians experiencing insufficient basic services such as education, justice and security while corruption, crime, crony capitalism and economic inequality increased as many political officials frequently moving between business and government positions without oversight.\nFollowing the 2021 Peruvian general election that saw leftist candidate Pedro Castillo elected into the presidency, Fitch Solutions warned that his election posed \"substantial risks to the 'Lima Consensus', the investor-friendly economic policy framework that has persisted over the last 20 years\".\nSectors.\nAgriculture.\nPeru is a country with many climates and geographical zones that make it a very important agricultural nation. Peruvian agricultural exports are highly appreciated and include artichokes, grapes, avocados, mangoes, peppers, sugarcane, organic coffee and premium-quality cotton.\nPeru is one of the 5 largest producers of avocado, blueberry, artichoke and asparagus, one of the 10 largest producers in the world of coffee and cocoa, one of the 15 largest producers in the world of potato and pineapple, and also has a considerable production of grape, sugarcane, rice, banana, maize and cassava; its agriculture is considerably diversified.\nIn 2018, Peru produced 10.3\u00a0million tons of sugarcane, 5.1\u00a0million tons of potato, 3.5\u00a0million tons of rice, 2.2\u00a0million tons of banana, 1.5\u00a0million tons of maize, 1.2\u00a0million tons of cassava, 921 thousand tons of palm oil, 645 thousand tons of grape, 548 thousand tons of pineapple, 504 thousand tons of avocado, 481 thousand tons of tangerine, 502 thousand tons of orange, 369 thousand tons of coffee, 383 thousand tons of mango, 360 thousand tons of asparagus, 270 thousand tons of lemon, 252 thousand tons of tomato, 207 thousand tons of barley, 195 thousand tons of wheat, 188 thousand tons of olives, 187 thousand tons of carrots, 175 thousand tons of papaya, 175 thousand tons of pepper, 154 thousand tons of artichoke, 140 thousand tons of apple, 134 thousand tons of cocoa, in addition to smaller productions of other agricultural products.\nIndustry and services.\nManufacturing.\nPeru has developed a medium manufacturing sector. The sector now represents 23 percent of GDP and is tied heavily to mining, fishing, agriculture, construction and textiles. Manufacturing is mainly devoted to processing to gain a value-added advantage. The most promising sector is textiles, metal mechanics, food industry, agricultural industry, manufactures, chemicals, pharmaceuticals, machinery and services.\nServices.\nTourism has represented a new growth industry in Peru since the early 1990s, with the government and private sector dedicating considerable energies to boosting the country's tourist destinations both to Peruvians and foreigners.\nNatural resources.\nPeru's natural resources are copper, silver, gold, timber, fish, iron ore, coal, phosphate, potash, and natural gas.\nExtraction.\nMining is a major pillar of the Peruvian economy. In 2019, the country was the 2nd largest world producer of copper and silver, 8th largest world producer of gold, 3rd largest world producer of lead, 2nd largest world producer of zinc, 4th largest world producer of tin, 5th largest world producer of boron and 4th largest world producer of molybdenum. The country was once the world's largest producer of silver and was also one of the five largest gold producers in the world.\nIllegal mining remains a significant problem in Peru with its associated deforestation, pollution, prostitution, poor working conditions and criminality.\nFishing and aquaculture.\nFishing is a major economic activity in Peru. As of 2022, Peru has the third-largest fishery, accounting for about 6.6% of the global marine species catch in 2022. The main target species is the Peruvian anchoveta, which accounted for about 86.7% of marine landings in 2022. The Peruvian anchoveta is primarily used for fishmeal and fish oil production, of which Peru is the world's largest producer of, typically accounting for between one-fourth and one-third of global trade of fishmeal and fish oil. Aquaculture has also progressed significantly since 2000, growing from a production value of about 6,500 tonnes to nearly 141,000 tonnes in 2022. According to Peru's Ministry of Production, the sector exported about US$2.9 billion worth of product in 2023, employing about 90,900 people across inland fisheries, marine fisheries, and aquaculture.\nExternal trade and investment.\nForeign investment and balance of payments.\nForeign trade and balance of payments.\nIn 2001 the current account deficit dropped to about 2.2% of GDP (US$1.17 billion)--from 3.1% in 2000\u2014while the trade balance registered a small deficit. Exports dropped slightly to $7.11\u00a0billion, while imports fell 2.1% to $7.20\u00a0billion. After being hit hard by El Ni\u00f1o in 1998, fisheries exports have recovered, and minerals and metals exports recorded large gains in 2001 and 2002, mostly as a result of the opening of the Antamina copper-zinc mine. By mid-2002, most sectors of the economy were showing gains. After several years of substantial growth, foreign direct investment not related to privatization fell dramatically in 2000 and 2001, as well as in the first half of 2002. Net international reserves at the end of May 2002 stood at $9.16\u00a0billion, up from $8.6\u00a0billion (2001), $17\u00a0billion at the end of 2006, over $20\u00a0billion in 2007, and over $35\u00a0billion in May 2008. Peru has signed a number of free trade agreements, including the 2007 United States-Peru Trade Promotion Agreement, and agreements with Chile, Canada, Singapore, Thailand and China. Under President Alan Garcia administration Peru achieved a bilateral trade agreement with U.S. since 2010 to improve exports for its country and reach in August 2011 its pick in exports of more than 4,700 MM.\nForeign investment.\nThe Peruvian government actively seeks to attract both foreign and domestic investment in all sectors of the economy. International investment was spurred by the significant progress Peru made during the 1990s toward economic, social, and political stability, but it slowed again after the government delayed privatizations and as political uncertainty increased in 2000. President Alejandro Toledo has made investment promotion a priority of his government. While Peru was previously marked by terrorism, hyperinflation, and government intervention in the economy, the Government of Peru under former President Alberto Fujimori took the steps necessary to bring those problems under control. Democratic institutions, however, and especially the judiciary, remain weak.\nThe Government of Peru's economic stabilization and liberalization program lowered trade barriers, eliminated restrictions on capital flows, and opened the economy to foreign investment, with the result that Peru now has one of the most open investment regimes in the world. Between 1992 and 2001, Peru attracted almost $17\u00a0billion in foreign direct investment, after negligible investment until 1991, mainly from Spain (32.35%), the United States (17.51%), Switzerland (6.99%), Chile (6.63%), and Mexico (5.53%). The basic legal structure for foreign investment in Peru is formed by the 1993 constitution, the Private Investment Growth Law, and the November 1996 Investment Promotion Law. Although Peru does not have a bilateral investment treaty with the United States, it has signed an agreement (1993) with the Overseas Private Investment Corporation (OPIC) concerning OPIC-financed loans, guarantees, and investments. Peru also has committed itself to arbitration of investment disputes under the auspices of ICSID (the World Bank'sInternational Center for the Settlement of Investment Disputes) or other international or national arbitration tribunals.\nCurrency.\nThe sol is the currency of Peru. The exchange rate as of January 2025 is 3.76 soles to the US dollar. It was instated in 1991, when the Peruvian government abandoned the inti due to hyperinflation of the currency; the sol has since maintained the lowest inflation rate in Latin America. The sol replaced the inti at a rate of 1 nuevo sol = 1,000,000 intis. The inti itself replaced another inflated currency, the sol, which was used between 1863 and 1985. The name \"sol\" comes from the Latin \"solidus\", and is also the Spanish word for \"sun\", which the ancient Inca civilization worshiped as the god Inti.\nThe sol currently enjoys a low inflation rate of 2.5%. Since it was put into use, the sol's exchange rate with the United States dollar has stayed mostly between 2.80 and 3.30 to 1. Out of all the currencies of the Latin American region, the sol is the most stable and reliable, being the least affected by the downturn in the value of the US dollar; during late 2007 and early 2008, the exchange rate fell to 2.69 to 1, which had not been seen since 1997. The exchange rate is set on a daily basis by the \"Banco Central de Reserva del Per\u00fa\" (Central Reserve Bank of Peru).\nThe sol is divided into 100 c\u00e9ntimos. The highest-denomination banknote is the 200 soles note; the lowest-denomination coin is the rarely used 5 c\u00e9ntimos coin.\nIncome and consumption.\nPeru divides its population into five socio-economic classes, A-E, with A representing the rich; B, the upper middle class; C, the middle class; D, the working class and low income families; and E, the marginalized poor. In 2018, the segments were described as \"crude\" by Miguel Planas of the Ministry of Finance due to the complicated structure of the society in Peru, where some classes make money off of illegal trade which aren't counted in the GDP, and are thus falsely classified as low income or marginalised poor families.\nEmployment.\nUnemployment in Greater Lima is 5.6%, while for the rest of Peru is 7%. FY 2012\u20132013 In the last report, the number of workers by participants belonging to the public sector amounted to 1.45 million.\nEconomic trends.\nGreater depth.\nFrom 1994 through 1998, under the government of Alberto Fujimori, the economy recorded robust growth driven by foreign direct investment, almost 46% of which was related to the privatization program. The government invested heavily on the country's infrastructure, which became a solid foundation for the future of the Peruvian economy. The economy stagnated from 1998 through 2001, the result of the century's strongest El Ni\u00f1o weather phenomenon, global financial turmoil, political instability, a stalled privatization program, increased government intervention in markets, and worsening terms of trade. President Alejandro Toledo implemented a recovery program after taking office, maintained largely orthodox economic policies, and took measures to attract investment, including restarting the privatization program. Nonetheless, political uncertainty led to GDP growth of 0.2% in 2001. The Lima Stock Exchange general index fell 34.5% in 2000 and 0.2% in 2001. Inflation remained at record lows, registering 3.7% in 2000.\nThe year 2001 saw deflation of 0.1%. The government's overall budget deficit rose sharply in 1999 and 2000 to 3.2% of GDP, the result of hikes in government salaries, expenditures related to the 2000 election campaign, higher foreign debt service payments, and lower tax revenues. The government brought the deficit down to 2.5% of GDP in 2001, and set a target of 1.9% of GDP for 2002. Peru's stability brought about a substantial reduction in underemployment, from an average of 74% from the late 1980s through 1994 to 43% in the 1995\u201396 period, but the rates began climbing again in 1997\u20132002 to over half the working population. The poverty rate remained at 54% in 2001, with 24% of Peruvians living in extreme poverty. In 2005, 18% of Peruvians were living in extreme poverty and a poverty rate at 39%. As of 2010, around 30% of its total population is poor.\nOutlook.\nThe virtues of today's new multi-polar world for Peru are many. At 30 million people, Peru is neither too small to matter nor so big it is going to be a power in its own right. Midsized states, benefits from a world where it is no longer mandatory to pick a big-power patron.\nWith expanding ports loading up boats to China on one side, and a new superhighway to Brazil on the other, along with a free trade agreement with the United States in its hip pocket, Peru seems well-positioned to prosper in the coming years. But former President Toledo may not be hyperbolic when he worries the future stability of the state may depend on its willingness to distribute wealth more evenly.\nForecasts for the medium- and long-term remain highly positive. Peru's real GDP growth in 2007 was (8.3%) and largest in Latin America in 2008 was an outstanding 9.8%, the highest in the world. Inflation remained low, at about 3%, while the budget surplus is expected to remain at about 1% of GDP. Private investment should keep growing at a rate of 15% a year. Exports and imports are expected to keep rising. The unemployment and underemployment indexes (5.2% and 34%, respectively, in Lima) should keep coming down as the economy grows, other cities in Peru like Cajamarca, Ica, Cuzco and Trujillo are starting to show less unemployment nowadays. The country is likely to attract future domestic and foreign investment in tourism, agriculture, mining, petroleum and natural gas, power industries and financial institutions.\nAccording to the IMF and the World Bank, Peruvian GDP economic growth between 2007 and 2013 was:\nIn 2007 at 8.9%, in 2008 at 9.7%, in 2009 at 0.9%, in 2010 at 8.6%, in 2011 at 6.0%, in 2012 at 6,3% and in 2013 at 5.3%.\nTherefore, Peruvian GDP grew in the 2007\u20132013 6 years period an outstanding net growth of 45.7% or a 7.61% yearly average. The IMF forecast for Peru's economic growth for the next 6 years 2013\u20132019 is a 7% yearly growth.\nIn FY 2011 for the first time since 1991 the size of the Peruvian economy surpassed the Chilean economy. Peru now is the fifth major economy in South America and is expected to become the fourth South American economy in 2018 by surpassing Venezuela.\nPrivate investment reached 25% of the GDP in 2007, and has remained stable through 2010; and inflation is under control at an average 2% per year for the next 5 years. International Debt will reach 25% of the GDP by 2010, down from 35% in 2006, and will be only 12% of the GDP by 2015. The International Monetary Reserves of the National Reserve Bank (Dollar, Euro, Yen, Gold, and other currencies) reached US$27\u00a0billion by the end of 2007, and US$31\u00a0billion at the end of 2008.\nCurrently reserves are at a US$73\u00a0billion level for end of FY 2013, which more than doubles the total foreign debt of Peru which is US$30\u00a0billion at the end of FY 2013.\nExports are growing at a pace of 25% and reached US$28\u00a0billion at the end of 2007 and US$30\u00a0billion at the end of 2010. In FY 2012 Peruvian exports reached a total of US$46\u00a0billion.\nHigh technological investment is growing fast in Peru, and will be 10% of the GDP by 2010.\nNarcotics.\nBackground.\nCoca has a long history of cultivation in the Andes, and has always been a traditional part of Peruvian life. However, the narcotic properties of coca were known only locally until 1786, when Lamarck listed the leaf in his botanical encyclopedia. After the arrival of the Spanish, coca cultivation increased and its use became more common and widespread. Since 1543, coca has been internationally recognized for its trading value, and regulations imposed upon it have attached increasing economic importance to the plant. Exchange of the coca leaf between consumers in the highlands and growers in the low-lying hills has gone on for at least the last millennium, strengthening local economic ties. Between 1884 and 1900, coca and cocaine grew in popularity for medical purposes and mass consumption in the United States. From 1905 to 1922, anti-cocaine sentiments in the US resulted in criminalization of both coca and cocaine. It was not until the 1920s that US diplomats began to extend drug prohibitions internationally.\nCurrent trends.\nThe Peruvian coca and cocaine industry is as huge as it is today because of advanced industrial nations' demand for drugs. This high demand has created a framework of dependence on \"coca-dollars\" and on US drug policy. Money from cocaine trafficking feeds local economies, supports inflation, and even causes social changes such as cocaine smoking among indigenous Peruvians. Coca farming today is still a significant source of income for peasants, as it accounts for 48% of total net family income in the high coca-growing Apur\u00edmac River region. In an effort to reduce drug use in America, for the past 50 years the US government together with the United Nations have been waging a war on drugs. The US Drug Control Program maintains that \"eliminating the cultivation of illicit coca and opium is the best approach to combating cocaine and heroin availability in the US.\"\nWith US government cooperation, the Peruvian Government installed the National Plan for the Prevention and Control of Drugs in 1995. This government prohibition of narcotics trafficking in Peru has resulted in a 70% reduction of coca leaf cultivation since 1995. However the reduction in cultivation may not have actual effects on cocaine production, as recent advances in coca growing and more efficient processing methods allow for greater cocaine yield. The size of the narcotics industry as a part of the national economy is difficult to measure, but estimates range from $300\u2013$600\u00a0million. An estimated 200,000 Peruvian households have economies based on the production, refining, or distribution of coca. Many economists believe that large flows of dollars into the banking system contribute to the traditional depression of the dollar exchange rate vis-a-vis the sol. The Central Bank engages in open market activities to prevent the price of the sol from rising to levels that would cause Peruvian exports to become prohibitively expensive.\nHurt economically by Peruvian Air Force interdiction efforts in the mid-1990s, drug traffickers are now using land and river routes as well as aircraft to transport cocaine paste and, increasingly, refined cocaine to consumers around and out of the country. The Air Bridge Denial Program was suspended in April 2001 after the Peruvian Air Force and strength of the U.S. DEA misidentified a civilian aircraft as a drug trafficker and shot it down, killing two American citizens on board. Peru continues to arrest drug traffickers and seize drugs and precursor chemicals, destroy coca labs, disable clandestine airstrips, and prosecute officials involved in narcotics corruption.\nWorking with limited aid of the U.S. Agency for International Development (USAID), the Peruvian Government carries out alternative development programs in the leading coca-growing areas in an effort to convince coca farmers not to grow that crop. Although the government previously eradicated only coca seed beds, in 1998 and 1999 it began to eradicate mature coca being grown in national parks and elsewhere in the main coca growing valleys. In 1999 the government eradicated more than 150\u00a0km2 of coca; this figure declined to 65\u00a0km2 in 2000, due largely to political instability. The government agency \"Contradrogas\", founded in 1996, facilitates coordination among Peruvian Government agencies working on counter-narcotics issues. Alternative crops, however, are not economically comparable to coca. 2004 prices indicate an annual income per hectare of $600 for coffee and $1000 for cocoa, versus up to $7500 for a hectare of coca.\nFor the global push towards a green economy, sustainability depends on access to minerals such as copper, lithium, and rare earth elements. Peru, as one of the most resource-rich nations in the world, plays an important role. Peru is currently considered the world's second-largest exporter of minerals such as copper, silver, zinc, and lithium; these minerals are essential to the technologies that drive change in industry to a cleaner and more sustainable future. This year, in August 2024, Peru and the United States signed a memorandum of understanding (MOU) for greater foreign direct investment (FDI) and shared technological innovation. The MOU represents Peru as the US supply for the accessibility of essential minerals, guaranteeing responsible extraction processes. Peru has more than 6 t of lithium and managed 31 active copper projects with almost US$40 billion in potential investments. Thus, this partnership marks a new era for the Peruvian economy. (Owen, 2024)\nEffect on family economies.\nThe anti-coca policies imposed in 1995 have had adverse effects on Peruvian's household economies. Many families dependent on coca farming have been forced to send their children to work as eradication of crops has decreased their household income. In states where coca is grown, child labour increased by 18% in 1997 and 40% in 2000. Work hours and domestic work increased as well, with girls taking on 28% more domestic work with boys doing 13% more. Wage work for adults also increased since 1995. As such, it can be inferred that the increase in child labour since eradication policies have come into effect is caused by children filling in for working parents. However, the issue of child labour in cocoa production is still present in Peru as reported in 2013 in the U.S. Department of Labor's report \"Findings on the Worst Forms of Child Labor\" and in December 2014, in the Bureau of International Labor Affairs's \"List of Goods Produced by Child Labor or Forced Labor\".\nCorruption.\nPeru is the 101st least corrupt country in the world according to Transparency International's Corruption Perceptions Index.\nThe Peruvian organization \"Ciudadanos al Dia\" has started to measure and compare transparency, costs, and efficiency in different government departments in Peru. It annually awards the best practices which has received widespread media attention. This has created competition among government agencies to improve.\nA recent case of corruption was the 2008 oil scandal, which caused protests in large cities around Peru. The cabinet has to resign due to the scandal. However, a judge absolved all the officials involved in the case in 2016. \nStatistics.\nMain economic indicators.\nThe following table shows the main economic indicators in 1980\u20132021 (with IMF staff stimtates in 2022\u20132027). Inflation below 5% is in green.\nHousehold income or consumption by percentage share:\n\"lowest 10%:\"\n0.8%\n\"highest 10%:\"\n37.5% (2000)\nInflation rate (consumer prices):\n2.08% (2010)\nBudget:\n\"revenues:\"\n$57 billion (2014 est.)\n\"expenditures:\"\n$50 billion, including long-term capital expenditures of $3.8 billion (2010 est.)\nIndustrial production growth rate:\n12% (2013 est.)\nElectricity \u2013 production:\n175,500 GWh (2013 est.)\nElectricity \u2013 production by source:\n\"natural gas:\"\n44.53%\n\"hydro:\"\n54.79%\n\"nuclear:\"\n0%\n\"other:\"\n0.68% (2013)\nElectricity \u2013 consumption:\n133,000 GWh (2013)\nElectricity \u2013 exports:\n32,000 kWh (2013) mainly to Ecuador\nElectricity \u2013 imports:\n0 kWh (2013)\nAgriculture \u2013 products:\ncoffee, cotton, sugarcane, rice, wheat, potatoes, plantains, coca; poultry, beef, dairy products, wool; fish\nExports:\n63.5 billion f.o.b. (2013 est.) of goods and products.\n10.5 billion f.o.b. (2013 est.) of services.\nTotal Exports $73.5 billion f.o.b. (2013)\nExports:\nfish and fish products, copper, zinc, gold, molybdenum, iron, crude petroleum and byproducts, lead; coffee, asparagus, artichokes, paprika, sugar, cotton, textiles, chemicals, pharmaceuticals, manufactures, machinery, services.\nExports \u2013 partners:\nMainland China 20%, United States 15%, European Union 15%, Brazil 10%, Chile 10%, Japan 5%, Mexico 5%, United Kingdom 5%, Bolivia 5% Rest of Latin America 5%, Rest of world 5%, (2013)\nImports:\nTotal Imports $68 billion f.o.b. (2013)\nImports \u2013 commodities:\nmachinery, transport equipment, foodstuffs, iron and steel, pharmaceuticals, electronics, petroleum and chemicals.\nImports \u2013 partners:\nMainland China 25%, US 15%, European Union 15%, Brazil 10%, Japan 10%, Chile 5%, Colombia 5%, Mexico 5%, Ecuador 4%, Bolivia 1%, Rest of World 5% (2013).\nTrade agreements.\nAccording to the Ministry of Foreign Trade and Tourism, Peru decided to negotiate trade agreements to consolidate the access of Peruvian exports to its most important markets by giving them permanent benefits unlimited in time and coverage as opposed to temporary commercial preferences given unilaterally by certain countries; a system that did not allow Peruvian exporters embark in long-term export-related investments.\nPeru \u2013 United States Trade Promotion Agreement.\nThe \"United States \u2013 Peru Trade Promotion Agreement\" () is a bilateral free trade agreement, whose objectives are eliminating obstacles to trade, consolidating access to goods and services and fostering private investment in and between the United States and Peru. Besides commercial issues, it incorporates economic, institutional, intellectual property, labor and environmental policies, among others. The agreement was signed on 12 April 2006; ratified by the Peruvian Congress on 28 June 2006; by the U.S. House of Representatives on 2 November 2007 and by the U.S. Senate on 4 December 2007. The agreement was implemented on 1 February 2009.\nPeru looks to the agreement are to:\nThe United States looks to the agreement to:\nThe U.S.-Peru agreement has faced criticism. In Peru, the treaty was championed by Toledo, and supported to different extents by former President Alan Garc\u00eda and candidates Lourdes Flores and Valent\u00edn Paniagua. Ollanta Humala has been its most vocal critic. Humala's Union for Peru won 45 of 120 seats in Congress in 2006, the largest share by a single party, prompting debate on ratification of the agreement before the new legislature was sworn in. Some Congressmen-elect interrupted the debate after forcibly entering Congress in an attempt to stop the agreement ratification.\nOne controversial element of the agreement relates to land resources. Laura Carlsen, of the Center for International Policy, who is also a contributor to Foreign Policy in Focus notes that \"Indigenous organizations warn that this ruling effectively opens up 45 million hectares to foreign investment and timber, oil, and mining exploitation.\"\nHowever, most of the criticism of the agreement has focused on its potential impact on Peru's agricultural sector. By planting crops to similar to those subsidized by the U.S., Peru faced a competitive disadvantage in the production of agricultural products because poor farming families with inadequate tools, technology and techniques may not be able to produce crops at low enough prices to export. In response to these concerns, Peruvian lawmakers created a Compensation Fund which directed $34\u00a0million per year to cotton, maize/corn, and wheat producers for a five-year period to help them adjust to the new competitive pressures.\nToledo is therefore a market-oriented politician who continued to globalize Peru's economy and is rumored to be getting ready for another run for president. Toledo says bluntly that unless the poorest in the country are better educated, better paid, housed, and fed, the Peruvian economic miracle will stall.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23436", "revid": "9021902", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23436", "title": "Telecommunications in Peru", "text": "Telecommunications in Peru include radio and television, fixed and mobile telephones, and the Internet.\nRegulation.\nThe technical regulator of communications in Peru is the Presidency of the Minister Council, through the \"Organismo Supervisor de la Inversi\u00f3n Privada en Telecomunicaciones\" (OSIPTEL) in English, Supervisory Agency for Private Investment in Telecommunications. The Ministry of Transport and Communications grants concessions, authorizations, permits and licenses.\nThe resale of telecommunication services is permitted as a regulated activity. Voice Over IP (VoIP) services are not expressly regulated, but may need a concession or a registry depending on the type of service provided. Carrier interconnection is mandatory and interconnection fees are regulated. The Peruvian government maintains a Telecommunications Investment Fund (FITEL) to promote universal service within the country's most isolated regions, including rural areas and areas of social interest. Following the successful implementation of mobile number portability, the government requires fixed number portability be launched by July 2014.\nAll telecommunication services have been liberalized and are rendered under a free competition regime according to the Telecommunications Law. Under Peru's single concession regime all telecom services, including fixed-line, mobile, pay TV, and Internet, are provided under unified concessions that cover the entire country.\nPrivatization began in 1994 when the state-owned companies Compa\u00f1\u00eda Peruana de Tel\u00e9fonos S.A. (CPT) and Entel Per\u00fa were auctioned to Telef\u00f3nica de Espa\u00f1a. In December 1994, Entel Per\u00fa was merged into CPT. In 1995, CPT changed its name to Telef\u00f3nica del Per\u00fa S.A. (TdP). Telef\u00f3nica del Per\u00fa continues to dominate the market for basic telephone services.\nThe operation of broadcasting companies is governed by the Law of Radio and Television (Law N\u00ba 28278). Spectrum is managed and controlled by the Ministry of Transport and Communications (MTC).\nTelephones.\nPeru's fixed-line penetration is the third lowest in South America after Bolivia and Paraguay. Barriers include widespread poverty, expensive services, little meaningful competition, and the geographical barriers imposed by the Andean mountains and Amazon jungles.\nUnder the name Movistar, Telef\u00f3nica del Per\u00fa dominates the basic telephone market. Am\u00e9rica M\u00f3vil\u2019s Claro occupies second place, while Americatel Peru is third with roughly 1% of the market. The remaining companies have market shares below 0.3%.\nMobile penetration is below the regional average with about one quarter of the population having no mobile phone at all, while others, primarily in urban areas, have multiple subscriptions.\nTelef\u00f3nica, operating as Movistar, is the mobile leader; Am\u00e9rica M\u00f3vil, operating as Claro, is second; and Mobile Per\u00fa is third. Vietnam's Viettel is expected to begin offering mobile services in the second half of 2014 and Virgin Mobile is expected to enter the market as a Mobile Virtual Network Operator (MVNO).\nInternet.\nPeru enjoyed a remarkably high dial-up Internet penetration rate, but broadband Internet penetration is more than two-thirds below the average for Latin America and Caribbean countries. Barriers include widespread poverty, limited literacy, limited computer ownership and access, rugged topography and, perhaps most significant, a lack of meaningful competition which has made broadband Internet access in Peru one of the slowest and most expensive in the region.\nInternet censorship and surveillance.\nIn 2011 the OpenNet Initiative reported no evidence of Internet filtering in all areas (political, social, conflict/security, and Internet tools) for which it tests.\nThere are no government restrictions on access to the Internet or credible reports that the government monitors e-mail or Internet chat rooms without appropriate legal authority. Individuals and groups engage in the free expression of views via the Internet, including by e-mail. The chief impediment to Internet access is a lack of infrastructure.\nThe constitution provides for freedom of speech and press, and the government generally respects these rights. Generally, an independent press and a functioning democratic political system combine to promote freedom of speech and press. A number of journalists and media outlets report experiencing threats or intimidation. Some observers claim that media outlets self-censor for fear of harassment or violence. The Press and Society Institute (IPYS) reports that the aggressors are often government officials (e.g., mayors, heads of government offices, regional presidents). The penal code criminalizes libel, and officials reportedly use it to intimidate reporters. The law designates all information about national security and defense as secret. Press freedom activists and local NGOs, such as IPYS, criticized the law as an attack on transparency, freedom of information, and freedom of the press.\nIn October 2013 the government passed a cybercrimes law designed to combat data sharing and the illegal access of information. The Press and Society Institute (IPYS) and other local NGOs criticized the law as legally ambiguous and argued that it could be used broadly to target journalists and limit freedom of the press.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23437", "revid": "20611691", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23437", "title": "Transport in Peru", "text": " \nThis article describes the transport in Peru.\nRailways.\ntotal: \nstandard gauge: , gauge \nnarrow gauge: , gauge\nThere are two unconnected principal railways in Peru.\nThe Ferrocarril Central Andino (FCCA; the former Ferrocarril Central del Per\u00fa) runs inland from Callao and Lima across the Andes watershed to La Oroya and Huancayo. It is the second highest railway in the world (following opening of the Qingzang railway in Tibet), with the Galera summit tunnel under Mount Meiggs at and Galera station at above sea level. In 1955 the railway opened a spur line from La Cima on the Morococha branch ( above sea level) to Volc\u00e1n Mine, reaching an (at the time) world record altitude of . Both branch and spur have since closed to traffic. From Huancayo the route is extended by the Ferrocarril Huancayo-Huancavelica. In July 2006 FCCA began work to regauge the Huancavelica line from to and it was finished in 2010. There was also a proposal for a tunnel under the Andes.\nThe Ferrocarriles del Sur del Per\u00fa (FCS), now operated by PeruRail, runs from the coast at Matarani to Cuzco, and to Puno on Lake Titicaca. From Cuzco, PeruRail runs the gauge line to Aguas Calientes for Machu Picchu.\nMetro.\nLima has a metro service or Lima Metro, also called \"Tren el\u00e9ctrico\" that has now only one line (called Linea 1). The line has an extension of , with 26 stations, and goes from the south east to north east Lima urban districts passing downtown (This is \"Villa El Salvador\" to \"San Juan de Lurigancho\"). The second line (called Linea 2) is now under construction and will run from the port of \"Callao\" to \"Ate\" passing downtown too (west to east).(2015).\nHuancayo Metro is the second urban rail line in Peru, is located in the Andean city of Huancayo and is currently under construction (2012).\nHighways.\n&lt;br&gt;\"total:\"\n&lt;br&gt;\"paved:\"\n45,000\u00a0km (Of which approximately 350\u00a0km of divided multi-line roads)\n&lt;br&gt;\"unpaved:\"\n40,900\u00a0km (1999 est.)\nThe Pan-American Highway runs the country from north to south next to the coast, from Tumbes (Ecuadoran border) to Tacna (Chilean border). From Arequipa a branch goes to Puno and then to Bolivia. Other important highways in Peru are the \"Longitudinal de la Sierra\", that goes from north to south in the highlands; and the \"Carretera Central\", that goes from Lima (in the coast) to Pucallpa (in the jungle).\nLong distance buses.\nInter-city travel in Peru is almost exclusively done in long-distance buses. Buses in most of the cities depart from bus terminals called \"terminal terrestre\". The main bus companies that link Lima with the major cities include Cruz del Sur and Orme\u00f1o. Other companies are \"Civa\" and \"Oltursa\"., while the full list of carriers include Transported Libertad and Turismo Mer, among others.\nWaterways.\n of navigable tributaries of Amazon system and of Lake Titicaca.\nThere are river boat service from Yurimaguas and Pucallpa to Iquitos, and from there to the Brazilian border in the Amazon River. Touristic boats can be reached at Puno in Lake Titicaca.\nPorts and harbors.\nPortuary administration in Peru is carried out by the National Port Authority.\nMerchant marine.\n&lt;br&gt;\"total:\"\n7 ships (\u00a0gross tonnage\u00a0(GT) or over) totaling \u00a0GT/\u00a0tonnes deadweight (DWT)\n&lt;br&gt;\"ships by type:\" (1999 est.)\nAirports and airlines.\nAccording to a 1999 estimate there are 234 airports in Peru. Jorge Chavez International Airport, in Lima is Peru's main national and international gateway, with an estimate of 98 percent of all international flights into Peru landing at this airport. Other important airports are located in Cusco, Arequipa, Iquitos and Piura.\nAirports \u2013 with paved runways:\n&lt;br&gt;\"total:\"\n44\n&lt;br&gt;\"over 3,047 m:\"\n7\n&lt;br&gt;\"2,438 to 3,047 m:\"\n17\n&lt;br&gt;\"1,524 to 2,437 m:\"\n12\n&lt;br&gt;\"914 to 1,523 m:\"\n7\n&lt;br&gt;\"under 914 m:\"\n1 (1999 est.)\nAirports \u2013 with unpaved runways:\n&lt;br&gt;\"total:\"\n190\n&lt;br&gt;\"over 3,047 m:\"\n1\n&lt;br&gt;\"2,438 to 3,047 m:\"\n2\n&lt;br&gt;\"1,524 to 2,437 m:\"\n26\n&lt;br&gt;\"914 to 1,523 m:\"\n67\n&lt;br&gt;\"under 914 m:\"\n94 (1999 est.)\nInternational airlines connecting Peru with North America, Europe and other Latin American countries include: Delta Air Lines, American Airlines, United Airlines, Air Canada, Iberia, Air France, KLM, LATAM Airlines, Avianca, AeroMexico, and British Airways.\n&lt;br&gt; with domestic service in Peru include LAN Peru, Star Peru, Peruvian Airlines, and LC Per\u00fa. Charter and Cargo airlines include ATSA, Andes Air and Cielos Airlines.\n include Aero Continente, AeroPer\u00fa and Faucett.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23438", "revid": "49364228", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23438", "title": "Peruvian Armed Forces", "text": "Combined military services of Peru\nThe Peruvian Armed Forces () are the military services of Peru, comprising independent Army, Navy and Air Force components. Their primary mission is to safeguard the country's independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity against any threat. As a secondary mission they participate in economic and social development as well as in civil defence tasks.\nThe National Police of Peru is often classified as a part of the armed forces. Although in fact it has a different organisation and a wholly civil mission, its training and activities over more than two decades as an anti-terrorist force have produced markedly military characteristics, giving it the appearance of a virtual fourth military service with significant land, sea and air capabilities and approximately 140,000 personnel. The Peruvian armed forces report through the Ministry of Defence, while the National Police of Peru report through the Ministry of Interior.\nHistory.\n19th century.\nThe Peruvian Army was officially established on 18 August 1821 when the Peruvian Guard Legion was established by the government of general Jos\u00e9 de San Mart\u00edn during the Peruvian War of Independence. San Mart\u00edn would found the Peruvian Navy months later on 8 October 1821.\nThe first international conflict fought by the newly formed republic was the Gran Colombia-Peru War, a maritime and terrestrial conflict against the state of the Gran Colombia, which was formed by the current-day states of Colombia, Ecuador, Panama and Venezuela. In early 1828, an incursion of Colombian troops in Bolivia sent by Simon Bolivar with the objective of gaining a foothold and influence in the country, forced Peru to launch a campaign against Bolivia to successfully force the Colombian expeditionary force to leave the country. Furious, Bolivar resolved to declare war against Peru on June 3, 1828, with former president of Bolivia Antonio Jose de Sucre being appointed Commander of the Colombian Army. The Peruvian Navy immediately proceeded to occupy and establish blockades along the Gran Colombia coasts, winning the first confrontation in the Battle of Punta Malpelo, forcing the Colombians to retreat. Victorious, the Peruvian navy set its sights on the strategic port of Guayaquil and proceeded to attack it at the Battle of Cruces, which saw the destruction of the Grancolombian pacific fleet and the naval blockade of the city of Guayaquil until the end of the conflict. In the land, the ties were more balanced, with the outnumbered Peruvian Army seizing the city of Cuenca on the Battle of Saraguro on February 13, 1829, and pushing north near Guayaquil. However, Venezuelan general De Sucre inflicted a defeat on the Peruvians at the Battle of Tarqui. The vastly outnumbered 900 Peruvian infantrymen were forced to retreat against the approaching 4,500 Grancolombian counterattack force in order to evade an encirclement. After the battle, Peru adopted a defensive strategy, establishing defensive lines along the Jaen and Maynas, which were claimed by the Grancolombians and one of their motivations for the war. After a series of skirmishes, the Peruvian army was able to hold those provinces, but had to end the occupation of Guayaquil. On February 28, 1829, Peruvian president La Mar and Sucre signed the La Mar-Sucre convention, which ended hostilities but left the borders on an ambiguous state. Yet, this was seen as a political win by the Peruvians, as holding these provinces opened the way of annexation, which would later be the cause of several Peruvian-Ecuadorian wars after the dissolution of the Gran Colombia in 1830.\nThe next major conflict faced Peru against the newly independent state of Ecuador in the Ecuadorian-Peruvian War (1857-1860), the first of the main conflicts between these two countries. \nThe conflict originated due to the international debt Ecuador, as the Gran Colombia, had to take from European creditors, mainly British, after the war of independence from Spain. Wanting to find a source of income, finances minister Francisco de Paula gave the creditors rights to several territories in the forest, some of them over disputed lands with Peru. This caused a Peruvian protest, as the controversy of the lands, specifically of the northern half of the Department of Loreto in Peru was a major point of contention first with the Gran Colombia, and then with Ecuador and Colombia. Ecuador reinstated its sovereign over the lands north of the Amazon, and assured British creditors of their rights over that territory. Thus, on October 26, 1858, the Peruvian congress authorized president Ram\u00f3n Castilla to command and army against Ecuador if needed to secure the national territory against European creditors. A blockade against Ecuadorian ports was also preferred. On November 1, 1858, the first Peruvian frigate arrived in Ecuadorian waters, and the start of the blockade of Guayaquil and Quito started. By this time, Ecuador was facing an internal crisis, called by Ecuadorian history books as the \u201cTerrible Year\u201d, in which a number of different politicians were fighting for control of the country as its coasts were in the middle of a blockade. Receiving no response from an unified Ecuadorian government, Castilla ordered 5,000 of his troops to advance into the Ecuadorian province of \u201cMapasingue\u201d, near Guayaquil, in order to force Ecuador to accept the Peruvians terms and to abandon its desires on the Amazon. Force by military action, the four governments vying for control of Ecuador selected caudillo Guillermo Franco as the sole representative of the country, signing the Treaty of Mapasingue with Castilla, thus agreeing to the Peruvian terms and stating the withdrawal of Peruvian troops from Ecuador. This angered the Ecuadorians, which called Franco as a traitor for collaborating with the Peruvians, and ousted him in the Battle of Guayaquil. This action strengthened the Peruvian position on the Amazon, which would not be challenged until the next century. \nThe War of the Pacific, a conflict between the Bolivia-Peru alliance and Chile resulted with one of the armed forces' worst failures as Chilean troops occupied the capital of Lima and the southern provinces, with Peru ceding the mineral-rich Arica Province to Chile after signing the Treaty of Anc\u00f3n and later treaties. The incompetence of the government and military was so great during the War of the Pacific period that it led to an intellectual movement dedicated to restoring pride for Peru, creating modern Peruvian nationalism.\n20th century.\nOn 20 May 1929, the Peruvian Air Force was created as the Peruvian Aviation Corps when the aviation units of the army and navy merged. Following World War II and the Ecuadorian\u2013Peruvian War, the Joint Command of the Armed Forces of Peru was created in 1957 after observations were made that the branches needed a centralized organization to coordinate the activities of the branches.\nWhen the government of Manuel Prado Ugarteche attempted to move political power to civilians, the military became upset with the new approach. In addition, the 1962 Peruvian general election saw the rise of the American Popular Revolutionary Alliance, with the armed forces and traditional aristocrats viewing their platform of land reform and the political inclusion of the indigenous peoples of Peru as a threat. After Fernando Bela\u00fande, a presidential candidate in election, raised concerns of electoral fraud, the military would support Bela\u00fande and would commit the 1962 Peruvian coup d'\u00e9tat against President Prado.\nThe Revolutionary Government of the Armed Forces of Peru led the nation following the 1968 Peruvian coup d'\u00e9tat, first headed by Juan Velasco Alvarado, who instituted left-wing policies that included nationalizing the economy and enacting the Peruvian Agrarian Reform. During the Revolutionary Government, the nation's debt increased heavily as a result of excessive borrowing and the 1970s energy crisis. Following the \"Tacnazo\" and subsequent overthrow of Velasco in 1975, Francisco Morales Berm\u00fadez would lead the Revolutionary Government until 1980, with his military government participating in the political repression of leftists during Operation Condor.\nDuring the government of Alan Garc\u00eda, the nation would begin to begin to experience hyperinflation and increased the beginning of the internal conflict in Peru with Shining Path. The armed force's perception that President Garcia's policies were detrimental to the nation resulted with the creation of \"Plan Verde\", a clandestine military operation that involved the genocide of impoverished and indigenous Peruvians, the control or censorship of media in the nation and the establishment of a neoliberal economy controlled by a military junta in Peru. A coup initially included in the plan was opposed by Anthony C. E. Quainton, the United States Ambassador to Peru. Military planners also decided against the coup as they expected Mario Vargas Llosa, a neoliberal candidate, to be elected in the 1990 Peruvian general election. Vargas Llosa later reported that Ambassador Quainton, personally told him that allegedly leaked documents of the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) purportedly being supportive of the candidacy of his opponent, Alberto Fujimori, were authentic, with Rend\u00f3n writing that the United States supported Fujimori because of his relationship with Vladimiro Montesinos, who had previously been charged with spying on the Peruvian armed forces for the CIA.\nFujimori was elected president of Peru in 1990, planning a coup with his military handlers during his next two years in office, with Fujimori becoming a figurehead leader and adopting many of the objectives of \"Plan Verde\" following the 1992 Peruvian self-coup. During the Fujimori administration, Montesinos would assume control of the government and placed weak officers as branch heads in order to maintain control, with every military branch's leader being personally filled by Montesinos. During this time, the armed forces' Grupo Colina death squad would kill dozens during various massacres in Peru and the military would participate in the Cenepa War against Ecuador in 1995.\n21st century.\nFollowing the downfall of Fujimori and Montesinos, the use of the \"terruqueo\" in the beginning of the twenty-first century was used to influence the public instead of violence performed by the military, though its use would provide impunity to members of the armed forces who violently responded to protests in the nation. Following the 2022 Peruvian political crisis, widespread protests occurred throughout Peru; the armed forces performed human rights violations against demonstrators and the politicization of the armed forces created concerns about the creation of a civilian-military government in Peru.\nService branches.\nJoint Command.\nThe Joint Command of the Armed Forces is tasked with the mission to \"plan, prepare, coordinate and conduct military operations and actions to guarantee independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity and support the national development of Peru\". This branch of the armed forces was developed in the 1950s following World War II, when Peru evaluated operational tactics used and adapted them to their own military. On 1 February 1957, the Joint Command was created following a commission of defense agencies studied its role, with the Joint Command depending directly on the President of Peru while also being \"the highest step in the planning and coordination of the operations of the Army, Navy and Aeronautics Forces\".\nArmy.\nHeadquartered in Lima, it has a strength of 90,000 troops divided in four military regions with headquarters in Piura, Lima, Arequipa and Iquitos. Every military region is assigned several brigades of which there are different types, including infantry, cavalry and armored. There are also several groups and battalions which operate independently of the army's organization.\nThe equipment of the Peruvian Army includes infantry weapons that include rifles and carbines such as the M16A2 and the M4A1 and pistols like the FN Five-seveN and Smith &amp; Wesson M&amp;P9.\nVehicles include several types of tanks (T-55 and AMX-13), armoured personnel carriers (M-113, UR-416), artillery (D30, M101, M109 and M114 howitzers), antiaircraft systems (ZSU-23-4 Shilka) and helicopters (Mil Mi-2, Mil Mi-17). Recently, Peru has sought to update their collection of tanks and armored personnel carriers that have not been updated since acquiring vehicles from the Soviet Union. After an initial deal with China fell through, Peru has attempted to make a deal with General Dynamics to purchase new military vehicles.\nNavy.\nThe Peruvian Navy (\"Marina de Guerra del Per\u00fa\") is organized in five naval zones headquartered in Piura, Lima, Arequipa, Iquitos and Pucallpa. It has a strength of around 25,988 troops divided between the Pacific Operations and the Amazon Operations General Commands and the Coast Guard.\nThe Pacific fleet flagship is the guided-missile cruiser BAP \"Almirante Grau\" (FM-53), named for the 19th-century Peruvian Admiral who fought in the War of the Pacific (1879\u20131883). The fleet also includes 7 \"Lupo\" class frigates (two built in Peru), 6 \"PR-72P\" class corvettes, 2 \"Pohang\"-class corvettes, several amphibious ships, 2 \"Type 209/1100\" and 4 \"Type 209/1200\" class German-built diesel submarines (the biggest submarine force in South America), as well as patrol vessels, tankers and cargo ships. The Peruvian Navy also has a naval aviation force, several naval infantry battalions and special forces units.\nMarines.\nThe Peruvian Marines date back to 6 November 1821, when the Peruvian Navy requested a battalion of soldiers. Its first battle was an attack on the Spanish, successfully taking the city of Arica (today Tacna). Into the mid-20th century, the Peruvian Marines modernized their equipment and by the 1980s with the Shining Path emerging as a new threat to Peru, the Marines began to be tasked with counterterrorism operations.\nAs part of the Peruvian Navy, the Peruvian Marines utilize the equipment and logistics of the Navy. Various Marine battalions are based in Anc\u00f3n, Iquitos, Mollendo, Pucallpa, Puno and Tumbes. The Peruvian Marines also have a Special Forces composed of the Esp\u00edritus Negros and Fuerza Delta, based on the American Delta Force and US Army Rangers.\nAir Force.\nOn May 20, 1929, the aviation divisions of the Peruvian army and navy were merged into the Peruvian Aviation Corps (CAP, \"Cuerpo de Aviaci\u00f3n del Peru\"). In 1950, the corps was reorganized again and became the Peruvian Air Force (FAP, \"Fuerza A\u00e9rea del Per\u00fa\").\nThe Peruvian Air Force is divided into six wing areas, headquartered in Piura, Chiclayo, Lima, Arequipa, Rioja and Iquitos. With a strength of 17,969 troops, the FAP counts in its arsenal with MiG-29 (interceptor) and Mirage 2000 (interdictor / multirole aircraft).\nIt also has Su-25 close-support aircraft, Mi-25 attack helicopters, Mi-17 transport helicopters, Aermacchi MB-339, Embraer EMB-312 Tucano subsonic training aircraft, and the Cessna A-37B for light attack and COIN missions.\nIn 1995, the FAP took part in the Cenepa War against Ecuador covering operations by the army and navy. After the war, the FAP began acquiring new aircraft, especially MiG-29 fighters and Su-25 close air support aircraft which are, along with the Mirage 2000 fighters, the main combat elements of the FAP.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23439", "revid": "50550835", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23439", "title": "Foreign relations of Peru", "text": " \nThe foreign relations of Peru are managed by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. is an important first-tier state in South America, Peru has been a member of the United Nations since 1945, and Peruvian Javier P\u00e9rez de Cu\u00e9llar served as UN Secretary General from 1981 to 1991. Former President Alberto Fujimori's tainted re-election to a third term in June 2000 strained Peru's relations with the United States and with many Latin American and European countries, but relations improved with the installation of an interim government in November 2000 and the inauguration of Alejandro Toledo in July 2001.\nPeru is planning full integration into the Andean Free Trade Area. In addition, Peru is a standing member of APEC and the World Trade Organization, and is an active participant in negotiations toward a Free Trade Area of the Americas (FTAA).\nDiplomatic relations.\nList of countries which Peru maintains diplomatic relations with:\nTransnational issues.\nIllicit drugs.\nUntil recently the world's largest coca leaf producer, Peru has reduced the area of coca under cultivation from 115,300 ha to\n38,700 ha, or 66%, between 1995 and 1999; most of cocaine base is shipped to neighboring Colombia, Bolivia, and Brazil for processing into cocaine for the international drug market, but exports of finished cocaine are increasing by maritime conveyance to Mexico, US, and Europe.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23440", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23440", "title": "Philippines", "text": "Archipelagic country in Southeast Asia\nThe Philippines, officially known as the Republic of the Philippines, is an archipelagic country in Southeast Asia. Located in the western Pacific Ocean, it consists of 7,641 islands, with a total area of roughly 300,000 square kilometers, which are broadly categorized in three main geographical divisions from north to south: Luzon, Visayas, and Mindanao. With a population of over 112 million, it is the world's fourteenth-most-populous country.\nThe Philippines is bounded by the South China Sea to the west, the Philippine Sea to the east, and the Celebes Sea to the south. It shares maritime borders with Taiwan to the north, Japan and the Korean Peninsula to the northeast, Palau to the east and southeast, Indonesia to the south, Malaysia to the southwest, Vietnam to the west, and China to the northwest. It has diverse ethnicities and a rich culture. Manila is the country's capital, and its most populated city is Quezon City. Both are within Metro Manila.\nNegritos, the archipelago's earliest inhabitants, were followed by waves of Austronesian peoples. The adoption of animism, Hinduism with Buddhist influence, and Islam established island-kingdoms. Extensive overseas trade with neighbors such as the late Tang or Song empire brought Chinese people to the archipelago as well, which would also gradually settle in and intermix over the centuries. The arrival of the explorer Ferdinand Magellan marked the beginning of Spanish colonization. In 1543, Spanish explorer named the archipelago in honor of King Philip II. Catholicism became the dominant religion, and Manila became the western hub of trans-Pacific trade. Hispanic immigrants from Latin America and Iberia would also selectively colonize. The Philippine Revolution began in 1896, and became entwined with the 1898 Spanish\u2013American War. Spain ceded the territory to the United States, and Filipino revolutionaries declared the First Philippine Republic. The ensuing Philippine\u2013American War ended with the United States controlling the territory until the Japanese invasion of the islands during World War II. After the United States retook the Philippines from the Japanese, the Philippines became independent in 1946. Since then, the country notably experienced a period of martial law from 1972 to 1981 under the dictatorship of Ferdinand Marcos and his subsequent overthrow by the People Power Revolution in 1986, returning to democracy.\nThe Philippines is an emerging market and a developing and newly industrialized country, whose economy is transitioning from being agricultural to service- and manufacturing-centered. It has a variety of natural resources and a globally-significant level of biodiversity. The country is also part of multiple international organizations and forums, mainly in ASEAN. Despite its fast economic growth, it continues to struggle with inequality, widespread corruption, and vulnerability to natural disasters due to its location within the Pacific Ring of Fire, and to the equator, making it prone to earthquakes, monsoon rains, and typhoons.\nEtymology.\nDuring his 1542 expedition, Spanish explorer Ruy L\u00f3pez de Villalobos named the islands of Leyte and Samar \" after the Prince of Asturias, later Philip\u00a0II of Castile. Eventually, the name \" would be used for the archipelago's Spanish possessions. Other names, such as \" (Western Islands), \" (Eastern Islands), Ferdinand Magellan's name, and \"\" (Islands of St. Lazarus), were used by the Spanish to refer to islands in the region before Spanish rule was established.\nDuring the Philippine Revolution, the Malolos Congress proclaimed it the (the Philippine Republic). American colonial authorities referred to the country as the Philippine Islands (a translation of the Spanish name). The United States began changing its nomenclature from \"the Philippine Islands\" to \"the Philippines\" in the Philippine Autonomy Act and the Jones Law. The official title \"Republic of the Philippines\" was included in the 1935 constitution as the name of the future independent state, and in all succeeding constitutional revisions.\nHistory.\nPrehistory (pre\u2013900).\nThere is evidence of early hominins living in what is now the Philippines as early as 709,000 years ago. Bones from Callao Cave potentially represent an otherwise unknown species, \"Homo luzonensis\", who lived 50,000 to 67,000 years ago. The oldest modern human remains on the islands are from the Tabon Caves of Palawan, U/Th-dated to 47,000 \u00b1 11\u201310,000 years ago. Tabon Man is presumably a Negrito, among the archipelago's earliest inhabitants descended from the first human migrations out of Africa via the coastal route along southern Asia to the now-sunken landmasses of Sundaland and Sahul.\nThe first Austronesians reached the Philippines from Taiwan around 2200 BC, settling the Batanes Islands (where they built stone fortresses known as \"ijangs\") and northern Luzon. Jade artifacts have been dated to 2000 BC, with lingling-o jade items made in Luzon with raw materials from Taiwan. By 1000 BC, the inhabitants of the archipelago had developed into four societies: hunter-gatherer tribes, warrior societies, highland plutocracies, and port principalities.\nEarly states (900\u20131565).\nThe earliest known surviving written record in the Philippines is the 900 AD Laguna Copperplate Inscription, which was written in Old Malay using the early Kawi script. By the 14th century, several large coastal settlements emerged as trading centers and became the focus of societal changes. Some polities had exchanges with other states throughout Asia.3 Trade with China began during the late Tang dynasty, and expanded during the Song dynasty. Throughout the second millennium AD, some polities were part of the tributary system of China.3 With extensive trade and diplomacy, this brought Southern Chinese merchants and migrants from Southern Fujian, who would gradually settle and intermix in the Philippines. Indian cultural traits such as linguistic terms and religious practices began to spread in the Philippines during the 14th century, via the Indianized Hindu Majapahit Empire. By the 15th century, Islam was established in the Sulu Archipelago and spread from there.\nPolities founded in the Philippines between the 10th and 16th centuries include Maynila, Tondo, Namayan, Pangasinan, Caboloan, Cebu, Butuan, Maguindanao, Lanao, Sulu, and Ma-i. The early polities typically had a three-tier social structure: nobility, freemen, and dependent debtor-bondsmen.3 Among the nobility were leaders known as datus, who were responsible for ruling autonomous groups (barangays or dulohan). When the barangays banded together to form a larger settlement or a geographically looser alliance,3 their more-esteemed members would be recognized as a \"paramount datu\", rajah or sultan, and would rule the community. Population density is thought to have been low during the 14th to 16th centuries due to the frequency of typhoons and the Philippines' location on the Pacific Ring of Fire. Portuguese explorer Ferdinand Magellan arrived in 1521, claimed the islands for Spain, and was killed by Lapulapu's men in the Battle of Mactan.\nSpanish and American colonial rule (1565\u20131934).\nUnification and colonization by the Crown of Castile began when Spanish explorer Miguel L\u00f3pez de Legazpi arrived from New Spain in 1565. Many Filipinos were brought to New Spain as slaves and forced crew, whereas many Latin Americans were brought to the Philippines as soldiers and colonists. The Philippines hosts the only Latin American established districts in Asia. Spanish Manila became the capital of the Captaincy General of the Philippines and the Spanish East Indies in 1571, Spanish territories in Asia and the Pacific. The Spanish invaded local states using the principle of divide and conquer, bringing most of what is the present-day Philippines under one unified administration.\nDisparate barangays were deliberately consolidated into towns, where Catholic missionaries could more easily convert their inhabitants to Christianity, which was initially Syncretist. Christianization by the Spanish friars occurred mostly across the settled lowlands over the course of time. From 1565 to 1821, the Philippines was governed as a territory of the Mexico City-based Viceroyalty of New Spain; it was then administered from Madrid after the Mexican War of Independence. Manila became the western hub of trans-Pacific trade by Manila galleons built in Bicol and Cavite.\nDuring its rule, Spain spent a significant sum of its treasury quelling indigenous revolts and defending against external military attacks, including Moro piracy, a 17th-century war against the Dutch, 18th-century British occupation of Manila, and conflict with Muslims in the south.\nAdministration of the Philippines was considered a drain on the economy of New Spain, and abandoning it or trading it for other territory was debated. This course of action was opposed because of the islands' economic potential, security, and the desire to continue religious conversion in the region. The colony survived on an annual subsidy from the Spanish crown averaging 250,000 pesos, usually paid as 75 tons of silver bullion from the Americas. British forces occupied Manila from 1762 to 1764 during the Seven Years' War. Spanish rule was restored with the 1763 Treaty of Paris. The Spanish considered their war with the Muslims in Southeast Asia an extension of the \"Reconquista\". The Spanish\u2013Moro conflict lasted for several hundred years. Spain conquered portions of Mindanao and Jolo during the last quarter of the 19th century, and the Muslim Moro in the Sultanate of Sulu acknowledged Spanish sovereignty.\nPhilippine ports opened to world trade during the 19th century, and Filipino society began to change. Social identity changed, with the term \"Filipino\" encompassing all residents of the archipelago instead of solely referring to Spaniards born in the Philippines.\nRevolutionary sentiment grew in 1872 after 200 locally recruited colonial troops and laborers alongside three activist Catholic priests were executed on questionable grounds. This inspired the Propaganda Movement, organized by Marcelo H. del Pilar, Jos\u00e9 Rizal, Graciano L\u00f3pez Jaena, and Mariano Ponce, which advocated political reform in the Philippines. Rizal was executed on December 30, 1896, for rebellion, and his death radicalized many who had been loyal to Spain. Attempts at reform met with resistance; Andr\u00e9s Bonifacio founded the Katipunan secret society, which sought independence from Spain through armed revolt, in 1892.\nThe Katipunan Cry of Pugad Lawin began the Philippine Revolution in 1896. Internal disputes led to the Tejeros Convention, at which Bonifacio lost his position and Emilio Aguinaldo was elected the new leader of the revolution. The 1897 Pact of Biak-na-Bato resulted in the Hong Kong Junta government in exile. The Spanish\u2013American War began the following year, and reached the Philippines; Aguinaldo returned, resumed the revolution, and declared independence from Spain on June 12, 1898. In December 1898, the islands were ceded by Spain to the United States with Puerto Rico and Guam after the Spanish\u2013American War. Spain ruled the Philippines for 333 years.\nThe First Philippine Republic was promulgated on January 21, 1899. Lack of recognition by the United States led to an outbreak of hostilities that, after refusal by the U.S. on-scene military commander of a cease-fire proposal and a declaration of war by the nascent Republic, escalated into the Philippine\u2013American War.\nThe war resulted in the deaths of 250,000 to 1\u00a0million civilians, primarily due to famine and disease. Many Filipinos were transported by the Americans to concentration camps, where thousands died. After the fall of the First Philippine Republic in 1902, an American civilian government was established with the Philippine Organic Act. American forces continued to secure and extend their control of the islands, suppressing an attempted extension of the Philippine Republic, securing the Sultanate of Sulu, establishing control of interior mountainous areas which had resisted Spanish conquest, and encouraging large-scale resettlement of Christians in once-predominantly-Muslim Mindanao.\nCommonwealth and World War II (1935\u20131946).\nCultural developments in the Philippines strengthened a national identity,12 and Tagalog began to take precedence over other local languages. Governmental functions were gradually given to Filipinos by the Taft Commission; the 1934 Tydings\u2013McDuffie Act granted a ten-year transition to independence through the creation of the Commonwealth of the Philippines the following year, with Manuel Quezon president and Sergio Osme\u00f1a vice president. Quezon's priorities were defence, social justice, inequality, economic diversification, and national character. Filipino (a standardized variety of Tagalog) became the national language, women's suffrage was introduced, and land reform was considered. The introduction of women's suffrage during the Commonwealth period (1935\u20131946) signifies a progressive step towards gender equality in the Philippines. This gave women the right to vote and participate in the country's political processes.\nThe Empire of Japan invaded the Philippines in December 1941 during World War II, and the Second Philippine Republic was established as a puppet state governed by Jose P. Laurel. Beginning in 1942, the Japanese occupation of the Philippines was opposed by large-scale underground guerrilla activity. Atrocities and war crimes were committed during the war, including the Bataan Death March and the Manila massacre. The Philippine resistance and Allied troops defeated the Japanese in 1944 and 1945. Over one\u00a0million Filipinos were estimated to have died by the end of the war. On October 11, 1945, the Philippines became a founding member of the United Nations. On July 4, 1946, during the presidency of Manuel Roxas, the country's independence was recognized by the United States with the Treaty of Manila.\nIndependence (1946\u2013present).\nEfforts at post-war reconstruction and ending the Hukbalahap Rebellion succeeded during Ramon Magsaysay's presidency, but sporadic communist insurgency continued to flare up long afterward. Under Magsaysay's successor, Carlos P. Garcia, the government initiated a Filipino First policy which promoted Filipino-owned businesses. Succeeding Garcia, Diosdado Macapagal moved Independence Day from July 4 to June 12\u2014the date of Emilio Aguinaldo's declaration\u2014 and pursued a claim on eastern North Borneo.\nIn 1965, Macapagal lost the presidential election to Ferdinand Marcos. Early in his presidency, Marcos began infrastructure projects funded mostly by foreign loans; this improved the economy, and contributed to his reelection in 1969. Near the end of his last constitutionally-permitted term, Marcos declared martial law on September 21, 1972 using the specter of communism and began to rule by decree; the period was characterized by political repression, censorship, and human rights violations. Monopolies controlled by Marcos's cronies were established in key industries, including logging and broadcasting; a sugar monopoly led to a famine on the island of Negros. With his wife, Imelda, Marcos was accused of corruption and embezzling billions of dollars of public funds. Marcos's heavy borrowing early in his presidency resulted in economic crashes, exacerbated by an early 1980s recession where the economy contracted by 7.3 percent annually in 1984 and 1985.\nOn August 21, 1983, opposition leader Benigno Aquino Jr. (Marcos's chief rival) was assassinated on the tarmac at Manila International Airport. Marcos called a snap presidential election in 1986 which proclaimed him the winner, but the results were widely regarded as fraudulent. The resulting protests led to the People Power Revolution, which forced Marcos and his allies to flee to Hawaii. Aquino's widow, Corazon, was installed as president and a new constitution was promulgated.\nThe return of democracy and government reforms which began in 1986 were hampered by national debt, government corruption, and coup attempts. A communist insurgency and military conflict with Moro separatists persisted; the administration also faced a series of disasters, including the eruption of Mount Pinatubo in June 1991. Aquino was succeeded by Fidel V. Ramos, who liberalized the national economy with privatization and deregulation. Ramos's economic gains were overshadowed by the onset of the 1997 Asian financial crisis. His successor, Joseph Estrada, prioritized public housing but faced corruption allegations which led to his overthrow by the 2001 EDSA Revolution and the succession of Vice President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo on January 20, 2001.\nArroyo's nine-year administration was marked by economic growth, but was tainted by corruption and political scandals, including electoral fraud allegations during the 2004 presidential election. Economic growth continued during Benigno Aquino III's administration, which advocated good governance and transparency. Aquino III signed a peace agreement with the Moro Islamic Liberation Front (MILF) resulting in the Bangsamoro Organic Law establishing an autonomous Bangsamoro region, but a shootout with MILF rebels in Mamasapano delayed passage of the law.\nGrowing public frustration with post-EDSA governance led to the 2016 election of populist Rodrigo Duterte, whose presidency saw the decline of liberalism in the country albeit largely retaining liberal economic policies. Among Duterte's priorities was aggressively increasing infrastructure spending to spur economic growth; the enactment of the Bangsamoro Organic Law; an intensified crackdown on crime and communist insurgencies; and an anti-drug campaign that reduced drug proliferation but that has also led to extrajudicial killings. In early 2020, the COVID-19 pandemic reached the Philippines, necessitating nationwide lockdowns that caused a brief but severe economic recession. Under a promise of continuing Duterte's policies, Marcos's son, Bongbong Marcos, ran with Duterte's daughter, Sara, and won the 2022 election. Marcos's renewal of a pro-US foreign policy, however, has been viewed as a reversal of Duterte's cordiality with China, and territorial disputes in the South China Sea have since escalated. The Marcos administration also arrested his predecessor Duterte, who was sent to the International Criminal Court in The Netherlands for trial of crimes against humanity, which led to the collapse of the Marcos-Duterte alliance. Later on, a series of corruption, mismanagement and irregularities in government-funded flood management projects occurred under his administration, resulting in numerous protests nationwide.\nGeography.\nThe Philippines is an archipelago of approximately 7,641 islands, covering a total area (including inland bodies of water) of about .15 Stretching north to south, from the South China Sea to the Celebes Sea, the Philippines is bordered by the Philippine Sea to the east, and the Sulu Sea to the southwest. The country's 11 largest islands are Luzon, Mindanao, Samar, Negros, Palawan, Panay, Mindoro, Leyte, Cebu, Bohol and Masbate, about 95 percent of its total land area. The Philippines' coastline measures , the world's fifth-longest, and the country's exclusive economic zone covers .\nIts highest mountain is Mount Apo on Mindanao, with an altitude of above sea level. The Philippines' longest river is the Cagayan River in northern Luzon, which flows for about . Manila Bay, on which is the capital city of Manila, is connected to Laguna de Bay (the country's largest lake) by the Pasig River.\nOn the western fringes of the Pacific Ring of Fire, the Philippines has frequent seismic and volcanic activity. The region is seismically active, and has been constructed by plates converging towards each other from multiple directions. About five earthquakes are recorded daily, although most are too weak to be felt. The last major earthquakes were in 1976 in the Moro Gulf and in 1990 on Luzon. The Philippines has 23 active volcanoes; of them, Mayon, Taal, Canlaon, and Bulusan have the largest number of recorded eruptions.\nThe country has valuable mineral deposits as a result of its complex geologic structure and high level of seismic activity. It is thought to have the world's second-largest gold deposits (after South Africa), large copper deposits, and the world's largest deposits of palladium. The country's gold production in 2015 is 21 metric tonnes. Other minerals include chromium, nickel, molybdenum, platinum, and zinc. However, poor management and law enforcement, opposition from indigenous communities, and past environmental damage have left these resources largely untapped.\nBiodiversity.\nThe Philippines is a megadiverse country, with some of the world's highest rates of discovery and endemism (67 percent). With an estimated 13,500 plant species in the country (3,500 of which are endemic), Philippine rain forests have an array of flora: about 3,500 species of trees, 8,000 flowering plant species, 1,100 ferns, and 998 orchid species have been identified. The Philippines has 167 terrestrial mammals (102 endemic species), 235 reptiles (160 endemic species), 99 amphibians (74 endemic species), 686 birds (224 endemic species), and over 20,000 insect species.\nAs an important part of the Coral Triangle ecoregion, Philippine waters have unique, diverse marine life and the world's greatest diversity of shore-fish species. The country has over 3,200 fish species, 121 endemic. Philippine waters sustain the cultivation of fish, crustaceans, oysters, and seaweeds.\nEight major types of forests are distributed throughout the Philippines: dipterocarp, beach forest, pine forest, molave forest, lower montane forest, upper montane (or mossy forest), mangroves, and ultrabasic forest. According to official estimates, the Philippines had of forest cover in 2023. Logging had been systemized during the American colonial period and deforestation continued after independence, accelerating during the Marcos presidency due to unregulated logging concessions. Forest cover declined from 70 percent of the Philippines' total land area in 1900 to about 18.3 percent in 1999. Rehabilitation efforts have had marginal success.\nThe Philippines is a priority hotspot for biodiversity conservation; it has more than 200 protected areas, which was expanded to as of 2023[ [update]]. Three sites in the Philippines have been included on the UNESCO World Heritage List: the Tubbataha Reef in the Sulu Sea, the Puerto Princesa Subterranean River, and the Mount Hamiguitan Wildlife Sanctuary.\nClimate.\nThe Philippines has a tropical maritime climate which is usually hot and humid. There are three seasons: a hot dry season from March to May, a rainy season from June to November, and a cool dry season from December to February. The southwest monsoon (known as the ) lasts from May to October. The northeast monsoon () lasts from November to April.\nThe coolest month is January, and the warmest is May. Temperatures at sea level across the Philippines tend to be in the same range, regardless of latitude. The average annual temperature is around . It is in Baguio, above sea level. The country's average humidity is 82 percent. Annual rainfall is as high as on the mountainous east coast, but less than in some sheltered valleys.\nThe Philippine Area of Responsibility has 19 typhoons in a typical year, usually from July to October. Eight or nine of them make landfall. The wettest recorded typhoon to hit the Philippines dropped in Baguio from July 14 to 18, 1911. The country is among the world's ten most vulnerable to climate change.\nGovernment and politics.\nThe Philippines has a democratic government, a constitutional republic with a presidential system. The president is head of state and head of government, and is the commander-in-chief of the armed forces. The president is elected through direct election by the citizens of the Philippines for a six-year term. The vice president, limited to two consecutive six-year terms, is elected separately from the president. This means the president and vice president may be from different political parties. The president appoints and presides over the cabinet and officials of various national government agencies and institutions. The bicameral Congress is composed of the Senate (the upper house, with members elected to a six-year term) and the House of Representatives (the lower house, with members elected to a three-year term).\nSenators are elected at-large, and representatives are elected from legislative districts and party lists. Judicial authority is vested in the Supreme Court, composed of a chief justice and fourteen associate justices, who are appointed by the president from nominations submitted by the Judicial and Bar Council.\nAttempts to change the government to a federal, unicameral, or parliamentary government have been made since the Ramos administration. Philippine politics tends to be dominated by well-known families, such as political dynasties or celebrities, and party switching is widely practiced. Corruption is significant, attributed by some historians to the Spanish colonial period's padrino system. The Roman Catholic church exerts considerable but waning influence in political affairs, although a constitutional provision for the separation of Church and State exists.\nForeign relations.\nA founding and active member of the United Nations, the Philippines has been a non-permanent member of the Security Council. The country participates in peacekeeping missions, particularly in East Timor. The Philippines is a founding and active member of ASEAN (Association of Southeast Asian Nations) and a member of the East Asia Summit, the Group of 24, and the Non-Aligned Movement. The country has sought to obtain observer status in the Organisation of Islamic Cooperation since 2003, and was a member of SEATO. Over 10\u00a0million Filipinos live and work in 200 countries, giving the Philippines soft power.\nDuring the 1990s, the Philippines began to seek economic liberalization and free trade to help spur foreign direct investment. It is a member of the World Trade Organization8 and the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation. The Philippines entered into the ASEAN Trade in Goods Agreement in 2010 and the Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership free trade agreement (FTA) in 2023. Through ASEAN, the Philippines has signed FTAs with China, India, Japan, South Korea, Australia and New Zealand.15 The country has bilateral FTAs with Japan, South Korea, and four European states: Iceland, Liechtenstein, Norway and Switzerland.\nThe Philippines has a long relationship with the United States, involving economics, security, and interpersonal relations. The Philippines' location serves an important role in the United States' island chain strategy in the West Pacific; a Mutual Defense Treaty between the two countries was signed in 1951, and was supplemented with the 1999 Visiting Forces Agreement and the 2016 Enhanced Defense Cooperation Agreement. The country supported American policies during the Cold War and participated in the Korean and Vietnam wars. In 2003, the Philippines was designated a major non-NATO ally. Under President Duterte, ties with the United States weakened in favor of improved relations with China and Russia. The Philippines relies heavily on the United States for its external defense;11 the U.S. has made regular assurances to defend the Philippines, including the South China Sea.\nSince 1975, the Philippines has valued its relations with China\u2014its top trading partner, and cooperates significantly with the country. Japan is the biggest bilateral contributor of official development assistance to the Philippines; although some tension exists because of World War II, much animosity has faded. Historical and cultural ties continue to affect relations with Spain. Relations with Middle Eastern countries are shaped by the high number of Filipinos working in those countries, and by issues related to the Muslim minority in the Philippines; concerns have been raised about domestic abuse and war affecting the approximately 2.5\u00a0million overseas Filipino workers in the region.\nThe Philippines has claims in the Spratly Islands which overlap with claims by China, Malaysia, Taiwan, and Vietnam. The largest of its controlled islands is Thitu Island, which contains the Philippines' smallest town. The 2012 Scarborough Shoal standoff, after China seized the shoal from the Philippines, led to an international arbitration case which the Philippines eventually won; China rejected the result, and made the shoal a prominent symbol of the broader dispute.\nChina has rejected new Philippine maritime laws aimed at strengthening sovereignty in the South China Sea, stating they infringe on Chinese territorial claims and vowing to defend its interests in contested areas.\nMilitary.\nThe volunteer Armed Forces of the Philippines (AFP) consist of three branches: the Philippine Air Force, the Philippine Army, and the Philippine Navy. Civilian security is handled by the Philippine National Police under the Department of the Interior and Local Government. The AFP had a total manpower of around 280,000 as of 2022[ [update]], of which 130,000 were active military personnel, 100,000 were reserves, and 50,000 were paramilitaries.\nIn 2023, , 1.4 percent of GDP, was spent on the Philippine military. Most of the country's defense spending is on the Philippine Army, which leads operations against internal threats such as communist and Muslim separatist insurgencies; its preoccupation with internal security contributed to the decline of Philippine naval capability which began during the 1970s. A military modernization program began in 1995 and expanded in 2012 to build a more capable defense system.\nThe Philippines has long struggled against local insurgencies, separatism, and terrorism. Bangsamoro's largest separatist organizations, the Moro National Liberation Front and the Moro Islamic Liberation Front, signed final peace agreements with the government in 1996 and 2014 respectively. Other, more-militant groups such as Abu Sayyaf and Bangsamoro Islamic Freedom Fighters have kidnapped foreigners for ransom, particularly in the Sulu Archipelago and Maguindanao, but their presence has been reduced.\nThe Communist Party of the Philippines (CPP) and its military wing, the New People's Army (NPA), have been waging guerrilla warfare against the government since the 1970s and have engaged in ambushes, bombings, and assassinations of government officials and security forces; although shrinking militarily and politically after the return of democracy in 1986, the CPP-NPA, through the National Democratic Front of the Philippines, continues to gather public support in urban areas by setting up communist fronts, infiltrating sectoral organizations, and rallying public discontent and increased militancy against the government. The Philippines ranked 104th out of 163 countries in the 2024 Global Peace Index.\nAdministrative divisions.\nThe Philippines is divided into 18 regions, 82 provinces, 149 cities, 1,493 municipalities, and 42,011 barangays. Regions other than Bangsamoro are divided for administrative convenience. Calabarzon was the region with the greatest population as of 2020[ [update]]. The National Capital Region (NCR) was the most densely populated.\nThe Philippines is a unitary state, with the exception of the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao (BARMM). There have been steps towards decentralization. A 1991 law devolved some powers to local governments.\nEconomy.\nThe Philippine economy is the world's 34th largest, with an estimated 2025[ [update]] nominal gross domestic product of . As a newly industrialized country, the Philippine economy has been transitioning from an agricultural base to one with more emphasis on services and manufacturing. The country's labor force was around 50\u00a0million as of 2023[ [update]], and its unemployment rate was 3.1 percent. Gross international reserves totaled as of January\u00a02024[ [update]]. Debt-to-GDP ratio decreased to 60.2 percent at the end of 2023 from a 17-year high 63.7 percent at the end of the third quarter of that year, and indicated resiliency during the COVID-19 pandemic. The country's unit of currency is the Philippine peso (\u20b1 or PHP).\nThe Philippines is a net importer, and a debtor nation. As of 2020[ [update]], the country's main export markets were China, the United States, Japan, Hong Kong, and Singapore; primary exports included integrated circuits, office machinery and parts, electrical transformers, insulated wiring, and semiconductors. Its primary import markets that year were China, Japan, South Korea, the United States, and Indonesia. Major export crops include coconuts, bananas, and pineapples; it is the world's largest producer of abaca, and was the world's second biggest exporter of nickel ore in 2022, as well as the biggest exporter of gold-clad metals and the biggest importer of copra in 2020.\nWith an average annual growth rate of six to seven percent since around 2010, the Philippines has emerged as one of the world's fastest-growing economies, driven primarily by its increasing reliance on the service sector. Regional development is uneven, however, with Manila (in particular) gaining most of the new economic growth. Remittances from overseas Filipinos contribute significantly to the country's economy; they reached a record in 2023, accounting for 8.5 percent of GDP. The Philippines is the world's primary business process outsourcing (BPO) center. About 1.3\u00a0million Filipinos work in the BPO sector, primarily in customer service.\nScience and technology.\nThe Philippines has one of the largest agricultural-research systems in Asia, despite relatively low spending on agricultural research and development. The country has developed new varieties of crops, including rice, coconuts, and bananas. Research organizations include the Philippine Rice Research Institute and the International Rice Research Institute.\nThe Philippine Space Agency maintains the country's space program, and the country bought its first satellite in 1996. Diwata-1, its first micro-satellite, was launched on the United States' Cygnus spacecraft in 2016.\nThe Philippines has a high concentration of cellular-phone users, and a high level of mobile commerce. Text messaging is a popular form of communication, and the nation sent an average of one\u00a0billion SMS messages per day in 2007. The Philippine telecommunications industry had been dominated by the PLDT-Globe Telecom duopoly for more than two decades, and the 2021 entry of Dito Telecommunity improved the country's telecommunications service. The Philippines was ranked 50th in the Global Innovation Index in 2025.\nTourism.\nThe Philippines is a popular retirement destination for foreigners because of its climate and low cost of living. The country's main tourist attractions are its numerous beaches; the Philippines is also a top destination for diving enthusiasts. Tourist spots include Boracay, called the best island in the world by \"Travel + Leisure\" in 2012; Coron and El Nido in Palawan; Cebu; Siargao, and Bohol.\nTourism contributed 5.2 percent to the Philippine GDP in 2021 (lower than 12.7 percent in 2019, before the COVID-19 pandemic), and provided 5.7\u00a0million jobs in 2019. The Philippines attracted 5.45\u00a0million international visitors in 2023, 30 percent lower than the 8.26 million record in pre-pandemic 2019; most tourists came from South Korea (26.4 percent), United States (16.5 percent), Japan (5.6 percent), Australia (4.89 percent), and China (4.84 percent).\nInfrastructure.\nTransportation.\nTransportation in the Philippines is by road, air, rail and water. Roads are the dominant form of transport, carrying 98 percent of people and 58 percent of cargo. In December 2018, there were of roads in the country. The backbone of land-based transportation in the country is the Pan-Philippine Highway, which connects the islands of Luzon, Samar, Leyte, and Mindanao. Inter-island transport is by the Strong Republic Nautical Highway, an integrated set of highways and ferry routes linking 17 cities. Jeepneys are a popular, iconic public utility vehicle; other public land transport includes buses, UV Express, TNVS, Filcab, taxis, and tricycles. Traffic is a significant issue in Manila and on arterial roads to the capital.\nDespite wider historical use, rail transportation in the Philippines is limited to transporting passengers within Metro Manila and the provinces of Laguna and Quezon, with a short track in the Bicol Region. The country had a railway footprint of only as of 2019[ [update]], which it planned to expand to . A revival of freight rail is planned to reduce road congestion.\nThe Philippines had 90 national government-owned airports as of 2022[ [update]], of which eight are international. Ninoy Aquino International Airport, formerly known as Manila International Airport, has the greatest number of passengers. The 2017 air domestic market was dominated by Philippine Airlines, the country's flag carrier and Asia's oldest commercial airline, and Cebu Pacific (the country's leading low-cost carrier).\nA variety of boats are used throughout the Philippines; most are double-outrigger vessels known as \"banca\" or . Modern ships use plywood instead of logs, and motor engines instead of sails; they are used for fishing and inter-island travel. The Philippines has over 1,800 seaports; of these, the principal seaports of Manila (the country's chief, and busiest, port), Batangas, Subic Bay, Cebu, Iloilo, Davao, Cagayan de Oro, General Santos, and Zamboanga are part of the ASEAN Transport Network.\nEnergy.\nThe Philippines had a total installed power capacity of 26,882 MW in 2021; 43 percent was generated from coal, 14 percent from oil, 14 percent hydropower, 12 percent from natural gas, and seven percent from geothermal sources. It is the world's third-biggest geothermal-energy producer, behind the United States and Indonesia. The country's largest dam is the San Roque Dam on the Agno River in Pangasinan. The Malampaya gas field, discovered in the early 1990s off the coast of Palawan, reduced the Philippines' reliance on imported oil; it provides about 40 percent of Luzon's energy requirements, and 30 percent of the country's energy needs.\nThe Philippines has three electrical grids, one each for Luzon, Visayas, and Mindanao. The National Grid Corporation of the Philippines manages the country's power grid since 2009 and provides overhead transmission lines across the country's islands. Electric distribution to consumers is provided by privately owned distribution utilities and government-owned electric cooperatives. As of end-2021, the Philippines' household electrification level was about 95.41%.\nPlans to harness nuclear energy began during the early 1970s during the presidency of Ferdinand Marcos in response to the 1973 oil crisis. The Philippines completed Southeast Asia's first nuclear power plant in Bataan in 1984. Political issues following Marcos' ouster and safety concerns after the 1986 Chernobyl disaster prevented the plant from being commissioned, and plans to operate it remain controversial.\nWater supply and sanitation.\nWater supply and sanitation outside Metro Manila is provided by the government through local water districts in cities or towns. Metro Manila is served by Manila Water and Maynilad Water Services. Except for shallow wells for domestic use, groundwater users are required to obtain a permit from the National Water Resources Board. In 2022, the total water withdrawals increased to from in 2021 and the total expenditures on water were amounted to \u20b1144.81\u00a0billion.\nMost sewage in the Philippines flows into septic tanks. In 2015, the Joint Monitoring Programme for Water Supply and Sanitation noted that 74 percent of the Philippine population had access to improved sanitation and \"good progress\" had been made between 1990 and 2015. Ninety-six percent of Filipino households had an improved source of drinking water and 92 percent of households had sanitary toilet facilities as of 2016[ [update]]; connections of toilet facilities to appropriate sewerage systems remain largely insufficient, however, especially in rural and urban poor communities.46\nDemographics.\nIn July 2024, the Philippines had a population of 112,729,484. More than 60 percent of the country's population live in the coastal zone. In 2020, 54 percent lived in urban areas. Manila, its capital, and Quezon City, the country's most populous city, are in Metro Manila. About 13.48\u00a0million people, percent of the Philippines' population, live in Metro Manila, the country's most populous metropolitan area and the world's fifth most populous. Between 1948 and 2010, the population of the Philippines increased almost fivefold, from 19\u00a0million to 92\u00a0million.\nThe country's median age is 25.3, and 63.9 percent of its population is between 15 and 64 years old. The Philippines' average annual population growth rate is decreasing, although government attempts to further reduce population growth have been contentious. The country reduced its poverty rate from 49.2 percent in 1985, to 18.1 percent in 2021. The Philippines' income inequality began to decline in 2012.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Largest_cities/styles.css\" /&gt;\nEthnicity.\nThe Philippines has substantial ethnic diversity, due to foreign influence and the archipelago's division by water and topography. In the 2020 census, the Philippines' largest ethnic groups were Tagalog (26.0 percent), Visayans [excluding the Cebuano, Hiligaynon, and Waray] (14.3 percent), Ilocano and Cebuano (both eight percent), Hiligaynon (7.9 percent), Bikol (6.5 percent), and Waray (3.8 percent). The country's indigenous peoples consisted of 110 enthnolinguistic groups, with a combined population of 15.56\u00a0million, in 2020. They include the Igorot, Lumad, Mangyan, and the indigenous peoples of Palawan.\nNegritos are thought to be among the islands' earliest inhabitants. These minority aboriginal settlers are an Australoid group, a remnant of the first human migration from Africa to Australia who were probably displaced by later waves of migration. Some Philippine Negritos have a Denisovan admixture in their genome. Ethnic Filipinos generally belong to several Southeast Asian ethnic groups, classified linguistically as Austronesians speaking Malayo-Polynesian languages.\nThe Austronesian population's origin is uncertain, but relatives of Taiwanese aborigines probably brought their language and mixed with the region's existing population. The Lumad and Sama-Bajau ethnic groups have an ancestral affinity with the Austroasiatic and Mlabri-speaking Htin peoples of mainland Southeast Asia. Westward expansion of Papuan ancestry from Papua New Guinea to eastern Indonesia and Mindanao has been detected in the Blaan people and the Sangir language, while ancient immigration added some Indian ancestry to the precolonial Indianized kingdoms of the islands.\nImmigrants arrived in the Philippines from elsewhere in the Spanish Empire, especially from the Spanish Americas. A 2016 National Geographic project concluded that people living in the Philippine archipelago carried genetic markers in the following percentages: 53 percent Southeast Asia and Oceania, 36 percent Eastern Asia, 5 percent Southern Europe, 3 percent Southern Asia, and 2 percent Native American (from Latin America).\nDescendants of mixed-race couples are known as Mestizos or , which during the Spanish colonial times, were mostly composed of Chinese mestizos (), Spanish mestizos () and the mix thereof (). The modern Chinese Filipinos are well-integrated into Filipino society. Primarily the descendants of immigrants from Fujian, the pure ethnic Chinese Filipinos during the American colonial era (early 1900s) purportedly numbered about 1.35\u00a0million; while an estimated 22.8\u00a0million (around 20 percent) of Filipinos have half or partial Chinese ancestry from precolonial, colonial, and 20th century Chinese migrants. During the Hispanic era (late 1700s), the tribute-census showed that mixed Spanish Filipinos made up a moderate ratio (around 5 percent) of all citizens. Meanwhile, a smaller proportion (2.33 percent) of the population were Mexican Filipinos. Almost 300,000 American citizens live in the country as of 2023[ [update]], this increased to 750,000 by year 2025, (forming 0.75% of the demographics) and up to 250,000 Amerasians, (0.25% of the country), are in the cities of Clark, Angeles, Manila, and Olongapo (When combined, American and Amerasian descent, form 1% of the population). Other significant non-indigenous minorities include Indians and Arabs. Japanese Filipinos include escaped Christians (Kirishitan) who fled persecutions by Shogun Tokugawa Ieyasu.\nLanguages.\n\"Ethnologue\" lists 186 languages for the Philippines, 182 of which are living languages. The other four no longer have any known speakers. Most native languages are part of the Philippine branch of the Malayo-Polynesian languages, which is a branch of the Austronesian language family. Spanish-based creole varieties, collectively known as Chavacano, are also spoken. Many Philippine Negrito languages have unique vocabularies which survived Austronesian acculturation.\nFilipino and English are the country's official languages. Filipino, a standardized version of Tagalog, is spoken primarily in Metro Manila. Filipino and English are used in government, education, print, broadcast media, and business, often with a third local language. Code-switching between English and other local languages, notably Tagalog, is common. The Philippine constitution provides for Spanish and Arabic on a voluntary, optional basis. Spanish, a widely used lingua franca during the late nineteenth century, has declined greatly in use, although Spanish loanwords are still present in Philippine languages. Arabic is primarily taught in Mindanao Islamic schools.\nIn 2020, the top languages generally spoken at home were Tagalog, Binisaya, Hiligaynon, Ilocano, Cebuano, and Bikol. Nineteen regional languages are auxiliary official languages as media of instruction:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nOther indigenous languages, including Cuyonon, Ifugao, Itbayat, Kalinga, Kamayo, Kankanaey, Masbate\u00f1o, Romblomanon, Manobo, and several Visayan languages, are used in their respective provinces. Filipino Sign Language is the national sign language, and the language of deaf education.\nReligion.\nAlthough the Philippines is a secular state with freedom of religion, an overwhelming majority of Filipinos consider religion very important and irreligion is very low. Christianity is the dominant religion followed by about 89 percent of the population. The country had the world's third-largest Roman Catholic population as of 2013[ [update]], and was Asia's largest Christian nation.\nCensus data from 2020 found that 78.8 percent of the population professed Roman Catholicism. Other Christian denominations include , the Philippine Independent Church, and Seventh-day Adventism. Protestants made up about 5% to 7% of the population in 2010. The Philippines sends many Christian missionaries around the world, and is a training center for foreign priests and nuns.\nIslam is the country's second-largest religion, with 6.4 percent of the population in the 2020 census. Most Muslims live in Mindanao and nearby islands, and most adhere to the Shafi'i school of Sunni Islam.\nAbout 0.2 percent of the population follow indigenous religions, whose practices and folk beliefs are often syncretized with Christianity and Islam. Buddhism is practiced by about 0.04% of the population, primarily by Filipinos of Chinese descent.\nHealth.\nHealth care in the Philippines is provided by the national and local governments, although private payments account for most healthcare spending. Per-capita health expenditure in 2024 was \u20b1 and health expenditures were 5.9 percent of the country's GDP. The 2023 budget allocation for healthcare was . The 2019 enactment of the Universal Health Care Act by President Duterte facilitated the automatic enrollment of all Filipinos in the national health insurance program. Since 2018, Malasakit Centers (one-stop shops) have been set up in several government-operated hospitals to provide medical and financial assistance to indigent patients.\nAverage life expectancy in the Philippines as of 2023[ [update]] is 70.48 years (66.97 years for males, and 74.15 years for females). Access to medicine has improved due to increasing Filipino acceptance of generic drugs.58 The country's leading causes of death in 2021 were ischaemic heart diseases, cerebrovascular diseases, COVID-19, neoplasms, and diabetes. Communicable diseases are correlated with natural disasters, primarily floods. One million Filipinos have active tuberculosis, the fourth highest global prevalence rate.\nThe Philippines has 1,387 hospitals, 33 percent of which are government-run; 23,281 barangay health stations, 2,592 rural health units, 2,411 birthing homes, and 659 infirmaries provide primary care throughout the country. Since 1967, the Philippines had become the largest global supplier of nurses; seventy percent of nursing graduates go overseas to work, causing problems in retaining skilled practitioners.\nEducation.\nPrimary and secondary schooling in the Philippines consists of six years of elementary period, four years of junior high school, and two years of senior high school. Public education, provided by the government, is free at the elementary and secondary levels and at most public higher-education institutions. Science high schools for talented students were established in 1963. The government provides technical-vocational training and development through the Technical Education and Skills Development Authority. In 2004, the government began offering alternative education to out-of-school children, youth, and adults to improve literacy; madaris were mainstreamed in 16 regions that year, primarily in Mindanao Muslim areas under the Department of Education. Catholic schools, which number more than 1,500, and higher education institutions are an integral part of the educational system.\nThe Philippines has 1,975 higher education institutions as of 2019[ [update]], of which 246 are public and 1,729 are private. Public universities are non-sectarian, and are primarily classified as state-administered or local government-funded. The national university is the eight-school University of the Philippines (UP) system. The country's top-ranked universities are the University of the Philippines Diliman, Ateneo de Manila University, De La Salle University, and University of Santo Tomas.\nIn 2019[ [update]], the Philippines had a basic literacy rate of 93.8 percent of those five years old or older, and a functional literacy rate of 91.6 percent of those aged 10 to 64. Education, a significant proportion of the national budget, was allocated from the 2023 budget. As of 2023[ [update]], the country has 1,640 public libraries affiliated with the National Library of the Philippines.\nCulture.\nThe Philippines has significant cultural diversity, reinforced by the country's fragmented geography. Spanish and American cultures profoundly influenced Filipino culture as a result of long colonization. The cultures of Lumads of Mindanao and the Sulu Archipelago developed distinctly, since they had limited Spanish influence and more influence from nearby Islamic regions. Indigenous groups such as the Igorots have preserved their precolonial customs and traditions by resisting the Spanish. A national identity emerged during the 19th century, however, with shared national symbols and cultural and historical touchstones.\nHispanic legacies includes the dominance of Catholicism, a creole language, numerous loanwords, the endangered Philippine Spanish, arts, architecture, literature, drama, food, music, dance, fashion and the prevalence of Spanish names and surnames, which resulted from an 1849 edict ordering the systematic distribution of family names and the implementation of Spanish naming customs; the names of many locations also have Spanish origins. American influence on modern Filipino culture is evident in the use of English, and Filipino consumption of fast food and American films and music.\nPublic holidays in the Philippines are classified as regular or special. Festivals are primarily religious, and most towns and villages have such a festival (usually to honor a patron saint). Better-known festivals include Ati-Atihan, Dinagyang, Moriones, Sinulog, and Flores de Mayo\u2014a month-long devotion to the Virgin Mary held in May. The country's Christmas season begins as early as September 1, and Holy Week is a solemn religious observance for its Christian population.\nValues.\nFilipino values are rooted primarily in personal alliances based in kinship, obligation, friendship, religion (particularly Christianity), and commerce. They center around social harmony through , motivated primarily by the desire for acceptance by a group. Reciprocity through (a debt of gratitude) is a significant Filipino cultural trait, and an internalized debt can never be fully repaid. The main sanction for divergence from these values are the concepts of (shame) and loss of (self-esteem).\nThe family is central to Philippine society; norms such as loyalty, maintaining close relationships and care for elderly parents are ingrained in Philippine society. Respect for authority and the elderly is valued, and is shown with gestures such as and the honorifics and and (older brother) or (older sister). Other Filipino values are optimism about the future, pessimism about the present, concern about other people, friendship and friendliness, hospitality, religiosity, respect for oneself and others (particularly women), and integrity.\nArt and architecture.\nPhilippine art combines indigenous folk art, east-Asian and Classical traditions. During the Spanish colonial period, art was used to spread Catholicism mainly through paintings and sculptures. The first recorded sculptor in the Philippines is Juan de los Santos (1590 \u20131660) known for making retablos. In 1821, Damian Domingo, the father of Filipino paintings, opened the \"Academia de Dibujo\" art school in Binondo. Other artists during Spanish colonial rule included painters such as Josef Luciano Dans, Jose Honorato Lozano, Mariano Asuncion and sculptors such as Isabelo Tampinco and Crispulo Hocson. Artist whose works drew attention to the Philippines are Juan Luna and F\u00e9lix Resurrecci\u00f3n Hidalgo. Fernando Amorsolo dominated Philippine paintings during the American colonial period, popular for his pastoral scenes of Philippine countryside. Victorio Edades known as the father of Modern Philippine Art, popularized Modernism in the Philippines in 1920s and 1930s.\nTraditional Philippine architecture has two main models: the indigenous and the , which developed under Spanish rule. Some regions, such as Batanes, differ slightly due to climate; limestone was used as a building material, and houses were built to withstand typhoons.\nSpanish architecture left an imprint in town designs around a central square or , but many of its buildings were damaged or destroyed during World War II. Several Philippine churches adapted baroque architecture to withstand earthquakes, leading to the development of Earthquake Baroque; four baroque churches have been listed as a collective UNESCO World Heritage Site. Spanish colonial fortifications () in several parts of the Philippines were primarily designed by missionary architects and built by Filipino stonemasons. Vigan, in Ilocos Sur, is known for its Hispanic-style houses and buildings.\nAmerican rule introduced new architectural styles in the construction of government buildings and Art Deco theaters. During the American period, construction of Gabaldon school buildings began, and some city planning using architectural designs and master plans by Daniel Burnham was done in portions of Manila and Baguio. Part of the Burnham plan was the construction of government buildings reminiscent of Greek or Neoclassical architecture. Buildings from the Spanish and American periods can be seen in Iloilo, especially in Calle Real.\nMusic and dance.\nThere are two types of Philippine folk dance, stemming from traditional indigenous influences and Spanish influence. Although native dances had become less popular, folk dancing began to revive during the 1920s. The Cari\u00f1osa, a Hispanic Filipino dance, is unofficially considered the country's national dance. Popular indigenous dances include the Tinikling and Singkil, which include the rhythmic clapping of bamboo poles. Present-day dances vary from delicate ballet to street-oriented breakdancing.\nRondalya music, with traditional mandolin-type instruments, was popular during the Spanish era. Spanish-influenced musicians are primarily bandurria-based bands with 14-string guitars. Kundiman developed during the 1920s and 1930s. The American colonial period exposed many Filipinos to U.S. culture and popular music. Rock music was introduced to Filipinos during the 1960s and developed into Filipino rock (or Pinoy rock), a term encompassing pop rock, alternative rock, heavy metal, punk, new wave, ska, and reggae. Martial law in the 1970s produced Filipino folk rock bands and artists who were at the forefront of political demonstrations. The decade also saw the birth of the Manila sound and Original Pilipino Music (OPM). Filipino hip-hop, which originated in 1979, entered the mainstream in 1990. Karaoke is also popular. From 2010 to 2020, Pinoy pop (P-pop) was influenced by K-pop and J-pop.\nLocally produced theatrical drama became established during the late 1870s. Spanish influence around that time introduced plays (with music) and s, with dance. The plays became popular throughout the country, and were written in a number of local languages. American influence introduced vaudeville and ballet. Realistic theatre became dominant during the 20th century, with plays focusing on contemporary political and social issues.\nLiterature.\nPhilippine literature consists of works usually written in Filipino, Spanish, or English. Some of the earliest well-known works were created from the 17th to the 19th\u00a0centuries. They include , an epic about an eponymous magical bird, and by Tagalog author Francisco Balagtas. Jos\u00e9 Rizal wrote the novels and , both of which depict the injustices of Spanish colonial rule.\nFolk literature was relatively unaffected by colonial influence until the 19th century due to Spanish indifference. Most printed literary works during Spanish colonial rule were religious in nature, although Filipino elites who later learned Spanish wrote nationalistic literature. The American arrival began Filipino literary use of English and influenced the development of the Philippine comics industry that flourished from the 1920s through the 1970s. In the late 1960s, during the presidency of Ferdinand Marcos, Philippine literature was influenced by political activism; many poets began using Tagalog, in keeping with the country's oral traditions.\nPhilippine mythology has been handed down primarily through oral tradition; popular figures are Maria Makiling, Lam-ang, and the Sarimanok. The country has a number of folk epics. Wealthy families could preserve transcriptions of the epics as family heirlooms, particularly in Mindanao; the Maranao-language \"Darangen\" is an example.\nMedia.\nPhilippine media primarily uses Filipino and English, although broadcasting has shifted to Filipino. Television shows, commercials, and films are regulated by the Movie and Television Review and Classification Board. Most Filipinos obtain news and information from television, the Internet, and social media. The country's flagship state-owned broadcast-television network is the People's Television Network (PTV). ABS-CBN and GMA, both free-to-air, were the dominant TV networks; before the May 2020 Philippine government denial of ABS-CBN's franchise renewal, it was the country's largest network. Philippine television dramas, known as s and mainly produced by ABS-CBN and GMA, are also seen in several other countries.\nLocal film-making began in 1919 with the release of the first Filipino-produced feature film: (\"A Girl from the Country\"), directed by Jose Nepomuceno.8 Production companies remained small during the silent film era, but sound films and larger productions emerged in 1933. The postwar 1940s to the early 1960s are considered a high point for Philippine cinema. The 1962\u20131971 decade saw a decline in quality films, although the commercial film industry expanded until the 1980s. Critically acclaimed Philippine films include (\"Miracle\") and (\"Gold, Silver, Death\"), both released in 1982. Since the turn of the 21st century, the country's film industry has struggled to compete with larger-budget foreign films (particularly Hollywood films). Art films have thrived, however, and several indie films have been successful domestically and abroad.\nThe Philippines has a large number of radio stations and newspapers. English broadsheets are popular among executives, professionals and students. Less-expensive Tagalog tabloids, which grew during the 1990s, are popular (particularly in Manila); however, overall newspaper readership is declining in favor of online news. The top three newspapers, by nationwide readership and credibility, are the \"Philippine Daily Inquirer\", \"Manila Bulletin\", and \"The Philippine Star\". Although freedom of the press is protected by the constitution, the country was listed as the seventh-most-dangerous country for journalists in 2022 by the Committee to Protect Journalists due to 13 unsolved murders of journalists.\nThe Philippine population are the world's top Internet users. In early 2021, 67 percent of Filipinos (73.91\u00a0million) had Internet access; the overwhelming majority used smartphones.\nCuisine.\nFrom its Malayo-Polynesian origins, traditional Philippine cuisine has evolved since the 16th century. It was primarily influenced by Hispanic, Chinese, and American cuisines, which were adapted to the Filipino palate. Filipinos tend to prefer robust flavors, centered on sweet, salty, and sour combinations. Regional variations exist throughout the country; rice is the general staple starch but cassava is more common in parts of Mindanao. Adobo is the unofficial national dish. Other popular dishes include \"lech\u00f3n\", \"kare-kare\", \"sinigang\", \"pancit\", \"lumpia\", and \"arroz caldo\". Traditional desserts are (rice cakes), which include \"puto\", \"suman\", and \"bibingka\". Ingredients such as calamansi, \"ube\", and \"pili\" are used in Filipino desserts. The generous use of condiments such as \"patis\", \"bagoong\", and \"toyo\" impart a distinctive Philippine flavor.\nUnlike other East or Southeast Asian countries, most Filipinos do not eat with chopsticks; they use spoons and forks. Traditional eating with the hands or fingers (known as ) had been used in less urbanized areas, but has been popularized with the introduction of Filipino food to foreigners and city residents.\nSports and recreation.\nBasketball, played at the amateur and professional levels, is considered the country's most popular sport. Other popular sports include boxing and billiards, boosted by the achievements of Manny Pacquiao and Efren Reyes. The national martial art is Arnis. (cockfighting) is popular entertainment, especially among Filipino men, and was documented by the Magellan expedition. Video gaming and esports are emerging pastimes, with the popularity of indigenous games such as \"patintero\", \"tumbang preso\", \"luksong tinik\", and \"piko\" declining among young people.\nThe men's national football team has participated in one Asian Cup. The women's national football team qualified for the 2023 FIFA Women's World Cup, their first World Cup, in January 2022. The Philippines has participated in every Summer Olympic Games since 1924, except when they supported the American-led boycott of the 1980 Summer Olympics. It was the first tropical nation to compete at the Winter Olympic Games, debuting in 1972. In 2021, the Philippines received its first-ever Olympic gold medal with weightlifter Hidilyn Diaz's victory in Tokyo.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23441", "revid": "37110517", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23441", "title": "History of the Philippines", "text": "The history of the Philippines dates from the earliest hominin activity in the archipelago at least by 709,000 years ago. \"Homo luzonensis\", a species of archaic humans, was present on the island of Luzon at least by 134,000 years ago. The earliest known anatomically modern human was from Tabon Caves in Palawan dating about 47,000 years. Negrito groups were the first inhabitants to settle in the prehistoric Philippines. These were followed by Austroasiatics, Papuans, and Austronesians. By around 3000 BCE, seafaring Austronesians, who form the majority of the current population, migrated southward from Taiwan.\nScholars generally believe that these ethnic and social groups eventually developed into various settlements or polities with varying degrees of economic specialization, social stratification, and political organization. Some of these settlements (mostly those located on major river deltas) achieved such a scale of social complexity that some scholars believe they should be considered early states. This includes the predecessors of modern-day population centers such as Manila, Tondo, Pangasinan, Cebu, Panay, Bohol, Butuan, Cotabato, Lanao, Zamboanga and Sulu as well as some polities, such as Ma-i, whose possible location is either Mindoro or Laguna. These polities were influenced by Islamic, Indian, and Chinese cultures. Islam arrived from Arabia, while Indian Hindu-Buddhist religion, language, culture, literature and philosophy arrived from the Indian subcontinent . Some polities were Sinified tributary states allied to China. These small maritime states flourished from the 1st millennium. These kingdoms traded with what are now called China, India, Japan, Thailand, Vietnam, and Indonesia. The remainder of the settlements were independent barangays allied with one of the larger states. These small states alternated from being part of or being influenced by larger Asian empires like the Ming dynasty, Majapahit and Brunei or rebelling and waging war against them.\nThe first recorded visit by Europeans is Ferdinand Magellan's expedition, which landed in Homonhon Island, now part of Guiuan, Eastern Samar, on March 17, 1521. They lost a battle against the army of Lapulapu, chief of Mactan, where Magellan was killed. The Spanish Philippines began with the Pacific expansion of New Spain and the arrival of Miguel L\u00f3pez de Legazpi's expedition on February 13, 1565, from Mexico. He established the first permanent settlement in Cebu. Much of the archipelago came under Spanish rule, creating the first unified political structure known as the Philippines. Spanish colonial rule saw the introduction of Christianity, the code of law, and the oldest modern university in Asia. The Philippines was ruled under the Mexico-based Viceroyalty of New Spain. After this, the colony was directly governed by Spain, following Mexico's independence.\nSpanish rule ended in 1898 with Spain's defeat in the Spanish\u2013American War. The Philippines then became a territory of the United States. U.S. forces suppressed a revolution led by Emilio Aguinaldo. The United States established the Insular Government to rule the Philippines. In 1907, the elected Philippine Assembly was set up with popular elections. The U.S. promised independence in the Jones Act. The Philippine Commonwealth was established in 1935, as a 10-year interim step prior to full independence. However, in 1942 during World War II, Japan occupied the Philippines. The U.S. military overpowered the Japanese in 1945. The Treaty of Manila in 1946 established the independent Philippine Republic.\nPrehistory.\nStone tools and fossils of butchered animal remains discovered in Rizal, Kalinga are evidences of early hominins in the country to as early as 709,000 years. Researchers found 57 stone tools near rhinoceros bones bearing cut marks and some bones smashed open, suggesting that the early humans were after the nutrient-rich marrow. A 2023 study dated the age of fossilized remains of \"Homo luzonensis\" of Cagayan at about 134,000 years.\nThis and the Angono Petroglyphs in Rizal suggest the presence of human settlement before the arrival of the Negritos and Austronesian speaking people. The Callao Man remains and 12 bones of three hominin individuals found by subsequent excavations in Callao Cave were later identified to belong in a new species named \"Homo luzonensis\". For modern humans, the Tabon Man remains are the still oldest known at about 47,000 years.\nThe Negritos were early settlers, but their appearance in the Philippines has not been reliably dated. They were followed by speakers of the Malayo-Polynesian languages, a branch of the Austronesian language family. The first Austronesians reached the Philippines at 3000\u20132200 BCE, settling the Batanes Islands and northern Luzon.\nFrom there, they rapidly spread downwards to the rest of the islands of the Philippines and Southeast Asia, as well as voyaging further east to reach the Northern Mariana Islands by around 1500 BCE. They assimilated the earlier Australo-Melanesian Negritos, resulting in the modern Filipino ethnic groups that all display various ratios of genetic admixture between Austronesian and Negrito groups. Before the expansion out of Taiwan, archaeological, linguistic and genetic evidence had linked Austronesian speakers in Insular Southeast Asia to cultures such as the Hemudu, its successor the Liangzhu and Dapenkeng in Neolithic China.\nThe most widely accepted theory of the population of the islands is the \"Out-of-Taiwan\" model that follows the Austronesian expansion during the Neolithic in a series of maritime migrations originating from Taiwan that spread to the islands of the Indo-Pacific; ultimately reaching as far as New Zealand, Easter Island, and Madagascar. Austronesians themselves originated from the Neolithic rice-cultivating pre-Austronesian civilizations of the Yangtze River delta in coastal southeastern China pre-dating the conquest of those regions by the Han Chinese.\nThis includes civilizations like the Liangzhu culture, Hemudu culture, and the Majiabang culture. It connects speakers of the Austronesian languages in a common linguistic and genetic lineage, including the Taiwanese indigenous peoples, Islander Southeast Asians, Chams, Islander Melanesians, Micronesians, Polynesians, and the Malagasy people. Aside from language and genetics, they also share common cultural markers like multihull and outrigger boats, tattooing, rice cultivation, wetland agriculture, teeth blackening, jade carving, betel nut chewing, ancestor worship, and the same domesticated plants and animals (including dogs, pigs, chickens, yams, bananas, sugarcane, and coconuts).\nA 2021 genetic study examining representatives of 115 indigenous communities found evidence of at least five independent waves of early human migration. Negrito groups, divided between those in Luzon and those in Mindanao, may come from a single wave and diverged subsequently, or through two separate waves. This likely occurred sometime after 46,000 years ago. Another Negrito migration entered Mindanao sometime after 25,000 years ago. Two early East Asian waves were detected, one most strongly evidenced among the Manobo people who live in inland Mindanao, and the other in the Sama-Bajau and related people of the Sulu archipelago, Zamboanga Peninsula, and Palawan. The admixture found in the Sama people indicates a relationship with the Htin and Mlabri people of mainland Southeast Asia, both peoples being speakers of an Austroasiatic language and reflects a similar genetic signal found in western Indonesia. These happened sometime after 15,000 years ago and 12,000 years ago respectively, around the time the last glacial period was coming to an end. Austronesians, either from Southern China or Taiwan, were found to have come in at least two distinct waves. The first, occurring perhaps between 10,000 and 7,000 years ago, brought the ancestors of indigenous groups that today live around the Cordillera Central mountain range. Later migrations brought other Austronesian groups, along with agriculture, and the languages of these recent Austronesian migrants effectively replaced those existing populations. In all cases, new immigrants appear to have mixed to some degree with existing populations. The integration of Southeast Asia into Indian Ocean trading networks around 2,000 years ago also shows some impact, with South Asian genetic signals present within some Sama-Bajau communities. There is also some Papuan migration to Southeast Mindanao as Papuan genetic signatures were detected in the Sangil and Blaan ethnic groups.\nBy 1000 BCE, the inhabitants of the Philippine archipelago had developed into four distinct kinds of peoples: tribal groups, such as the Aetas, Hanunoo, Ilongots and the Mangyan who depended on hunter-gathering and were concentrated in forests; warrior societies, such as the Isneg and Kalinga who practiced social ranking and ritualized warfare and roamed the plains; the petty plutocracy of the Ifugao Cordillera Highlanders, who occupied the mountain ranges of Luzon; and the harbor principalities of the estuarine civilizations that grew along rivers and seashores while participating in trans-island maritime trade. It was also during the first millennium BCE that early metallurgy was said to have reached the archipelagos of maritime Southeast Asia via trade with India\nAround 300\u2013700 CE, the seafaring peoples of the islands traveling in \"balangays\" began to trade with the Indianized kingdoms in the Malay Archipelago and the nearby East Asian principalities, adopting influences from both Buddhism and Hinduism.\nMaritime Jade Road.\nThe Maritime Jade Road was initially established by the animist indigenous peoples between the Philippines and Taiwan, and later expanded to cover Vietnam, Malaysia, Indonesia, Thailand, and other countries. Artifacts made from white and green nephrite have been discovered at a number of archeological excavations in the Philippines since the 1930s. The artifacts have been both tools like adzes and chisels, and ornaments such as lingling-o earrings, bracelets and beads. Tens of thousands were found in a single site in Batangas. The jade is said to have originated nearby in Taiwan and is also found in many other areas in insular and mainland Southeast Asia. These artifacts are said to be evidence of long range communication between prehistoric Southeast Asian societies. Throughout history, the Maritime Jade Road has been known as one of the most extensive sea-based trade networks of a single geological material in the prehistoric world, existing for 3,000 years from 2000 BCE to 1000 CE. The operations of the Maritime Jade Road coincided with an era of near absolute peace which lasted for 1,500 years, from 500 BCE to 1000 CE. During this peaceful pre-colonial period, not a single burial site studied by scholars yielded any osteological proof for violent death. No instances of mass burials were recorded as well, signifying the peaceful situation of the islands. Burials with violent proof were only found from burials beginning in the 15th century, likely due to the newer cultures of expansionism imported from India and China. When the Spanish arrived in the 16th century, they recorded some warlike groups, whose cultures have already been influenced by the imported Indian and Chinese expansionist cultures of the 15th century.\nThe Sa Hu\u1ef3nh culture.\nThe Sa Hu\u1ef3nh culture centered on present-day Vietnam, showed evidence of an extensive trade network. Sa Hu\u1ef3nh beads were made from glass, carnelian, agate, olivine, zircon, gold and garnet; most of these materials were not local to the region, and were most likely imported. Han dynasty-style bronze mirrors were also found in Sa Hu\u1ef3nh sites.\nConversely, Sa Hu\u1ef3nh produced ear ornaments have been found in archaeological sites in Central Thailand, Taiwan (Orchid Island), and in the Philippines, in the Palawan, Tabon Caves. One of the great examples is the Kalanay Cave in Masbate; the artefacts on the site in one of the \"Sa Hu\u1ef3nh-Kalanay\" pottery complex sites were dated 400BCE\u20131500 CE. The Maitum anthropomorphic pottery in the Sarangani Province of southern Mindanao is c. 200 CE.\nAmbiguity of what is Sa Hu\u1ef3nh culture puts into question its extent of influence in Southeast Asia. Sa Hu\u1ef3nh culture is characterized by use of cylindrical or egg-shaped burial jars associated with hat-shaped lids. Using its mortuary practice as a new definition, Sa Hu\u1ef3nh culture should be geographically restricted across Central Vietnam between Hue City in the north and Nha Trang City in the south. Recent archeological research reveals that the potteries in Kalanay Cave are quite different from those of the Sa Hu\u1ef3nh but strikingly similar to those in Hoa Diem site, Central Vietnam and Samui Island, Thailand. New estimate dates the artifacts in Kalanay cave to come much later than Sa Hu\u1ef3nh culture at 200\u2013300 CE. Bio-anthropological analysis of human fossils found also confirmed the colonization of Vietnam by Austronesian people from insular Southeast Asia in, e.g., the Hoa Diem site.\n\"Dates are approximate, consult particular article for details\"\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Legend/styles.css\" /&gt;\u00a0 Prehistoric (or Proto-historic) Iron Age &lt;templatestyles src=\"Legend/styles.css\" /&gt;\u00a0 Historic Iron Age\nPrecolonial period (AD 900 to 1565) \u2013 Independent polities.\nAlso known to a lesser extent as the Pre-Philippines period, is a pre-unification period characterized by many independent states known as polities each with its own history, cultures, chieftains, and governments distinct from each other. According to sources from Southern Liang, people from the kingdom of Langkasuka in present-day Thailand were wearing cotton clothes made in Luzon, Philippines as early as 516\u2013520 CE.\nThe British Historian Robert Nicholl citing Arab chronicler Al Ya'akubi, had written that on the early years of the 800s, the kingdoms of Muja (then Pagan Brunei) and Mayd (Ma-i) waged war against the Chinese Empire. Medieval Indian scholars also referred to the Philippines as \"Panyupayana\" (The lands surrounded by water).\nBy the 1300s, a number of the large coastal settlements had emerged as trading centers, and became the focal point of societal changes. This phase of history can be noted for its highly mobile nature, with barangays transforming from being settlements and turning into fleets and vice versa, with the wood constantly re-purposed according to the situation. Politics during this era was personality-driven and organization was based on shifting alliances and contested loyalties set in a backdrop of constant inter-polity interactions, both through war and peace.\nLegendary accounts often mention the interaction of early Philippine polities with empire, but there is not much archaeological evidence to definitively support such a relationship. Considerable evidence exists, on the other hand, for extensive trade with the empire.\nThe exact scope and mechanisms of Indian cultural influences on early Philippine polities are still the subject of some debate among Southeast Asian historiographers, but the current scholarly consensus is that there was probably little or no direct trade between India and the Philippines, and Indian cultural traits, such as linguistic terms and religious practices, filtered in during the 10th through the early 14th centuries, through early Philippine polities' relations with the empire. The Philippine archipelago is thus one of the countries, just at the outer edge of what is considered the.\nThe early polities of the Philippine archipelago were typically characterized by a three-tier social structure. Although different cultures had different terms to describe them, this three-tier structure invariably consisted of an apex nobility class, a class of \"freemen\", and a class of dependent debtor-bondsmen called.\" Among the members of the nobility class were leaders who held the political office of which was responsible for leading autonomous social groups called. Whenever these banded together, either to form a larger settlement or a geographically looser alliance group, the more senior or respected among them would be recognized as a, variedly called a. Eventually, by the 14th to 16th century, inter-kingdom warfare escalated and population densities across the archipelago was low.\nInitial recorded history.\nDuring the period of the south Indian Pallava dynasty and the north Indian Gupta Empire, Indian culture spread to Southeast Asia and the Philippines that led to the establishment of Indianized kingdoms.\nThe date inscribed in the oldest Philippine document found so far, the Laguna Copperplate Inscription, is 900 CE. From the details of the document, written in Kawi script, the bearer of a debt, Namwaran, along with his children Lady Angkatan and Bukah, are cleared of a debt by the ruler of Tondo. It is the earliest document that shows the use of mathematics in precolonial Philippine societies. A standard system of weights and measures is demonstrated by the use of precise measurement for gold, and familiarity with rudimentary astronomy is shown by fixing the precise day within the month in relation to the phases of the moon. From the various Sanskrit terms and titles seen in the document, the culture and society of Manila Bay was that of a Hindu\u2013Old Malay amalgamation, similar to the cultures of Java, Peninsular Malaysia and Sumatra at the time.\nThere are no other significant documents from this period of precolonial Philippine society and culture until the Doctrina Christiana of the late 16th century, written at the start of the Spanish period in both native Baybayin script and Spanish. Other artifacts with Kawi script and baybayin were found, such as an Ivory seal from Butuan dated to the early 10th\u201314th centuries and the Calatagan pot with baybayin inscription, dated to not later than early 16th century.\nIn the years leading up to 1000, there were already several maritime societies existing in the islands but there was no unifying political state encompassing the entire Philippine archipelago. Instead, the region was dotted by numerous semi-autonomous \"barangays\" (settlements ranging in size from villages to city-states) under the sovereignty of competing thalassocracies ruled by datus, wangs, rajahs, sultans or lakans. or by upland agricultural societies ruled by \"petty plutocrats\". A number of states existed alongside the highland societies of the Ifugao and Mangyan. These included:\nSome of these regions were part of the Malayan empires of Srivijaya, Majapahit and Brunei.\nThe polity of Tondo.\nTondo was a major trade hub on Luzon island in the northern part of the Pasig River delta. The earliest historical record of local polities and kingdoms, the Laguna Copperplate Inscription, indirectly refers to the Tagalog polity of Tondo (c.\u2009before 900\u20131589) and two to three other settlements believed to be located somewhere near Tondo, as well as a settlement near Mt. Diwata in Mindanao, and the temple complex of Medang in Java. Although the precise political relationships between these polities is unclear in the text of the inscription, the artifact is usually accepted as evidence of intra- and inter-regional political linkages as early as 900. By the arrival of the earliest European ethnographers during the 1500s, Tondo was led by the paramount ruler called a \"Lakan\". It had grown into a major trading hub, sharing a monopoly with the Rajahnate of Maynila over the trade of Ming dynasty products throughout the archipelago. This trade was significant enough that the Yongle Emperor appointed a Chinese governor named Ko Ch'a-lao to oversee it.\nSince at least the year 900, this thalassocracy centered in Manila Bay flourished via an active trade with Chinese, Japanese, Malays, and various other peoples in Asia. Tondo thrived as the capital and the seat of power of this ancient kingdom, which was led by kings under the title \"Lakan\" that belongs to the caste of the Maharlika, who were the feudal warrior class in ancient Tagalog society. At its height, they ruled a large part of what is now known as Luzon from Ilocos to Bicol from possibly before 900 CE to 1571, becoming the largest precolonial state. The Spaniards called them \"Hidalgos\".\nThe people of Tondo had developed a culture that is predominantly Hindu and Buddhist, they were also good agriculturists, and lived through farming and aquaculture. During its existence, it grew to become one of the most prominent and wealthy kingdom states in precolonial Philippines due to heavy trade and connections with several neighboring nations such as China and Japan.\nDue to its very good relations with Japan, the Japanese called Tondo as \"Luzon\", even a famous Japanese merchant, Luzon Sukezaemon, went as far as to change his surname from \"Naya\" to Luzon. Japan's interaction with Philippine states have precedence in the 700s when Austronesian peoples like the Hayato and Kumaso settled in Japan and culturally mediated with the locals and their Austronesian kin to the south, served at the Imperial court and sometimes waged battles in Japan. Japan also imported Mishima ware manufactured in Luzon. In 900 CE, the lord-minister Jayadewa presented a document of debt forgiveness to Lady Angkatan and her brother Bukah, the children of Namwaran. This is described in the Philippines' oldest known document, the Laguna Copperplate Inscription.\nThe Chinese also mention a polity called \"Luzon.\" This is believed to be a reference to Maynila since Portuguese and Spanish accounts from the 1520s explicitly state that \"Lu\u00e7on\" and \"Maynila\" were \"one and the same\", although some historians argue that since none of these observers actually visited Maynila, \"Lu\u00e7on\" may simply have referred to all the Tagalog and Kapampangan polities that rose up on the shores of Manila Bay.\nCainta.\nCainta was a fortified upriver polity in present-day Rizal province that occupied both shores of an arm of the Pasig River. The river bisected it in the middle, a moat surrounded its log walls and stone bulwarks armed with native cannons (Lantakas) and the city itself was encased by Bamboo thickets.\nNamayan.\nNamayan, also a Pasig river polity, arose as a confederation of local barangays. Local tradition says that it achieved its peak in the 11th\u201314th centuries. Archeological findings in Santa Ana have produced the oldest evidence of continuous habitation among the Pasig-river polities, pre-dating artifacts found within the historical sites of Maynila and Tondo.\nKumintang.\nKumintang was a large polity around the Calumpang River in modern-day Batangas. According to local tradition, it was ruled by a legendary figure named Gat Pulintan, who refused to be Christianized and settled to the hills to take refuge and continue resistance against Spanish occupation. It became a Spanish town in 1581 and unofficially renamed as Batangan.\nPangasinan.\nPlaces in Pangasinan like Lingayen Gulf were mentioned as early as 1225, when Lingayen as known was Li-ying-tung had been listed in Chao Ju-kua's \"Chu Fan Chih\" (An account of the various barbarians) as one of the trading places along with Mai (Mindoro or Manila). In northern Luzon, Pangasinan) (c.\u20091406\u20131576) sent emissaries to China in 1406\u20131411 as a tributary-state, and it also traded with Japan. Chinese records of this kingdom, named Feng-chia-hsi-lan (Pangasinan), and was notable for its salt-making industry, began when the first tributary King (Wang in Chinese), Kamayin, sent an envoy offering gifts to the Chinese Emperor. The state occupies the current province of Pangasinan. It flourished around the same period, the Srivijaya and Majapahit empires arose in Indonesia which had extended their influence to much of the Malay Archipelago. Pangasinan enjoyed full independence until the Spanish conquest.\nIn the sixteenth century Pangasinan was called the \"Port of Japan\" by the Spanish. The locals wore native apparel typical of other maritime Southeast Asian ethnic groups in addition to Japanese and Chinese silks. Even common people were clad in Chinese and Japanese cotton garments. They also blackened their teeth and were disgusted by the white teeth of foreigners, which were likened to that of animals. Also, used porcelain jars typical of Japanese and Chinese households. Japanese-style gunpowder weapons were also encountered in naval battles in the area. In exchange for these goods, traders from all over Asia would come to trade primarily for gold and slaves, but also for deerskins, civet and other local products. Other than a notably more extensive trade network with Japan and China, they were culturally similar to other Luzon groups to the south.\nMa-i.\nArab chronicler Al Ya'akubi, had written that in the 800s, the kingdoms of Muja (Then Pagan/Hindu Brunei) and Mayd (Ma-i) militarily competed with the Chinese Empire. Volume 186 of the official history of the Song dynasty describes the polity of Ma-i (c.\u2009before 971 \u2013 after 1339). Song dynasty traders visited Ma-i annually, and their accounts described Ma-i's geography, trade products, and the trade behaviors of its rulers. Chinese merchants noted that Ma-i's citizens were honest and trustworthy. Because the descriptions of Mai's location in these accounts are unclear, there is dispute about Mai's location, with some scholars believing it was located in Bay, Laguna, and others believing it was on the island of Mindoro. The Buddhist polity traded with Ryukyu and Japan. Chao Jukua, a customs inspector in Fukien province, China wrote the \"Zhufan Zhi\" (\"Description of the Barbarous Peoples\"). William Henry Scott said, that unlike other Philippine kingdoms or polities which needed backing from the Chinese Imperial Court to attract commerce, the Polity of Ma-i was powerful enough to have no need to send tributes to the Chinese throne. According to commercial receipts, Ma-i's industries specialized in the export of \"kapok cotton, yellow bees-wax, tortoise shell, medicinal betel nuts, and cloth of various patterns.\"\nThe nation of Sandao.\nSandao \"\u4e09\u5d8b\" in Chinese characters, which was also known as Sanyu (\u4e09\u5dbc), was a Prehispanic Filipino nation recorded in Chinese annals as a nation occupying the islands of Jiamayan \u52a0\u9ebb\u5ef6 (present-day Calamian), Balaoyou \u5df4\u59e5\u9149 (present-day Palawan), and Pulihuan \u84b2\u88cf\u559a (near present-day Manila). In the Chinese Gazetteer the Zhufan zhi \u8af8\u8543\u5fd7 (1225), it was described as a vassal-state of the more powerful nation of Ma-i centered in nearby Mindoro.\nThe nation of Pulilu.\nPulilu was a Prehispanic polity centered at Polillo, Quezon and was mentioned in the Chinese Gazeteer Zhufan zhi \u8af8\u8543\u5fd7 (1225). It is described as politically connected to the nation of Sandao \"\u4e09\u5d8b\" at the Calamianes which itself was a vassal-state to the larger country of Ma-i \"\u9ebb\u9038\" centered in Mindoro. Its people were recorded to be warlike, and prone to pillaging and conflict. In this area, the sea is full of coral reefs, which have wavy surfaces that resemble decaying tree trunks or razor blades. Ships going by the reefs must be ready to make sharp maneuvers to avoid them because they are sharper than swords and halberds. Red coral and blue langgan coral are also produced here; however, they are quite difficult to find. It is also similar to the nation of Sandao in local customs and trade products. The chief export of this small polity are rare corals.\nVisayan belligerence against Imperial China.\nWriting in the 13th century, the Chinese historian Chao Ju-Kua mentioned raids conducted by the \"Pi-sho-ye\" on the port cities of southern China between A.D. 1174\u20131190, which he believed came by way of the southern portion of the island of Taiwan. Subsequent historians identified these raiders as Visayans from the Visayas islands while the historian Efren B. Isorena, through analysis of historical accounts and wind currents in the Pacific side of East and Southeast Asia, concluded that said raiders were most likely the people of Ibabao (the precolonial name for the eastern coast and a portion of the northern coast of Samar).\nMadja-as.\nOne theory espoused by some historians is that ten exiled datus of the collapsing empire of Srivijaya led by Datu Puti migrated to the central islands of the Philippines, fleeing from Rajah Makatunaw of the island of Borneo. Upon reaching the island of Panay and purchasing the island from Negrito chieftain Marikudo, they established a confederation of polities and named it Madja-as and they settled the surrounding islands of the Visayas. This is according to Pedro Monetclaro's book Maragtas. However, the actual personage of Rajah Makatunaw was mentioned in earlier Chinese texts about Brunei dating him to 1082, when he was the descendant of Seri Maharaja and he was accompanied by Sang Aji (the ancestor of Sultan Muhammad Shah). There is thus a disparity of dates between the Maragtas Book (based on oral legends) and the Chinese texts. Historian Robert Nicholl also positively identify the pre-Islamic Bruneian Buddhist kingdom of Vijayapura, itself a Bornean tributary of the Srivijaya Empire in Palembang, and in earlier times was a rump state in Sarawak of the fallen Funan Civilization formerly at what is now Cambodia, this was the ancestral homeland of the Visayans of the 10 Datus of Panay. Furthermore, he identified the Rajah Makatunao mentioned in the Maragtas book with Rajah Tugau of the Melano nation centered in Sarawak. Augustinian Friar Rev. Fr. Santaren recorded that Datu Macatunao or Rajah Makatunao who was the \"sultan of the Moros,\" and a relative of Datu Puti who seized the properties and riches of the ten datus was eventually killed by the warriors named Labaodungon and Paybare, using native Filipino and Bornean recruits. This, after learning of this injustice from their father-in-law Paiburong, sailed to Odtojan in Borneo where Makatunaw ruled. The warriors sacked the city, killed Makatunaw and his family, retrieved the stolen properties of the 10 datus, enslaved the remaining population of Odtojan, and sailed back to Panay. Labaw Donggon and his wife, Ojaytanayon, later settled in a place called Moroboro. Afterwards, the datus in Panay, other Visayan islands, and southern Luzon were said to have founded various towns.\nCebu (historical polity).\nThe Kingdom of Cebu was a precolonial state. It was founded by Sri Lumay otherwise known as Rajamuda Lumaya, who was a half Malay half Tamil (South Indian) from Sumatra. The Chinese recorded the name of the Rajahanate of Cebu as 'Sokbu' (\u675f\u52d9) in Hokkien or 'Suwu' in Mandarin. A kingdom of the same name as Suwu was mentioned to have existed as early as the year 1225, according to the Chinese Annals the Zhufan Zhi (\u8af8\u8543\u5fd7) and the later 17th Century Chinese traders to the Philippines referred to Cebu using the same term, it is thus presumed to be the same location. The Indianized royalty of Cebu ruled the native Cebuano people from the Sanskrit-labeled capital, Singhapala which is Sanskrit for \"Lion City\", the same root words as with the modern city-state of Singapore. This rajahnate warred against the 'magalos' (slave traders) of Maguindanao and had an alliance with the Rajahnate of Butuan and Indianized Kutai in South Borneo, before it was weakened by the insurrection of Datu Lapulapu. The kingdom enjoyed the diplomatic recognition of Thailand as observed by Ferdinand Magellan's expedition which noted an embassy borne by a ship from Siam (Thailand) that had landed at the Rajahnate and had tributes meant for Rajah Humabon. Goods exported from Cebu include: rice, millet, panicum, maize, figs, oranges, lemons, sugar-canes, cocos, gourds, ginger, honey, and other such things; also palm-wine and some gold.\nButuan.\nThe official history of the Song dynasty next refers to the Rajahnate of Butuan (c.\u2009before 1001\u20131756) in northeastern Mindanao which is the first polity from the Philippine archipelago recorded as having sent a tribute mission to the Chinese empire\u2014on March 17, 1001, CE. Butuan later attained prominence under the rule of Rajah Sri Bata Shaja. In the year 1011, Rajah Sri Bata Shaja, the monarch of the Indianized Rajahnate of Butuan, a maritime-state famous for its goldwork and metallurgy industry plus its manufacture of musical instruments sent a trade envoy under ambassador Likan-shieh to the Chinese Imperial Court demanding equal diplomatic status with other states. The request being approved, it opened up direct commercial links with the Rajahnate of Butuan and the Chinese Empire thereby diminishing the monopoly on Chinese trade previously enjoyed by their rivals, Tondo and the Champa civilization. Evidence of the existence of this rajahnate is given by the Butuan Silver Paleograph. Researcher Eric Casino, believes the name of the first Rajah mentioned in Chinese records, Rajah Kiling, is not Visayan in origin but rather, Indian, because Kiling refers to the people of India. The Sejarah Melayu (Malay Annals) of the nearby country of Malaysia, refers to the similarly worded Keling as immigrant people from India.\nSanmalan.\nAt the same time as the rise of Butuan was the emergence of Sanmalan. Sanmalan was a precolonial Philippine kingdom on what is now Zamboanga. Known in Chinese records as \"Sanmalan\" \u4e09\u9ebb\u862d. The Chinese chronicled during 982, a tribute from its Rajah or King, Chulan, represented at the imperial court by ambassador Ali Bakti. It transshipped goods from West Asia for local consumption, trading in products like: aromatics, dates, glassware, ivory, peaches, refined sugar, and rose- water. In the 1200s, the Chinese chronicle Zhufan zhi (\u8af8\u8543\u5fd7) recorded its change from a trade emporium to slaving state as Zamboanga began waging war and raiding its neighboring kingdoms in Borneo, Philippines, Sulawesi, and Ternate; for slaves to sell in Java.\nInfluence of the Madjapahit onto the Philippines.\nDuring the 1300s, the Chinese annals, \"Nanhai zhi\", reported that Brunei invaded or administered Sarawak and Sabah as well as the Philippine kingdoms of Butuan, Sulu and Ma-i (Mindoro) which would regain their independence at a later date. Afterwards, the Javanese-centered Hindu empire of Majapahit, in turn invaded Brunei and had briefly ruled the Sulu Archipelago as recorded in the epic poem Nagarakretagama, which stated that they controlled Solot (Sulu).\nEventually, Sulu reestablished independence, and in vengeance, assaulted the Majapahit province of Poni (Brunei) before a fleet from the capital drove them out.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;According to Javanese records a Javanese force expelled Sulu\nmarauders from Brunei during the reign of Angka Wijaya who was the last king to reign over Majapahit. The inhabitants of the Soeloe Islands (in the present Philippines) made an attack against Brunei (in order to obtain camphor), in keeping with their (piratical) nature, but they were driven off by the Javanese soldiers.\u2014\u200a\nSulu reaction against Majapahit Imperialism didn't stop with the sacking of Poni (Brunei) as Sulu also invaded North and East Kalimantan in Borneo, which were former Majapahit territories. The subsequent start of the Islamic era ushered the slow death of Majapahit as its provinces eventually seceded and became independent sultanates. With the upsurge of Islam, the remnants of Hindu Majapahit eventually fled to the island of Bali.\nIn Luzon, citing Kapampangan oral legends, Nick Joaquin wrote about a princess of Namayan named Sasaban who married the Emperor of Majapahit, locally known as Soledan and is allegedly the Maharajah Anka Widyaya.\nThe Sultanate of Sulu.\nIn 1380, Karim ul' Makdum and Shari'ful Hashem Syed Abu Bakr, an Arab trader born in Johore, Malaysia; arrived in Sulu from Malacca and established the Sultanate of Sulu by converting its previous ruler, the Hindu king, Rajah Baguinda, to Islam and then marrying his daughter. This sultanate eventually gained great wealth due to its diving for fine pearls. Before Islamization, the then Rajahnate of Sulu was established by Visayan speaking Hindu migrants from the Rajahnate of Butuan to the Sulu Archipelago as Tausug, the language of the Sulu state is classified as a Southern Visayan language. Then Hindu Sulu started off as a spice-entrep\u00f4t for mutual trade with their cousins in the Butuan Rajahnate as well as the Champa civilization across the sea, in the 10th to 13th Centuries. Champa which is located in Central Vietnam and the port-kingdom of Sulu traded with each other which resulted in Cham merchants settling in Sulu where they were known as Orang Dampuan . The Orang Dampuan were slaughtered by envious native Sulu Buranuns due to the wealth of the Orang Dampuan. The Buranun were then subjected to retaliatory slaughter by the Orang Dampuan. Harmonious commerce between Sulu and the Orang Dampuan was later restored and the Orang Dampuans became the ancestors of the local Yakan people. The Yakans were descendants of the Taguima-based Orang Dampuan who came to Sulu from Champa. As told before, Sulu was also briefly ruled under the Hindu Majapahit empire as narrated in the Nagarakretagama but afterwards, Sulu rebelled and sacked Brunei which was a nearby loyal province of Majapahit as Sulu extended its conquest to the former Majapahit territory of East and North Kalimantan. However, with the onset of Islam by the 15th century, they associated themselves with their new Arab-descended sultans whose origins was in Malacca and their fellow co-religionist Moros (ethnic groups of the Philippine who had accepted Islam) than their still Hindu, Visayan-speaking cousins. This culminated with royal intermarriages between the families of the then newly Islamized Maynila, as well the Sultanates of Brunei, Sulu and Malacca.\nThe Sultanate of Maguindanao.\nThe Sultanate of Maguindanao rose to prominence at the end of the 15th century or the beginning of the 16th century, Shariff Mohammed Kabungsuwan of Johor, Malaysia: introduced Islam in the island of Mindanao and he subsequently married Paramisuli, an Iranun princess from Mindanao, and established the Sultanate of Maguindanao.\nIt ruled most parts of coastal Mindanao and continued to exist prior to the Spanish colonialization until the 19th century. The Sultanate also traded and maintained good relations with the Chinese, Dutch, and the British. The Sultanate's main exports include: rice, wax, tobacco, and clove and cinnamon barks, alongside coconut oil, sago, beans, tortoiseshells, bird's nests, and ebony hardwood.\nConfederate States of Lanao.\nThe Sultanates of Lanao in Mindanao, Philippines were founded in the 16th century through the influence of Shariff Kabungsuan, who was enthroned as first Sultan of Maguindanao in 1515. Islam was introduced to the area by Muslim missionaries and traders from the Middle East, Indian and Malay regions who propagated Islam to Sulu and Maguindanao.\nUnlike in Sulu and Maguindanao, the Sultanate system in Lanao was uniquely decentralized. The area was divided into Four Principalities of Lanao or the Pat a Pangampong a Ranao which are composed of a number of royal houses (Sapolo ago Nem a Panoroganan or The Sixteen (16) Royal Houses) with specific territorial jurisdictions within mainland Mindanao. This decentralized structure of royal power in Lanao was adopted by the founders, and maintained up to the present day, in recognition of the shared power and prestige of the ruling clans in the area, emphasizing the values of unity of the nation (kaiisaisa o bangsa), patronage (kaseselai) and fraternity (kapapagaria). By the 16th century, Islam had spread to other parts of the Visayas and Luzon.\nThe Bruneian Empire and the expansion of Islam.\nUpon the secession of Poni (Brunei) from the Majapahit Empire, they imported the Arab Emir from Mecca, Sharif Ali, and became an independent Sultanate. During the reign of his descendant, Sultan Bolkiah, in 1485 to 1521, he married Laila Menchanai, the daughter of Sulu Sultan Amir Ul-Ombra to expand Brunei's influence in both Luzon and Mindanao. Eventually, Rajah Salalila of Maynila married the daughter of Sultan Bolkiah and Puteri Laila Menchanai of Sulu, placing Maynila under the influence of Brunei. The new dynasty under the Islamized Rajah Salalila was established to challenge the House of Lakandula in Tondo.\nFurthermore, Islam was further strengthened by the arrival to the Philippines of traders and proselytizers from Malaysia and Indonesia. The invasion of Brunei spread Chinese royalty such as Ong Sum Ping's kin and companions plus Arab dynasties such as the clan of Sultan Sharif Ali and allies to the Philippines. Brunei was so powerful that it already subjugated their Hindu Bornean neighbor, Kutai, to the south, though Kutai survived through a desperate alliance with Hindu Butuan and Cebu which were already struggling against encroaching Islamic powers like Maguindanao. Brunei had also gained influence over the northern third and the southern third of the Philippines. Sultan Bolkiah is associated with the legend of Nakhoda Ragam the singing captain, a myth about a handsome, virile, strong, musically gifted and angelic voiced prince who is known for his martial exploits. There is contextual evidence that Sultan Bolkiah may indeed be Nakhoda Ragam, since he is of half Visayan-Filipino descent since later Spanish accounts record that Filipinos, especially Visayans, were obsessed with singing and the warrior castes were particularly known for their great singing abilities.\nThe Lucoes.\nConcurrent with the spread of Islam in the Philippine archipelago was the rise of the Lucoes, or \"Luzones\", who were the people of Luzon. They rose to prominence by establishing overseas communities all across Southeast Asia as well as maintaining relations with South and East Asia, participating in trading ventures, navigation expeditions and military campaigns in Burma, Lucoes warriors aided the Burmese king in his invasion of Siam in 1547. At the same time, Lusung warriors fought alongside the Siamese king and faced the same Burmese Army. They were also in Japan, Brunei, Malacca, East Timor and Sri Lanka where they were employed as traders and mercenaries. One prominent Lu\u00e7\u00f5es was Regimo de Raja, who was a spice magnate and a Temenggung (Jawi: \u062a\u0645\u06a0\u0762\u0648\u06a0) (Governor and Chief General) in Portuguese Malacca. He was also the head of an international armada which traded and protected commerce between the Indian Ocean, the Strait of Malacca, the South China Sea, and the medieval maritime principalities of the Philippines.\nPinto noted that there were a number of Luzones in the Islamic fleets that went to battle with the Portuguese in the Philippines during the 16th century. The Sultan of Aceh together with the Ottoman commander Heredim Mafamede whose uncle was the Viceroy of Egypt, assigned Luzones to defend Aceh, and gave one of them, Sapetu Diraja, the task of holding Aru (northeast Sumatra) in 1540. Pinto also says one was named leader of the Malays remaining in the Moluccas Islands after the Portuguese conquest in 1511. Pigafetta notes that one of them was in command of the Brunei fleet in 1521.\nHowever, the Luzones did not only fight on the side of the Muslims. Pinto says they were also apparently among the natives of the Philippines who fought the Muslims in 1538.\nThe Luzones were also pioneer seafarers, and it is recorded that the Portuguese were not only witnesses but also direct beneficiaries of Lusung's involvement. Many Luzones chose Malacca as their base of operations because of its strategic importance. When the Portuguese finally took Malacca in 1512, the resident Luzones held important government posts in the former sultanate. They were also large-scale exporters and ship owners that regularly sent junks to China, Brunei, Sumatra, Siam and Sunda. One Lusung official by the name of Surya Diraja annually sent 175 tons of pepper to China and had to pay the Portuguese 9000 cruzados in gold to retain his plantation. His ships became part of the first Portuguese fleet that paid an official visit to the Chinese empire in 1517. Furthermore, the Boxer Codex said that: \"The Lu\u00e7\u00f5es, called Lequios, bring gold and cotton from their land, and trade Chinese silk and porcelain\" It is also recorded that every year, the Lu\u00e7\u00f5es load Canton with 175 casks of pepper. In addition to this, they also brought tortoise-shell and resins from their coast, which fetched a high price in China. Overall, \"In the fairs of Malacca, the Lu\u00e7\u00f5es were famed merchants of pepper and gold, even exchanging them for Chinese silk.\" As Fern\u00e3o Lopes de Castanheda writes of them.\nOn Mainland Southeast Asia, Luzones aided the Burmese king in his invasion of Siam in 1547. At the same time, Luzones fought alongside the Siamese king and faced the same elephant army of the Burmese king in the defence of the Siamese capital at Ayuthaya. Diogo do Couto wrote of them as such: \"Under their chief Balagtas, 300 Lu\u00e7\u00f5es fought for the King of Siam against Burmese invaders\u2014so effective that the Siamese granted them land.\" The fact that the Thai/Siamese king granted them land and ennobled them attest to their admirable performance. Lucoes military and trade activity reached as far as Sri Lanka in the Indian subcontinent where Lungshanoid pottery made in Luzon were discovered in burials.\nThe Portuguese were soon relying on Luzones bureaucrats for the administration of Malacca and on Luzones warriors, ships and pilots for their military and commercial ventures in East Asia.\nIt was through the Luzones who regularly sent ships to China that the Portuguese discovered the ports of Canton in 1514. And it was on Luzones ships that the Portuguese were able to send their first diplomatic mission to China 1517. The Portuguese had the Luzones to thank for when they finally established their base at Macao in the mid-1500s.\nThe Luzones were also instrumental in guiding Portuguese ships to discover Japan. The Western world first heard of Japan through the Portuguese. But it was through the Luzones that the Portuguese had their first encounter with the Japanese. The Portuguese king commissioned his subjects to get good pilots that could guide them beyond the seas of China and Malacca. In 1540, the Portuguese king's factor in Brunei, Br\u00e1s Bai\u00e3o, recommended to his king the employment of Lusung pilots because of their reputation as \"discoverers.\" Thus it was through Luzones navigators that Portuguese ships found their way to Japan in 1543. The Luzones so impressed the Portuguese soldier, Joao de Barros, he considered the Luzones who were militarily and commercially active across the region, \"the most warlike and valiant of these parts.\" Meanwhile, in the nearby Sultanate of Aceh the Lu\u00e7\u00f5es fighting men so impressed the Sultan, that they were assigned to become the Sultan's royal guard and to be assigned as the Sultan's royal guard, is proof of Lu\u00e7oes men's physical strength, martial prowess, and masculine attractiveness; as during that time period, among medieval kingdoms, that office was delegated only to the most strong, intelligent, handsome, attractive, virile, aristocratic, and combat-worthy, of warriors.\nFilipinos from the island of Luzon (Lucoes) were not the only Filipinos abroad, historian William Henry Scott, quoting the Portuguese manuscript Summa Orientalis, noted that Mottama in Burma (Myanmar) had a large presence of merchants from the island of Mindanao.\nRise and fall of Bo-ol.\nAround 1563, at the closing stages of the precolonial era, the Bo-ol achieved prominence and it was known to a later Spanish missionary, Alcina, as the \"Venice of the Visayas\", because it was a wealthy, wooden and floating city-state in the Visayas. However, this kingdom was eventually attacked and destroyed by soldiers from the Sultanate of Ternate, a state made up of Muslim Moluccans. The survivors of the destruction, led by their datu, Pagbuaya, migrated to northern Mindanao and established a new settlement in the region known as Dapitan. They then waged war against the Sultanate of Lanao and settled in the lands conquered from them. Eventually, in vengeance against the Muslims and Portuguese allied to the Ternateans, they aided the Spanish in the conquest of Muslim Manila and in the Spanish expeditions to capture Portuguese Ternate.\nInter-kingdom rivalries.\nDuring this period there was also a simmering territorial conflict between the polity of Tondo and Maynila, to which the ruler of Maynila, Rajah Matanda, sought military assistance against Tondo from his relatives at the Sultanate of Brunei. The Hindu Rajahnates of Butuan and Cebu also endured slave raids from, and waged wars against the Sultanate of Maguindanao. Simultaneous with these slave-raids, was the rebellion of Datu Lapulapu of Mactan against Rajah Humabon of Cebu. The population was sparse due to warfare and also due to the common frequency of typhoons and the Philippines' location on the Pacific ring of fire. The multiple states competing over the limited territory and people of the islands simplified Spanish colonialization by allowing its conquistadors to effectively employ a strategy of divide and conquer for rapid conquest.\nSpanish settlement and rule (1565\u20131898).\nEarly Spanish expeditions and conquests.\nA Spanish expedition around the world led by Portuguese explorer Ferdinand Magellan sighted Samar Island but anchored off Suluan Island on March 16, 1521. They landed the next day on Homonhon Island, now part of Guiuan, Eastern Samar. Magellan claimed the islands he saw for Spain and named them Islas de San L\u00e1zaro. He established friendly relations with some of the local leaders especially with Rajah Humabon and converted some of them to Christianity. In the Philippines, they explored many islands including the island of Mactan. However, Magellan was killed during the Battle of Mactan against the local datu, Lapulapu.\nOver the next several decades, other Spanish expeditions were dispatched to the islands. Ruy L\u00f3pez de Villalobos led an expedition that visited Leyte and Samar in 1543 and named them \"Las Islas Filipinas\" in honor of Philip of Asturias, the Prince of Asturias at the time. Philip became Philip II of Spain on January 16, 1556, when his father, Charles I of Spain (who also reigned as Charles V, Holy Roman Emperor), abdicated the Spanish throne. The name was then extended to the entire archipelago later on in the Spanish era.\nEuropean colonialization began in earnest when Spanish explorer Miguel L\u00f3pez de Legazpi arrived from Mexico in 1565 and formed the first European settlements in Cebu. Beginning with just five ships and five hundred men accompanied by Augustinian monks, and further strengthened in 1567 by two hundred soldiers, he was able to repel the Portuguese and create the foundations for the unification and colonialization of the Archipelago. In 1571, the Spanish, their Latin-American recruits and their Filipino (Visayan) allies, commanded by able conquistadors such as Mexico-born Juan de Salcedo (who was in love with Tondo's princess, Kandarapa, a romance his Spanish grandfather Miguel Lopez de Legaspi, disapproved of) attacked Maynila, a vassal-state of the Brunei Sultanate and liberated plus incorporated the kingdom of Tondo as well as establishing Manila as the capital of the Spanish East Indies. During the early part of the Spanish colonialization of the Philippines, the Spanish Augustinian friar Gaspar de San Agust\u00edn, O.S.A., describes Iloilo and Panay as one of the most populated islands in the archipelago and the most fertile of all the islands of the Philippines. He also talks about Iloilo, particularly the ancient settlement of Halaur, as site of a progressive trading post and a court of illustrious nobilities.\nLegazpi built a fort in Maynila and made overtures of friendship to Lakan Dula, Lakan of Tondo, who accepted. However, Maynila's former ruler, the Muslim rajah, Rajah Sulayman, who was a vassal to the Sultan of Brunei, refused to submit to Legazpi, but failed to get the support of Lakan Dula or of the Pampangan and Pangasinan settlements to the north. When Tarik Sulayman and a force of Kapampangan and Tagalog Muslim warriors attacked the Spaniards in the battle of Bangkusay, he was finally defeated and killed, the Spanish also destroyed the walled Kapampangan city-state of Cainta.\nIn 1578, the Castilian War erupted between the Christian Spaniards and Muslim Bruneians over control of the Philippine archipelago. On one side, the newly Christianized non-Muslim Visayans of Panay and Cebu, as well as Butuan (which were from northern Mindanao), as well as the remnants of Bo-ol (Dapitan) had previously waged war against the Sultanate of Sulu, Sultanate of Maguindanao and Kingdom of Maynila, then joined the Spanish in the war against the Bruneian Empire and its allies, the Bruneian puppet-state of Maynila, Sulu which had dynastic links with Brunei as well as Maguindanao which was an ally of Sulu. The Spanish and its Visayan allies assaulted Brunei and seized its capital, Kota Batu. This was achieved as a result in part of the assistance rendered to them by two noblemen, Pengiran Seri Lela and Pengiran Seri Ratna. The former had traveled to Manila to offer Brunei as a tributary of Spain for help to recover the throne usurped by his brother, Saiful Rijal. The Spanish agreed that if they succeeded in conquering Brunei, Pengiran Seri Lela would indeed become the sultan, while Pengiran Seri Ratna would be the new Bendahara. In March 1578, the Spanish fleet, led by De Sande himself, acting as Capit\u00e1n General, started their journey towards Brunei. The expedition consisted of 400 Spaniards and Mexicans, 1,500 Filipino natives and 300 Borneans. The campaign was one of many, which also included action in Mindanao and Sulu.\nThe Spanish succeeded in invading the capital on April 16, 1578, with the help of Pengiran Seri Lela and Pengiran Seri Ratna. Sultan Saiful Rijal and Paduka Seri Begawan Sultan Abdul Kahar were forced to flee to Meragang then to Jerudong. In Jerudong, they made plans to chase the conquering army away from Brunei. The Spanish suffered heavy losses due to a cholera or dysentery outbreak. They were so weakened by the illness that they decided to abandon Brunei to return to Manila on June 26, 1578, after just 72 days. Before doing so, they burned the mosque, a high structure with a five-tier roof.\nPengiran Seri Lela died in August\u2013September 1578, probably from the same illness that had afflicted his Spanish allies, although there was suspicion, he could have been poisoned by the ruling sultan. Seri Lela's daughter, the Bruneian princess, left with the Spanish and went on to marry a Christian Tagalog, named Agust\u00edn de Legazpi of Tondo and had children in the Philippines.\nConcurrently, northern Luzon became a center of the \"Bahan Trade\" (comercio de bafan), found in Lu\u00eds Fr\u00f3is' Historia de Japam, mainly refers to the robberies, raids, and pillages conducted by the Japanese pirates of Ky\u016bsh\u016ba as they assaulted the China seas. The Sengoku period (1477\u20131603) or the warring states period of Japan had spread the wak\u014d's \u502d\u5bc7 (Japanese Pirates) activities in the China Seas, some groups of these raiders relocated to the Philippines and established their settlements in Luzon. Because of the proximity to China's beaches, the Philippines were favorable a location to launch raids on the provinces of Guangdong and Fujian, and for shipping with Indochina and the Ry\u016bky\u016b Islands. These were the halcyon days of the Philippine branch of the Bahan trade. Thus, the Spanish sought to fight off these Japanese Pirates, prominent among whom was warlord Tayfusa, whom the Spaniards expelled after he set up the beginnings of a city-state of Japanese pirates in Northern Luzon. The Spanish repelled them in the fabled 1582 Cagayan battles. Due to the 1549 Ming ban on trade leveled against the Ashikaga shogunate as a consequence of the Wokou pirate raids, this resulted in the ban for all the Japanese to enter China, and for Chinese ships to sail to Japan. Thus, Manila became the only place where the Japanese and Chinese can openly trade, often also trading Japanese silver for Chinese silk.\nIn 1587, Magat Salamat, one of the children of Lakandula, along with Lakandula's nephew and lords of the neighboring areas of Tondo, Pandacan, Marikina, Candaba, Navotas and Bulacan, were executed when the Tondo Conspiracy of 1587\u20131588 failed in which a planned grand alliance with the Japanese Christian-captain, Gayo, (Gayo himself was a Woku who once pirated in Cagayan) and Brunei's sultan, would have restored the old aristocracy. Its failure resulted in the hanging of Agust\u00edn de Legaspi and the execution of Magat Salamat (the crown-prince of Tondo). Thereafter, some of the conspirators were exiled to Guam or Guerrero, Mexico.\nSpanish power was further consolidated after Miguel L\u00f3pez de Legazpi's complete assimilation of Madja-as, his subjugation of Rajah Tupas, the Rajah of Cebu and Juan de Salcedo's conquest of the provinces of Zambales, La Union, Ilocos, the coast of Cagayan, and the ransacking of the Chinese warlord Limahong's pirate kingdom in Pangasinan.\nThe Spanish also invaded Northern Taiwan and Ternate in Indonesia, using Filipino warriors, before they were driven out by the Dutch. The Sultanate of Ternate reverted to independence and afterwards led a coalition of sultanates against Spain. While Taiwan became the stronghold of the Ming-loyalist and pirate state of the Kingdom of Tungning. The Spanish and the Moros of the sultanates of Maguindanao, Lanao and Sulu also waged many wars over hundreds of years in the Spanish\u2013Moro conflict, they were supported by the Papuan language speaking Sultanate of Ternate in Indonesia which regained independence from Spain, as well as the Sultanate of Brunei, not until the 19th century did Spain succeed in defeating the Sulu Sultanate and taking Mindanao under nominal suzerainty.\nThe Spanish considered their war with the Muslims in Southeast Asia an extension of the Reconquista, a centuries-long campaign to retake and rechristianize the Spanish homeland which was invaded by the Muslims of the Umayyad Caliphate. The Spanish expeditions into the Philippines were also part of a larger Ibero-Islamic world conflict that included a war against the Ottoman Caliphate which had just invaded former Christian lands in the Eastern Mediterranean and which had a center of operations in Southeast Asia at its nearby vassal, the Sultanate of Aceh. Thus the Philippines became a theatre of the ongoing world-wide-ranging Ottoman\u2013Habsburg wars.\nIn time, Spanish fortifications were also set up in Taiwan and the Maluku islands. These were abandoned and the Spanish soldiers, along with the newly Christianized natives of the Moluccas, withdrew back to the Philippines in order to re-concentrate their military forces because of a threatened invasion by the Japan-born Ming-dynasty loyalist, Koxinga, ruler of the Kingdom of Tungning. However, the planned invasion was aborted. Meanwhile, settlers were sent to the Pacific islands of Palau and the Marianas.\nIn 1593, a diplomatic entourage addressed to the \"King of Luzon\" from the King of Cambodia which bore an elephant as a tribute arrived in Manila. The King of Cambodia which witnessed the military activity of precolonial Luzones people who were mercenaries across Southeast Asia including at Burma and Siam, now implored the new rulers of Luzon, the Spaniards, to aid him in a war to retake his kingdom from an invasion by the Siamese. That had caused the ill-fated Spanish expedition to Cambodia that although ended in failure had set the foundations of the future restoration of Cambodia from Thai rule under French Cochinchina which tapped Spanish allies.\nIncorporation to the Mexico-based Viceroyalty of New Spain.\nThe founding of Manila by uniting the dominions of Sulayman III and Rajah Ache \"Matanda\" of Maynila who was a vassal to the Sultan of Brunei, and Lakandula of Tondo who paid tribute to Ming dynasty China \u2013 caused the creation of Manila on February 6, 1579, through the Papal bull \"Illius Fulti Pr\u00e6sidio\" by Pope Gregory XIII, encompassing all Spanish colonies in Asia as a suffragan of the Archdiocese of Mexico. Aside from Manila the capital, the Spanish and Latino populations were first concentrated in the 5 newly founded Spanish Royal Cities of Cebu, Arevalo, Nueva Segovia, Nueva Caceres, and Vigan. Aside from these cities, they were also scattered across the Presidios of Cavite, Calamianes, Caraga, and Zamboanga. For much of the Spanish period, the Philippines was part of the Mexico-based Viceroyalty of New Spain. Of the Spaniards and Latinos sent to the Philippines, almost half of the individuals levied to Manila were reported in judicial files as espa\u00f1oles (Spanish born in the colonies, who were often just \"very pale mestizos\"), and about a third, as mestizos (whereas Indian (Native American), mulattos, and blacks could be mistaken for mestizos of darker color). Castizos amounted to a total of 15 percent, while peninsulares (Spaniards born in Spain) were around 5 percent of those punished with deportation to Manila.\nThe Spanish rationalized the demographic layout, resource extraction, defense, and commerce of the colony; which was previously a scattered constellation of rival precolonial kingdoms, via a process known as the \"Iberian Reductions\", wherein people were relocated, sometimes forcibly, from their previous settlements and were resettled into new towns and barrios which were modeled after academic standards formed in Spain and Portugal. People were moved into a centralized \"cabecera\" (town/district capital), where a newly built church and an \"ayuntamiento\" (town hall) were situated. This allowed the government to defend, control and Christianize the indigenous population in scattered independent settlements, to conduct population counts, and to collect tributes. The new aristocracy in these newly founded towns were the Principal\u00eda, which arose when Spanish and Mexican settlers intermixed with the precolonial native royalty and Chinese merchant elites, and formed a nascent landed gentry per each locale.\nSpanish settlement during the 16th and 17th centuries.\nThe \"Memoria de las Encomiendas en las Islas\" of 1591, just twenty years after the conquest of Luzon, reveals a remarkable progress in the work of colonialization and the spread of Christianity. A cathedral was built in the city of Manila with an episcopal palace, Augustinian, Dominican and Franciscan monasteries and a Jesuit house. The king maintained a hospital for the Spanish settlers and there was another hospital for the natives run by the Franciscans. In order to defend the settlements the Spaniards established in the Philippines, a network of military fortresses called \"Presidios\" were constructed and officered by the Spaniards, and sentried by Latin-Americans and Filipinos, across the archipelago, to protect it from foreign nations such as the Portuguese, British and Dutch as well as raiding Muslims and Wokou.\nThe Manila garrison was composed of roughly four hundred Spanish soldiers and the area of Intramuros as well as its surroundings, were initially settled by 1200 Spanish families. In Cebu City, at the Visayas, the settlement received a total of 2,100 soldier-settlers from New Spain. At the immediate south of Manila, Mexicans were present at Ermita and at Cavite where they were stationed as sentries. In addition, men conscripted from Peru, were also sent to settle Zamboanga City in Mindanao, to wage war upon Muslim pirates. These Peruvian soldiers who settled in Zamboanga were led by Don Sebasti\u00e1n Hurtado de Corcuera who was governor of Panama. He also used Panamanians, including even some Genoese from Panama Viejo descended from colonists at the Republic of Genoa, a nation once active in the Crusades. There were also communities of Spanish-Mestizos that developed in Iloilo, Negros and Vigan.\nInteractions between native Filipinos and immigrant Spaniards plus the Latin-Americans and their Spanish-Mestizo descendants eventually caused the formation of a new language, Chavacano, a creole of Mexican Spanish. Meanwhile, in the suburb of Tondo, there was a convent run by Franciscan friars and another by the Dominicans that offered Christian education to the Chinese converts to Christianity. The same report reveals that in and around Manila were collected 9,410 tributes, indicating a population of about 30,640 who were under the instruction of thirteen missionaries (ministers of doctrine), apart from the monks in monasteries. In the former province of Pampanga the population estimate was 74,700 and 28 missionaries. In Pangasinan 2,400 people with eight missionaries. In Cagayan and islands Babuyanes 96,000 people but no missionaries. In La Laguna 48,400 people with 27 missionaries. In Bicol and Camarines Catanduanes islands 86,640 people with fifteen missionaries. Based on the tribute counts, the total founding population of Spanish-Philippines, as of year 1591, was 667,612 people, of which: 20,000 were Chinese migrant traders, 15,600 were Latino soldier-colonists sent from Peru and Mexico (In the 1600s), Immigrants included 3,000 Japanese residents, and 600 pure Spaniards from Europe. Of the 600 Spaniards from Europe, two hundred and thirty-six of them were given encomiendas and were ennobled, as they scattered across the many provinces of the Philippines to serve as administrators. There was also a large but unknown number of Indian Filipinos as majority of the slaves imported into the archipelago were from Bengal or Southern India, adding Dravidian speaking South Indians and Indo-European speaking Bangladeshis into the ethnic mix, and the rest were Malays and Negritos. They were under the care of 140 missionaries, of which 79 were Augustinians, nine Dominicans and 42 Franciscans. Adding during the Spanish evacuation of Ternate, Indonesia, the 200 families of mixed Mexican-Filipino-Spanish and Moluccan-Portuguese descent who had ruled over the briefly Christianized Sultanate of Ternate (They later reverted to Islam) were relocated to Ternate, Cavite and Ermita, Manila. and they were presaged by their previous ruler, Sultan Said Din Burkat who was enslaved but eventually converted to Christianity and was freed after being deported to Manila.\nThe islands were fragmented and sparsely populated due to constant inter-kingdom wars and natural disasters (as the country is on the Typhoon belt and Pacific Ring of Fire), which made it easy for Spanish invasion. The Spanish then brought political unification to most of the Philippine archipelago via the conquest of the various small maritime states although they were unable to fully incorporate parts of the sultanates of Mindanao and the areas where the ethnic groups and highland plutocracy of the animist Ifugao of Northern Luzon were established. The Spanish introduced elements of western civilization such as the code of law, western printing and the Gregorian calendar alongside new food resources such as maize, pineapple and chocolate from Latin America.\nEducation played a major role in the socio-economic transformation of the archipelago. The oldest universities, colleges, and vocational schools and the first modern public education system in Asia were all created during the Spanish colonial period, and by the time Spain was replaced by the United States as the colonial power, Filipinos were among the most educated subjects in all of Asia. The Jesuits founded the Colegio de Manila in 1590, which later became the Universidad de San Ignacio, a royal and pontifical university. They also founded the Colegio de San Ildefonso on August 1, 1595. After the expulsion of the Society of Jesus in 1768, the management of the Jesuit schools passed to other parties. On April 28, 1611, through the initiative of Bishop Miguel de Benavides, the University of Santo Tomas was founded in Manila. The Jesuits also founded the Colegio de San Jos\u00e9 (1601) and took over the Escuela Municipal, later to be called the Ateneo de Manila University (1859). All institutions offered courses included not only religious topics but also Science subjects such as physics, chemistry, natural history and mathematics. The University of Santo Tom\u00e1s, for example, started by teaching theology, philosophy and humanities and the Faculty of Jurisprudence and Canonical Law, together with the schools of medicine and pharmacy were opened during the 18th century.\nOutside the tertiary institutions, the efforts of missionaries were in no way limited to religious instruction but also geared towards promoting social and economic advancement of the islands. They cultivated into the natives their taste for music and taught Spanish language to children. They also introduced advances in rice agriculture, brought from America maize and cocoa and developed the farming of indigo, coffee and sugar cane. The only commercial plant introduced by a government agency was the plant of tobacco.\nChurch and state were inseparably linked in Spanish policy, with the state assuming responsibility for religious establishments. One of Spain's objectives in colonialization of the Philippines was the conversion of the local population to Christianity. The work of conversion was facilitated by the disunity and insignificance of other organized religions, except for Islam, which was still predominant in the southwest. The pageantry of the church had a wide appeal, reinforced by the incorporation of indigenous social customs into religious observances. The eventual outcome was a new Christian majority, from which the Muslims of western Mindanao and the upland tribal and animistic peoples of Luzon remained detached and alienated (Ethnic groups such as the Ifugaos of the Cordillera region and the Mangyans of Mindoro).\nAt the lower levels of administration, the Spanish built on traditional village organization by co-opting local leaders. This system of indirect rule helped create an indigenous upper class, called the \"principal\u00eda\", who had local wealth, high status, and other privileges. This perpetuated an oligarchic system of local control. Among the most significant changes under Spanish rule was that the indigenous idea of communal use and ownership of land was replaced with the concept of private ownership and the conferring of titles on members of the \"principal\u00eda\".\nAs a result of pacification campaigns, religious conversions, colonizations, and settlement by the Spanish in cooperation with the local natives, the 1599 Philippines sovereignty referendums were proclaimed, and therein, assent was given by the governed Filipino peoples, in accepting Spanish sovereignty.\nAround 1608 William Adams, an English navigator, contacted the interim governor of the Philippines, Rodrigo de Vivero y Velasco, on behalf of Tokugawa Ieyasu, who wished to establish direct trade contacts with New Spain. Friendly letters were exchanged, officially starting relations between Japan and New Spain. From 1565 to 1821, the Philippines was governed as a territory of the Viceroyalty of New Spain from Mexico, via the \"Royal Audiencia\" of Manila, and administered directly from Spain from 1821 after the Mexican revolution, until 1898.\nThe Manila galleons, were constructed in Bicol and Cavite. The Manila galleons were accompanied with a large naval escort as it traveled to and from Manila and Acapulco. The galleons sailed once or twice a year, between the 16th and 19th centuries. The Manila Galleons brought with them goods, settlers and military reinforcements destined for the Philippines, from Latin America. The reverse voyage also brought Asian commercial products and immigrants to the western side of the Americas. Legally, the Manila Galleons were only allowed to trade between Mexico and the Philippines; however, illegal trade, commerce, and inter-migration, were happening in secret between the Philippines and other would-be nations in the Spanish Americas due to the tremendous demand and profitability of Asian products in Latin America and this clandestine defiance of Spanish colonial decrees forbidding trade, continued all throughout the term of the Manila Galleons.\nThe Spanish military fought off various indigenous revolts and several external challenges, especially from the British, Dutch, and Portuguese and Chinese pirates. Christian missionaries converted most of the lowland inhabitants to Christianity and founded schools, universities, and hospitals. In 1863 a Spanish decree introduced education, establishing public schooling in Spanish.\nIn 1646, a series of five naval actions known as the Battles of La Naval de Manila was fought between the forces of Spain and the Dutch Republic, as part of the Eighty Years' War. Although the Spanish forces consisted of just two Manila galleons and a galley with crews composed mainly of Filipino volunteers, against three separate Dutch squadrons, totaling eighteen ships, the Dutch squadrons were severely defeated in all fronts by the Spanish-Filipino forces, forcing the Dutch to abandon their plans for an invasion of the Philippines.\nIn 1687, Isaac Newton included an explicit reference to the Philippines in his classic Philosophi\u00e6 Naturalis Principia Mathematica by mentioning Leuconia, the ancient Ptolemaic name for the Philippines.\nSpanish rule during the 18th century.\nColonial income derived mainly from entrep\u00f4t trade: The Manila Galleons sailing from the port of Manila to the port of Acapulco on the west coast of Mexico brought shipments of silver bullion, and minted coin that were exchanged for return cargoes of Asian, and Pacific products. A total of 110 Manila galleons set sail in the 250 years of the Manila-Acapulco galleon trade (1565 to 1815). There was no direct trade with Spain until 1766.\nThe Philippines was never profitable as a colony during Spanish rule, and the long war against the Dutch from the West, in the 17th century together with the intermittent conflict with the Muslims in the South and combating Japanese Wokou piracy from the North nearly bankrupted the colonial treasury. Furthermore, the state of near constant war caused a high death and desertion rate among the Mestizo and Indio (Native American) soldiers sent from Mexico and Peru that were stationed in the Philippines. The high death and desertion rate also applied to the native Filipino warriors conscripted by Spain, to fight in battles all across the archipelago. The repeated wars, lack of wages and near starvation were so intense, almost half of the soldiers sent from Latin America either died or fled to the countryside to live as vagabonds among the rebellious natives or escaped enslaved Indians (from India) where they race-mixed through rape or prostitution, further blurring the racial caste system Spain tried hard to maintain. Mixed Spanish-Filipino descent may be more common than expected as many Spaniards often had Filipino concubines and mistresses and they frequently produced children out of wedlock. These circumstances contributed to the increasing difficulty of governing the Philippines. The Royal Fiscal of Manila wrote a letter to King Charles III of Spain in which he advises to abandon the colony, but the religious orders opposed this since they considered the Philippines a launching pad for the conversion of the Far East.\nThe Philippines survived on an annual subsidy paid by the Spanish Crown and often procured from taxes and profits accrued by the Viceroyalty of New Spain (Mexico), and the 200-year-old fortifications at Manila had not been improved much since first built by the Spanish. This was one of the circumstances that made possible the brief British occupation of Manila between 1762 and 1764.\nBritish occupation (1762\u20131764).\nBritain declared war against Spain on January 4, 1762, and on September 24, 1762, a force of British Army regulars and British East India Company soldiers, supported by the ships and men of the East Indies Squadron of the British Royal Navy, sailed into Manila Bay from Madras, India. Manila was besieged and fell to the British on October 4, 1762.\nOutside of Manila, the Spanish leader Sim\u00f3n de Anda y Salazar organized a militia of 10,000 mostly from Pampanga to resist British attempts to extend their conquest outside Manila. Anda y Salazar established his headquarters first in Bulacan, then in Bacolor. After a number of skirmishes and failed attempts to support Filipino uprisings, the British command admitted to the War Secretary in London that the Spanish were \"in full possession of the country\". The occupation of Manila ended in April 1764 as agreed to in the peace negotiations for the Seven Years' War in Europe. The Spanish then persecuted the Binondo Chinese community for its role in aiding the British. An unknown number of Indian soldiers known as sepoys, who came with the British, deserted and settled in nearby Cainta, Rizal, which explains the uniquely Indian features of generations of Cainta residents.\nSpanish rule in the second part of the 18th century.\nIn 1766 direct communication was established with Spain and trade with Europe through a national ship based on Spain. In 1774, colonial officers from Bulacan, Tondo, Laguna de Bay, and other areas surrounding Manila reported with consternation that discharged soldiers and deserters (from Mexico, Spain and Peru) during the British occupation were providing the indios military training for the weapons that had been disseminated all over the territory during the war. Expeditions from Spain were administered since 1785 by the Real Compa\u00f1\u00eda de Filipinas, which was granted a monopoly of trade between Spain and the islands that lasted until 1834, when the company was terminated by the Spanish crown due to poor management and financial losses. About this time, Governor-General Anda complained that the Latin-American and Spanish soldiers sent to the Philippines had dispersed \"all over the islands, even the most distant, looking for subsistence\".\nIn 1781, Governor-General Jos\u00e9 Basco y Vargas established the Economic Society of the Friends of the Country. The Philippines was administered from the Viceroyalty of New Spain until the independence to Mexico in 1821 necessitated the direct rule from Spain of the Philippines from that year.\nIn the late 1700s to early 1800s, Joaqu\u00edn Mart\u00ednez de Z\u00fa\u00f1iga, an Agustinian Friar from Spain, in his Two Volume Book: \"Estadismo de\nlas islas Filipinas\" compiled a census of the Spanish-Philippines based on the tribute counts (Which represented an average family of seven to ten children and two parents, per tribute) and came upon the following statistics:\nThe Spanish-Filipino population as a proportion of the provinces widely varied; with as high as 19% of the population of Tondo province (The most populous province and former name of Manila), to Pampanga 13.7%, Cavite at 13%, Laguna 2.28%, Batangas 3%, Bulacan 10.79%, Bataan 16.72%, Ilocos 1.38%, Pangasinan 3.49%, Albay 1.16%, Cebu 2.17%, Samar 3.27%,\nIloilo 1%, Capiz 1%, Bicol 20%, and Zamboanga 40%. According to the data, in the Archdiocese of Manila which administers much of Luzon under it, about 10% of the population was Spanish-Filipino. Summing up all the provinces including those with no Spanish Filipinos, all in all, in the total population of the Philippines, Spanish Filipinos and mixed Spanish-Filipinos composed 5% of the population.\nThe book, \"Intercolonial Intimacies Relinking Latin/o America to the Philippines, 1898\u20131964 By Paula C. Park\" citing \"Forzados y reclutas: los criollos novohispanos en Asia (1756-1808)\" gave a higher number of later Mexican soldier-immigrants to the Philippines, pegging the number at 35,000 immigrants in the 1700s, in a Philippine population which was only around 1.5 Million, thus forming 2.33% of the population.\nMeanwhile, government records show that 20% of the Philippines' total population were either pure Chinese or Mixed Chinese-Filipinos\nSpanish rule during the 19th century.\nThe Philippines was included in the vast territory of the Kingdom of Spain, in the first constitution of Spain promulgated in Cadiz in 1812. It was never a colony as modern-day historical literature would say, but an overseas region in Asia (Spanish Constitution 1812). The Spanish Constitution of 1870 provides for the first autonomous community for \"Archipelago Filipino\" where all provinces in the Philippine Islands will be given the semi-independent home rule program.\nDuring the 19th century Spain invested heavily in education and infrastructure. Through the Education Decree of December 20, 1863, Queen Isabella II of Spain decreed the establishment of a free public school system that used Spanish as the language of instruction, leading to increasing numbers of educated Filipinos. Additionally, the opening of the Suez Canal in 1869 cut travel time to Spain, which facilitated the rise of the ilustrados, an enlightened class of Spanish-Filipinos that had been able to enroll in Spanish and European universities.\nA great number of infrastructure projects were undertaken during the 19th century that put the Philippine economy and standard of living ahead of most of its Asian neighbors and even many European countries at that time. Among them were a railway system for Luzon, a tramcar network for Manila, and Asia's first steel suspension bridge Puente Claveria, later called Puente Colgante.\nOn August 1, 1851, the Banco Espa\u00f1ol-Filipino de Isabel II was established to attend the needs of the rapid economic boom, that had greatly increased its pace since the 1800s as a result of a new economy based on a rational exploitation of the agricultural resources of the islands. The increase in textile fiber crops such as abac\u00e1, oil products derived from the coconut, indigo, that was growing in demand, etc., generated an increase in money supply that led to the creation of the bank. Banco Espa\u00f1ol-Filipino was also granted the power to print a Philippine-specific currency (the Philippine peso) for the first time (before 1851, many currencies were used, mostly the pieces of eight).\nSpanish Manila was seen in the 19th century as a model of colonial governance that effectively put the interests of the original inhabitants of the islands before those of the colonial power. As John Crawfurd put it in its History of the Indian Archipelago, in all of Asia the \"Philippines alone did improve in civilization, wealth, and populousness under the colonial rule\" of a foreign power. John Bowring, Governor General of British Hong Kong from 1856 to 1860, wrote after his trip to Manila:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Credit is certainly due to Spain for having bettered the condition of a people who, though comparatively highly civilized, yet being continually distracted by petty wars, had sunk into a disordered and uncultivated state.\nThe inhabitants of these beautiful Islands upon the whole, may well be considered to have lived as comfortably during the last hundred years, protected from all external enemies and governed by mild laws vis-a-vis those from any other tropical country under native or European sway, owing in some measure, to the frequently discussed peculiar (Spanish) circumstances which protect the interests of the natives.\nIn \"The Inhabitants of the Philippines\", Frederick Henry Sawyer wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe first official census in the Philippines was carried out in 1878. The colony's population as of December 31, 1877, was recorded at 5,567,685 persons. This was followed by the 1887 census that yielded a count of 6,984,727, while that of 1898 yielded 7,832,719 inhabitants.\nLatin-American revolutions and direct Spanish rule.\nIn the Americas; overseas Filipinos were involved in several anti-colonial movements, Filomeno V. Aguilar Jr. in his paper: \"Manilamen and seafaring: engaging the maritime world beyond the Spanish realm\", stated therein that Filipinos who were internationally called Manilamen were active in the navies and armies of the world even after the era of the Manila Galleons such as the case of the Argentine war of independence wherein an Argentinian of French descent, Hypolite Bouchard, laid siege to Monterey California as a privateer for the Argentine army. His second ship, the Santa Rosa, which was captained by the American Peter Corney, had a multi-ethnic crew which included Filipinos. It has been proposed that those Filipinos were recruited in San Blas, an alternative port to Acapulco Mexico where several Filipinos had settled during the Manila-Acapulco Galleon trade era. Argentinian-Philippine relations can be traced even earlier since the Philippines already received immigrants from South America, like the soldier Juan Ferm\u00edn de San Mart\u00edn, who was the brother of the leader of the Argentinian Revolution Jose de San Martin. Likewise, in Mexico, about 200 Filipinos were recruited by Miguel Hidalgo in his revolution against Spain, the most prominent of which was the Manila-born Ramon Fabi\u00e9 afterwards when the revolution was continued by President Guerrero, General Isidoro Montes de Oca, another Filipino-Mexican, had participated in the Mexican Revolutionary war against Spain too. The recent participation of overseas Filipinos in Anti-Imperial wars in the Americas started even earlier when Filipinos in the settlement of Saint Malo, Louisiana assisted the United States in the defense of New Orleans during the War of 1812.\nUpon Mexican independence, the Filipinos had such an effect on Mexico that there were plans among the newly independent Mexicans, to help the Filipinos revolt against Spain too, there was even a secret memorandum from the Mexican government which read:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Now that we Mexicans have fortunately obtained our independence by revolution against Spanish rule, it is our solemn duty to help the less fortunate countries especially the Philippines, with whom our country has had the most intimate relations during the last two centuries and a half. We should send secret agents with a message to their inhabitants to rise in revolution against Spain and that we shall give them financial and military assistance to win their freedom. Should the Philippines succeed in gaining her independence from Spain, we must felicitate her warmly and from an alliance of amity and commerce with her as a sister nation. Moreover, we must resume the intimate Mexico-Philippine relations, as they were during the halcyon days of the Acapulco-Manila galleon trade.\nLikewise, in this period, overseas Filipinos were also active in the Asia-Pacific especially in China and Indochina. During the Taiping rebellion, Frederick Townsend Ward had a militia employing foreigners to quell the rebellion for the Qing government, at first he hired American and European adventurers but they proved unruly, while recruiting for better troops, he met his aide-de-camp, Vincente (Vicente?) Macanaya, who was twenty three years old in 1860 and was part of the large Filipino population then living in Shanghai, who \"were handy on board ships and more than a little troublesome on land\", as Caleb Carr journalistically put it. Smith, another writer about China also notes in his book: \"Mercenaries and Mandarins\" that Manilamen were \"Reputed to be brave and fierce fighters\" and \"were plentiful in Shanghai and always eager for action\". During this Taiping rebellion, by July 1860, Townsend Ward's force of Manilamen ranging from one to two hundred mercenaries successfully assaulted Sung-Chiang Prefecture. Thus, while the Philippines was slowly engendered with revolutionary fervour being suppressed by Spain, overseas Filipinos have had an active role in the military and naval engagements of various nations in the Americas and Asia-Pacific. Soldiers from the Philippines were recruited by France, which was allied to Spain, to initially protect Indo-Chinese converts to Christianity who were persecuted by their native governments, and later for an actual conquest of Vietnam and Laos as well as the establishment of the Protectorate of Cambodia which was liberated from Thai invasions and re-established as a vassal-state of France with the combined Franco-Spanish-Filipino forces creating French Cochinchina which was governed from the former Cambodian and now Vietnamese city of Saigon.\nThe \"\" and \"Latino\" dissatisfaction against the Peninsulares (Spaniards direct from Spain) spurred by their love of the land and their suffering people had a justified hatred against the exploitative \"Peninsulares\" who were only appointed to high positions due to their race and unflinching loyalty to the homeland. This resulted in the uprising of Andres Novales a Philippine born soldier of Mexican descent, who earned great fame in richer Spain but chose to return to serve in poorer Philippines. He was supported by local soldiers as well as former officers in the Spanish army of the Philippines who were primarily from the now sovereign Mexico as well as the freshly independent nations of Colombia, Venezuela, Peru, Chile, Argentina and Costa Rica. The uprising was brutally suppressed but it foreshadowed the 1872 Cavite Mutiny that was a precursor to the Philippine Revolution. However, Hispanic-Philippines reached its zenith when the Philippine-born Marcelo Azc\u00e1rraga Palmero became a hero as he restored the Bourbon dynasty of Spain to the throne during his stint as Lieutenant-General (Three Star General) after the Bourbons have been deposed by revolutionaries. He eventually became Prime Minister of the Spanish Empire and was awarded membership in the Order of the Golden Fleece, which is considered the most exclusive and prestigious order of chivalry in the world. In the aftermath of Chilean soldiers' participation in the Andres Novales uprising against Spain, the Irish-Chilean founder of Chile, Bernardo O'Higgins, caught wind of anti-Spanish sentiment among Filipinos and planned to send a fleet to liberate the Philippines from Spain, under the command of Scottish-Chilean admiral, Lord Thomas Cochrane. The fleet would have been sent to the Philippines had it not been for Bernardo O'Higgins' untimely exile.\nPhilippine Revolution.\nRevolutionary sentiments arose in 1872 after three Filipino priests, Mariano Gomez, Jos\u00e9 Burgos, and Jacinto Zamora, known as Gomburza, were accused of sedition by colonial authorities and executed by garotte. This would inspire the Propaganda Movement in Spain, organized by Marcelo H. del Pilar, Jos\u00e9 Rizal, Graciano L\u00f3pez Jaena, and Mariano Ponce, that clamored for adequate representation to the Spanish Cortes and later for independence. Jos\u00e9 Rizal, the most celebrated intellectual and radical ilustrado of the era, wrote the novels \"Noli Me T\u00e1ngere\", and \"El filibusterismo\", which greatly inspired the movement for independence. The Katipunan, a secret society whose primary purpose was that of overthrowing Spanish rule in the Philippines, was founded by Andr\u00e9s Bonifacio who became its \"Supremo\" (leader).\nIn the 1860s to 1890s, in the urban areas of the Philippines, especially at Manila, according to burial statistics, as much as 3.3% of the population were pure European Spaniards and the pure Chinese were as high as 9.9%. The Spanish-Filipino and Chinese-Filipino Mestizo populations also fluctuated. Eventually, everybody belonging to these non-native categories diminished because they were assimilated into and chose to self-identify as pure Filipinos since during the Philippine Revolution, the term \"Filipino\" included anybody born in the Philippines coming from any race.\nThat would explain the abrupt drop of otherwise high Chinese, Spanish and mestizo, percentages across the country by the time of the first American census in 1903.\nThe Philippine Revolution began in 1896. Rizal was wrongly implicated in the outbreak of the revolution and executed for treason in 1896. The Katipunan in Cavite split into two groups, Magdiwang, led by Mariano \u00c1lvarez (a relative of Bonifacio's by marriage), and Magdalo, led by Baldomero Aguinaldo cousin of Emilio Aguinaldo. Tension between the factions led to the Tejeros Convention in 1897, at which an election chose Emilio Aguinaldo as president over Bonifacio and Trias. Subsequent leadership conflicts with Bonifacio culminated in his execution by Aguinaldo's soldiers. Aguinaldo agreed to a truce with the Pact of Biak-na-Bato and Aguinaldo and his fellow revolutionaries were exiled to Hong Kong. Not all the revolutionary generals complied with the agreement. One, General Francisco Macabulos, established a Central Executive Committee to serve as the interim government until a more suitable one was created. Armed conflicts resumed, this time coming from almost every province in Spanish-governed Philippines.\nIn 1898, as conflicts continued in the Philippines, the USS Maine, having been sent to Cuba because of U.S. concerns for the safety of its citizens during an ongoing Cuban revolution, exploded and sank in Havana harbor. This event precipitated the Spanish\u2013American War. After Commodore George Dewey defeated the Spanish squadron at Manila, a German squadron arrived in Manila and engaged in maneuvers which Dewey, seeing this as obstruction of his blockade, offered war\u2014after which the Germans backed down. The German Emperor expected an American defeat, with Spain left in a sufficiently weak position for the revolutionaries to capture Manila\u2014leaving the Philippines ripe for German picking.\nThe U.S. invited Aguinaldo to return to the Philippines in the hope he would rally Filipinos against the Spanish colonial government. Aguinaldo arrived on May 19, 1898, via transport provided by Dewey. On June 12, 1898, Aguinaldo declared the independence of the Philippines in Kawit, Cavite. Aguinaldo proclaimed a Revolutionary Government of the Philippines on June 23. By the time U.S. land forces arrived, the Filipinos had taken control of the entire island of Luzon except for the Spanish capitol in the walled city of Intramuros. In the Battle of Manila, on August 13, 1898, the United States captured the city from the Spanish. This battle marked an end of Filipino-American collaboration, as Filipino forces were prevented from entering the captured city of Manila, an action deeply resented by the Filipinos.\nThe First Philippine Republic (1899\u20131901).\nOn January 23, 1899, the First Philippine Republic was proclaimed under Asia's first democratic constitution, with Aguinaldo as its president. Under Aguinaldo, The Philippine Revolutionary Army was also renowned to be racially tolerant and progressive as it had a multi-ethnic composition that included various other races and nationalities asides from the native Filipino, being its officers. Juan Cailles an Indian and French Mestizo served as a Major General, the Chinese Filipino Jos\u00e9 Ignacio Paua was a Brigadier General, and Vicente Catalan who was appointed supreme Admiral of the Philippine Revolutionary Navy was a Cuban of Criollo descent. There were even Japanese, French and Italian soldiers in the Revolution and Republic, such as the Japanese officer Captain Chizuno Iwamoto, French soldier Estaquio Castellor, and Italian revolutionary Captain Camillo Ricchiardi. And, even among the defeated Spanish Army and American invaders, there are those who defected to the side of the Philippine Republic. The most famous of which was African-American Captain David Fagen who joined the Filipinos due to his disgust of American racism against both African-Americans and Filipinos. Various nations, mostly Latin American, also influenced the new Republic, the Sun in the Philippine flag was taken from the Sun of May of Peru, Argentina, and Uruguay which symbolized Inti who was the Incan Sun God, while the stars in the flag were inspired by the stars in the flags of the nations of Texas, Cuba, and Puerto Rico. The Constitution of the First Philippine Republic was also influenced by the Constitutions of Cuba, Belgium, Mexico, Brazil, Nicaragua, Costa Rica, and Guatemala, in addition to using the French Constitution of 1793.\nDespite the establishment of the First Philippine Republic, Spain and the United States had sent commissioners to Paris to draw up the terms of the Treaty of Paris to end the Spanish\u2013American War. The Filipino representative, Felipe Agoncillo, had been excluded from sessions as Aguinaldo's government was not recognized by the family of nations. Although there was substantial domestic opposition, the United States decided to annex the Philippines. Despite the fact that the first Philippine Republic was patterned after the French and American Revolutions, plus the Latin-American Republics; the Americans and French themselves sought to crush the revolution in the Philippines. In addition to Guam and Puerto Rico, Spain was forced in the negotiations to cede the Philippines to the U.S. in exchange for US$20,000,000.00. U.S. President McKinley justified the annexation of the Philippines by saying that it was \"a gift from the gods\" and that since \"they were unfit for self-government, ... there was nothing left for us to do but to take them all, and to educate the Filipinos, and uplift and civilize and Christianize them\", even though the Philippines had already been Christianized by the Spanish over the course of several centuries. The First Philippine Republic resisted the U.S. occupation, resulting in the Philippine\u2013American War (1899\u20131913).\nAmerican rule (1898\u20131946).\nFilipinos initially saw their relationship with the United States as that of two nations joined in a common struggle against Spain. However, the United States later distanced itself from the interests of the Filipino insurgents. Emilio Aguinaldo was unhappy that the United States would not commit to paper a statement of support for Philippine independence. The islands were ceded by Spain to the United States alongside Puerto Rico and Guam as a result of the latter's victory in the Spanish\u2013American War. A compensation of US$20\u00a0million was paid to Spain according to the terms of the 1898 Treaty of Paris. Relations deteriorated and tensions heightened as it became clear that the Americans were in the islands to stay.\nPhilippine\u2013American War.\nHostilities broke out on February 4, 1899, after two American privates killed three Filipino soldiers as American forces launched a major attack in San Juan, a Manila suburb. This began the Philippine\u2013American War, which cost far more money and took far more lives than the Spanish\u2013American War. Some 126,000 American soldiers would be committed to the conflict; 4,234 Americans died, as did 12,000\u201320,000 Philippine Republican Army soldiers who were part of a nationwide guerrilla movement of at least 80,000 to 100,000 soldiers.\nThe general population, caught between Americans and rebels, suffered significantly. At least 200,000 Filipino civilians died as an indirect result of the war mostly as a result of the cholera epidemic at the war's end that took between 150,000 and 200,000 lives. Atrocities were committed by both sides.\nThe poorly equipped Filipino troops were easily overpowered by American troops in open combat, but they were formidable opponents in guerrilla warfare. Malolos, the revolutionary capital, was captured on March 31, 1899. Aguinaldo and his government escaped, however, establishing a new capital at San Isidro, Nueva Ecija. On June 5, 1899, Antonio Luna, Aguinaldo's most capable military commander, was killed by Aguinaldo's guards in an apparent assassination while visiting Cabanatuan, Nueva Ecija to meet with Aguinaldo. With his best commander dead and his troops suffering continued defeats as American forces pushed into northern Luzon, Aguinaldo dissolved the regular army on November 13 and ordered the establishment of decentralized guerrilla commands in each of several military zones. Another key general, Gregorio del Pilar, was killed on December 2, 1899, in the Battle of Tirad Pass\u2014a rear guard action to delay the Americans while Aguinaldo made good his escape through the mountains.\nAguinaldo was captured at Palanan, Isabela on March 23, 1901, and was brought to Manila. Convinced of the futility of further resistance, he swore allegiance to the United States and issued a proclamation calling on his compatriots to lay down their arms, officially bringing an end to the war. However, sporadic insurgent resistance continued in various parts of the Philippines, especially in the Muslim south, until 1913.\nIn 1900, President McKinley sent the Taft Commission to the Philippines with a mandate to legislate laws and re-engineer the political system. On July 1, 1901, William Howard Taft, the head of the commission, was inaugurated as Civil Governor, with limited executive powers. The authority of the Military Governor was continued in those areas where the insurrection persisted. The Taft Commission passed laws to set up the fundamentals of the new government, including a judicial system, civil service, and local government. A Philippine Constabulary was organized to deal with the remnants of the insurgent movement and gradually assume the responsibilities of the United States Army.\nThe Tagalog, Negros, and Zamboanga Republics.\nBrigadier General James F. Smith arrived at Bacolod on March 4, 1899, as the Military Governor of the Sub-district of Negros, after receiving an invitation from Aniceto Lacson, president of the breakaway Cantonal Republic of Negros. The Negros Republic became a Pro-American protectorate of the United States. Another insurgent republic was briefly formed during American administration: the Tagalog Republic in Luzon, under Macario Sakay. In the island of Mindanao the Chavacano-speaking Republic of Zamboanga was proclaimed. That government was formed by Vicente \u00c1lvarez with the support of Jamalul Kiram II, the then Sultan of Sulu, and included Latin-American (Peruvian, Uruguayan and Argentinian) enslaved soldiers who had revolted against the Spanish colonial government and included Muslims, Lumads, and Christians in his anti-Spanish army.\nInsular Government (1901\u20131935).\nThe Philippine Organic Act was the basic law for the Insular Government, so called because civil administration was under the authority of the U.S. Bureau of Insular Affairs. This government saw its mission as one of tutelage, preparing the Philippines for eventual independence. On July 4, 1902, the office of military governor was abolished and full executive power passed from Adna Chaffee, the last military governor, to Taft, who became the first U.S. Governor-General of the Philippines.\nUnited States policies towards the Philippines shifted with changing administrations. During the early years of territorial administration, the Americans were reluctant to delegate authority to the Filipinos, but an elected Philippine Assembly was inaugurated in 1907, as the lower house of a bicameral legislature, with the appointive Philippine Commission becoming the upper house.\nPhilippines was a major target for the progressive reformers. A 1907 report to Secretary of War Taft provided a summary of what the American civil administration had achieved. It included, in addition to the rapid building of a public school system based on English teaching, and boasted about such modernizing achievements as:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;steel and concrete wharves at the newly renovated Port of Manila; dredging the River Pasig; streamlining of the Insular Government; accurate, intelligible accounting; the construction of a telegraph and cable communications network; the establishment of a postal savings bank; large-scale road-and bridge-building; impartial and incorrupt policing; well-financed civil engineering; the conservation of old Spanish architecture; large public parks; a bidding process for the right to build railways; Corporation law; and a coastal and geological survey.\nIn 1903 the American reformers in the Philippines passed two major land acts designed to turn landless peasants into owners of their farms. By 1905 the law was clearly a failure. Reformers such as Taft believed landownership would turn unruly agrarians into loyal subjects. The social structure in the rural Philippines was highly traditional and highly unequal. Drastic changes in landownership posed a major challenge to local elites, who would not accept it, nor would their peasant clients. The American reformers blamed peasant resistance to landownership for the law's failure and argued that large plantations and sharecropping was the Philippines' best path to development.\nElite Filipina women played a major role in the reform movement, especially on health issues. They specialized on such urgent needs as infant care and maternal and child health, the distribution of pure milk and teaching new mothers about children's health. The most prominent organizations were the La Protecci\u00f3n de la Infancia, and the National Federation of Women's Clubs.\nWhen Democrat Woodrow Wilson became U.S. president in 1913, new policies were launched designed to gradually lead to Philippine independence. In 1902 U.S. law established Filipinos citizenship in the Philippine Islands; unlike Hawaii in 1898 and Puerto Rico in 1918, they did not become citizens of the United States. The Jones Law of 1916 became the new basic law, promised eventual independence. It provided for the election of both houses of the legislature.\nIn socio-economic terms, the Philippines made solid progress in this period. Foreign trade had amounted to 62 million pesos in 1895, 13% of which was with the United States. By 1920, it had increased to 601\u00a0million pesos, 66% of which was with the United States. A health care system was established which, by 1930, reduced the mortality rate from all causes, including various tropical diseases, to a level similar to that of the United States itself. The practices of slavery, piracy and headhunting were suppressed but not entirely extinguished. A new educational system was established with English as the medium of instruction, eventually becoming a \"lingua franca\" of the Islands. The 1920s saw alternating periods of cooperation and confrontation with American governors-general, depending on how intent the incumbent was on exercising his powers vis-\u00e0-vis the Philippine legislature. Members of the elected legislature lobbied for immediate and complete independence from the United States. Several independence missions were sent to Washington, D.C. A civil service was formed and was gradually taken over by Filipinos, who had effectively gained control by 1918.\nPhilippine politics during the American territorial era was dominated by the Nacionalista Party, which was founded in 1907. Although the party's platform called for \"immediate independence\", their policy toward the Americans was highly accommodating. Within the political establishment, the call for independence was spearheaded by Manuel L. Quezon, who served continuously as Senate president from 1916 until 1935.\nWorld War I gave the Philippines the opportunity to pledge assistance to the US war effort. This took the form of an offer to supply a division of troops, as well as providing funding for the construction of two warships. A locally recruited national guard was created and significant numbers of Filipinos volunteered for service in the US Navy and army.\nDaniel Burnham built an architectural plan for Manila which would have transformed it into a modern city.\nFrank Murphy was the last Governor-General of the Philippines (1933\u201335), and the first U.S. High Commissioner of the Philippines (1935\u201336). The change in form was more than symbolic: it was intended as a manifestation of the transition to independence.\nCommonwealth.\nThe Great Depression in the early thirties hastened the progress of the Philippines towards independence. In the United States it was mainly the sugar industry and labor unions that had a stake in loosening the U.S. ties to the Philippines since they could not compete with the Philippine cheap sugar (and other commodities) which could freely enter the U.S. market. Therefore, they agitated in favor of granting independence to the Philippines so that its cheap products and labor could be shut out of the United States.\nIn 1933, the United States Congress passed the Hare\u2013Hawes\u2013Cutting Act as a Philippine Independence Act over President Herbert Hoover's veto. Though the bill had been drafted with the aid of a commission from the Philippines, it was opposed by Philippine Senate President Manuel L. Quezon, partially because of provisions leaving the United States in control of naval bases. Under his influence, the Philippine legislature rejected the bill. The following year, a revised act known as the Tydings\u2013McDuffie Act was finally passed. The act provided for the establishment of the Commonwealth of the Philippines with transition to full independence after a ten-year period. The commonwealth would have its own constitution and be self-governing, though foreign policy would be the responsibility of the United States, and certain legislation required approval of the United States president. The Act stipulated that the date of independence would be on July 4 following the tenth anniversary of the establishment of the Commonwealth.\nA Constitutional Convention was convened in Manila on July 30, 1934. On February 8, 1935, the 1935 Constitution of the Republic of the Philippines was approved by the convention by a vote of 177 to 1. The constitution was approved by President Franklin D. Roosevelt on March 23, 1935, and ratified by popular vote on May 14, 1935.\nOn September 17, 1935, presidential elections were held. Candidates included former president Emilio Aguinaldo, the \"Iglesia Filipina Independiente\" leader Gregorio Aglipay, and others. Manuel L. Quezon and Sergio Osme\u00f1a of the Nacionalista Party were proclaimed the winners, winning the seats of president and vice-president, respectively.\nThe Commonwealth Government was inaugurated on the morning of November 15, 1935, in ceremonies held on the steps of the Legislative Building in Manila. The event was attended by a crowd of around 300,000 people. Under the Tydings\u2013McDuffie Act this meant that the date of full independence for the Philippines was set for July 4, 1946, a timetable which was followed after the passage of almost eleven very eventful years.\nThe new government embarked on ambitious nation-building policies in preparation for economic and political independence. These included national defense (such as the National Defense Act of 1935, which organized a conscription for service in the country), greater control over the economy, the perfection of democratic institutions, reforms in education, improvement of transport, the promotion of local capital, industrialization, and the colonization of Mindanao.\nHowever, uncertainties, especially in the diplomatic and military situation in Southeast Asia, in the level of U.S. commitment to the future Republic of the Philippines, and in the economy due to the Great Depression, proved to be major problems. The situation was further complicated by the presence of agrarian unrest, and of power struggles between Osme\u00f1a and Quezon, especially after Quezon was permitted to be re-elected after one six-year term.\nA proper evaluation of the policies' effectiveness or failure is difficult due to Japanese invasion and occupation during World War II.\nWorld War II and Japanese occupation.\nMilitary.\nJapan launched a surprise attack on the Clark Air Base in Pampanga on the morning of December 8, 1941, just ten hours after the attack on Pearl Harbor. Aerial bombardment was followed by landings of ground troops on Luzon. The defending Philippine and United States troops were under the command of General Douglas MacArthur. Under the pressure of superior numbers, the defending forces withdrew to the Bataan Peninsula and to the island of Corregidor at the entrance to Manila Bay.\nOn January 2, 1942, General MacArthur declared the capital city, Manila, an open city to prevent its destruction. The Philippine defense continued until the final surrender of United States-Philippine forces on the Bataan Peninsula in April 1942 and on Corregidor in May of the same year. Most of the 80,000 prisoners of war captured by the Japanese at Bataan were forced to undertake the infamous Bataan Death March to a prison camp 105\u00a0kilometers to the north. About 10,000 Filipinos and 1,200 Americans died before reaching their destination.\nPresident Quezon and Osme\u00f1a had accompanied the troops to Corregidor and later left for the United States, where they set up a government in exile. MacArthur was ordered to Australia, where he started to plan for a return to the Philippines.\nThe Japanese military authorities immediately began organizing a new government structure in the Philippines and established the Philippine Executive Commission. They initially organized a Council of State, through which they directed civil affairs until October 1943, when Japan declared the Philippines an independent republic at Gozen Kaigi since U.S. government had promised independence of the Philippines in 1935. The Japanese-sponsored republic headed by President Jos\u00e9 P. Laurel proved to be unpopular.\nFrom mid-1942 through mid-1944, Japanese occupation of the Philippines was opposed by large-scale underground and guerrilla activity. The Philippine Army, as well as remnants of the U.S. Army Forces Far East, continued to fight the Japanese in a guerrilla war and was considered an auxiliary unit of the United States Army. Supplies and encouragement were provided by U.S. Navy submarines and a few parachute drops. Their effectiveness was such that by the end of the war, Japan controlled only twelve of the forty-eight provinces. One element of resistance in the Central Luzon area was furnished by the Hukbalahap, which armed some 30,000 people and extended their control over much of Luzon. While remaining loyal to the United States, many Filipinos hoped and believed that liberation from the Japanese would bring them freedom and their already-promised independence.\nThe Philippines was the bloodiest theater of the war for the invading empire, with at least 498,600 Japanese troops killed in fighting the combined Filipino resistance and American soldiers, a larger number of casualties compared to the second-placed theater, the entirety of China, which caused the Japanese about 455,700 casualties. The occupation of the Philippines by Japan ended at the war's conclusion. At the eve of the liberation of the Philippines, the Allied forces and the Japanese Empire waged the largest naval battle in history, by gross tonnage in the Battle of Leyte Gulf. The American army had been fighting the Philippines Campaign since October 1944, when MacArthur's Sixth United States Army landed on Leyte. Landings in other parts of the country had followed, and the Allies, with the Philippine Commonwealth troops, pushed toward Manila. However, fighting continued until Japan's formal surrender on September 2, 1945. Approximately 10,000 U.S. soldiers were missing in action in the Philippines when the war ended, more than in any other country in the Pacific or European Theaters. The Philippines suffered great loss of life and tremendous physical destruction, especially during the Battle of Manila. An estimated 1 million Filipinos had been killed, a large portion during the final months of the war, and Manila had been extensively damaged.\nHome front.\nAs in most occupied countries, crime, looting, corruption, and black markets were endemic. Japan in 1943 proposed independence on new terms, and some collaborators went along with the plan, but Japan was clearly losing the war and nothing became of it.\nWith a view of building up the economic base of the Greater East Asia Co-Prosperity Sphere, the Japanese Army envisioned using the islands as a source of agricultural products needed by its industry. For example, the Japanese had a surplus of sugar from Taiwan but a severe shortage of cotton, so they tried to grow cotton on sugar lands with disastrous results. They lacked the seeds, pesticides, and technical skills to grow cotton. Jobless farm workers flocked to the cities, where there was minimal relief and few jobs. The Japanese Army also tried using cane sugar for fuel, castor beans and copra for oil, derris for quinine, cotton for uniforms, and abaca (hemp) for rope. The plans were very difficult to implement in the face of limited skills, collapsed international markets, bad weather, and transportation shortages. The program was a failure that gave very little help to Japanese industry, and diverted resources needed for food production.\nLiving conditions were bad throughout the Philippines during the war. Transportation between the islands was difficult because of lack of fuel. Food was in very short supply, due to inflation.\nThe Third Republic (1946\u20131965).\nThe return of the Americans in spring 1945 was welcomed by nearly all the Filipinos, in sharp contrast to the situation in nearby Dutch East Indies. The collaborationist \"Philippine Republic\" set up by the Japanese under Jose P. Laurel, was highly unpopular, and the extreme destructiveness of the Japanese Army in Manila in its last days solidified Japan's image as a permanent target of hate. The pre-war Commonwealth system was reestablished under Sergio Osme\u00f1a, who became president in exile after President Quezon died in 1944. Osme\u00f1a was little-known and his Nacionalista Party was no longer such a dominant force. Osme\u00f1a supporters challenged the legitimacy of Manuel Roxas who had served as secretary to Laurel. MacArthur testified to Roxas' patriotism and the collaborationist issue disappeared after Roxas was elected in 1946 on a platform calling for closer ties with the United States; adherence to the new United Nations; national reconstruction; relief for the masses; social justice for the working class; the maintenance of peace and order; the preservation of individual rights and liberties of the citizenry; and honesty and efficiency of government. The United States Congress passed a series of programs to help rehabilitation, including $2 billion over five years for war damages and rehabilitation, and a new tariff law that provided for a 20-year transition from free trade to a low tariff with the United States. Washington also demanded that Americans would have equal rights with Filipinos in business activities, a special treatment that was resented. In 1947 the United States secured an agreement that it would keep its major military and naval bases. On the whole the transition to independence, achieved in 1946, was mostly peaceful and highly successful, despite the extreme difficulties caused by massive war damages. The special relationship with the United States remained the dominant feature until sharp criticism arose in the 1960s.\nAdministration of Manuel Roxas (1946\u20131948).\nElections were held in April 1946, with Manuel Roxas becoming the first president of the independent Republic of the Philippines. The United States ceded its sovereignty over the Philippines on July 4, 1946, as scheduled. Ending the 381 years of colonial rule in the country that had lasted from April 27, 1565, since the Spanish settlement. However, the Philippine economy remained highly dependent on United States markets\u2014more dependent, according to United States high commissioner Paul McNutt, than any single U.S. state was dependent on the rest of the country. The Philippine Trade Act, passed as a precondition for receiving war rehabilitation grants from the United States, exacerbated the dependency with provisions further tying the economies of the two countries. A military assistance pact was signed in 1947 granting the United States a 99-year lease on designated military bases in the country.\nDuring Roxas' term of office administration of the Turtle Islands and Mangsee Islands was transferred by the United Kingdom to the Republic of the Philippines. By an international treaty concluded in 1930 between the United States (in respect of its then overseas territory, the Philippine Archipelago) and the United Kingdom (in respect of its then protectorate, the State of North Borneo) the two powers agreed the international boundaries between those respective territories. In that treaty the United Kingdom also accepted that the Turtle Islands as well as the Mangsee Islands were part of the Philippines Archipelago and therefore under US sovereignty. However, by a supplemental international treaty concluded at the same time, the two powers agreed that those islands, although part of the Philippines Archipelago, would remain under the administration of the State of North Borneo's British North Borneo Company. The supplemental treaty provided that the British North Borneo Company would continue to administer those islands unless and until the United States government gave notice to the United Kingdom calling for administration of the islands to be transferred to the U.S. The U.S. never gave such a notice. On July 4, 1946, the Republic of the Philippines was born. It became the successor to the U.S. under the treaties of 1930. On July 15, 1946, the United Kingdom annexed the State of North Borneo and, in the view of the United Kingdom, became the sovereign power with respect to what had been the State of North Borneo. On September 19, 1946, the Republic of the Philippines notified the United Kingdom that it wished to take over the administration of the Turtle Islands, Tawi-Tawi and the Mangesse Islands. Pursuant to a supplemental international agreement, the transfer of administration became effective on October 16, 1947.\nRoxas did not stay long in office because of a heart attack as he was speaking at Clark Air Base on April 15, 1948. He was succeeded by his vice president Elpidio Quirino.\nAdministration of Elpidio Quirino (1948\u20131953).\nThe Roxas administration granted general amnesty to those who had collaborated with the Japanese in World War II, except for those who had committed violent crimes. Roxas died suddenly of a heart attack in April 1948, and the vice president, Elpidio Quirino, was elevated to the presidency. He ran for president in his own right in 1949, defeating Jos\u00e9 P. Laurel and winning a four-year term.\nWorld War II had left the Philippines demoralized and severely damaged. The task of reconstruction was complicated by the activities of the Communist-supported Hukbalahap guerrillas (known as \"Huks\"), who had evolved into a violent resistance force against the new Philippine government. Government policy towards the Huks alternated between gestures of negotiation and harsh suppression. Secretary of Defense Ramon Magsaysay initiated a campaign to defeat the insurgents militarily and at the same time win popular support for the government. The Huk movement had waned in the early 1950s, finally ending with the unconditional surrender of Huk leader Luis Taruc in May 1954.\nEnhancing President Manuel Roxas' policy of social justice to alleviate the lot of the common mass, President Quirino, almost immediately after assuming office, started a series of steps calculated to effectively ameliorate the economic condition of the people. After periodic surprise visits to the slums of Manila and other backward regions of the country, President Quirino officially made public a seven-point program for social security, to wit: unemployment insurance, old-age insurance, accident and permanent disability insurance, health insurance, maternity insurance, state relief, and labor opportunity.\nPresident Quirino also created the Social Security Commission, making Social Welfare Commissioner Asuncion Perez chairman of the same. This was followed by the creation of the President's Action Committee on Social Amelioration, charged with extending aid, loans, and relief to the less fortunate citizens. Both the policy and its implementation were hailed by the people as harbingers of great benefits.\nAdministration of Ramon Magsaysay (1953\u20131957).\nAs President, he was a close friend and supporter of the United States and a vocal spokesman against communism during the Cold War. He led the foundation of the Southeast Asia Treaty Organization, also known as the Manila Pact of 1954, that aimed to defeat communist-Marxist movements in Southeast Asia, South Asia and the Southwestern Pacific.\nDuring his term, he made Malaca\u00f1ang literally a \"house of the people\", opening its gates to the public. One example of his integrity followed a demonstration flight aboard a new plane belonging to the Philippine Air Force (PAF): President Magsaysay asked what the operating costs per hour were for that type of aircraft, then wrote a personal check to the PAF, covering the cost of his flight. He restored the people's trust in the military and in the government.\nMagsaysay's administration was considered one of the cleanest and most corruption-free in modern Philippine history; his rule is often cited as the Philippines' \"Golden Years\". Trade and industry flourished, the Philippine military was at its prime, and the country gained international recognition in sports, culture, and foreign affairs. The Philippines placed second on a ranking of Asia's clean and well-governed countries.\nSupported by the United States, Magsaysay was elected president in 1953 on a populist platform. He promised sweeping economic reform, and made progress in land reform by promoting the resettlement of poor people in the Catholic north into traditionally Muslim areas. Though this relieved population pressure in the north, it heightened religious hostilities. Remnants of the communist Hukbalahap were defeated by Magsaysay. He was extremely popular with the common people, and his death in an airplane crash in March 1957 dealt a serious blow to national morale. At this time, the Philippines joined the United Nations in defending South Korea from North Korean invasions. The Philippines was the first country in Southeast Asia to recognize South Korean independence and was the first to send military units to fight on South Korea's behalf.\nAdministration of Carlos P. Garcia (1957\u20131961).\nCarlos P. Garcia succeeded to the presidency after Magsaysay's death, and was elected to a four-year term in the election of November that same year. His administration emphasized the nationalist theme of \"Filipino first\", arguing that the Filipino people should be given the chances to improve the country's economy.\nGarcia successfully negotiated for the United States' relinquishment of large military land reservations. However, his administration lost popularity on issues of government corruption as his term advanced.\nAdministration of Diosdado Macapagal (1961\u20131965).\nIn the presidential elections held on November 14, 1961, Vice President Diosdado Macapagal defeated re-electionist President Carlos P. Garcia and Emmanuel Pelaez as a vice president. President Macapagal changed the independence day of the Philippines from July 4 to June 12.\nThe Agricultural Land Reform Code (RA 3844) was a major Philippine land reform law enacted in 1963 under President Macapagal.\nMarcos era.\nMacapagal ran for re-election in 1965, but was defeated by his former party-mate, Senate President Ferdinand Marcos, who had switched to the Nacionalista Party. Early in his presidency, Marcos initiated public works projects and intensified tax collection. In a failed attempt to retake east Sabah, the Jabidah massacre, where Muslim Tausug Filipinos were killed by the Philippine Army, occurred under the authority of Marcos. Due to his popularity among Christians, Marcos was re-elected president in 1969, becoming the first president of the Philippines to get a second term. Crime and civil disobedience increased. The Communist Party of the Philippines formed the New People's Army and the Moro National Liberation Front continued to fight for an independent Muslim nation in Mindanao. An explosion which killed opposition lawmakers during the proclamation rally of the senatorial slate of the Liberal Party on August 21, 1971, led Marcos to suspend the writ of habeas corpus. Protests surged and the writ was restored on January 11, 1972.\nMartial law.\nAmid the growing popularity of the opposition, Marcos declared martial law on September 21, 1972, by virtue of Proclamation No. 1081 to stifle dissent. Marcos justified the declaration by citing the threat of Communist insurgency and the alleged ambush of defense secretary Juan Ponce Enrile. Ruling by decree, Marcos curtailed press freedom and other civil liberties, abolished Congress, closed down major media establishments, ordered the arrest of opposition leaders and militant activists, including his staunchest critics: senators Benigno Aquino Jr., Jovito R. Salonga, and Jos\u00e9 W. Diokno. Crime rates plunged dramatically after a curfew was implemented. Many protesters, students, and political opponents were forced to go into exile, and a number were killed.\nA constitutional convention, which had been called for in 1970 to replace the colonial 1935 Constitution, continued the work of framing a new constitution after the declaration of martial law. The new constitution went into effect in early 1973, changing the form of government from presidential to parliamentary and allowing Marcos to stay in power beyond 1973. Marcos claimed that martial law was the prelude to creating a \"New Society\", which he would rule for more than two decades. The economy during the 1970s was robust, due to previous engagements by various administrations. However, the economy suffered after incurring massive debt and downgrading prospects of the Philippines under martial rule, while the wife of the president, Imelda Marcos, lived in high society.\nThe human rights abuses under the dictatorship particularly targeted political opponents, student activists, journalists, religious workers, farmers, and others who fought back against the administration. Based on the documentation of Amnesty International, Task Force Detainees of the Philippines, and similar human rights monitoring entities, the dictatorship was marked by 3,257 known extrajudicial killings, 35,000 documented tortures, 77 'disappeared', and 70,000 incarcerations.\nSome 2,520 of the 3,257 murder victims were tortured and mutilated before their bodies were dumped in various places for the public to discover \u2013 a tactic meant to sow fear among the public, which came to be known as \"salvaging.\" Some bodies were even cannibalized.\nFourth Republic.\nMarcos officially lifted martial law on January 17, 1981. However, he retained much of the government's power for arrest and detention. Corruption and nepotism as well as civil unrest contributed to a serious decline in economic growth and development under Marcos, whose own health faced obstacles due to lupus. The political opposition boycotted the 1981 presidential elections, which pitted Marcos against retired general Alejo Santos, in protest over his control over the results. Marcos won by a margin of over 16 million votes, allowing him to have another six-year term under the new Constitution that his administration crafted. Finance Minister Cesar Virata was eventually appointed to succeed Marcos as Prime Minister.\nIn 1983, opposition leader Ninoy Aquino was assassinated at Manila International Airport upon his return to the Philippines after a long period of exile. This coalesced popular dissatisfaction with Marcos and began a succession of events, including pressure from the United States, that culminated in a snap presidential election in February 1986. The opposition united under Aquino's widow, Corazon Aquino. The official election canvasser, the Commission on Elections (Comelec), declared Marcos the winner of the election. However, there was a large discrepancy between the Comelec results and that of Namfrel, an accredited poll watcher. The allegedly fraudulent result was rejected by local and international observers. Cardinal Jaime Sin declared support for Corazon Aquino, which encouraged popular revolts. General Fidel Ramos and Defense Minister Juan Ponce Enrile withdrew their support for Marcos. A peaceful civilian-military uprising, now popularly called the People Power Revolution, forced Marcos into exile and installed Corazon Aquino as president on February 25, 1986. The administration of Marcos has been called by various sources as a kleptocracy and a conjugal dictatorship.\nFifth Republic (1986\u2013present).\nAdministration of Corazon Aquino (1986\u20131992).\nCorazon Aquino immediately formed an emergency government to try stabilizing the country's situation that provided for a transitional \"Freedom Constitution\". A new permanent constitution would later be ratified and enacted in February 1987.\nThe constitution crippled presidential power to declare martial law, proposed the creation of autonomous regions in the Cordilleras and Muslim Mindanao, and restored the presidential form of government and the bicameral Congress.\nProgress was made in revitalizing democratic institutions and respect for civil liberties, but Aquino's administration was also viewed as weak and fractious, and a return to full political stability and economic development was hampered by several attempted coups staged by disaffected members of the Philippine military.\nEconomic growth was additionally hampered by a series of natural disasters, including the 1991 eruption of Mount Pinatubo that left 700 dead and 200,000 homeless.\nDuring the Aquino presidency, Manila witnessed six unsuccessful coup attempts, the most serious occurring in December 1989.\nIn 1991, the Philippine Senate rejected a treaty that would have allowed a 10-year extension of the U.S. military bases in the country. The United States turned over Clark Air Base in Pampanga to the government in November, and Subic Bay Naval Base in Zambales in December 1992, ending almost a century of U.S. military presence in the Philippines.\nAdministration of Fidel V. Ramos (1992\u20131998).\nIn the 1992 elections, Defense Secretary Fidel V. Ramos, endorsed by Aquino, won the presidency with just 23.6% of the vote in a field of seven candidates. Early in his administration, Ramos declared \"national reconciliation\" his highest priority and worked at building a coalition to overcome the divisiveness of the Aquino years.\nHe legalized the Communist Party and laid the groundwork for talks with communist insurgents, Muslim separatists, and military rebels, attempting to convince them to cease their armed activities against the government. In June 1994, Ramos signed into law a general conditional amnesty covering all rebel groups, and Philippine military and police personnel accused of crimes committed while fighting the insurgents.\nIn October 1995, the government signed an agreement bringing the military insurgency to an end. A peace agreement with the Moro National Liberation Front (MNLF), a major separatist group fighting for an independent homeland in Mindanao, was signed in 1996, ending the 24-year-old struggle. However, an MNLF splinter group, the Moro Islamic Liberation Front, continued the armed struggle for an Islamic state.\nEfforts by Ramos supporters to gain passage of an amendment that would allow him to run for a second term were met with large-scale protests, leading Ramos to declare he would not seek re-election.\nOn his presidency the death penalty was revived in the light of the rape-slay case of UPLB students Eileen Sarmienta and Allan Gomez in 1993 and the first person to be executed was Leo Echegaray in 1999.\nAdministration of Joseph Estrada (1998\u20132001).\nJoseph Estrada, a former movie actor who had served as Ramos' vice president, was elected president by a landslide victory in 1998. His election campaign pledged to help the poor and develop the country's agricultural sector. He enjoyed widespread popularity, particularly among the poor. Estrada assumed office amid the Asian Financial Crisis. The economy did, however, recover from a low \u22120.6% growth in 1998 to a moderate growth of 3.4% by 1999.\nLike his predecessor there was a similar attempt to change the 1987 constitution. The process is termed as CONCORD or Constitutional Correction for Development. Unlike Charter change under Ramos and Arroyo the CONCORD proposal, according to its proponents, would only amend the 'restrictive' economic provisions of the constitution that is considered as impeding the entry of more foreign investments in the Philippines. However, it was not successful in amending the constitution.\nAfter the worsening secessionist movement in Mindanao in April 2000, Estrada declared an \"all-out-war\" against the Moro Islamic Liberation Front (MILF). The government later captured 46 MILF camps including the MILF's headquarters, Camp Abubakar.\nIn October 2000, however, Estrada was accused of having accepted millions of pesos in payoffs from illegal gambling businesses. He was impeached by the House of Representatives but his impeachment trial in the Senate broke down when the senate voted to block examination of the president's bank records. In response, massive street protests erupted demanding Estrada's resignation. Faced with street protests, cabinet resignations, and a withdrawal of support from the armed forces, Estrada resigned from office on January 20, 2001.\nAdministration of Gloria Macapagal Arroyo (2001\u20132010).\nVice President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo (the daughter of President Diosdado Macapagal) was sworn in as Estrada's successor on the day of his departure. Her accession to power was further legitimized by the mid-term congressional and local elections held four months later, when her coalition won an overwhelming victory.\nArroyo's initial term in office was marked by fractious coalition politics as well as a military mutiny in Manila in July 2003 that led her to declare a month-long nationwide state of rebellion. Later on in December 2002 she said would not run in the May 10, 2004, presidential election, but she reversed herself in October 2003 and decided to join the race anyway.\nShe was elected and sworn in for her own six-year term as president on June 30, 2004. In 2005, a tape of a wiretapped conversation surfaced bearing the voice of Arroyo apparently asking an election official if her margin of victory could be maintained. The tape sparked protests calling for Arroyo's resignation. Arroyo admitted to inappropriately speaking to an election official, but denied allegations of fraud and refused to step down. Attempts to impeach the president failed later that year.\nHalfway through her second term, Arroyo unsuccessfully attempted to push for an overhaul of the constitution to transform the present presidential-bicameral republic into a federal parliamentary-unicameral form of government, which critics describe would be a move that would allow her to stay in power as Prime Minister.\nHer term saw the completion of infrastructure projects like Line 2 in 2004.\nNumerous other scandals (such as the Maguindanao massacre, wherein 58 people were killed, and the unsuccessful NBN-ZTE broadband deal) took place in the dawn of her administration.\nOn May 20, 2008, the K\u201312 curriculum was implemented in the Philippines through the Omnibus Education Reform Act of 2008 filed by Mar Roxas and further emphasized by ASEAN Charter on December 15, 2008, adding two more years to the country's pre-university cycle. Its implementation process took 9 years and three presidents from May 2008 to June 5, 2017, from Arroyo to Rodrigo Duterte.\nShe formally ended her term as president on June 30, 2010 (wherein she was succeeded by Senator Benigno Aquino III) and ran for a seat in congress the same year (becoming the second president after Jose P. Laurel to run for lower office following the presidency).\nAdministration of Benigno Aquino III (2010\u20132016).\nBenigno Aquino III, the son of president Corazon C. Aquino, began his presidency on June 30, 2010. His administration claimed to be focused on major reforms that would bring greater transparency, reduced poverty, reduced corruption, and a booming market which will give birth to a newly industrialized nation.\nHe continued the 9-year implementation process of the K\u201312 curriculum that was started under his predecessor Gloria Macapagal Arroyo in 2008. Part of the it is the new curriculum's effectivity on April 24, 2012. To maintain continuity, Kindergarten was made compulsory through Kidergarten Education Reform Act of 2012 and the further 12 years by Enhanced Basic Education Act of 2013.\nThe 2010 Manila hostage crisis caused deeply strained relations between Manila and Hong Kong for a time.\nThe Sultanate of Panay, the newset of 21 in the country, was formally established covering 10 000 Muslims in the island.\nTensions regarding Sabah due to the Sultanate of Sulu's claim gradually rose during the early years of his administration. Standoffs in Sabah between The Sultanate of Sulu's Royal Army and the Malaysian forces struck in 2013. A surprise incursion by the supporters of the Sultanate of Sulu on Sabah resulted in the killing of civilians and members of the Malaysian armed forces. Following this attack, Malaysia ceased the annual cession of approximately $1,000 to the Sultan's heirs, which it had honored as part of an 1878 agreement with a British trading company over the use of the Sultanate's territory. In response to Malaysia's suspension of the annual payments, the Sulu claimants sought international arbitration, demanding US$32 billion. In January 2022, Spanish arbitrator Gonzalo Stampa ruled in their favor, awarding a historic US$14.9 billion. However, on 27 June 2023, the French Court of Appeals annulled the award, delivering a landmark victory for Malaysia. Recently, Stampa was convicted of contempt of court for defying rulings from the Madrid High Court and sentenced to six months in prison.\nIn 2012, the Framework Agreement on the Bangsamoro was signed to create the Bangsamoro Government in Mindanao. In response, the Bangsamoro Islamic Freedom Fighters (BIFF) was assembled by religious extremists with the goal of seceding from the Philippines.\nThe economy performed well at 7.2% GDP growth, the second fastest in Asia.\nThe country was hit by Typhoon Yolanda (Haiyan) on November 8, 2013, which heavily devastated the Visayas. Massive rehabilitation efforts by foreign world powers sending aid, devolved into chaos following the revelations that the administration and that the government had not been properly handing out the aid packages and preference for political maneuvering over the safety of the people, leading to mass deterioration of food and medical supplies.\nIn 2014, the Comprehensive Agreement on the Bangsamoro was signed after 17 years of negotiation with the Moro Islamic Liberation Front (MILF), a move which sought to bring peace in Mindanao and the Sulu. When US President Barack Obama visited the Philippines on April 28, 2014, Aquino signed the Enhanced Defense Cooperation Agreement, facilitating the return of United States Armed Forces bases into the country.\nFrom January 15 to 19, 2015, Pope Francis stayed in the Philippines for a series of publicity tours and paid visits to the victims of Typhoon Haiyan. On January 25, 2015, 44 members of the Philippine National Police-Special Action Force (PNP-SAF) were killed during an encounter between MILF and BIFF in Mamasapano, Maguindanao, leading to a delay in the passage of the Bangsamoro Basic Law.\nUnder Aquino's presidency, the Philippines has had controversial clashes with the People's Republic of China on a number of issues (such as the standoff in Scarborough Shoal in the South China Sea and the dispute over the Spratly Islands). This resulted in the proceedings of the Philippines to file a sovereignty case against China in a global arbitration tribunal. Later on in 2014, the Aquino Administration then filed a case to the Arbitration Tribunal in The Hague which challenged Beijing's claim in the South China Sea after Chinese ships were accused of harassing a small Philippine vessel carrying goods for stationed military personnel in the South Thomas Shoal where an old Philippine ship had been stationed for many years.\nOn January 12, 2016, the Philippine Supreme Court upheld the Enhanced Defense Cooperation Agreement paving the way for the return of United States Armed Forces bases into the country. On March 23, 2016, Diwata-1 was launched to the International Space Station (ISS), becoming the country's first micro-satellite and the first satellite to be built and designed by Filipinos.\nAdministration of Rodrigo Duterte (2016\u20132022).\nDavao City mayor Rodrigo Duterte succeeded Aquino and became the first president from Mindanao. Under Duterte's first 100 days, the government launched a 24-hour complaint office accessible to the public through a nationwide hotline, 8888, and changed the nationwide emergency telephone number from 117 to 911. Duterte launched an intensified anti-drug campaign to fulfill a campaign promise of wiping out criminality in six months; by August 2019, the death toll for the war on drugs was 5,779.\nThe implementation of K\u201312 from 2008, carried over from his predecessors Arroyo and Aquino III, continued throughout Duterte administration until the new curriculum was implemented on Grade 6 on June 5, 2017, which entirely phased out the older 1945\u20132017 K\u20134th Year system first used on May 28, 1945, and completed the 9-year process of the former.\nOn July 12, 2016, the Permanent Court of Arbitration ruled in favor of the Philippines in its case against China's claims in the South China Sea; the ruling deprived surface features in the contested area of territorial-generating status, effectively deflating China's nine-dash line territorial claims. Later that November, president Ferdinand Marcos' remains were buried at the \"Libingan ng mga Bayani\" (the country's official cemetery for heroes) after the Supreme Court of the Philippines ruled in favor of the burial, provoking protests from various groups.\nFollowing clashes between government forces and the Maute group in Marawi, Duterte, on May 23, 2017, signed Proclamation No. 216 declaring a 60-day martial law in Mindanao. To attain inclusive economic growth and improve quality of life in the country, in 2017, the Duterte administration launched its socioeconomic policy, DuterteNomics, in which infrastructure development and industrialization were a significant part of. The policy included the Build! Build! Build! Infrastructure Plan, which aimed to sustain the country's economic growth and accelerate poverty reduction by developing transport infrastructure such as railways, roads, airports, and seaports, irrigation, and flood control projects. Duterte signed the Universal Access to Quality Tertiary Education Act, providing free tuition and exemption from other fees in public universities and colleges, as well as subsidies for those enrolled in private higher education institutions. Duterte also signed into law the Universal Health Care Act, the creation of the Department of Human Settlements and Urban Development, establishing a national cancer control program, and allowing subscribers to keep their mobile numbers for life.\nIn 2018, the Bangsamoro Organic Law was legislated into law and was ratified following a successful plebiscite a year later. The Bangsamoro transition period began, paving the way for the formal creation of the Bangsamoro ARMM.\nAdministration of Bongbong Marcos (2022\u2013present).\nIn May 2022, Ferdinand Marcos Jr. (known by his nickname \"Bongbong\"), son of former president and dictator Ferdinand Marcos, won the presidential election by a landslide. His vice presidential candidate was Sara Duterte, daughter of then-president Rodrigo Duterte. On June 30, 2022, Marcos was sworn in as the Philippine president and Sara Duterte was sworn in as vice-president. A few weeks after his inauguration as president, the 2022 Luzon earthquake hit Northern Luzon, resulting in 11 casualties and 615 people injured.\nBagong Pilipinas (transl.\u2009New Philippines), the administration's term for its brand of governance and leadership, was officially launched with a kick-off rally on January 28, 2024, at the Quirino Grandstand in Manila, the capital of the Philippines. It was attended by about 400,000 supporters with the participation of Vice President Sara Duterte, other key Malaca\u00f1ang officials, and Manila Mayor Honey Lacuna. The rally was streamed online to engage a wider audience beyond Manila.\nAs president, Marcos signed into law the creation of the Maharlika Investment Fund, the first sovereign wealth fund of the Philippines. Under his term, the Philippines ratified the RCEP in February, and entered into force in June 2023. Marcos also went on many foreign trips in hopes to attract more foreign investments in the country.\nDuring Marcos' administration, the number of American citizens who lived in the country increased from 300,000 as of 2023[ [update]], to 750,000 by year 2025, (forming 0.75% of the demographics) mainly due to his liberal visa policies. Furthermore, up to 250,000 Amerasians, (0.25% of the country), can be found living across the cities of Clark, Angeles, Manila, and Olongapo(When combined, American and Amerasian descent, form 1% of the population).\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23442", "revid": "28903366", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23442", "title": "Geography of the Philippines", "text": "The Philippines is an archipelago that comprises 7,641 islands, and with a total land area of , it is the world's fifth largest island country. The eleven largest islands contain 95% of the total land area. The largest of these islands is Luzon at about . The next largest island is Mindanao at about . The archipelago is around from the Asian mainland and is located between Taiwan and Borneo.\nThe Philippine archipelago is divided into three Island groups: Luzon, the Visayas, and Mindanao. The Luzon islands include Luzon itself, Palawan, Mindoro, Marinduque, Masbate, Romblon, Catanduanes, Batanes, and Polillo. The Visayas is a group of islands in the central Philippines, the largest of which are: Panay, Negros, Cebu, Bohol, Leyte, Samar, Siquijor, Biliran, and Guimaras. The Mindanao islands include Mindanao itself, Dinagat, Siargao, Camiguin, Samal, plus the Sulu Archipelago, composed primarily of Basilan, Sulu, and Tawi-Tawi.\nThe Philippines lies between 4\u00b023' and 21\u00b0 North (N) latitude and between 116\u00b0 and 127\u00b0 East (E) longitude.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nPhysical geography.\nThe Philippine archipelago lies in Southeast Asia, and numbers some 7,641 islands. The Philippines occupies an area that stretches for from about the fifth to the twentieth parallels north latitude. The total land area is , with cadastral survey data suggesting it may be larger. This makes it the fifth largest island country in the world. Only approximately 1,000 of its islands are populated, and fewer than one-half of these are larger than . Eleven islands make up 95 percent of the Philippine landmass, and two of these \u2014 Luzon and Mindanao \u2014 measure and , respectively. They, together with the cluster of islands in Visayas in between them, represent the three principal regions of the archipelago that are identified by the three stars on the Philippine flag. The Philippines is broken up into many islands by the sea. This gives it the fifth longest coastline of in the world. The Exclusive economic zone of the Philippines covers , from its shores. It is located between 116\u00b0\u00a040', and 126\u00b0\u00a034' E longitude and 4\u00b0\u00a040' and 21\u00b0\u00a010' N latitude and is bordered by the Philippine Sea to the east, the South China Sea to the west, and the Celebes Sea to the south. The island of Borneo is located a few hundred kilometers southwest and Taiwan is located directly to the north. The Moluccas and Sulawesi are located to the south-southwest and Palau is located to the east of the islands.\nOff the coast of eastern Mindanao is the Philippine Trench, which descends to a depth of . The Philippines is part of a western Pacific arc system characterized by active volcanoes. Among the most notable peaks are Mount Mayon near Legazpi City, Taal Volcano south of Manila, and Mount Apo in Mindanao. All of the Philippine islands are prone to earthquakes. The northern Luzon highlands, or Cordillera Central, rise to between and , and, together with the Sierra Madre in the northeastern portion of Luzon and the mountains of Mindanao, boast rain forests that provide refuge for numerous upland tribal groups. The rain forests also offer prime habitat for more than 500 species of birds, including the Philippine eagle (or monkey-eating eagle), some 1,100 species of orchids, and some 8,500 species of flowering plants.\nThe longest river is the Cagayan River in northern Luzon, measuring about . Manila Bay, upon the shore of which the capital city of Manila lies, is connected to Laguna de Bay, the largest lake in the Philippines, by the Pasig River. Subic Bay, Davao Gulf, and the Moro Gulf are other important bays. The San Juanico Strait separates the islands of Samar and Leyte but it is traversed by the San Juanico Bridge. The Puerto Princesa Subterranean River, which runs underground through a karst landscape before reaching the ocean, is a UNESCO World Heritage Site.\nOther extensive river systems are the Pulangi River, which flows into the Mindanao River (Rio Grande de Mindanao); the Agusan, in Mindanao which flows north into the Mindanao Sea; and the Pampanga, which flows south from east Central Luzon into Manila Bay. Several rivers have been harnessed for hydroelectric power.\nA global remote sensing analysis suggested in 2018 that there were of tidal flats in the Philippines and is therefore ranked as the 15th country in terms of how much tidal flat occurs there.\nTo protect the country's biological resources, the government has taken a first step of preparing a Biodiversity Action Plan to address conservation of threatened species.\nMost of the islands used to be covered by tropical rainforests. However, illegal logging has reduced forest cover to less than 10% of the total land area.\nGeology.\nThe Philippine Archipelago is geologically part of the Philippine Mobile Belt located between the Philippine Sea Plate, the South China Sea Basin of the Eurasian Plate, and the Sunda Plate. The Philippine Trench (also called the Mindanao Trench) is a submarine trench in length found directly east of the Philippine Mobile Belt and is the result of a collision of tectonic plates. The Philippine Sea Plate is subducting under the Philippine Mobile Belt at the rate of about per year. The Philippine Fault System consists of a series of seismic faults that produce several earthquakes per year, most of which are not felt. The Galathea Depth in the Philippine Trench is the deepest point in the country and the third deepest in the world. The trench is located in the Philippine Sea.\nThe islands are composed of volcanic, coral, principal rock formations. Twelve main forest formations are classified, which are the Mangrove forest, Beach forest, Freshwater swamp forest, Peat swamp forest, Molave forest (Forest over Limestone), Bonsai forest (Forest over Ultramafic rocks), Tropical semi-evergreen rain forest, Tropical moist deciduous forest, Dipterocarp forest (Tropical lowland evergreen rainforest), Tropical lower montane rain forest, Mossy forest (tropical upper montane rain forest), and Tropical sub-alpine forest. The highest mountain is Mount Apo. It measures up to above sea level and is located on the island of Mindanao. The second highest point can be found on Mindanao as well, at Mount Dulang-dulang, a peak above sea level.\nSituated on the western fringes of the Pacific Ring of Fire, the Philippines experiences frequent seismic and volcanic activity. The Benham Plateau to the east in the Philippine Sea is an undersea region active in tectonic subduction. Around 20 earthquakes are registered daily, though most are too weak to be felt. The last major earthquake was the 1990 Luzon earthquake. There are many active volcanoes such as the Mayon Volcano, Mount Pinatubo, and Taal Volcano. The eruption of Mount Pinatubo in June 1991 produced the second largest terrestrial eruption of the 20th\u00a0century. The Philippines is the world's second-biggest geothermal energy producer behind the United States, with 18% of the country's electricity needs being met by geothermal power.\nMount Pinatubo is notorious for its destructive VEI-6 eruption on June 15, 1991. Taal Volcano, one of the Decade Volcanoes, had a VEI-3.7 eruption on January 12, 2020. Mount Mayon is renowned for having an almost perfect cone, but has a violent history of 47 eruptions since 1616 and its VEI-4 eruption on June 23, 1897, rained fire for seven days.\nSignificant mineral deposits exist as a result of the country's complex geologic structure and high level of seismic activity. These deposites are considered highly valuable. The country is thought to have the second-largest gold deposits after South Africa, along with a large amount of copper deposits. Palladium, originally discovered in South America, was found to have the world's largest deposits in the Philippines too. Romblon island is a source of high-quality marble. Other minerals include chromite, nickel, and zinc. Despite this, a lack of law enforcement, poor management, opposition due to the presence of indigenous communities, and past instances of environmental damages and disasters, have resulted in these mineral resources remaining largely untapped.\nLuzon.\nThe Batanes and Babuyan islands.\nThe Batanes and Babuyan Islands are situated on the northernmost extremity of the Philippines at Luzon Strait facing Taiwan. It contains the northernmost point of land, the islet of Y'Ami in the Batanes Islands, separated from Taiwan by the Bashi Channel (c. wide).\nWestern Luzon.\nThis region stretches from Mairaira Point in Pagudpud, Ilocos Norte in the north to Cochinos Point in Mariveles, Bataan in the south. The terrain ranges from coastal plains to rugged mountains bordered by the South China Sea in the west and the Cordillera Central and Zambales mountain ranges in the east. Western Luzon is known for its beaches, surf spots and historic towns.\nCagayan Valley.\nNestled between the Cordilleras in the west and the Sierra Madre mountain ranges in the east is the Cagayan Valley, also the name of the administrative region which it covers. Through its center runs the country's longest river, the Cagayan, flowing in a northward direction before emptying its waters in the Luzon Strait at the town of Aparri.\nCordilleras and Caraballos.\nThe Cordilleras and Caraballos, together with the Sierra Madre Range, form the main mountain system in Northern Luzon.\nThe Cordilleras consists of two, sometimes three, mountain ranges that are found in northwestern central Luzon. The first, called \"Caraballo del Sur\", forms the nucleus of the system and has its highest peaks in the border between the provinces of Abra, Ilocos Norte and Cagayan. \"Caraballo Occidentalles\", is further divided into two ranges, the Cordillera Norte and Cordillera Central. They line the central portions of the Cordillera Administrative Region.\nThe Caraballos (\"Caraballo de Baler\") start where the Sierra Madre and the Cordilleras meet. They are found south of Cagayan Valley, northeast of the Central Luzon Plains.\nSierra Madre Mountains.\nLying in the eastern portion of Luzon is the longest mountain range in the Philippines, the Sierra Madre, stretching from Quezon province in the south to Cagayan in the north. 80 percent of the mountain range is tropical rainforest, which is diminishing from rampant illegal logging activity. The range serves as the eastern wall of Luzon Island that protects inhabitants from tropical cyclones usually coming from the Pacific Ocean.\nCentral Luzon Plains.\nThe largest plain of the nation is situated in the Central Luzon region and produces most of the national rice supply, earning itself the nickname \"Rice Bowl of the Philippines\". The plains encompass the provinces of Bulacan, Nueva Ecija, Pampanga, Tarlac and Pangasinan.\nManila-Katagalugan plains.\nSouth of the Central Luzon plains lies the largest inland freshwater lake in Southeast Asia, Laguna de Bay. To the east of the lake is a plain that stretches westward to Manila Bay. Large rivers from bays and mountain springs traverse the plain. In the northern part of the region, that is, Manila and Rizal, most of the plain had been converted into cities and towns, and are thus industrialized. Lying east of the lake is the southern terminus of the Sierra Madre mountain range at northern Quezon province.\nTo the southwest of Laguna de Bay is the nation's third largest lake, the Taal, bordered to the north by the Tagaytay Ridge, a ridge stretching from southern Cavite to northern Batangas provinces.\nBondoc Peninsula.\nThe Bondoc Peninsula is located in the southeastern part of Quezon Province.\nBicol Peninsula.\nSoutheast of Laguna de Bay lies the Bicol Peninsula, connected to mainland Luzon by the isthmus of Tayabas. The predominantly flat landscape features several solitary peaks, usually active volcanoes, which include Iriga, Mayon and Bulusan.\nThe peninsula has an irregular coastline that features large bays and gulfs, which include Lamon Bay, San Miguel Bay, Lagonoy Gulf, and Albay Gulf to the north, and the Tayabas Bay, Ragay Gulf and Sorsogon Bay to the south.\nMindoro Island.\nMindoro coastal plains.\nMindoro's coastal plains are characterized by rice and corn fields, rivers, beaches, and extensive open space areas. Most of the population is concentrated on the northern and eastern coast of this island where the city of Calapan and Puerto Galera are located.\nMindoro highlands.\nThe Mindoro mountain range begins with Mount Halcon and is further divided into three. The northwest ends at Calavite Point and is a landmark for ships. The east originates from Lake Naujan and the west follows the Mindoro Strait.\nPalawan.\nKalayaan islands (Spratly Islands).\nThe Kalayaan Islands are located to the west of Palawan. \"Kalayaan\" is a Filipino word meaning \"freedom\".\nVisayas.\nPanay-Negros-Cebu Area.\nPanay is the third largest island in the Philippines, behind Mindanao and Luzon. Negros is home to the Canlaon Volcano, one of the active volcanoes in the Philippines. Cebu is a long and narrow island and is the 126th largest island in the world. Other islands nearby include: Guimaras to the south, Negros to the southeast, Bantayan Island and the Romblon island group to the north and Boracay nearby to the northeast.\nMindanao.\nEastern Pacific Cordillera.\nThe eastern coast of Mindanao features a long mountain range, the Eastern Pacific Cordillera, which stretches from Bilar Point at Surigao in the north to Cape San Agustin at Davao in the south. Forming its northern portion are the Diwata Mountains (also spelled \"Diuata\"), separated from the south by low passes situated at the middle. To the east of the range are narrow strips of lowland that feature several inlets and bays, the most prominent of which include the Lianga and Bislig bays.\nDavao-Agusan Trough.\nTo the west of the Pacific Cordillera lies an extensive lowland, the Davao-Agusan Trough. Its northern portion includes the Agusan Valley which forms the lower river basin of the Agusan River. The river flows in a northward direction and empties into Butuan Bay. Draining the southern portion of the lowland are several other rivers, which include the Tagum, flowing southward to Davao Gulf.\nCentral Mindanao highlands.\nSituated west of the Davao-Agusan Trough is a complex series of mountain ranges called the Central Mindanao Highlands (also known as the \"Central Cordillera\"). From these mountains form the headwaters of several rivers which include the Rio Grande de Mindanao, Pulangi, Maridagao and Tagoloan rivers. Several tall mountains, such as Mount Apo, the country's highest are found within the range.\nBukidnon-Lanao plateaus.\nThe north-central portion of Mindanao is dominated by an extensive highland region, the Bukidnon-Lanao Plateau, which includes the Kitanglad and Kalatungan mountain ranges. Within the plateau lies the country's second largest lake, Lake Lanao situated at an elevation of 2,296 feet, drained by the Agus River flowing northward to its river mouth at Iligan Bay.\nCotabato Basin.\nSouth of the Bukidnon-Lanao Plateau lies a large depression, the Cotabato Basin, which forms the lower river basin of the country's second largest river system, the Rio Grande de Cagayan (also known as the \"Mindanao River\"). Surrounded by three mountain ranges, the basin's only opening to the sea is to the northwest at Illana Bay, where the Mindanao River empties into the ocean.\nTo the southeast of the main basin are two large valleys, the Koronadal and Allah valleys.\nTiruray highlands.\nSituated south and west of the Cotabato Basin are a moderately high mountain range, the Tiruray Highlands, which block off the Basin from the southern coastline. South of the highlands are narrow strips of coastlines.\nZamboanga peninsula.\nAt the northwestern tip of Mindanao is the generally mountainous Zamboanga Peninsula. The chain of mountain ranges in this region is called \"Zamboanga Cordilleras\", with the highest elevation at Mount Dapi, which is high.\nThe southern coastline is irregular, featuring two smaller peninsulas, the Sibuguey and Baganian, extending southward to the Moro Gulf.\nOutlying islands of Mindanao.\nDinagat and Siargao Islands.\nTo the north of the Diwata Mountains at northeast Mindanao lie Siargao island and the Dinagat group of islands.\nSulu Archipelago.\nSouthwest of the Zamboanga Peninsula is the Sulu Archipelago, a chain of islands which comprise the smaller archipelago provinces of Basilan, Sulu, and Tawi-Tawi.\nAdministrative geography.\nThe Philippines is divided into a hierarchy of local government units (LGUs) with the 81 provinces and 38 independent cities as the primary unit. Provinces are further subdivided into component cities and municipalities, both of which consist of barangays, the smallest local government unit.\nRegions.\nThere are 17 regions comprising the Philippines. Each region, with the exception of the National Capital Region, is further subdivided into component provinces. The National Capital Region is divided into four special districts.\nMost government offices establish regional offices in a city to serve the constituent provinces. Such cities are designated as \"regional centers\". The regions themselves do not possess a separate local government, with the exception of the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region.\nProvinces.\nForming the regions, with the exception of the National Capital, are the 82 provinces. Each province has a capital city or municipality.\nLandlocked and island provinces.\nOf the 82 provinces of the Philippines, 16 are \"landlocked\", and 16 are \"island provinces\".\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nClimate.\nThe Philippines has a tropical maritime climate that is usually hot and humid. There are three seasons: \"tag-init\" or \"tag-araw\", the hot dry season or summer from March to May; \"tag-ulan\", the rainy season from June to November; and \"tag-lamig\", the cool dry season from December to February. The southwest monsoon (from May to October) is known as the Habagat, and the dry winds of the northeast monsoon (from November to April), the Amihan. Temperatures usually range from to although it can get cooler or hotter depending on the season. The coolest month is January; the warmest is May. Some locations have no dry season (meaning, all months have an average rainfall of above ) and certain higher-altitude areas can have a subtropical climate. Manila and most of the lowland areas are hot and dusty from March to May. Even at this time, however, temperatures rarely rise above . Mean annual sea-level temperatures rarely fall below . Annual rainfall measures as much as in the mountainous east coast section of the country, but less than in some of the sheltered valleys.\nThe average yearly temperature is around . In considering temperature, location in terms of latitude and longitude is not a significant factor. Whether in the extreme north, south, east, or west of the country, temperatures at sea level tend to be in the same range. Altitude usually has more of an impact. The average annual temperature of Baguio at an elevation of above sea level is , making it a popular destination during hot summers. Annual rainfall measures as much as in the mountainous east coast section but less than in some of the sheltered valleys. Monsoon rains, although hard and drenching, are not normally associated with high winds and waves. But the Philippines sit astride the typhoon belt, and it suffers an annual onslaught of dangerous storms from July through October. These are especially hazardous for northern and eastern Luzon and the Bicol and Eastern Visayas regions, but Manila gets devastated periodically as well.\nIn the last decade, the Philippines has been hit severely by natural disasters. In 2005 alone, Central Luzon was hit by both a drought, which sharply curtailed hydroelectric power, and by a typhoon that flooded practically all of low-lying Manila's streets. Still more damaging was the 1990 earthquake that devastated a wide area in Luzon, including Baguio and other northern areas. The city of Cebu and nearby areas were struck by a typhoon that killed more than a hundred people, sank vessels, destroyed part of the sugar crop, and cut off water and electricity for several days. The Philippines is prone to about six to nine storms which make landfall each year, on average. The 1991 Mount Pinatubo eruption also damaged much of Central Luzon, the lahar burying towns and farmland, and the ashes affecting global temperatures.\nSitting astride the typhoon belt, the islands experience 15-20 typhoons annually from July to October, with around nineteen typhoons entering the Philippine area of responsibility in a typical year and eight or nine making landfall. Historically typhoons were sometimes referred to as \"baguios\". The wettest recorded typhoon to hit the Philippines dropped in Baguio from July 14 to 18, 1911. The Philippines is highly exposed to climate change and is among the world's ten countries that are most vulnerable to climate change risks.\nBuilding construction is undertaken with natural disasters in mind. Most rural housing has consisted of nipa huts that are easily damaged but are inexpensive and easy to replace. Most urban buildings are steel and concrete structures designed (not always successfully) to resist both typhoons and earthquakes. Damage is still significant, however, and many people are displaced each year by typhoons, earthquakes, and other natural disasters. In 1987 alone the Department of Social Welfare and Development helped 2.4 million victims of natural disasters.\nStatistics.\nCIA Statistics.\nUnless otherwise indicated, the information below is taken from CIA Factbook information for the Philippines.\n* Total: \n**country rank in the world: \"72nd\"\n* Land: \n* Water: \n*Australia comparative: approximately times the size of Victoria\n*Canada comparative: approximately the size of the Yukon\n*United States comparative: slightly larger than Arizona\n*United Kingdom comparative: approximately times the size of the United Kingdom\n*EU comparative: slightly smaller than Italy\nNatural hazards.\nThe Philippines sit astride typhoon belt and are usually affected by 15 and struck by five to six cyclonic storms per year; landslides; active volcanoes; destructive earthquakes; tsunamis.\nEnvironment - current issues.\nTyphoon Haiyan in November 2013 caused major problems.\nSubnational enclaves and exclaves.\nIn political geography, an enclave is a territory or part of a territory lying wholly within the boundaries of another, and an exclave is one which is politically attached to a larger piece but not actually contiguous with it. Many entities are both enclaves and exclaves, but the two are not synonymous.\nSubnational quadripoint.\nA quadripoint is a point on the Earth that touches four distinct regions. Such points are often called \"four corners\", from the corners of the four regions meeting there.\nMore than four.\nFour distinct geographic divisions converging at a single point is not uncommon in the Philippines, and there are other points of convergence between five or more divisions that can be found.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nGeographic center.\nThe island province of Marinduque prides itself as being the geographic center of the Philippines. The Marinduque governor has stated that their claim to be the Geographical Center of the Philippines has received notice and support from the National Mapping and Resource Information Authority (NAMRIA). The Luzon Datum of 1911 in Marinduque is used as point number one for all map makers in the country.\nThe boundaries of the Philippine archipelago are described in Article III of the Treaty of Paris (1898), as comprising an irregular polygon. A box enclosing that polygon would have corners at 20\u00b0N 116\u00b0E, 20\u00b0N 127\u00b0E, 4.75\u00b0N 127\u00b0E, 4.75\u00b0N 116\u00b0E. The center of this box would lie at 121.5 E, 12.375 N. That point lies roughly in the center of the Tablas Strait between the islands of Tablas and Mindoro.\n\"Republic Act No. 9522\", \"An Act to Define the Baselines of the Territorial Sea of the Philippines\", describes an irregular polygon which fits within a box with its center at 121\u00b044'47.45\"E 12\u00b046'6.1252\"N, a point also roughly in the center of the Tablas Strait.\nThe \"CIA Factbook\" locates the Philippines at 13\u00b0N 122\u00b0E.\nThe extreme points under Philippine control as of 2010[ [update]] are:\nThe center of a box enclosing these points would be located at 12\u00b046\u20196.13\"N, 120\u00b026\u201936.46\"E. That point is located in the Mindoro Strait, about NNE of Apo Island, in Sablayan, Occidental Mindoro.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23443", "revid": "50750033", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23443", "title": "Demographics of the Philippines", "text": "Demographic features of the Philippines include population density, ethnicity, education level, health of the populace, economic status, religious affiliations, and other aspects of the population. The Philippines annualized population growth rate between the years 2020 and 2024 was 0.80%. According to the 2024 census, the population of the Philippines is 112,729,484. The first census in the Philippines was held in the year 1591 which counted 667,612 people.\nThe majority of Filipinos are lowland Austronesians, while the Aetas (Negritos), as well as other highland groups form a minority. The indigenous population is related to the indigenous populations of the Malay Archipelago. Some ethnic groups that have been in the Philippines for centuries before Spanish and American colonial rule have assimilated or intermixed. This is the case with the Sama-Bajau ethnicity which possess Austroasiatic ancestry and the Blaan people who possess Papuan ancestry, while ancient immigration integrated some Indian ancestry to the precolonial Indianized kingdoms in the islands. Meanwhile, Spanish era censuses from the 1700s, record that 2.33% of the population were Mexicans and 5% were mixed Spanish-Filipinos or pure Spanish-Filipinos. Records from the Philippine government shows that pure Chinese were 1.35 million and mixed Chinese-Filipinos composed about 20% of the population. Up to 750,000 people from the United States of America also live in the Philippines. They represent 0.75% of the total population, while an additional 250,000 about 0.25% of Filipinos are Amerasians of half Filipino and half American descent. Thus making the percentage of the population having either full or partial American descent amount to 1% of the Philippines' demographics. Other ethnic groups include the Arabs who intermixed with Muslim Filipinos and the Japanese who form parts of the population.\nThe most commonly spoken indigenous languages are Tagalog and Cebuano, with 23.8\u00a0million (45\u00a0million speakers as Filipino) and 16 million speakers, respectively. Nine other indigenous languages have at least one million native speakers: Ilocano, Hiligaynon, Waray, Bicolano, Kapampangan, Pangasinan, Maranao, Maguindanao, and Tausug. One or more of these are spoken as a mother tongue by more than 93% of the population. Filipino and English are the official languages, but there are between 120 and 170 distinct indigenous Philippine languages (depending on expert classifications).\nPopulation history.\nThe first census in the Philippines was in 1591, based on books collected. The books counted the total founding population of the Spanish-Philippines as 667,612 people. 20,000 were Chinese migrant traders, at different times: around 15,600 individuals were Latino soldier-colonists who were cumulatively sent from Peru and Mexico and they were shipped to the Philippines annually, 3,000 were Japanese residents, and 600 were pure Spaniards from Europe. There was a large but unknown number of South Asian Filipinos, as the majority of the slaves imported into the archipelago were from Bengal and India, adding Dravidian and Indo-Aryan speaking South Indians and Indo-European speaking Bengalis into the ethnic mix.\nThe rest were Austronesians and Negritos. With 667,612 people, during this era, the Philippines was among the most sparsely populated lands in Asia. In contrast, Japan during that era (the 1500s) had a population of 8 million and Mexico had a population of 4 million, which was huge compared to the Philippine's 600,000. In 1600, the method of population counting was revamped by the Spanish officials, who then based the counting of the population through church records.\nStephanie J. Mawson, by rummaging through records in the archives of Mexico discovered that the Spaniards were not the only immigrant group to the Philippines; Peru and Mexico too sent soldiers to the islands, and in fact outnumbered the Spaniards who immigrated to the Philippines.\nIn 1798, the population of Luzon or Luconia was estimated to be around 600,000 with the other islands, unknown. 200,000 of the 600,000 population were of mixed-raced descent of either Spanish, Chinese or Latin-American admixture. 5,000 enlisted soldiers on that year, were of South American descent, while 2,500 were pure Spanish officers. There were 20,000 new Chinese immigrants. The book, \"Intercolonial Intimacies Relinking Latin/o America to the Philippines, 1898\u20131964 By Paula C. Park\" citing \"Forzados y reclutas: los criollos novohispanos en Asia (1756\u20131808)\" gave a higher number of later Mexican soldier-immigrants to the Philippines, pegging the number at 35,000 immigrants in the 1700s in a population of only 1.5 million, thus forming 2.33% of the population.\nIn 1799, Friar Manuel Buzeta estimated the population of all the Philippine islands as 1,502,574. Despite the number of Mixed Spanish-Filipino descent being the lowest, they may be more common than expected as many Spaniards often had Filipino concubines and mistresses and they frequently produced children out of wedlock.\nIn the late 1700s to early 1800s, Joaqu\u00edn Mart\u00ednez de Z\u00fa\u00f1iga, an Agustinian Friar from Spain, in his Two Volume Book: \"Estadismo de las islas Filipinas\" compiled a census of the Spanish-Philippines based on the tribute counts (Which represented an average family of seven to ten children and two parents, per tribute) and came upon the following statistics:\nThe Spanish-Filipino population as a proportion of the provinces widely varied; with as high as 19% of the population of Tondo province (The most populous province and former name of Manila), to Pampanga 13.7%, Cavite at 13%, Laguna 2.28%, Batangas 3%, Bulacan 10.79%, Bataan 16.72%, Ilocos 1.38%, Pangasinan 3.49%, Albay 1.16%, Cebu 2.17%, Samar 3.27%,\nIloilo 1%, Capiz 1%, Bicol 20%, and Zamboanga 40%. According to the data, in the Archdiocese of Manila which administers much of Luzon under it, about 10% of the population was Spanish-Filipino. Summing up all the provinces including those with no Spanish Filipinos, all in all, in the total population of the Philippines, Spanish Filipinos and mixed Spanish-Filipinos composed 5% of the population.\nMeanwhile, government records show that 20% of the Philippines' total population were either pure Chinese or Mixed Chinese-Filipinos\nThe first official census was in 1878, when the population as of midnight on December 31, 1877, was counted. This was followed by the 1887 census, with the 1898 census not completed. The 1887 census yielded a count of 5,984,727 excluding non-Christians.\nIn the 1860s to 1890s, in the urban areas of the Philippines, especially at Manila, according to burial statistics, as much as 3.3% of the population were pure European Spaniards and the pure Chinese were as high as 9.9%. The Spanish-Filipino and Chinese-Filipino mestizo populations may have fluctuated. Eventually, everybody belonging to these non-native categories diminished because they were assimilated into and chose to self-identify as pure Filipinos. Since during the Philippine Revolution, the term \"Filipino\" included anybody born in the Philippines coming from any race. That would explain the abrupt drop of otherwise high Chinese, Spanish and mestizo percentages across the country by the time of the first American census in 1903.\n1903 census.\nIn 1903 the population of the Philippines was recounted by American authorities to fulfill Act 467. The survey yielded 7,635,426 people, including 56,138 who were foreign-born.\n1920 census.\nAccording to the 1920 United States census, there were 10,314,310 people in the Philippines. 99 percent were Filipino; 51,751 were either Chinese or Japanese; 34,563 were of mixed race; 12,577 were Caucasian; and 7,523 were African.\n1939.\nThe 1939 census was undertaken in conformity with Section 1 of Commonwealth Act 170. The Philippine population figure was 16,000,303.\n1941.\nIn 1941 the estimated population of the Philippines reached 17,000,000. Manila's population was 684,000.\nBy then, some 27% of the population could speak English as a second language, while the number of Spanish speakers as first language had further fallen to 3% from 10 to 14% at the beginning of the century. In 1936, Tagalog was selected to be the basis for a national language. In 1987, the Filipino language, a standard language based on Tagalog, was imposed as the national language and as one of the two official languages alongside English.\n1948.\nIn 1948, just two years after the independence of the Philippines from the United States of America, the country conducted its first post-war national census, recording a population of 19,234,182.\n1966.\nThe country ranks 18th in the world with 33,704,741 people, an increase of 899,211 people compared to 1965 data. Comparing the 1941 population of 17,000,000, the increase nearly doubled, reaching 16,704,749 in 67 years.\nPhilippine census surveys.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nIn 1960, the government of the Philippines conducted a survey on both population, and housing. The population was pegged at 27,087,685. Successive surveys were again conducted in 1970, 1975, 1980, and 1990, which gave the population as 36,684,948, 42,070,660, 48,098,460, and 60,703,206 respectively. In 1995, the POPCEN was launched, undertaken at the month of September, The data provided the bases for the Internal Revenue Allocation to local government units, and for the creation of new legislative areas. The count was made official by then President Fidel Ramos by Proclamation No, 849 on August 14, 1995, The population was 68,616,536.\n&lt;includeonly&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chart/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;/includeonly&gt;\n&lt;includeonly&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chart/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;/includeonly&gt;\n&lt;includeonly&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chart/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;/includeonly&gt;\n&lt;includeonly&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chart/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;/includeonly&gt;\nVital statistics.\nRegistered births and deaths.\nSource: Philippine Statistics Authority\nNotable events in Filipino demographics:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"template:sticky header/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Sort under/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Table alignment/tables.css\" /&gt;\nCurrent vital statistics.\nAs the finalized, instead of provisional, live birth data for 2022 was published on January 5, 2024, while the corresponding finalized death data was published on February 6, 2024, it's better to take the monthly provisional updates with a 12-month delay. For example, regarding the latest provisional update at the end of July 2024, the data within the reference period from January through July 2023 would be reliable, while the data from August on would likely be underregistered &amp; would face large revision during future months.\nDemographic and health surveys.\nTotal fertility rate (TFR) (wanted fertility rate) and crude birth rate (CBR):\nSingle mother phenomenon and illegitimate birth rate.\nMore than half of the children born every year in the Philippines are illegitimate, and the percentage of illegitimate children is rising by 2% per year. The percentage of unwed woman in live-in relationship is consistently rising e.g. from 5.2% in 1993 to 18.8% in 2022, i.e. over 30 years the percentage of women in live-in increased nearly 360%; and the percentage of women in a married arrangement is consistently decreasing every year e.g. from 54.4% in 1993 to 36.2% in 2022, i.e. over 30 years 33% less woman chose to marry.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Table alignment/tables.css\" /&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"template:row hover highlight/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe following table, based on the annual official data sourced from Philippine Statistics Authority, shows the growing annual trend of illegitimate child births by percentages:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Table alignment/tables.css\" /&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"template:row hover highlight/styles.css\"/&gt;\nFirst time single mothers are mainly due to the teenage pregnancy among girls in the 17 to 19 years old age bracket, thus getting trapped in the cycle of poverty and abuse. Some females become prostitutes in the Philippines after they become unwed single mothers from teenage pregnancy. As of 2016 more than half of Filipina women did not want additional children, but access to contraceptives was limited, and many people were hesitant to use what contraceptives were available due to opposition from the Catholic Church. The reasons for the high illegitimate birthrate and single motherhood include the unpopularity of artificial contraception inadequate sex education, delays in implementing birth control legislation and a machismo attitude among many Filipino males. There are three million household heads without a spouse, two million of whom were female (2015 PSA estimates).\nBetween 2010 and 2014, 54% of all pregnancies in the Philippines (1.9\u00a0million pregnancies) were unintended. Consequently, 9% of women between 15 and 19 years of age have begun childbearing, and every year there are 610 000 unsafe abortions. In 2017, modern contraceptive prevalence rate (CPR) in \"the Philippines was 40% among married women of reproductive age and 17% among unmarried sexually active women\" and \"Forty-six percent of married women used no contraceptive method in 2017 and 14% a traditional method.\" The \"unmet need for family planning' which is the lack of access of contraceptives to women do not want to have more children or wish to delay having children was 17% among married women and 49% among unmarried and among unmarried only 22% women were able to access modern contraceptive methods. \"As a consequence of the low contraceptive met need, 68% of unintended pregnancies occur in women not using any method and 24% in those using traditional methods\" and the rest had to resort to unsafe traditional methods.\nThe Catholic Church in Philippines opposes sex before or outside marriage, and the use of modern contraceptive and the passing of laws allowing for divorce. The Catholic religion that was introduced by Spanish colonial era Catholic friars was adapted through a process of enculturation. Hence, there is a gap between the [relatively more orthodox] scriptural Catholic religion and the version practiced by Filipinos in daily life. 84% Filipinos are Catholic, and what Filipinos actually do in practice is different from what they believe in, i.e. Filipinos practice a liberal cultural attitude towards sexual relationships while also contrastingly practicing orthodox Catholic religious belief which opposes the modern scientific contraceptives and laws based on the modern values, resulting in lack of access to family planning methods, stigmatization of medical abortions, a high number of unwanted pregnancies, lack of access to safe modern medical abortions, high and still rising trend of illegitimate newborn birth rate.\nThe law of the Philippines continues to differentiate and discriminate between filiation (recognition of the biological relationship between father and child) and legitimacy (legally considered a legitimate child), national law still continues to label the \"nonmarital births\" as \"illegitimate\", which has been criticized by the social and legal activists for the constitutional stigmatization and denial of equal legal rights.\nLife expectancy.\nSource: \"UN World Population Prospects\"\nStructure of the population.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Hidden begin/styles.css\"/&gt;Population by sex and age group (Census 01.VIII.2015) (excluding 2134 Filipinos in Philippine embassies, consulates and missions abroad):\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Hidden begin/styles.css\"/&gt;Population estimates by sex and age group (01.VII.2021) (estimates or projections based on the 2015 population census):\nBy region.\nTotal fertility rate (TFR) and other related statistics by region, as of 2013:\nEthnic groups and modern immigrants in the Philippines.\nThe majority of the people in the Philippines are related to Austronesian peoples. According to the CIA Factbook, the largest ethnic groups as of 2020 are the Tagalogs (26%), the Bisaya people (14.3%), the Ilocano people (8%), the Bicolano people (6.5%), the Waray people (3.8%), the Kapampangan people (3.0%), the Pangasinan people (1.9%), and the Maguindanao people (1.9%), among other local ethnicities (18.5%). The indigenous peoples of the Philippines form a minority of the population. Other large ethnic groups include Filipinos of Japanese, Indian, Chinese, Spanish, and American descent. There are more than 175 ethnolinguistic groups in the Philippines, each with their own, identity, literature, tradition, music, dances, foods, beliefs, and history, but which form part of the tapestry of Filipino culture. The latest censuses did not take account of ethnicity, and the only census that included questions on ethnicity is of the 2000 census.\nNevertheless, a 2019 Anthropology Study by Matthew Go, published in the Journal of Human Biology, using physical anthropology, estimated that, 72.7% of Filipinos are Asian, 12.7% of Filipinos can be classified as Hispanic (Latin-American Mestizos or Austronesian-Spanish Mestizos), 7.3% as Indigenous American, African at 4.5% and European at 2.7%. However, this is only according to an interpretation of the data wherein the reference groups, which were cross checked to the Filipino samples; for the Hispanic category, were Mexican-Americans, and the reference groups for the: European, African, and Indigenous American, categories, were: White Americans, Black Americans, and Native Americans from the USA, while the Asian reference groups were sourced from Chinese, Japanese, and Vietnamese origins.\nIn contrast, a different anthropology study using Morphoscopic ancestry estimates in Filipino crania using multivariate probit regression models by J. T. Hefner, while analyzing Historic and Modern samples of Philippine skeletons, paint a different picture, in that, when the reference group for \"Asian\" was Thailand (Southeast Asians) rather than Chinese, Japanese, and Vietnamese; and the reference group for \"Hispanic\" was Colombians (South Americans) rather than Mexicans, the historical and modern sample results for Filipinos, yielded the following ratios: Asian at 48.6%, African at 32.9%, and only a small portion classifying as either European at 12.9%, and finally for Hispanic at 5.7%.\nThe total number of immigrants and expats in Philippines as of the 2010 census is 177,365. By country:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nLanguages.\nAccording to the Komisyon sa Wikang Filipino, there are 135 ethnic languages in the Philippine archipelago, each spoken by the respective ethno-linguistic group, except for the national Filipino language which is spoken by all 134 ethno-linguistic groups in the country. Most of the languages have several varieties (dialects), totaling over 300 across the archipelago. In the 1930s, the government promoted the use of the Tagalog language as the national language, and called the new Tagalog-based language as the national Filipino language, becoming the 135th ethnic language of the country. Visayan languages (Cebuano, Waray, Hiligaynon, etc.) are widely spoken throughout the Visayas and in most parts of Mindanao. Ilokano is the lingua franca of Northern Luzon excluding Pangasinan. Zamboangue\u00f1o Chavacano is the official language of Zamboanga City and lingua franca of Basilan.\nFilipino and English are the official languages of the country for purposes of communication and instruction. Consequently, English is widely spoken and understood, although fluency has decreased as the prevalence of Tagalog in primary and secondary educational institutions has increased.\nReligion.\nThe Philippine Statistics Authority in October 2015 reported that % of the total Filipino population were Roman Catholics, 10.8% were Protestant and % were Islamic. Although the 2012 International Religious Freedom (IRF) reports that an estimate by the National Commission on Muslim Filipinos (NCMF) in 2011 stated that there were then 10.3\u00a0million Muslims, or about 10 percent of the total population however this is yet to be proven officially. In 2000, according to the \"World Values Survey\", 1.8% were Protestant Christians and 10.9% were then irreligious. Other Christian denominations include the Iglesia ni Cristo (one of a number of separate Churches of Christ generally not affiliated with one another), Aglipayan Church, Members Church of God International, and the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (LDS Church). Minority religions include Buddhism, Hinduism, and Judaism.\nRoman Catholics and Protestants were converted during the four centuries of Western influence by Spain, and the United States. Under Spanish rule, much of the population was converted to Christianity.\nOrthodox Christianity also has a presence in the Philippines. The Orthodoxy was brought over by Russian and Greek immigrants to the Philippines. Protestant Christianity arrived in the Philippines during the 20th century, introduced by American missionaries.\nOther religions include Judaism, Mahayana Buddhism, often mixed with Taoist beliefs, Hinduism, Sikhism, and Indigenous Philippine folk religions.\nEducation.\nEducation in the Philippines has been influenced by foreign models, particularly the United States, and Spain. Philippine students enter public school at about age four, starting from nursery school up to kindergarten. At about seven years of age, students enter elementary school (6 to 7 years). This is followed by junior high school (4 years) and senior high school (2 years). Students then take the college entrance examinations (CEE), after which they enter university (3 to 5 years). Other types of schools include private school, preparatory school, international school, laboratory high school, and science high school. School year in the Philippines starts from June, and ends in March with a two-month summer break from April to May, one week of semestral break in October, and a week or two during Christmas and New Year holidays.\nStarting in SY 2011\u20132012 there has been a phased implementation of a new program. The K to 12 Program covers kindergarten and 12 years of basic education (six years of primary education, four years of junior high school, and two years of senior high school [SHS]).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23444", "revid": "6326132", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23444", "title": "Politics of the Philippines", "text": " \nPolitics in the Philippines are governed by a three-branch system of government. The country is a democracy, with a president who is directly elected by the people and serves as both the head of state and the head of government. The president serves as the leader of the executive branch and is a powerful political figure. A president may only hold office for one six-year term. The bicameral Congress consists of two separate bodies: the Senate, with members elected at-large across the country, and the larger House of Representatives, with members chosen mostly from specific geographic districts. The Congress performs legislative functions. The judiciary is overseen by the Supreme Court of the Philippines and has extensive review jurisdiction over judgments issued by other governmental and administrative institutions.\nThe legal system, which covers both civil and criminal law, has been impacted by the prior rule of both Spain and the United States. Spanish control was mostly supported by local intermediaries, which resulted in an elite-dominated system. The United States took sovereignty of the whole archipelago following the Spanish\u2013American war, suppressing the nascent First Philippine Republic that had been declared after the end of Spanish administration. Control by the United States resulted in democracy and institutions that were fashioned after the American political system. Martial law's implementation hampered this. National politics were ruled by a two-party system when the country attained independence in 1946 and changes brought about by the restoration of democracy are what led to the multi-party system that exists today. There have been various levels of left-wing insurgencies since independence, as well as a continuous Islamic insurgency.\nElections are held every three years, although the president, vice-president, and Senators are elected for six-year terms. Results are determined through plurality voting, including plurality-at-large for elections (such as for the Senate) with multiple winners. A mixed-member proportional representation system is used to elect a minority of the House of Representatives. Local government units have some revenue-generating powers, under a code intended to decentralize power away from the national government. Administrative structures at local levels are designed to foster civil society participation.\nPolitics is dominated by a powerful elite, with dynastic politics common at both the local and national levels. Political parties are weak, with elections instead dominated by individual and familial personalities. Political positions provide extensive opportunities for patronage, and clientelism and electoral fraud are common. Corruption is considered widespread, while state institutions are relatively weak. Politics has been heavily influenced at times by the Catholic Church, the Philippine military, and the United States. Despite pessimism about the potential for political change, democracy maintains strong public support, and voter turnout is high.\nExecutive.\nExecutive power is vested to the president, who is both head of state and head of government. This individual is directly elected to a six-year term through a single-round first past the post election, and being limited to one term are unable to seek re-election. To be eligible for the presidency, an individual must be at least 40 years old, and must have resided in the Philippines for the decade prior to the election. Presidents may legislate through executive orders and other administrative actions, and must approve or veto bills coming from the Congress.\nThe vice president, limited to two consecutive six-year terms, is elected separately from the president. This means the president and vice president may be from different political parties. While the vice president has no constitutional powers aside from acting as president when the latter is unable to do so, the president may give the former a cabinet office. In case of death, resignation, or incapacitation, of the president, the vice president becomes the president until the expiration of the term. The vice president may also serve as Acting President if the president is temporarily incapacitated. Following in the line of succession are the Senate president and the Speaker of the House.\nExecutive power is exercised through the Cabinet, who are appointed by the president. While the appointees may wield executive power, all powers and responsibilities ultimately remain with the president, who may overrule any decision made by a cabinet member. The Cabinet includes the heads of executive departments. Actions taken by executive and administrative officials are taken as actions exercised by the president. Cabinet members may not be members of Congress. Close relatives of the president are explicitly barred from certain offices.\nThe president is also the commander in chief of the Armed Forces of the Philippines, thereby ensuring civilian supremacy over the military. This title gives the president several emergency military powers, such as the ability to suspend habeas corpus and declare martial law, although these powers automatically end after 60 days unless extended by Congress, and can be reviewed by the Supreme Court. The president also proposes a national budget, which Congress may alter before they adopt it.\nThe president wields significant political power, including considerable influence over supposedly independent agencies due to the power of appointment. The president directly controlled the Philippine Development Assistance Fund until the Supreme Court declared this unconstitutional in 2013. Following this, the Disbursement Acceleration Program was created to allow the president to direct funds, although some parts of this new program have similarly been declared unconstitutional. Such influence means that the legislature has never overcome a presidential veto, despite having the theoretical power to do so. A commission on appointments, independent from the legislature but made up of members from it, has the power to veto presidential appointments. However, court rulings mean the president can renominate an individual repeatedly upon rejection, and that that individual can effectively carry out the role by being officially in an acting capacity. The strength of the presidency combined with weak state institutions exacerbates corruption in the country.\nUnder the 1987 constitution, the House of Representatives has the power to impeach the president through a vote of one-third of its members, and the Senate decides upon the case. Impeachment proceedings against an individual can not occur more than once per year, which can be abused through the filing cases with weak impeachment claims to forestall the filing of stronger cases. President Joseph Estrada was the first Asian head of state to be tried following impeachment, although he was not ousted by the Senate. No president has ever been ousted through impeachment.\nLegislature.\nCongress is a bicameral legislature. The upper house, the Senate, is composed of 24 senators. These are elected through plurality-at-large voting, with the entire country considered a single district. The senators elect amongst themselves a Senate President. Half of the Senate seats are contested every three years, and senators are limited to serving a maximum of two consecutive six-year terms.\nThe lower house is the House of Representatives, currently composed of 311 representatives, with 20% elected via party-list system, and the rest elected from legislative districts. Legislative districts are intended to be roughly equal in population, and every city with a population of at least 250,000 people is guaranteed at least one representative. The House of Representatives is headed by the Speaker. Representatives are elected every three years, and are limited to three three-year terms.\nEach bill needs the consent of both houses to be submitted to the president for his signature. If the president vetoes the bill, Congress can override the veto with a two-thirds supermajority. If either house voted down on a bill or fails to act on it after an adjournment \"sine die\", the bill is lost and would have to be proposed to the next congress, with the process starting all over again. Congress's decisions are mostly via majority vote, except for voting on constitutional amendments and other matters. Each house has its inherent power, with the Senate given the power to vote on treaties, while money bills may only be introduced by the House of Representatives. The constitution provides Congress with impeachment powers, with the House of Representatives having the power to impeach, and the Senate having the power to try the impeached official.\nThe control the legislature has over funding includes individual discretionary funds. These funds are considered an avenue for patronage politics and are often seen a symbol of corruption. They are derogatorily referred to as \"pork barrel\" funds. In addition to being able to use such funds to curry favor or gain support, politicians can personally benefit from kickbacks, which are often directly used for re-election campaigns.\nThe Priority Development Assistance Fund scam highlighted the link between such funding and legislative support for executive initiatives.\nAs of 2019[ [update]], the PDP-LABAN, the Nacionalista Party (NP), the Nationalist People's Coalition (NPC), National Unity Party (NUP), and the Liberal Party (LP) are the parties with largest membership in Congress. The party of the sitting president controls the House of Representatives, where members often change party affiliation to join the president's party. The Senate has generally acted more independently.\nJudiciary.\nThe judiciary is headed by the Supreme Court, which lies at the top of three lower court levels. The Supreme Court is the court of last resort, and can decide on the constitutionality of laws. Vested with the responsibility of overseeing the other branches of government, the Supreme Court has significant powers, able to go as far as overruling discretionary decisions made by political and administrative individuals and bodies, giving it powers usually seen as those of the executive and legislature. The court can effectively create law without precedent, and such decisions are not subject to review by other bodies.\nAll lower levels of courts have their bases through legislation, rather than the constitution. Their proceedings are determined by the Supreme Court. Courts are arranged in a three-level hierarchy, with each level able to review only rulings at lower levels. Within the regular court system, the Court of Appeals is the second-highest appellate court. Below this, Regional Trial Courts have original jurisdiction on most criminal matters, and are the main trial courts. The Regional Trial Courts are organized within judicial regions, which correspond to the administrative regions. The lowest level courts are the Metropolitan Trial Courts.\nAlongside the regular courts, a variety of special courts have been set up at various levels of the judicial system. The Court of Tax Appeals was set up specifically to rule on tax matters. The Sandiganbayan is a special court set up to deal with cases of government corruption. Some Regional Trial Courts specialize in a particular sort of case, such as heinous crime courts, family courts, and environmental courts. Sharia courts, which have been set up in some regions on the same level as Regional and Metropolitan courts, rule on personal law where both parties are Muslim. Some administrative bodies are able to exercise very specific quasi-judicial powers, as determined by law.\nThe president appoints justices and judges to the judicial system. For an appointment to the Supreme Court, the president must select from a short-list provided by the Judicial and Bar Council, although they have influence over the shortlist and can ask for it to be changed. The Judicial and Bar Council is responsible for vetting appointments. Congress has no control over appointments, to reduce its political influence on the judiciary. However, the Chief Justice can be impeached by the legislature, which took place for the first time with the conviction of Chief Justice Renato Corona in 2012. Political pressure is thought to be behind inconsistencies between some court decisions. Traditionally the most senior associate justice became the Chief Justice. However, this tradition was broken by President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo, and her successor President Benigno Aquino III also bypassed seniority in some judicial appointments.\nThe Ombudsman of the Philippines is selected by the president from a list provided by the Judicial and Bar Council. This selection does not need confirmation, and lasts for a seven-year term with no re-appointment. The Ombudsman investigates and prosecutes public officials and agencies, except for the president, who is immune while in office. Considerable power lies with the position to request information and direct public officials to carry out certain tasks as required by law. The Office of the Solicitor General is an independent body that represents the government in legal cases.\nLegal system.\nThe Philippine legal system is a hybrid form based on the Spanish civil law and American common law system, with a system of Sharia law in place for some areas of law involving Muslims.\nThe Constitution is the supreme law of the land and laws passed by the Congress must be consistent with the Constitution. Since the establishment of the 1898 Constitution, there have been only three new constitutions, implemented in 1935, 1973, and 1987, respectively. Prior to 1898, the Spanish Constitution of 1812 had applied to the Philippines for a short time, and there were numerous proposed constitutions during the Philippine Revolution. The most notable of these was the Malolos Constitution. The presidential system established with the 1935 Constitution was replaced by a semi-parliamentary system in 1973 under the authoritarian rule of President Marcos, concentrating power in his hands.\nAfter the 1986 People Power Revolution brought President Aquino to power, she issued a proclamation establishing a temporary constitution and created a constitutional commission. The commission finished writing a new constitution on October 15, 1986, which was subsequently approved by referendum on February 2, 1987. The 1987 constitution restored the presidential system, being based on the 1935 constitution rather than the 1973 one. The constitution is designed to provide a number of checks and balances, including the establishment of independent constitutional commissions and an Ombudsman. The Ombudsman and members of these commissions, in addition to the leaders of the executive (the president and vice-president) and judicial (Justices of the Supreme Court, including the Chief Justice) branches, may be removed through impeachment.\nAll presidents under the current constitution have proposed some type of constitutional reform, although none have succeeded. Wariness around such change exists due to the structural aim of the constitution in limiting Presidential power compared to previous constitution, leaving reform open to accusations of being a power grab. A switch to a unicameral parliamentary system is seen by some as a way to make the legislature and government more responsive and effective. It has also been argued such a change would weaken the presidency, and strengthen the role of political parties. Such a proposal gained majority support in the house along with presidential support in the mid-2000s, but stalled due to senate opposition. Reforming the country as a federation is a recurring issue arising as a result of a desire for local autonomy. Such considerations influenced the 1987 constitution; while it maintained the unitary state, it included provisions for autonomous regions and for stronger local government.\nThe Civil Code of the Philippines is based on the Civil Code of Spain, which was extended to the Philippines on July 31, 1889. A notable feature of this code is the influence of the Catholic Church, which remains to this day. Under this code, judicial decisions applying or interpreting the laws or the Constitution is part of the legal system, the doctrine of \"stare decisis\" applies in deciding legal controversies. However, the application of \"stare decisis\" is not the same as in full common law jurisdictions, as it incorporates civil law precedent. The constitution grants the Supreme Court the power of judicial review, through which it can \"determine whether or not there has been a grave abuse of discretion amounting to lack or excess of jurisdiction on the part of any branch or instrumentality of the Government\".\nThis power is extensive enough that the court can create new law without precedent in such situations, and such decisions are not themselves subject to review from another body. The president may issue executive orders, proclamations or other executive issuance. The Philippines adopts the dualist system in the incorporation of international law, with such laws able to come into force either through adoption in domestic legislation or a constitutional declaration. The local legislative assemblies may enact local ordinances within their respective territorial and political boundaries in accordance with the local autonomy granted by the Local Government Code.\nElections.\nSince 1935 and the establishment of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, elections have been administered by the Commission on Elections (COMELEC). The elected officials are the president, vice president, members of Congress, regional governors and assemblymen, provincial governors, vice governors, and board members, city and municipal mayors, vice mayors and councilors, and barangay (village) chairmen and councilors. Elections are for fixed terms. Most elected officials have three-year terms, with the exceptions being the president, vice president, and senators, whose terms last for six years.\nAll terms above the barangay level begin and end on June 30 of the election year, and all elected officials are limited to three consecutive terms, except for senators, and the vice president, who are limited to two, and for the president, who cannot be reelected. 12 of the 24 senators are up for election every 3 years. All are elected on a national basis, with voters selecting up to 12 names from the list of all candidates. It is not required to fill out 12 names for the vote to be valid, and voters select 7.5 candidates on average. This system increases the importance of name familiarity, with up to one-fifth of voters reporting they decide upon their votes while inside the voting booth. All positions are voted on separately, including those of president and vice-president.\nDespite the plurality voting system used to elect presidents, elections are effectively a multi-party system. Prior to the Marcos regime, the country effectively had a two-party system, however the restriction of presidents to one term in the 1987 has likely prevented that system from reemerging. Even during the two-party era, internal party structures were weak. Three presidents had previously switched parties after falling to obtain the nomination in their previous party's conference. Under the 1987 constitution, elections above the barangay level are held every three years since 1992 on the second Monday of May, although senate seats, the presidency, and the vice presidency are only contested every six years since 1992.\nEver since elections were first introduced by the United States, single-winner elections have been carried out using a plurality voting system: the candidate with the highest number of votes is elected. Multiple-winner elections, except for representatives elected through the party-list system, are done via plurality-at-large voting. Each voter has \"x\" votes, from which the \"x\" candidates with the highest number of votes are elected. A constitutional commission was assembled after the 1986 People Power Revolution in part to consider the process of elections. It determined to keep plurality/first-past-the-post voting for 80% of seats, but to use a mixed-member proportional representation party-list system to allocate up to 20% of seats. However, such a system was not used until the 1998 general election, which followed the passing of the Party-List System Act in 1995. Prior to this law passing, sectoral representatives were appointed by the President.\nA group participating in the party-list system (which may not be running in any single-member constituencies) must receive 2% of votes cast to enter congress, and can win a maximum of three seats. The 1998 election saw 123 organizations run, and only 32% of voters selecting a party-list organization, meaning only 13 organizations passed the 2% threshold taking up only 14 of the 52 seats allocated to party-list organizations. COMELEC decided to allocate the remaining seats to organizations that had not reached the 2% threshold despite prior rules indicating they would be distributed among parties that passed the threshold by vote share. Following a legal challenge, the Supreme Court overruled COMELEC, implementing its own system to allocate the seats, limiting the maximum three seats to only the most-voted organization. In the run-up to the 2001 election COMELEC approved over 160 organizations. Following a legal challenge at the Supreme Court COMELEC all but 42 were disqualified, including seven which had won more than 2% of the votes. Two court later nullified two of the disqualifications.\nThe 1986 commission also kept the \"open ballot\" system, where voters had to write the name of their chosen candidate on the voting form. The distribution of sample filled-in ballots to voters by politicians provided more opportunities for patronage through the determination of which other names appear on a politicians sample ballot, and increased the power of local politicians who were better able to distribute these ballots to voters. The 1992 and 2004 presidential elections were contested in court following accusations of electoral fraud. Neither case succeeded.\nVote counting in these elections could take up to 18 hours, and tabulation could take up to 40 days. In 1992 COMELEC adopted a strategic plan to modernize voting, and the first electronic vote-counting pilot test took place in the 1996 Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao general election. This pilot was considered a success. In 1997 a law was based calling for the open ballots to be replaced by pre-printed ballots. However, it was not until the May 2010 elections that electronic vote-counting was used for a national election. This change in the process saw ballots shift from the \"open ballot\" system to ballots where voters fill in ovals next to the candidate names. It has been reported by COMELEC that this new system reduces the ability for vote-buyers to monitor how people vote. It also reduced vote count time, with manual counting previously taking perhaps months.\nNational and local elections began to be held on the same day from May 1992, following the passage of Republic Act (RA) 7166. The country has a voting age of 18. Under the 1987 constitution all registered parties are allowed poll watchers, whereas under the previous system poll watchers were only allowed from the two main parties. Political advertising was allowed beginning in 2001. Various forms of electoral fraud occur throughout the various elections, and are even expected by a majority of voters. Vote buying is especially prevalent, and campaigns are estimated to cost as much as 16 times the legal campaign finance limit.\nPolitical Dynamics and Spectrum.\nThe political dynamics and spectrum in the Philippines differ significantly from those in other parts of the world. While there are certain similarities, the emphasis tends to lean more toward the influence of social and cultural factors on ideological development.\nThe Left or the Progressives\n1. National Democracy (ND) (Far Left) - National Democracy (ND), also referred to as the National Democratic Left or Pambansang Demokrasya, is a far-left political ideology in the Philippines championed by the Communist Party of the Philippines (CPP). Rooted in Marxist\u2013Leninist\u2013Maoist principles, it envisions the establishment of a \u201cpeople\u2019s democracy\u201d led by a communist vanguard party. ND characterizes Philippine society as semi-colonial and semi-feudal and seeks to address what it identifies as three core problems: imperialism, feudalism, and bureaucrat capitalism. Its strategy begins with a national democratic revolution, which serves as a precursor to a socialist revolution, ultimately aiming for a communist society.\n2. Social Democracy (SocDem) (Near Left) - Social Democracy (SocDem) in the Philippines, exemplified by parties such as Akbayan Citizen\u2019s Action Party, promotes progressive reforms within a democratic framework rather than pursuing revolutionary upheaval. Grounded in principles of social justice, participatory governance, and human rights, SocDem prioritizes reducing inequality through state intervention, inclusive economic policies, and institutional reforms. In contrast to the far-left National Democratic movement, SocDem organizations operate within the electoral system and frequently collaborate with centrist parties to advance their agenda. Their approach seeks to harmonize market mechanisms with social welfare, striving for a more equitable society while preserving existing democratic institutions.\nThe Center\n3. Liberal Democracy (LibDem) (Center) - Liberal Democracy in the Philippines is grounded in the principles of constitutional governance, individual rights, and the rule of law. It emphasizes representative institutions, separation of powers, and the protection of civil liberties as essential to a functioning democracy. Historically linked to parties such as the Liberal Party, this ideology promotes economic policies that combine market freedom with social responsibility, aiming to foster growth while safeguarding equity. Despite challenges from authoritarian regimes and populist movements, liberal democracy remains a central framework for political discourse and governance in the country.\nThe Center-Right or the Traditionals\n4. Christian-Muslim Democracy - Christian-Muslim Democracy in the Philippines is embodied by parties such as Lakas\u2013Christian Muslim Democrats (Lakas\u2013CMD). Positioned at the center-right of the political spectrum, this ideology integrates elements of Christian democratic and Islamic democratic principles, emphasizing ethical governance, social justice, and respect for religious diversity within a democratic system. It promotes policies that uphold family values, community solidarity, and participatory governance while fostering national unity among the country\u2019s major faith traditions\u2014Christianity and Islam. The goal is to harmonize religious values with democratic institutions, ensuring inclusive development and peace in a multi-faith society.\n5. Illiberal Democracy - Illiberal Democracy in the Philippines describes a system where democratic structures\u2014such as elections and representative institutions\u2014formally exist but are weakened by authoritarian tendencies and the erosion of civil liberties. This model became prominent during Rodrigo Duterte\u2019s administration, marked by strongman leadership, diminished institutional checks, and a prioritization of order and security over liberal norms. Illiberalism often reflects public frustration with elite-driven liberal democracy and governance failures, leading to conditional support for democracy alongside acceptance of coercive measures. While citizens endorse democratic procedures, they frequently favor leaders who \u201cdiscipline\u201d democracy, resulting in a hybrid system that combines electoral legitimacy with illiberal practices.\nLocal government.\nThe Philippines has been highly centralized since Spanish rule, being governed from an \"Imperial Manila\". The Spanish created some bodies to bring together barangays in 1893, and the Americans organized provincial governments in 1905. Both actions, however, left the majority of power with the capital. During the Commonwealth period, local governments remained under the direct control of the president, before some autonomy was granted to cities and municipalities in 1959 through RA 2264, \"An Act Amending the Laws Governing Local Governments by Increasing their Autonomy and Reorganizing Provincial Governments\", and to barangays (then called barrios) through RA 2370, the \"Barrio Charter Act\". Further powers were given under the \"Decentralization Act of 1967\" (RA 5185) before local elections were abolished with the imposition of martial law in 1972.\nThe 1987 constitution mandates that local governments must have local autonomy. The 1991 Local Government Code (Republic Act 7160) shifted some power away from the capital. Barangays are grouped into municipalities or cities, while municipalities and cities may be further grouped into provinces. Each barangay, municipality or city, and the province is headed by a captain, mayor, or governor, respectively, with its legislatures being the Sangguniang Barangay (village council), the Sangguniang Bayan (municipal council) or the Sangguniang Panlungsod (city council), and the Sangguniang Panlalawigan (provincial board), respectively. The Local Government Code seeks to enhance civil participation in local government, mandating civil society representation on bodies such as school and health boards. There are also mechanisms for the recall of elected officials, and local legislation through publicly organized referendum, although such mechanisms are rarely used.\nRegions are groupings of adjacent provinces created by the national government, often with linguistic or ethnic similarities. However, they do not by themselves have any local government. The exception is the autonomous region in Muslim Mindanao, which has its own regional government. While Article X of the 1987 constitution allows autonomous regions in the Cordilleras and Muslim Mindanao, only the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao (BARMM) exists. A referendum held in 1989 led to four provinces voting to be part of the Autonomous Region of Muslim Mindanao (ARMM). In 1990 elections were held for a regional governor, a vice-governor, and for representatives in the Regional Assembly.\nA 2018 law confirmed through a 2019 plebiscite transformed the ARMM into the more powerful BARMM. Elections in Mindanao have a reputation for electoral anomalies. Two laws aimed at creating the proposed autonomous region in Cordillera were defeated after two plebiscites. The National Capital Region has a unique governing body, the Metropolitan Manila Development Authority, which carries out some region-equivalent functions.\nThe concentration of political and economic power in Manila leads has created the demand for changes such as decentralization or federalism. Most of the local governments' budgets are derived from the Internal Revenue Allotment (IRA), a disbursement from the national government's budget. This makes most local government units ultimately dependent on the national government, with provinces further from the capital, which tend to be poorer, more reliant on IRA funding from the national government. However, local governments do have the ability to raise income through other measures, such as taxes, which is reflected by significantly increased responsibilities.\nCulture and influences.\nDespite the challenges faced by Filipino elections, and a sometimes pessimistic view about the potential of elections, there is broad public support for democracy, coupled with a free press and an established legal system. Voter turnout in legislative and executive elections averages above 75 percent. However, other forms of political participation, such as membership in a political party, civil society organization, and labor unions, are rarely used. There are several examples of mass direct action throughout history, including the long-running communist rebellion in the Philippines and the multiple \"People Power\" events. A distrust of the state, and of state institutions such as the police, is a continuing legacy of martial law.\nPolitical parties continue to be weak, often created to propel a single candidate before fading from relevancy. The power of the president within the political system may be one factor limiting the development of stable political parties, as the president is in a position to considerably support their allies. Parties often serve to ally various political families, and it is common for politicians elected on losing party tickets to switch allegiance to the party of the president. The power of traditional elites outside of the government has also inhibited the development of strong national institutions. Broad democratic political debate is linked with the concept of good governance, rather than political movements related to class. The persistence of poverty is widely linked in political discourse to the presence of corruption. Campaigns focus on personal qualities and records, rather than party platforms.\nThere has been strong continuity in class structures from the Spanish period to the present. One prominent historical narrative sees Philippine history through the lens of an \"unfinished revolution\", tracing the takeover of the Philippine Revolution by elites from the masses to unfulfilled expectations of reform following the People Power Revolution. Electoral pressure is absorbed through elections, despite the winners of elections invariably coming from various factions of the elite, and political parties being differentiated more by patronage networks than by policies. The importance of election funding creates a cyclic effect as political positions provide access to state power which provides the ability to generate funds. This state capture means that reforms occur slowly, even if popular.\nWhile questions over land reform have persisted since the colonial era, and have been considered by multiple administrations faced with peasant and communist-related political instability, the links between legislators and landlords mean progress has been limited and the vast majority of farmers continue to work on land owned by others. This failure to achieve significant land reform is thought to have restricted the growth of the Philippine economy, and is linked to continuing political inequality. Despite such inequality, the strength of the left movement has declined since the restoration of democracy.\nA small professional and technical middle class, mostly concentrated in urban areas such as Metro Manila, are relatively trusted within the civil service and play a significant role in civil society organization. Such organizations are examples of cause-based politics, an exception to the usual model of Philippine political parties and political organization. While too small to change the overall political structure, civil society organizations are sometimes able to influence policy on specific issues. Notably, the role they played in the People Power Revolution led to a brief political consensus towards a more technocratic and relatively economically liberal state.\nSome tension exists between this middle class with the larger but less active poorer class, most clearly expressed in the different outcomes and opinions regarding the entwined EDSA II and EDSA III protests. Unlike in the first People Power Revolution, which saw joint participation from both classes, these following mass protests are generally considered to have predominantly middle and lower class movements respectively, with EDSA III failing to overturn the success of EDSA II.\nPoliticians at local and national levels are usually either dynastic candidates or popular celebrities. Dynastic politics is very common. Members of the House and local government officials can be elected for a maximum of three terms, although positions often pass to family members. In 1992, 32% of the representatives in the restored Congress were children of politicians, and 15% represented a third or fourth generation. In 2010, over half of the members of the House of Representatives and over half of all Governors were related to someone who had been in Congress over the previous 20 years. Over 60% of high-level local elective offices were held by a dynastic candidate. For both dynastic candidates and celebrities, voter familiarity with their names is thought to drive their electoral success.\nLevels of education correlate with voting for each of the types of candidates, with those with less education more likely to vote for celebrity candidates and those with more education more likely to vote for dynastic candidates. Less wealthy voters are more likely to vote for celebrity candidates, although it has little impact on votes for dynastic candidates. Older voters are more likely to vote for celebrity candidates, and voters in Luzon are more likely to vote for celebrity candidates than voters in the Visayas or Mindanao. While the constitution bans political dynasties, no legislation has been passed to define what this means. Term limits have had a limited effect on such dynasties.\nIn addition to strong divisions in class identity, the Philippines has a diversity of regional identities, driven by its archipelagic nature and varied history. Regional and ethnic identities are sometimes stronger than national identity, with national identity often being driven by Christians, and more specifically Tagalogs. Contrasted with the broad Christian Filipino identity is that of the Muslims, and that of often-marginalized indigenous peoples. Winning a presidential election usually comes with winning the highly populous Tagalog areas of Southern Luzon. Most winning candidates have done well throughout the Philippines, winning pluralities in Luzon, the Visayas, and Mindanao. However, some elections have been won without the Visayas or Mindanao, and in a single case, the 2004 election, the Presidency was won without a plurality in Luzon. However, the importance of national image has been increasing in presidential contests.\nDespite the centralization of national power, politics itself is very decentralized. Political patronage relationships extend vertically through the various levels of political administration. National politicians then relied on local politicians to drive turnout within the constituency of the local politician, incentivizing government funding of local projects rather than national ones to shore up support, and causing national political parties to function more as an alliance of local politicians rather than centralized platforms.\nDecentralization of power to local governments and widespread poverty have reinforced the presence of clientelism within politics. Such an effect is particularly strong in the geographically defined House of Representative seats. The importance of name recognition in politics (especially under the open ballot system) and the use of single-member district entrenchs local politicians. Politics is defined by clans and personalities rather than political parties, and politicians receive support from members of their linguistic group or from a geographical area that identifies with them. Political, cultural, and geographical borders are mutually reinforcing.\nFactional rivalries have dominated local politics since the late 19th century. As democracy expanded under American rule, these rivalries influenced provincial and national politics. Local politics is thus often more personal and potentially violent than national politics. It can also grow more authoritarian, even as national politics becomes more democratic. The competitiveness of different localities varies greatly, from having a long-entrenched dynasty, to having regular electoral turnover.\nFurthermore, a strong emphasis on family, so entrenched it is enshrined in the civil code, makes local familial links more important than state support, and personal links more important than ideological interests. Particular families are associated with certain areas, and a seat passing within a family is often seen as political continuity, with competition provided instead by seats passing to another family. A paternalistic landlord-tenant relationship typifies politician voter relationships in rural areas.\nLocal politicians attend events such as baptisms, funerals, and weddings within their constituency, often providing a direct financial donation. In urban areas, where established patron-client links are weaker, patronage takes the form of machine politics, being more specific and short-term. In such situations, electoral fraud and physical coercion is more common. Vote buying is extremely prevalent, including \"negative vote buying\", where voters are taken out of their constituency on voting day or have their fingers inked without having cast a ballot. Over time, this model of control, supported through the economic benefits of state capture, has become more prominent compared to the older paternalistic model.\nCatholic Church.\nThe influence of the Church in civil society dates back to the Spanish era, when the Church exercised considerable secular power. Despite the separation of Church and State that was established under American rule, the Church retained social influence among both elites and the wider population and a desire to promote its global values within the country. The Church provides a unifying moral framework that transcends class lines, linking the rich with the poor.\nNational structures were established shortly after independence, and the Church became directly involved in elections, both through its administrative hierarchy and through the actions of individual clergy. The politicization of the Church increased after the Second Vatican Council, in great part due to the activism of Catholic youth. Another factor was the increasing filipinization of the Church following independence. The Church did not initially strongly oppose Marcos and agreed with his anti-communist stance. However, internal opposition grew over the course of the martial law era.\nPublic political opposition from individual clergy members eventually shifted the opinion of the Church hierarchy, who supported the candidacy of Corazon Aquino and the subsequent People Power Revolution. Due to these events, the Church began to see itself as a \"guardian of democracy\". Later, the Church was one of the institutions that became opposed to the Presidency of Joseph Estrada.\nReligious orders, such as the Society of Jesus and Opus Dei, run private educational establishments for law, medicine, and business. The Church is active in social and economic development, in ways not always in alignment with the desire of state authorities. It has organized to assist in anti-corruption efforts. The Church maintains strong influence on the topic of family, notably through its support of large family size and its opposition to birth control. Catholic influence led to the removal of divorce laws following independence.\nThe political influence of the Church has decreased in the 21st century, following sexual abuse revelations and the death of the prominent Cardinal Jaime Sin. A symbolic moment for Church influence was the passing of the Reproductive Health Act of 2012 by the Benigno Aquino administration. This law aimed to make contraception and family planning more accessible, a topic which had faced long-standing Church opposition. Public opinion was thought to be in favor of the law. The Rodrigo Duterte administration has also clashed with the Church, with Duterte at times directly positioning himself against the Church. While Duterte himself is not in favor of a divorce law, proposals to legalize divorce gained significant support in Congress following his election, with one bill being passed by the House of Representatives before rejection by the Senate. The measure was reintroduced in the next session of Congress. During the 2022 presidential elections campaign, the Church endorsed the candidacy of vice president Leni Robredo to prevent Bongbong Marcos, son of dictator Ferdinand Marcos, from winning the election. Robredo, who won in 18 of the 86 dioceses in the country, lost the presidential race in a landslide.\nMilitary.\nThe Philippine military became officially involved in socioeconomic issues during the Hukbalahap Rebellion. Its involvement was expanded further by Ferdinand Marcos, who actively used the military for civil work. While the 1935 constitution designated the president the Commander in Chief, the 1973 constitution was the first to explicitly include the principle of civilian control of the military. Despite this change, during martial law under Marcos, military leaders took over aspects of local government and became directly involved in the economy, and the military itself expanded threefold. During this period, the communist and Islamist rebellions in the Philippines led to further involvement by the military in politics. Internal opposition to Marcos developed as corruption became more apparent, and following the 1986 elections an apparently failed coup by a military faction sparked what became the People Power Revolution The military's perceived role in this overthrowing of President Marcos created a precedent for direct intervention into politics.\nThe 1987 constitution kept the 1973 text on civilian rule over the military, although it added that the armed forces were the \"protector of the people and the state\". It also separated the Philippine Constabulary from the military, while shifting response for internal security from the military to the police. However, the military has remained more involved in politics than it was before martial law, playing a role in the 2001 Second EDSA Revolution which overthrew President Estrada. Failed or suspected coups took place in the late 1980s, 2003, 2006, and 2007.\nCivilian oversight of the military includes a dedicated deputy ombudsman for the military, investigation by the Commission on Human Rights, and the jurisdiction of civilian courts. The 1989 Philippine coup d'\u00e9tat attempt led to rebellion and mutiny becoming crimes. As an institution the military is supportive of democracy, with many factions often coming out in opposition to attempted coups. However, weak civilian institutions continue to provide openings for military influence. Amnesty was granted to those involved in past coup attempts in 1992.\nThe practice of recruiting retired military officers for some executive branch roles, such as ambassadorships, or within cabinet, was started by Marcos and continued after the restoration of democracy. The separation between the police and the military was impeded by the continuing communist and Islamic rebellions. The president remains able to use the military to rule by decree. Localized instances of martial law have been declared in 2009 and 2017, both in Mindanao.\nUnited States.\nEven after Philippine independence, the United States remained entwined within Philippine politics and the Philippine economy. Influence also remains in social and civil institutions. In the context of the Cold War, direct and indirect influence was leveraged in the early days of independence to reinforce democratic institutions. Early civil influence was particularly strong among veterans' networks, and the American military maintained support for Philippine military campaigns against the Hukbalahap. During the Hukbalahap rebellion the United States also supported land reforms to reduce potential attraction to communism, although this pressure subsided as the rebellion ceased.\nWhen Marcos declared martial law, to muted American response and with general acquiescence, the strategic value of the Philippines and its American military bases led to continued official support. While the United States eventually pressured Marcos to bring back elections, such support enabled Marcos to stay in power even as civil society and the military began to turn against him. Eventually, the United States supported the development of an anti-Marcos coalition, and in 1989 intervened to halt a coup against the new Aquino government.\nThe influence of the United States decreased in the 1990s, when agreements to host American military bases ended and the country increased the regional aspects of its foreign policy. Following the September 11 attacks in the United States, security ties deepened once more, as the Moro insurgency became linked with the global war on terror. This growing cooperation included the limited return of some US forces to Philippine soil.\nHistory.\nPre-independence.\nBefore the onset of Spanish rule in the 16th century, the Philippines was split into numerous barangays, which were small entities while being part of region-wide trade networks. The arrival of Hindu influence increased the power of Indianized datus. The first large state was Sulu, which adopted Islam in the 15th century. Spanish Captain-General Miguel L\u00f3pez de Legazpi established a settlement in Cebu in 1565. Maynila was conquered in 1571, and Manila subsequently became the center of Spanish administration.\nSpain gradually conquered the majority of the modern Philippines, although full control was never established over some Muslims areas in the south and in the Cordillera highlands. In the 19th century Spain eventually gained control over the seas and coasts. Inward migration in the Cordilleras to escape Spanish control and an increase in trade saw settlements in interior areas increase in population and political complexity. Throughout Spanish rule, the archipelago remained divided by regional identity and language.\nRule during the Spanish era was dominated by the church, especially friars. Ultimate power was held by the King and the Council of the Indies, with the Philippines being part of New Spain, although the islands functioned practically autonomously. The Philippines had their own Governor and a judicial body was established in 1583. Direct Spanish rule did not extend far from Manila, and locals were relied upon for administration. Traditional native elites, along with some native officeholders and high-value tax payers, became part of a group known as the \"principalia\". Over time, this elite class became more culturally distinct, gaining an education unavailable to most and intermarrying with Spanish officials and Chinese merchants.\nIn the 19th century, Philippine ports opened to world trade and shifts started occurring within Filipino society. An expanding civil service and a changing economy saw more complex social structures emerge with new upper and middle classes. The Latin American wars of independence and renewed immigration led to shifts in social identity, with the term \"Filipino\" shifting from referring to Spaniards born in the Iberian Peninsula and in the Philippines to a term encompassing all people in the archipelago. This identity shift was driven by wealthy families of mixed ancestry, for which it developed into a national identity. A class of educated individuals became known as the Ilustrados. This group gained prominence in Philippine administration, and became increasingly involved in politics.\nIn the 1880s, some prominent Ilustrados launched the Propaganda Movement. For the most part this was a campaign for secular self-government as a full part of Spain, but as proposed liberal reforms were rejected, some saw the movement as the beginning of a national awakening. In 1892 the Katipunan split from the movement, led by members of Manila's urban middle class. The Katipunan advocated complete Philippine independence, and began the Philippine Revolution in 1896. The Spanish\u2013American war reached the Philippines on May 1 with the Battle of Manila Bay. The Katipunan under Emilio Aguinaldo proclaimed the independence of the Philippines on June 12, 1898. Aguinaldo proclaimed a revolutionary government, and convened a congress that approved the Malolos Constitution, inaugurating the First Philippine Republic.\nSpain ceded the Philippines to the United States in 1898. The Philippine\u2013American War erupted in February 1899 in a skirmish in Manila. Aguinaldo was captured on April 1, 1901. The Americans gave Filipinos limited self-government at the local level by 1901. The hierarchical social structure that existed under Spanish rule was co-opted by the United States, with democracy introduced in a manner which did not threaten the power of the existing elites. Local elites were entrenched into the national system.\nThe first election of the Philippine Assembly in 1907 was won by the independence-supporting Nacionalista Party, led by Sergio Osme\u00f1a. The Nacionalista party would maintain electoral dominance until independence. In some rural areas opposition to American rule persisted among the poorer population, and the development of class consciousness-based political organization led to peasant revolts in the 1930s. American forces extended their control over the entirety of the islands, securing the Sultanate of Sulu and establishing control over interior mountainous areas. The Philippine government pursued a policy of gradually strengthening government in Mindanao, supported by immigration from Christian areas. Despite this, the traditional political structures of Sultanates and Datus continued as a parallel political structure.\nThe 1916 Jones Law envisioned eventual Philippine independence. The Nacionalista-dominated legislature grew more powerful, seizing state bodies and using nationalism to weaken American oversight. The establishment of the senate led to the Nacionalistas forming opposing camps loyal to Osme\u00f1a (the Unipersonalistas) and Senate President Manuel L. Quezon (the Colectavistas). The 1934 Tydings\u2013McDuffie Act paved the way for the Commonwealth of the Philippines and mandated U.S. recognition of independence of the Philippine Islands after a ten-year transition period.\nQuezon and Osme\u00f1a were elected as president and vice president, respectively, in 1935. In 1937 the voting franchise was expanded to include literate women. A national curriculum similarly sought to impose a single vision of a Filipino identity across the diverse ethnolinguistic groups of the islands, and Tagalog was established as a national language. Treatment of the Commonwealth by the United States was inconsistent: sometimes it was treated as a separate country, sometimes as under US jurisdiction. The presidential system of the Commonwealth government was based on that of the United States. However, while dividing power between three branches similarly to the constitution of the United States, the 1935 constitution gave the Philippine president significantly more power both politically and economically than that accorded to the president of the United States.\nThe Japanese invasion of 1941 at the onset of World War II forced the Commonwealth government to go into exile, and subjected the country to a puppet government. The KALIBAPI became the sole legal political party, and Jose P. Laurel was declared president of an independent Second Philippine Republic. In rural areas, a sudden vacuum of elite power led to the formation of new local governments by the remaining populace, beginning the Hukbalahap Rebellion. The Americans reconquered the Philippines in 1944, and Osme\u00f1a, who had succeeded Quezon upon the latter's death, restored the Commonwealth government.\nThe Nacionalistas were divided following the war, with a leadership struggle leading to Manuel Roxas setting up what would later be the Liberal Party. Roxas defeated Osme\u00f1a in the 1946 presidential election, and became the last president of the Commonwealth. A left-wing political movement that spawned from the Hukbalahap fight against the Japanese was suppressed by the former elite with American support, leading to the continuation of the rebellion against the new government. The Americans granted independence on July 4, 1946, and Roxas became the first president of the new Republic of the Philippines.\nIndependence.\nThe impact of the war led to a weaker civil service and a reduction in the dominance of Manila, with provincial politicians gaining political power and in some cases \"de facto\" autonomy. Many leveraged their provincial power to engage in national politics. Universal suffrage saw an expansion of voter participation, although power remained concentrated in the hands of a small elite. A diversifying post-war economy largely brought an end to the land-based cacique democracy patronage system. Political offices became lucrative by themselves, and patronage became more reliant on access to government funds. These changes did not shift the overall shape of Filipino politics, which remained a two-party system dominated by a narrow elite. There was little policy difference between the parties.\nRoxas suffered a fatal heart attack in 1948, allowing Vice President Elpidio Quirino to rule the country for the next six years. Quirino sought to significantly expand executive power. Quirino's Liberal government was widely seen as corrupt and was easily beaten by his former Defense secretary Ramon Magsaysay in 1953. Magsaysay, who oversaw the surrender of the long-running Hukbalahap Rebellion, was massively popular. Magsaysay implemented a plan to settle surrendered Hukbalahap rebels in Mindanao, cementing a demographic shift in Mindanao from a Muslim to a Christian majority.\nBefore the 1957 election, Magsaysay was killed in a plane crash. His vice president, Carlos P. Garcia, succeeded him and won the election. He continued Magsaysay's \"Filipino First\" policy and implemented an austerity program. Garcia was defeated by his vice president, Diosdado Macapagal of the Liberal Party, in 1961. Macapagal initiated a return to a system of free enterprise, and sought land reform and electrification. Macapagal was defeated in 1965 by Senator Ferdinand Marcos.\nThe growing and diversifying economy of the 1960s led to a growth in private business power and an expansion in mass media. Marcos was the first president to be re-elected, in 1969, although the election was tainted by violence and allegations of fraud and vote buying. Civil unrest heightened after the election. Communist rebellion strengthened during Marcos' rule, and a Moro insurgency emerged in Mindanao. Marcos declared martial law in 1972.\nAttempts to end the war in Mindanao led Marcos to recognize Islamic holidays, introduce a code of Muslim personal laws, and formally recognize a number of sultans in Mindanao and Sulu. Marcos framed his government as fighting against the rich landed elite that traditionally dominated politics. He relied on the growing technocratic civil service, who were receptive to such arguments, to effectively run the country under martial law. Marcos also relied on the military, which gained increased power and resources during the martial law period. A constitutional convention finalized a new constitution in November 1972, which introduced a semi-presidential system.\nMarcos continued to rule by decree without elections until 1978, when the Interim Batasang Pambansa (IBP) legislature was elected. Marcos had complete control over the bureaucracy, local governments, military, the press, and COMELEC. The 1978 parliamentary and the 1980 local elections were dominated by Marcos' Kilusang Bagong Lipunan party. The unicameral IBP had little real power. The Supreme Court affirmed the expansive executive powers claimed under martial law. Marcos laid out a vision of a \"new society\", which would represent an end to old oligarchies.\nSome political dynasties who were not Marcos allies were stripped of assets and power, in many cases replaced in local politics by Marcos allies. Marcos ended martial law in 1981, shortly before a visit to the Philippines by Pope John Paul II, although he retained immense executive powers. Opposition groups still boycotted the 1981 presidential election, which Marcos easily won. Opposition leader Benigno Aquino Jr. was slain upon his return to the Philippines in 1983.\nBy this time, the government was marred by a weak economy, rampant corruption, and a loss of political support. A united opposition participated in the 1984 parliamentary election, making gains. A snap election saw the opposition nominate Benigno's widow Corazon as their candidate. Marcos was declared the winner of the 1986 election, but the opposition refused to accept the result, alleging that the election was rigged. The People Power Revolution drove Marcos from power, and Aquino became president.\nThe 1987 constitution restored democracy along the lines of the 1935 constitution. The new constitution introduced some elements of direct democracy. The 1988 local elections saw the traditional elite recapturing local political office. Aquino's government was mired by coup attempts, and saw continued rebellions by communists and Islamic separatists. In 1991, a new Local Government Code shifted some power and resources to lower levels of government.\nAquino did not wish to run for election again, and leading up to the 1992 presidential election she supported Fidel V. Ramos, who had left her party to form his own. Ramos won, albeit under controversial circumstances and allegations of electoral fraud. The 1992 elections were the first to be synchronized, with presidential, legislative, and local elections held simultaneously. With the 1997 Asian financial crisis damaging the image of economy liberalism, and with no clear successor to Ramos, Ramos's vice president Joseph Estrada won the 1998 election with a comfortable margin on a populist campaign appealing directly to poorer voters.\nThe Estrada administration was embroiled in charges of cronyism and corruption, leading to his impeachment by the House of Representatives. In the impeachment trial, Estrada's allies in the Senate successfully prevented evidence to be presented, triggering massive protests. The military withdrew their support from Estrada and transferred their allegiance to Vice President Arroyo; the Supreme Court later ruled the presidency as vacant, and Estrada left Malaca\u00f1ang Palace.\nArroyo was sworn in as president on January 20, 2001. Estrada's supporters launched their own mass movement, which was ultimately unsuccessful. Arroyo's People Power Coalition won a majority of seats in the 2001 elections and therefore consolidated power. In 2003, a failed coup attempt took place in the central business district. As she had served less than four years as president, Arroyo was eligible for re-election. She won the 2004 election with a slim plurality. It was later exposed that Arroyo rigged the election. This second term saw another coup attempt. By the end of her presidency, Arroyo was the most unpopular president since the 1986 People Power Revolution.\nBefore the 2010 election, former president Aquino died, and her son, Benigno Aquino III, won the election. His administration was politically stable, seen as relatively clean, and had the highest ratings since Marcos. While his popularity dipped towards the end of his administration, it was linked to perceptions about the failure of change within the wider political system, rather than to Aquino himself. In the 2016 presidential election, Aquino's handpicked successor was decisively defeated by Davao City mayor Rodrigo Duterte.\nDuterte ran on a populist platform, winning votes from various socioeconomic classes, with particularly strong appeal to the middle classes. Duterte implemented a war on drugs that led to thousands of deaths. Duterte then prioritized infrastructure spending, and sought to end the communist insurgency. The administration made peace with the Moro Islamic Liberation Front, replacing the ARMM with the more powerful Bangsamoro region. The Duterte government has largely continued Aquino's economic policies, including those focused on the poor. Its political policies have shown a shift towards illiberal democracy, with the politicization of legal institutions and less regard for checks and balances.\nIn May 2022, Ferdinand Marcos Jr (known by his nickname \"Bongbong\"), son of former president Ferdinand Marcos, received nearly 59 percent of the vote and won the presidential election by landslide. His vice presidential candidate was Sara Duterte, daughter of then-president Rodrigo Duterte. On 30 June 2022, Marcos was sworn in as the Philippine president and Sara Duterte was sworn in as vice-president.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23445", "revid": "262716", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23445", "title": "Economy of the Philippines", "text": "The economy of the Philippines is an emerging market, and considered as a newly industrialized country in the Asia-Pacific region. In 2025, the Philippine economy is estimated to be at \u20b128.50 trillion ($497.5 billion), making it the world's 32nd largest by nominal GDP and 9th largest in Asia according to the International Monetary Fund.\nThe Philippine economy is a service-oriented economy, with relatively more modest contributions from the manufacturing and agriculture sectors. It has experienced significant economic growth and transformation in the past, posting one of the highest GDP growth rates in Asia. With an average annual growth rate of around 6 percent since 2010, the country has emerged as one of the fastest-growing economies in the world. The Philippines is a founding member of the United Nations, Association of Southeast Asian Nations, Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation, East Asia Summit and the World Trade Organization. The Asian Development Bank (ADB) is headquartered in the Ortigas Center located in the city of Mandaluyong, Metro Manila.\nThe country's primary exports include semiconductors and electronic products, transport equipment, garments, chemical products, copper, nickel, abaca, coconut oil, and fruits. Its major trading partners include Japan, China, the United States, Singapore, South Korea, the Netherlands, Hong Kong, Germany, Taiwan, and Thailand.\nIn 2017, the Philippine economy was projected to become the 9th largest in Asia and 19th largest in the world by 2050. By 2035, the Filipino economy is predicted to be the 22nd largest in the world.\nThe Philippines has been named as one of the Tiger Cub Economies, alongside Indonesia, Malaysia, Vietnam, and Thailand. However, major problems remain, mainly related to alleviating the wide income and growth disparities between the country's different regions and socioeconomic classes, reducing corruption, and investing in the infrastructure necessary to ensure future growth.\nIn 2024, the World Economic Forum chief B\u00f8rge Brende said that \"there is a real opportunity for this country to become a $2-trillion economy.\"\nIn 2025, the Philippines enacted Republic Act No. 12252, amending the Investors\u2019 Lease Act to allow foreign investors to lease private land for up to 99 years, up from the previous limit of 75 years (50 + 25 extension). This reform aims to enhance the country's competitiveness in attracting long-term foreign direct investment by offering greater leasehold security for commercial and industrial projects.\nOverview.\nThe Philippine economy has been growing steadily over decades and the International Monetary Fund in 2014 reported it as the 39th largest economy in the world. The Philippines posted a high GDP growth rate of 7.6 percent in 2022. However, the country is not a part of the Group of 20 nations; instead, it is grouped in a second tier for emerging markets or newly industrialized countries.\nNotes for economic growth (1980\u20132023):\n1980-82: Slower economic growth due to mismanagement\n1983-86: Recession due to factors like corruption\n1987-90: Recovery from 1984 crisis\n1991-1992: Inflation and natural disasters (notably Mount Pinatubo eruption) caused slower growth\n1993-97: Fast growth\n1998: Minor recession due to the 1997 Asian financial crisis\n1999-2001: Recovery\n2002: Recession due to the EDSA II Protest\n1999-2001: Recovery\n2002-2008: Post-EDSA II recovery\n2009: Effects of the Great Recession\n2010-2019: Philippines as a Tiger Economy\n2020: Coronavirus Outbreak\n2021-2023: Rebound \nA chart below outlines selected statistics showing trends in the gross domestic product of the Philippines using data taken from the International Monetary Fund.\nComposition by sector.\nAs a newly industrialized country, the Philippines is still an economy with a large agricultural sector; however, the country's service industry has expanded recently. Much of the industrial sector is based on processing and assembly operations in the manufacturing of electronics and other high-tech components, usually from foreign multinational corporations.\nFilipinos who go abroad to work\u2013-known as Overseas Filipino Workers or OFWs\u2014are a significant contributor to the economy but are not reflected in the below sectoral discussion of the domestic economy. OFW remittances is also credited for the Philippines' recent economic growth resulting in investment status upgrades from credit ratings agencies such as the Fitch Group and Standard &amp; Poor's. From more than US$2\u00a0billion worth of remittance from Overseas Filipinos sent to the Philippines in 1994, this significantly increased to a record US$38.34\u00a0billion in 2024 and represented 8.3 percent of the country's GDP.\nAgriculture.\nAs of 2022[ [update]], agriculture employs 24 percent of the Filipino workforce accounting for 8.9 percent of the total GDP. The type of activity ranges from small subsistence farming and fishing to large commercial ventures with significant export focus.\nThe Philippines is the world's third largest producer of coconuts, and the world's largest exporter of coconut products. Coconut production is generally concentrated in medium-sized farms. The Philippines is also the world's third largest producer of pineapples, producing in 2021.\nRice production in the Philippines is important to the food supply in the country and economy. The Philippines is the 8th largest rice producer in the world as of 2019[ [update]], accounting for 2.5 percent of global rice production. Rice is the most important food crop, a staple food in most of the country; it is produced extensively in Central Luzon), Western Visayas, Cagayan Valley, Soccsksargen, and Ilocos Region.\nThe Philippines is one of the largest producers of sugar in the world. At least 17 provinces located in eight regions of the nation have grown sugarcane crops, of which the Negros Island Region accounts for half of the country's total production. As of Crop Year 2012\u20132013, 29 mills are operational divided as follows: 13 mills in Negros, 6 mills in Luzon, 4 mills in Panay, 3 mills in Eastern Visayas and 3 mills in Mindanao. A range from are devoted to sugarcane production. The largest sugarcane areas are found in the Negros Island Region, which accounts for 51 percent of sugarcane areas planted. This is followed by Mindanao which accounts for 20 percent; Luzon with 17 percent; Panay with 7 percent and Eastern Visayas with 4 percent.\nAutomotive and aerospace.\nThe ABS used in Mercedes-Benz, BMW, and Volvo cars are made in the Philippines. Automotive sales in the Philippines increased to 467,252 in 2024 from 429,807 units a year prior. Toyota sells the most vehicles in the country followed by Mitsubishi, Ford, Nissan, and Suzuki. Honda and Suzuki produce motorcycles in the country. Since around the 2010s, several Chinese car brands have entered the Philippine market; these include Chery and Foton Motor.\nAerospace products in the Philippines are mainly for the export market and include manufacturing parts for aircraft built by both Boeing and Airbus. Moog is the biggest aerospace manufacturer with base in Baguio; the company produces aircraft actuators in their manufacturing facility. Total export output of aerospace products in the Philippines reached US$780 million in 2019.\nElectronics.\nA Texas Instruments plant in Baguio has been operating for 20 years and is the largest producer of DSP chips in the world. Texas Instruments' Baguio plant produces all the chips used in Nokia cell phones and 80% of chips used in Ericsson cell phones in the world. Toshiba hard disk drives are manufactured in Santa Rosa, Laguna. Printer manufacturer Lexmark has a factory in Cebu City. Electronics and other light industries are concentrated in Laguna, Cavite, Batangas and other Calabarzon provinces with sizable numbers found in Southern Philippines that account for most of the country's export.\nThe Philippine Electronics Industry is classified into (73%) Semiconductor Manufacturing Services (SMS) and (27%) Electronics Manufacturing Services (EMS) according to SEIPI, the largest organization of foreign and Filipino electronics companies in the Philippines. Electronic products continued to be the country's top export with total earnings of US$45.66\u00a0billion and accounted for 57.8 percent of the total export of goods in 2022.\nMining and extraction.\nThe Philippines is rich in mineral and geothermal energy resources. In 2019, it produced of electricity from geothermal sources (% of total electricity production). A 1989 discovery of natural gas reserves in the Malampaya oil fields off the island of Palawan is being used to generate electricity in three gas-powered plants. Philippine gold, nickel, copper, palladium and chromite deposits are among the largest in the world. Other important minerals include silver, coal, gypsum, and sulphur. Significant deposits of clay, limestone, marble, silica, and phosphate exist.\nAbout 60 percent of total mining production are accounted for by non-metallic minerals, which contributed substantially to the industry's steady output growth between 1993 and 1998, with the value of production growing 58 percent. Philippine mineral exports amounted to US$4.22\u00a0billion in 2020. Low metal prices, high production costs, lack of investment in infrastructure, and a challenge to the new mining law have contributed to the mining industry's overall decline.\nThe industry rebounded starting in late 2004 when the Supreme Court upheld the constitutionality of an important law permitting foreign ownership of Philippines mining companies. In 2019, the country was the 2nd largest world producer of nickel and the 4th largest world producer of cobalt. According to Philippine Statistics Authority, the total monetary value of four key metallic minerals which were appraised to Class A namely: copper, chromite, gold and nickel were valued at US$9.01\u00a0billion in 2022. Class A mineral resources are commercially recoverable that could contribute to economy annually.\nOffshoring and outsourcing.\nBusiness process outsourcing (BPO) and the call center industry contribute to the Philippines' economic growth resulting in investment status upgrades from credit ratings agencies such as Fitch and S&amp;P. In 2008, the Philippines has surpassed India as the world leader in business process outsourcing (BPO). The industry generated 100,000 jobs, and total revenues were placed at US$960 million for 2005. In 2011, BPO sector employment ballooned to over 700,000 people and is contributing to a growing middle class; this increased to around 1.3 million employees by 2022. BPO facilities are concentrated in IT parks and centers in economic zones across the Philippines: Metro Manila, Metro Cebu, Metro Clark, Bacolod, Davao City, and Iloilo City; other areas with significant presence of the BPO industry include Baguio, Cagayan de Oro, Dasmari\u00f1as, Dumaguete, Lipa, Naga, and Santa Rosa, Laguna. The majority of the top ten BPO firms of the United States operate in the Philippines.\nCall centers began in the Philippines as plain providers of email response and managing services and is a major source of employment. Call center services include customer relations, ranging from travel services, technical support, education, customer care, financial services, online business to customer support, and online business-to-business support. The Philippines is considered as a location of choice due to its many outsourcing benefits such as less expensive operational and labor costs, the high proficiency in spoken English of a significant number of its people, and a highly educated labor pool.\nThe growth in the BPO industry is promoted by the Philippine government. The industry is highlighted by the Philippines Development Plan as among the 10 high potential and priority development areas. The government provides incentive programs such as tax holidays, tax exemptions, and simplified export and import procedures. Additionally, training is also available for BPO applicants.\nRenewable energy resources.\nThe Philippines has significant potential in solar energy; however, as of 2021[ [update]], most of the domestically produced electricity is based on fossil fuel resources, particularly coal. The country produced of renewable energy in 2019.\nOn November 15, 2022, the renewable energy sector was granted the ability to operate with 100 percent foreign ownership, an increase from the previous 40 percent limit. This change allows for the infusion of foreign capital into the renewable energy (RE) industries. The Department of Energy is targeting an increase in the share of renewable energy in the country's power generation mix, aiming for 35 percent by 2030 and 50 percent by 2040, up from the current 22 percent. Danish firm Copenhagen Infrastructure Partners (CIP) is investing US$5\u00a0billion to develop three offshore wind energy projects with a potential capacity of ; it will be located in Camarines Norte and Camarines Sur (1000 MW), Northern Samar (650 MW), Pangasinan and La Union (350 MW). In 2022, the share of RE in the energy mix was at 22.8 percent.\nShipbuilding and repair.\nThe Philippines is a significant player in the global shipbuilding industry with 118 registered shipyards in 2021 distributed in Subic, Cebu, Bataan, Navotas and Batangas. As of 2022, it is the seventh largest shipbuilding nation by gross tonnage. Subic-made cargo vessels are exported to countries where shipping operators are based. South Korea's Hanjin started production in Subic in 2007 of the 20 ships ordered by German and Greek shipping operators. Bulk carriers, container ships and big passenger ferries are built in the country's shipyards. General Santos' shipyard is mainly for ship repair and maintenance.\nSurrounded by waters, the country has abundant natural deep-sea ports ideal for development as production, construction and repair sites. In the ship repair sector, the Navotas complex in Metro Manila is expected to accommodate 96 vessels for repair. Shipbuilding is part of Philippines' maritime heritage; employing over 600,000 people and contributing almost 15 percent of revenues to the ocean-based industries.\nRegional accounts.\nFor the year 2022, all economies of the 17 regions in the Philippines recorded positive growths; Western Visayas had the highest growth (9.3 percent), followed by Cordillera Administrative Region (8.7 percent), and Davao Region (8.15 percent).\nAccording to the Philippine Statistics Authority (PSA), gross regional domestic product (GRDP) is GDP measured at regional levels. Figures below are for the year 2019.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"template:row hover highlight/styles.css\"/&gt;\nProvincial accounts.\nAccording to the Philippine Statistics Authority (PSA), Provincial Product Account (PPA) is GDP measured at provincial levels. Figures below are for the year 2022.\n\"Source: Philippine Statistics Authority\"\nCity accounts.\nFigures below are Provincial Product Accounts (PPA) for Highly Urbanized Cities (HUC) or Independent Cities. No data available for cities within Metro Manila.\n\"source: Philippine Statistics Authority\"\nStatistics.\nGDP-related data can be found here:\nGovernment budget.\nThe national government budget for 2025 has set the following budget allocations:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23446", "revid": "49810921", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23446", "title": "Telecommunications in the Philippines", "text": " \nTelecommunications in the Philippines are well-developed due to the presence of modern infrastructure facilities. The industry was deregulated in 1995 when President Fidel Ramos signed Republic Act No. 7925 (The Public Telecommunications Policy Act of the Philippines). This law opened the sector to more private players and improved the provision of telecom services are better and fairer rates, leading to the creation of many telecommunication service providers for mobile, fixed-line, Internet and other services.\nHistory.\nPre-reform.\nColonial period.\nTwo private companies offered telecom services namely Eastern Extension Australasia and China Telegraph Company which is a subsidiary of Britain's Cable and Wireless. The Spanish authorizes Eastern Extension to construct and operate the first submarine cable linking the Philippines and Hong Kong.\nA telephone network was established in Iloilo City in 1894. Jose de Olagier y Feliu requested permission from the Spanish Officials in the Philippines in 1892 to operate a telephone network covering the Spanish cities of Iloilo, Jaro, and the town of Molo. Permission was granted for a 10-km radius telephone network with bidding for the public works done in Madrid and Manila. By May 1894, all necessary posts and ridges were installed. The telephone network in Iloilo City was operational by June 1, 1894. \nThe Philippine Islands Telephone and Telegraph Company is American-owned which started operations in 1905 in the present-day Metro Manila. In 1928, merged with Cebu, Panay, and Negros Telephone and Telegraph companies to form the Philippine Long Distance Telephone Company (PLDT). In 1932, the colonial Philippine congress granted PLDT a 50-year franchise to operate a national telephone system.\nThe establishment of the Public Service Commission to regulate the industry as well as other utilities, meanwhile the Bureau of Posts was created to operate telegraph services nationwide.\nPost-independence, 1946\u20131969.\nInitially, PLDT was managed by Americans, including the American company General Telephone and Electric Corporation (GTE) as a major stockholder. However, in March 1967, GTE disposed of their 28% controlling interest in PLDT. Which is why on November 7, 1967, the Philippines Telecommunications Investment Corporation (PTIC) was registered to buy GTE's controlling interest. Ramon Cojuangco, who was part of one of the most influential clans in Philippine history, was a main incorporator. PTIC formally took control of PLDT on January 1, 1968. This led to the takeover of PLDT by the Filipinos, becoming a dominant player in telecommunications because of its authorization to operate a national network. Company officials however dispute that they were a monopoly because of the existence of a government telephone system, and over 60 provincial companies operating in the country. The Bureau of Telecommunications (Butel) handled the government telephone system, which by 1975 had 34,643 operational telephone lines, or about 10.2% of the total telephone capacity of the country.\nThere were also four major companies with license for international data communication.\nPaptelco vs. PLDT.\nIn 1976, the Philippine Association of Private Telephone Companies was organized to protect the interest of small telephone companies. By 1975, around 60 small telephone companies provided 11.7% of the total telephone capacity at the time. These small companies were dependent on PLDT to place inter-provincial and overseas calls, in which PLDT used this interconnection to their advantage.\nPLDT could allow, slow down, or deny interconnection at will. Some companies which found it financially impossible to operate without interconnection sold their companies to PLDT. They also dictated the interconnection access rates, which meant that PLDT cornered most telecommunications revenues. Eventually, by 1991, PLDT had 94% of the total lines.\nMartial law developments.\nFerdinand Marcos's Presidential Decree No. 217 in 1973 mandated all PLDT subscribers to invest in PLDT to raise its equity and finance its expansion program. This law, known as the Subscribers Investment Plan (SIP) required all PLDT subscribers to buy non-voting shares in the company. Mandatory investors held about 85% of the total company equity shares but had no actual power in controlling the company.\nPLDT also had access to international loans from the World Bank. These loans assisted PLDT's dominance, and PLDT became the single largest private recipient of foreign loans to the Philippines.\nIn 1981, a National Telecommunications Development Plan was released. A section of the plan recommended the integration of all private telephone companies under one monopoly. Marcos issued a presidential directive to Retelco, PLDT's main competitor in Metro Manila, to merge with PLDT. The merger was met with objection by the owners of Retelco, but the merger was continued because Marcos threatened to withdraw the companies' franchises.\nDevelopments under Aquino.\nThe Corazon Aquino government's policy was two-pronged: it was to increase public spending in underserved or unserved municipalities, and allow entry of new players. In 1987, the DOTC adopted a series of policies aimed at rationalizing the development of the industry. This led to the reversal of Marcos' push towards the integration of the telecommunications system under a monopoly. It also affirmed that development of the national telcos needs an introduction of competition and regulated entry into the market. During the end of Cory's term however, telecommunications was poor but PLDT prevailed with their tactics in maintaining their monopoly.\nReform.\nLiberalization.\nUnder the Ramos administration, a coalition named the Movement for Reliable and Efficient Phone System (MORE Phones) was formed with the goal of liberalizing the telecommunications industry. Until the mid-1990s, MORE Phones continued to pressure PLDT to be more transparent and accountable. Ricardo Manapat, who wrote about the illegitimate activities of the Marcoses and their cronies, wrote a follow-up report entitled \"Wrong Number: the PLDT Telephone Monopoly.\" The report revealed PLDT's questionable management practices as well as how the Cojuangco family controlled the company, despite owning only 1.6% of the total stock.\nAs a countermeasure against PLDT's earlier attempts at refusing interconnection with its competitors, President Ramos signed an Executive Order 59 on 24 February 1993. EO 59 required interconnection among all authorized telecommunications companies, in order for subscribers on one operator to reach the subscribers of another. In the Senate, anti-monopoly bills were filed in the House of Representatives and it was reported that PLDT was the main target of these bills. The Congress had already approved nine telecom franchise, their applications pending at the NTC for provisional authority to operate international, cellular, or value-added services. This also led to the Congress controlling who could obtain a franchise. But PLDT would successfully block new entrants to the industry by filing various legal challenges.\nIn 1994, the NTC and several other industry players devised the Service Area Scheme (SAS) This scheme was in response to imbalanced demand of telecom companies in urban areas over rural areas.The SAS attempted to allow companies to earn profits but also ensure that part of those profits would be channeled to serve less profitable areas. Companies were allocated both profitable and unprofitable areas to ensure operational viability and the provision of rural telephony.\nProminent industry players.\nGlobe Telecom.\nGlobe Telecom (Globe) is a joint venture between Ayala Corporation and Singapore Telecommunications Limited (SingTel). Globe was the first foreign company to be granted entry into the Philippine's liberalized market. In 1994, Globe launched its digital cellular services, pioneering the use of Global System for Mobile Communications Technology (GSM). In fact, Globe popularized the short messaging service (SMS) through adding it for free with their basic services.\nWhen the 1997 Asian financial crisis stuck, there were two consolidations that happened in the industry. In June 2001, the Globe-Islacom merger was completed. This merger resulted to providing improved services and a wider coverage for the two companies subscribers.\nSmart Communications.\nSmart Communications (Smart) was the first company to enter the liberalised market. In September 1999, PLDT purchased Smart Communications absorbing it as a 100-percent owned subsidiary. Smart was financially supported by First Pacific. This partnership resulted in the rapid construction of Smart's network and more importantly, the subsidization of handsets. Smart was also authorized to offer both international gateway and cellular telephone services. At the end of 2005, Smart became the largest cellular operator in the Philippines with over 15.4 million subscribers.\nDito Telecommunity.\nDito Telecommunity (Dito), formerly known as Mindanao Islamic Telephone Company, Inc. (Mislatel), is a consortium of Davao businessman Dennis Uy's Udenna Corporation (through its subsidiary Dito CME Holdings Corporation) and Chinese state-owned China Telecommunications Corporation, a parent company of China Telecom. As the third player, it began its commercial operations on March 8, 2021. As of February 2023, Dito's total mobile subscriber base reached 13.1 million.\n6.782 million (2011)\n* 9 international gateways; satellite earth stations \u2013 3 Intelsat (1 Indian Ocean and 2 Pacific Ocean); submarine cables to Hong Kong, Guam, Singapore, Taiwan, and Japan\n105.9 million (2023)\nFacts and figures.\nMobile.\nMobile prefixes used.\nMobile Numbers are coded base on network providers ranging from 0813 to 0999, and international code for Philippines replace the zero to make an international call to the Philippines that would make it +63813 to +63999.\nMobile market.\nConsidered one of the most profitable industries, telecoms have emerged in the country due to it becoming a necessity and its product life cycle. The mobile market of the Philippines has been run by the duopoly of Smart together with Globe Telecom. The two companies have a very tight hold on the industry but they continue to fight for more subscribers and they are in a race to introduce new services. However, both still lost subscribers during 2017 as the market went through consolidation.\nAlthough based in the Philippines, there was alleged foreign ownership in PLDT (76%) and Globe (73%)\u2014resulting a duopoly in the telecom industry. As alleged by the journalst Rigoberto Tiglao, Anthony Salim is the biggest controlling stockholder of PLDT through Hong Kong based First Pacific Company Limited, which led him to establish and expand in the Philippines as a conglomerate. This however is countered by legal disclosures of PLDT which as of June 30, 2025 details foreign ownership to 11.21% if only counting voting common shares, and maximum of 20.40% if also including voting preferred shares.\nIt was expected that for 2018-2013 the growth of mobile subscribers would be low due to a highly mature and highly competitive market. There will be a movement from 4G to 5G services for faster browsing.\nThe mobile average revenue per user (ARPU) levels have been decreasing in the Philippines due to the visible competition in the mobile industry. In order to grab market share, aggressive price competition is done by these operators. There has been a drastic increase in mobile broadband penetration, as well as an increase of wireless broadband users over the past five years. It is predicted that over the next five years will have a strong growth. On the other hand, it could decline and slow down as the market matures. Currently, the Philippines is preparing from the move from 4G to 5G. A \u201c5G technolab\u201d is currently in the works in PLDT. Meanwhile, Globe Telecom announced its plans to release 5G within the middle of 2019.\nSMS.\nSMS services are very common in the Philippines, from news briefs to multimedia services. Cellular mobile services began in the country only in 1991. In May 2000, the number of cellular phone subscribers exceeded the number of fixed line subscribers. This is because of the spotty telephone service and high cost of fixed line subscriptions. It was also seen how SMS is affordable. This led to the Philippines has become the global capital of text messaging, which was a feature of the mobile phone that was ignored by other countries. Meanwhile, in 2001, the popularity of the text messaging in the Philippines has created a subculture called Generation Txt, where teenagers and young mobile professionals have developed their own language in text.\nCivilian logistical communication through SMS was an important part of the EDSA II revolt in 2001 that overthrew the government of President Joseph Estrada.\nAM 369, FM 583, shortwave 5 (2003) \n\"11.5 million (1997)\"\n3.7 billion (2018)\n\"233 + 1373 CATV networks\"\nIn the Philippines, there is barely any growth in the fixed broadband market. This is because most Filipinos use mobile phones and very few have fixed lines (landlines). Mobile broadband use is more popular in the country and fixed broadband penetration in the Philippines is still low. Since market leader PLDT is now offering fibre-based services and will soon be introducing hybrid technology such as G.fast, it is pushing its competitors like Globe Telecom to match them. In general, Internet service in the Philippines is still too unaffordable for majority of the population. The prices are declining but the market continues to struggle against low entry level packages.\nFrom being the \"texting capital of the world,\" the Philippines has one of the heaviest social media usage globally. The average Filipino spends around 4 hours on social media. Despite most Filipinos wanting to be connected, the Akamai Q3 2016 report states that the Philippines ironically has the second slowest fixed line broadband Internet speed in the world.\nBased on this Q2 2017 report by Akamai, the Philippines' average internet speed (IPV4) was a lowly 5.5\u00a0Mbps, which was below the global average of 7.2\u00a0Mbps during the time of the study. Ookla, the company behind the popular internet speed testing service Speedtest, shows that the country's average fixed broadband and mobile speeds as of June 2018 sits at 17.9\u00a0Mbps and 13.7\u00a0Mbps respectively.\nInternet.\nList of Internet Service Providers (ISPs) in the Philippines.\n\"As of June 2021\"\n*InfiniVAN Inc.\n*Converge ICT Solutions\n*Sky Cable Corporation\n*PLDT\n*Globe Telecom\n*Dito Telecommunity\n*RISE\n*Net 1\n*PT&amp;T\n*DCTV Cable Network\n*Now Telecom\n*Eastern Communications\n*Streamtech (formerly Planet Cable)\n*Royal Cable\n*Radius Telecoms\n*Parasat Cable Television\n*Asian Vision\n*Horizon Gateway Corporation\n*Kabayan Broadband\n76 million (2018)\n.ph\nLIRNEasia's Telecommunications Regulatory Environment (TRE) index, which summarizes stakeholders' perception on certain TRE dimensions, provides insight into how conducive the environment is for further development and progress. The most recent survey was conducted in July 2008 in eight Asian countries, including Bangladesh, India, Indonesia, Sri Lanka, Maldives, Pakistan, Thailand, and the Philippines. The tool measured seven dimensions: i) market entry; ii) access to scarce resources; iii) interconnection; iv) tariff regulation; v) anti-competitive practices; and vi) universal services; vii) quality of service, for the fixed, mobile and broadband sectors.\nThe prominent companies providing telecommunication services are Philippine Long Distance Telephone (PLDT) and Globe Telecom (Globe). The two aforementioned companies are the leading players in the industry, causing a duopoly. The Filipinos continually pay expensive prices for slow internet without the presence of a third player. The dismay in the Internet and Communications Technology (ICT) of the Philippines can be seen simply through their pricing points and comparing that to the neighboring countries in South East Asia.\nIn 2016, an Australian telecommunications company called Telstra was having talks with San Miguel Corporation (SMC) to enter the Philippine market as the third player. However, Telstra did not push through. The Australian company did not give any explicit reason for their repudiation. However, some analysts would assume that Telstra was turned off with the pricing battle caused by the duopoly.\nThe \u201cKonektadong Pinoy\u201d bill lapsed into law in 2025, aiming to liberalize the telecom market, encourage competition, and make internet access more affordable.\nImportance of telecommunications to the Philippines.\nA lot of Filipinos work outside of their country and they keep contact with their families back home using calling cards to the Philippines because those are cheaper than direct calling. According to the TNS Digital Life Study of 2012, about 81% of urban Filipinos use the internet to keep in touch with their relatives abroad. 90% of overseas Filipino workers (OFWs) belong to social media networking sites such as Facebook wherein they. Some people use e-mail or instant messaging, but the preferred method is still the phone. The use of a mobile phone for offers the cheapest way overseas Filipino workers (OFW) to send money or remittances to their families back in the Philippines.\nFurthermore, in a study done in 2015 by the US-based Pew Research Center, 88% of Filipinos consider the internet good for education. The survey also notes that 76% of Filipinos see the internet as good for the maintenance of personal relationships. 73% believe that the internet is good for the economy, especially with the boom of online or electronic commerce.\nApart from that, telecommunications is used in the Philippine establishments. According to the 2015 Survey on Information and Communication Technology, 61.9% of establishments have local area network (LAN). 13.7% of establishments utilize the internet for their business. This includes e-commerce. 17.6% of establishments conduct business transactions using the mobile phone.\nTelco tower operators.\nCommon towers or cell sites that allow co-sharing arrangements between separate telecommunications services is currently being rolled out across the Philippines. The policy for common towers is meant to encourage a rise in investment activities and broad market-led development on the part of ICT providers.\nPresently, there are over 20 tower companies with licenses to operate but only six of these companies as having the capabilities, wherewithal, and customer support to secure meaningful build-to-suit (BTS) commitments from mobile network operators for new sites.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23447", "revid": "49402000", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23447", "title": "Transportation in the Philippines", "text": " \nTransportation in the Philippines covers the transportation methods within the archipelagic nation of over 7,600 islands. From a previously underdeveloped state of transportation, the government of the Philippines has been improving transportation through various direct infrastructure projects, and these include an increase in air, sea, road, and rail transportation and transport hubs.\nJeepneys are a popular and iconic public utility vehicle; they have become a symbol of the Philippine culture. Another popular mode of public transportation in the country is the motorized tricycles, especially common in smaller urban and rural areas. The Philippines has four railway lines: Manila Light Rail Transit System Line 1 (LRT Line 1), LRT Line 2, MRT Line 3, and the PNR Metro Commuter Line operated by the Philippine National Railways. There are also steam engines found in the Visayas, mostly Negros island, which operate sugar mills such as Central Azucarera. Taxis and buses are also important modes of public transport in urban areas.\nThe Philippines has 12 international airports and more than 20 major and minor domestic airports serving the country. Ninoy Aquino International Airport is the country's chief airport. \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nRoad infrastructure.\nRoads.\nAs of October 2018, the Philippines has of roads. The road network consists of:\nIn 1940, there were of road in the entire country, half of which was in central and southern Luzon. The roads served 50,000 vehicles.\nRoad classification is based primarily on administrative responsibilities (with the exception of barangays), i.e., which level of government built and funded the roads. Most of the barangay roads are unpaved village-access roads built in the past by the Department of Public Works and Highways (DPWH), but responsibility for maintaining these roads have been devolved to local government units (LGUs). Farm-to-market roads fall under this category, and a few are financed by the Department of Agrarian Reform and the Department of Agriculture.\nHighways.\nHighways in the Philippines include national roads classified into three types: national primary, national secondary, and national tertiary roads.\nThe Pan-Philippine Highway is a network of roads, bridges, and ferry services that connect the islands of Luzon, Samar, Leyte, and Mindanao, serving as the Philippines' principal transport backbone. The northern terminus of the highway is in Laoag, and the southern terminus is at Zamboanga City.\nEpifanio de los Santos Avenue (EDSA) is one of the most known highways in the Philippines. The avenue passes through 6 of the 17 settlements in Metro Manila, namely, the cities of Caloocan, Quezon City, Mandaluyong, San Juan, Makati and Pasay. EDSA is the longest highway in the metropolis and handles an average of 2.34 million vehicles. Commonwealth Avenue is also an important highway in the metropolis, it serves the Quezon City area and has a length of 12.4\u00a0km (7.7\u00a0mi). Other important thoroughfares in Metro Manila that are part of the Philippine highway network include Espa\u00f1a Boulevard, Quezon Avenue, Taft Avenue, and the Alabang\u2013Zapote Road.\nOutside Metro Manila, the MacArthur Highway links Metro Manila to the provinces in central and northern Luzon. It is a component of both N1 (from Caloocan to Guiguinto) and N2 (from Guiguinto northwards to Laoag) of the Philippine highway network and Radial Road 9 (R-9) of Metro Manila's arterial road network. Both Kennon Road and Aspiras\u2013Palispis Highway are major roads leading to and from Baguio. Aguinaldo Highway, Jose P. Laurel Highway, Manila South Road, and Calamba\u2013Pagsanjan Road (part of Manila East Road) are the major roads in the Calabarzon region. Andaya Highway (N68) links the province of Quezon to Bicol Region. Located in Cebu City is the Colon Street, considered the oldest thoroughfare in the country. Among the major highways in Mindanao are Sayre Highway, Butuan\u2013Cagayan de Oro\u2013Iligan Road, Surigao\u2013Davao Coastal Road, Davao\u2013Cotabato Road, and Maria Clara L. Lobregat Highway.\nThe Strong Republic Nautical Highway links many of the islands' road networks through a series of roll-on/roll-off ferries, some rather small covering short distances and some larger vessels that might travel several hours or more.\nExpressways.\nThe Philippines has numerous expressways and most of them are located in the main island of the country, Luzon. The first expressway systems in the country are the North Luzon Expressway formerly known as North Diversion Road and the South Luzon Expressway, formerly known as South Super Highway. Both were built in the 1970s, during the presidency of Ferdinand Marcos.\nThe North Luzon Expressway (NLEX) is a 4 to 8-lane limited-access toll expressway that connects Metro Manila to the provinces of the Central Luzon region. The expressway begins in Quezon City at a cloverleaf interchange with EDSA. It then passes through various cities and municipalities in the provinces of Bulacan and Pampanga. The expressway ends at Mabalacat and merges with the MacArthur Highway, which continues northward into the rest of Central and Northern Luzon.\nThe South Luzon Expressway (SLEX) is another important expressway in the country, it serves the southern part of Luzon. The expressway is a network of two expressways that connects Metro Manila to the provinces of Calabarzon in the southern part of Luzon. It starts at the Paco District of Manila then passes through Manila, Makati, Pasay, Para\u00f1aque, Taguig and Muntinlupa in Metro Manila; San Pedro, Bi\u00f1an in Laguna; Carmona in Cavite, then transverses again to Bi\u00f1an, Santa Rosa, Cabuyao and Calamba in the province of Laguna and ends in Santo Tomas, Batangas.\nThe Subic\u2013Clark\u2013Tarlac Expressway is another expressway that serves the region of Central Luzon, the expressway is linked to the North Luzon Expressway through the Mabalacat Interchange. Its southern terminus is at the Subic Bay Freeport Zone in Zambales, it passes through the Clark Freeport Zone and its northern terminus is at Brgy. Amucao in Tarlac City. Construction on the expressway began in April 2005, and opened to the public three years later.\nThe Manila\u2013Cavite Expressway (CAVITEX), a 14-km expressway that runs from Para\u00f1aque to Kawit, Cavite, also passes through Las Pinas and Bacoor. \nThe Southern Tagalog Arterial Road (STAR), a 41-kilometer expressway that runs through the province of Batangas, connecting Santo Tomas to Batangas City.\nThe Cavite\u2013Laguna Expressway (CALAX) is an expressway that connects Cavite, Laguna and Metro Manila. As of 2023[ [update]], it connects Silang and Bi\u00f1an, with construction ongoing for the remainder.\nThe Philippine government and other private sectors are building more plans and proposals to build new expressways through public\u2013private partnership.\nRoad transportation.\nAs of May 2022, there are over 5.8 million registered motor vehicles in the country, with motorcycles and tricycles accounting for 60 percent of all registered motor vehicles, followed by utility vehicles at 18 percent, cars and SUVs at 16 percent, and trucks at 3 percent.\nAutomobiles.\nThe Philippines' automobile industry started during the American colonial period from 1898 to 1946, with the introduction of American-made cars, which have been sold in the Philippines ever since. An import substitution policy was developed for the 1950s, which led to the prohibition of and then punishingly high tariffs on the import of fully built-up cars (CBUs) from 1951 until 1972. During the 1973 oil crisis, Philippine president Ferdinand Marcos advised Filipinos to buy smaller, more efficient vehicles with four-cylinder engines. In the early 1970s, the local Volkswagen assembler attempted to build a native national car, the \"Volkswagen Sakbayan\" (short for \"sasakyangkatutubongbayan\"), to avoid reliance on imported \"completely-knocked-down\" or \"semi-knocked-down\" parts, but this did not last long. In 1972 the government instituted the Progressive Car Manufacturing Program (PCMP), a system with scheduled increases in local parts content requirement which also allowed program participants to import a certain proportion of CBU vehicles. The original participants were General Motors, Ford, PAMCOR (a Chrysler/Mitsubishi joint venture), Delta Motors Corporation (Toyota), and Nissan Motor Philippines.\nAs of May 2022, cars account for 9 percent of all registered motor vehicles in the country, while SUVs account for 7 percent of the total.\nBus.\nBuses, after ferries and airlines, are the next primary mode of long-distance transportation in the Philippines.\nPublic bus services in the Philippines are divided into two types: provincial buses and city buses. Provincial buses are used for medium to long-haul routes between cities and towns (including those involving ferries). City bus networks exist in the three metropolitan areas (Metro Manila, Metro Cebu, Metro Davao). Bus services are run by private companies, and routes, operations and fares are regulated by the Land Transportation Franchising and Regulatory Board (LTFRB).\nBus rapid transit (BRT) systems exist in some regions. Extant BRT systems are the EDSA Carousel in Metro Manila and the Clark Loop in Clark Freeport Zone. A third BRT system is under construction in Cebu City. An integrated bus transit system will also be implemented in Davao City.\nMotorcycles.\nMotorcycles are the most dominant form of private transportation in the country, accounting for 49 percent of all registered motor vehicles as of May 2022. A Social Weather Stations survey in 2021 also reveals that 36 percent of households nationwide reported owning a motorcycle, accounting for 50 percent of vehicle owners. They are commonly used for package and food delivery services to transport goods and are often regarded as a cheaper alternative to buying a private car. Motorcycles are also regarded for their size which allows them to easily split through lanes in heavily congested traffic corridors and be easily stored or parked. They have also been used for taxi services, commonly referred to as an \"angkas\".\nThe use of motorcycles grew in popularity in the country started in the 1990s with motorcycle enthusiasts that went on leisure rides and delivery companies that sought a cheap, efficient way of moving goods around. Initially limited to American brands, the entry of Chinese, Japanese, and Taiwanese motorcycle brands disrupted the market throughout the early 2000s and sparked a growing interest in motorcycle ownership and usage. By 2005, the number of registered motorcycles surpassed that of cars.\nLimousines.\nLimousines are used by the president and vice-president of the Philippines, as well as wedding services for wealthy families. Otherwise, they are seldom seen on Philippine roads due to considerations like cost and road traffic conditions but if used, they are utilized for bridal events or limo services. Limousines include the Chrysler 300C, Lincoln Town Car, Mercedes-Benz E-Class and S-Class, as well as SUV-based limousines such as the Cadillac Escalade and Hummer H2.\nJeepneys.\nJeepneys are the most popular means of public transportation in the Philippines. They were originally made from US military jeeps left over from World War II and are known for their flamboyant decoration and crowded seating. They have become a ubiquitous symbol of Filipino culture.\nOriginal jeepneys were simply refurbished military jeeps by Willys and Ford, modern jeepneys are now produced by independently owned workshops and factories in the Philippines with surplus engines and parts coming from Japan. In the central island of Cebu, the bulk of jeepneys are built from second-hand Japanese trucks, originally intended for cargo. These are euphemistically known as \"surplus\" trucks.\nThere are two classes of jeepney builders in the Philippines. The backyard builders produce one to five vehicles a month, source their die-stamped pieces from one of the larger manufacturers, and work with used engines and chassis from salvage yards (usually the Isuzu 4BA1, 4BC2, 4BE1 series diesel engines or the Mitsubishi Fuso 4D30 diesel engines). The second type is the large volume manufacturer. They have two subgroups: the PUJ, or \"public utility jeep,\" and the large volume metal-stamping companies that supply parts as well as complete vehicles.\nThe jeepney builders in the past were mostly based in Cebu City and Las Pi\u00f1as. The largest manufacturer of vintage-style army jeepneys is MD Juan. Other makers include Armak Motors (San Pablo, Laguna), Celestial Motors (San Pablo, Laguna), Hebron Motors, LGS Motors, Malague\u00f1a (Imus, Cavite), Mega (Lipa, Batangas), Morales Motors (San Mateo, Rizal), and Sarao Motors (Las Pi\u00f1as). Another manufacturer, PBJ Motors, manufactured jeepneys in Pampanga using techniques derived from Sarao Motors. Armak sells remanufactured trucks and vehicles as an adjunct, alongside its jeepneys.\nMotorized tricycles.\nAs of May 2022, motorized tricycles account for 11 percent of all registered motor vehicles in the country.\nTaxi.\nTaxis are one of the modes of transportation in the country. They are regulated by the Department of Transportation (DOTr), the Land Transportation Office (LTO), and the Land Transportation Franchising and Regulatory Board (LTFRB). The taxicabs there vary from models and uses. Most taxicabs have yellow colored license plates, taxi signs, LTFRB Registration number, and taximeter, which is mandatory in every cab.\nTaxis from the Philippines are mostly used in metropolitan areas. \nNon-motorized land transport.\nHuman-powered and animal-powered transport exist in the Philippines in the form of walking, cycling, pedicabs (also known as \"traysikad\" or \"padyak\"), and horse- or cattle-drawn kalesas. The United Nations and such organizations as Clean Air Asia support the integration of non-motorized transport as part of a clean and \"highly cost-effective transportation strategy\" that \"brings about large health, economic and social co-benefits, particularly for the urban poor.\"\nIn Marikina, the local government constructed a network of bikeways to help reduce air pollution, greenhouse gas emissions, fuel consumption, and traffic congestion in the city. The bikeways project was awarded by the World Health Organization in 2008 in the category of climate change and health.\nAccording to a survey conducted by the Social Weather Stations on bicycle ownership in May 2021, over 20 percent of households nationwide reported owning a bicycle, accounting for 27 percent of vehicle owners.\nRail transportation.\nRail transportation in the Philippines includes services provided by three rapid transit lines and one commuter rail line: the Manila Light Rail Transit System (Lines 1 and 2), Manila Metro Rail Transit System (Line 3) and the PNR Metro Commuter Line. The government has plans to expand the country's railway footprint from 77 kilometers as of 2017 to more than 320 kilometers by 2022. These railway lines are currently operating in Metro Manila, as well as commuter services in Calabarzon and in Bicol Region.\nThe Manila Light Rail Transit System (LRT) is a rapid transit system serving the Metro Manila area, it is the first metro system in Southeast Asia. The system served a total 928,000 passengers each day in 2012. Its 31 stations along over 31 kilometers (19\u00a0mi) of mostly elevated track form two lines: the original Line 1, and the more modern Line 2 which passes through the cities of Caloocan, Manila, Marikina, Pasay, San Juan and Quezon City. Apart from the LRT system, the Manila Metro Rail Transit System (MRT) system also serves Metro Manila. The system is located along the Epifanio de los Santos Avenue (EDSA), one of Metro Manila's main thoroughfares. It has 13 stations along its 16.95\u00a0km track form a single line which is the Line 3 which passes through the cities of Makati, Mandaluyong, Pasay and Quezon City. Some of the stations of the system have been retrofitted with escalators and elevators for easier access, and ridership has increased. By 2004, Line 3 had the highest ridership of the three lines, with 400,000 passengers daily.\nThe Philippine National Railways (PNR) operates a commuter line that serves a region from Metro Manila south toward Laguna. PNR, a state-owned railway system of the Philippines, alongside a tramway system in Manila, were established during the Spanish Colonial period. The intercity rail used to provide services on Luzon, connecting northern and southern Luzon with Manila; on the other hand, the tramway served what is known today as Metro Manila. In 1988, the railway line to northern Luzon became disused and later the services to Bicol were halted although plans to revive the southern line are around as of 2017. Panay Railways is a company that ran rail lines on Panay until 1989 and Cebu until World War II.\nFuture projects in the pipeline, such as the North\u2013South Commuter Railway (NSCR), a 147-km railway connecting Clark Freeport in Pampanga to Calamba, Laguna, will utilize the old PNR right of way; the Metro Manila Subway, a 36-kilometer underground rapid transit, will connect from East Valenzuela to NAIA Terminal 3 or Bicutan; the MRT-4, a 12-kilometer elevated railway, will connect Ortigas Center to Taytay, Rizal; and the MRT-7, a 22-km elevated route, will connect from North EDSA to San Jose Del Monte, Bulacan.\nWater transportation.\nBoats.\nMotorized and non-motorized boats are the primary mode of water transportation between islands and across inland and coastal waters. The native bangka is also typically used for fishing, transporting goods, and island hopping tours.\nRiver ferries.\nThe Pasig River Ferry Service is a river ferry service that serves Metro Manila, it is also the only water-based transportation that cruised the Pasig River. The entire ferry network had 17 stations operational and 2 lines. The first line was the Pasig River Line which stretched from Plaza Mexico in Intramuros, Manila to Nagpayong station in Pasig. The second line was the Marikina River Line which served the Guadalupe station in Makati up to Santa Elena station in Marikina.\nFerry services.\nBecause it is an island nation, ferry services are an important means of transportation. A range of ships are used, from large cargo ships to small pump boats. Some trips last for a day or two on large overnight ferries. There are numerous shipping companies in the Philippines. Notable companies include 2GO Travel, Starlite Ferries, Montenegro Lines, and Trans-Asia Shipping Lines. Other trips can last for less than 15 minutes on small, open-air pump boats such as those that cross the Iloilo Strait or between the Caticlan jetty port and Boracay island.\nPorts and harbors.\nThe busiest port is the Port of Manila, especially the Manila International Cargo Terminal and the Eva Macapagal Port Terminal, both in the pier area of Manila. Other cities with bustling ports and piers include Bacolod, Batangas City, Cagayan de Oro, Cebu City, Davao City, Butuan, Iligan, Iloilo City, Jolo, Legazpi City, Lucena City, Puerto Princesa, San Fernando, Subic, Zamboanga City, Cotabato City, General Santos, Allen, Ormoc, Ozamiz, Surigao and Tagbilaran. Most of these terminals comprise the Strong Republic Nautical Highway, a nautical system conceptualized under the term of President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo where land vehicles can use the roll-on/roll-off (ro-ro) ferries to cross between the different islands.\nAir transportation.\nAirports.\nManila, Iloilo, Cebu, Davao, Clark, Subic, Zamboanga, Laoag, Legazpi and Puerto Princesa are the international gateways to the country, with Ninoy Aquino International Airport (NAIA) in Manila as the main and premier gateway of the country.\nNinoy Aquino International Airport serves as the primary gateway of the Philippines, it serves the Metro Manila area and its surrounding regions. It is located in the boundary of Para\u00f1aque and Pasay in the National Capital Region. In 2012, NAIA became the 34th busiest airport in the world, passenger volume increased to about eight percent to a total of 32.1 million passengers, making it one of the busiest airports in Asia.\nClark International Airport is also a major gateway to the country. It was originally planned to replace Ninoy Aquino International Airport as the country's premier airport, amid the plan to shut down Ninoy Aquino International Airport. The airport mostly serves low-cost carriers that avail themselves of the lower landing fees than those charged at NAIA.\nOther important airports in the Philippines are Mactan\u2013Cebu International Airport in Lapu-Lapu City, Cebu; Iloilo International Airport in Cabatuan, Iloilo; Francisco Bangoy International Airport in Davao City; Zamboanga International Airport in Zamboanga City; Puerto Princesa International Airport in Puerto Princesa, Palawan; General Santos International Airport in General Santos; and Bicol International Airport in Legazpi, Albay.\nAirlines.\nPhilippine Airlines (PAL) is the national flag carrier of the Philippines and is the first commercial airline in Asia. Philippine Airlines remains as the country's biggest airline company, it has the largest number of international flights to the Philippines as well as domestic flights. As of 2013[ [update]], Philippine Airlines flies to 8 domestic and 58 international destinations in 33 countries and territories across Asia, North America, South America, Africa, Oceania and Europe. The airlines operates hubs in Clark, Manila, Cebu, and Davao.\nCebu Pacific is considered to be the country's low-cost carrier and leading domestic airline, flying to 37 domestic destinations. Since the launching of its international operations in November 2001, flies to 27 destinations in 15 countries and territories across Asia and Oceania. As of 2024[ [update]], the airline operates hubs in Manila, Cebu, Davao, Clark, and Iloilo.\nOther low-cost carriers in the country include Cebgo, PAL Express, and Philippines AirAsia. These airlines have routes to several tourist destinations in the country.\nIssues.\nWith the rapid growth in economic activities and urbanization, public utility vehicles, along with private vehicles, exponentially increased in numbers, which resulted in poorer air quality and frequent traffic congestion in the cities.\nTraffic congestion.\nTraffic congestion is an issue in Metro Manila. According to John Forbes, a senior advisor at the American Chamber of Commerce at the Philippines, increasing car sales and lack of mass transit and highways cause most traffic congestion, and was feared to make Metro Manila \"uninhabitable\" by 2020. A TomTom Traffic Index report in 2024 cited Metro Manila as having the worst traffic in the world for a metropolitan area.\nEconomic losses due to traffic congestion costs about \u20b13 billion, as of 2012. By 2030, over \u20b16 billion will be lost in the Philippines' economy due to traffic congestion, according to JICA.\nAir pollution.\nThere are around 270,000 franchised jeepney units on the road across the country, with some 75,000 units in Metro Manila alone. With the country's fast development and economic growth, old-model jeepneys have become the main contributor to air pollution in the cities. According to the Manila Aerosol Characterization Experiment (MACE 2015) study, diesel-powered jeepneys, which account for 20% of the total vehicle fleet, are responsible for 94% of the soot particle mass in Metro Manila.\nAccording to the President of Partnership for Clean Air Rene Pineda, the issue stems from overpopulation, since more vehicles on the roads increases road congestion, and high-rise buildings and infrastructure means air pollution gets trapped on the ground instead of dispersing.\nAccording to the World Bank, land transport in the Philippines contributed 25 million tons of carbon dioxide equivalent in 2020.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23448", "revid": "6326132", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23448", "title": "Armed Forces of the Philippines", "text": "Military forces of the Philippines\nThe Armed Forces of the Philippines (AFP) () is the military force of the Philippines. It consists of three main service branches; the Army, the Air Force, and the Navy (including the Marine Corps). The President of the Philippines is the Commander-in-Chief of the AFP and forms military policy with the Department of National Defense, an executive department acting as the principal organ by which military policy is carried out, while the Chief of Staff of the Armed Forces of the Philippines serves as the overall commander and the highest-ranking officer in the AFP.\nFounded under the National Defense Act of 1935, while tracing its roots to the Philippine Revolutionary Army, the AFP has played an integral part in the country's history. The AFP has also been involved in various conflicts, such as combatting rebellion against the Communist Party of the Philippines (CPP) and its attached organizations, the New People's Army (NPA) and the National Democratic Front of the Philippines (NDF), and operations against local Islamic terrorists in Mindanao. The AFP has also been part of various peacekeeping operations around the world, as part of its contribution to the United Nations. At present, military service is entirely voluntary.\nAs a result of the diminished number of active communist rebels and jihadist groups in the 2020s, the AFP has been shifting its primary focus from handling internal threats such as insurgency and local terrorism to defending the Philippine territory from external threats.\nHistory.\nPre-colonial Philippines maintained local militia groups under the barangay system. Reporting to the datu, these groups, aside from maintaining order in their communities, also served as their defense forces. With the arrival of Islam, the system of defense forces in the Mindanao region's sultanates under Muslim control mirrored those other existing sultanates in the region. These local warriors who were in the service of the Sultan were also responsible to qualified male citizens appointed by him.\nDuring the Spanish colonial period, the Spanish Army was responsible for the defense and general order of the archipelago in the land, while the Spanish Navy conducts maritime policing in the seas as well as providing naval logistics to the Army. The Guardia Civil took police duties and maintaining public order in villages and towns. In the early years of Spanish colonial era, most of the formations of the army were composed of conquistadors backed with native auxiliaries. By the 18th and 19th centuries, line infantry and cavalry formations were created composed of mixed Spanish and Filipino personnel, as well as volunteer battalions composed of all-Filipino volunteers during the later half of the 19th Century. Units from other colonies were also levied to augment the existing formations in the Philippines. Almost all of the formations of the Spanish Army in the archipelago participated in the local religious uprisings between 17th and 19th centuries, and in the Philippine Revolution in 1896 fighting against the revolutionary forces. At the peak of the revolution, some Filipinos and a few Spaniards in the Spanish Army, Guardia Civil, and Navy defected to the Philippine Revolutionary Army.\nThe Spanish cession of the Philippines in the 1898 Treaty of Paris put the independence of the newly declared Southeast Asian republic in grave danger. The revolutionaries were fighting desperately as the American forces already landed in other islands and had taken over towns and villages. The Americans established the Philippine Constabulary in 1901 manned by Filipino fighters and used against Gen. Aguinaldo who was later captured.\nOn April 9, 1902, Philippine President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo proclaimed that the Philippine\u2013American War had ended on April 16, 1902, with the surrender of General Miguel Malvar.\nSince the beginning of American rule in the Philippines, the United States Army had taken the responsibility for the defense of the country in the land, and the United States Navy in the seas until the passage of the National Defense Act of 1935 which called for a separate defense force for the Philippines.\nCreation and the Commonwealth Era.\nIn accordance with the National Defense Act of 1935, the \"Armed Forces of the Philippines\" was officially established on December 21, 1935, when the act entered into force. Retired U.S. General Douglas MacArthur was asked to supervise its foundation and training. MacArthur accepted the offer and became a Field Marshal of the Philippines, a rank no other person has since held. Jean MacArthur, his wife, found the situation amusing and remarked that her husband had gone from holding the highest rank in the United States Army to holding the highest rank in a non-existent army. President Quezon officially conferred the title of Field Marshal on MacArthur in a ceremony at Malaca\u00f1an Palace on August 24, 1936, when he appeared with a gold marshal's baton and a unique uniform.\nThe Army of the Philippines included naval and air assets directly reporting to Army headquarters, and the Philippine Constabulary, later part of the ground forces proper as a division. In 1938 the Constabulary Division was separated from the army and reorganized into a national police force.\nThe administration of the military throughout the islands was divided into ten \"military districts.\"\nMacArthur expanded the Army of the Philippines with the revival of the Navy in 1940 and the formation of the Philippine Army Air Corps (formerly the Philippine Constabulary Air Corps), but they were not ready for combat at the start of the Pacific War in December 1941 and unable to defeat the 1941\u201342 Japanese invasion of the Philippines.\nWorld War II.\nIn 1940\u201341, most soldiers of the Philippine military were incorporated in the U.S. Army Forces Far East (USAFFE), with MacArthur appointed as its commander. USAFFE made its last stand on Corregidor Island, after which Japanese forces were able to force all remaining Filipino and American troops to surrender. The establishment of the general headquarters of the Philippine Commonwealth Army are military station went to the province during the occupation. Those who survived the invasion but escaped from the Japanese formed the basis of recognized guerrilla units and ongoing local military force of the Philippine Commonwealth Army that continued the fighting against the enemy all over the islands. The Philippine Constabulary went on active service under the Armed Forces of the Philippines during liberation.\nAfter independence.\nAfter Japan was defeated in World War II, the Philippines gained its independence in 1946. (This was its second independence after the Philippine Declaration of Independence in 1898).\nThe pre-war military districts briefly continued to be used for administering the military, until they were reorganized into Military Area Commands in 1946. In 1947 the modern AFP first emerged with the upgrade of the PAAC to the Philippine Air Force.\n1950 saw the creation of the Philippine Marine Corps, a naval infantry force under the command of the Philippine Navy, after then-Defense Secretary Ramon Magsaysay ordered Commodore Ramon Alcaraz to go to study the organization of the U.S. Marines. Alcaraz recommended the creation of the new service, earning him the distinction of being the \"Father\" of the Philippine Marine Corps.\nDuring the Korean War from 1951 to 1953, the Philippines sent various AFP battalions, known as the Philippine Expeditionary Forces to Korea (PEFTOK) to fight as part of the US-led United Nations Command in liberating South Korea from the invading North Korean troops.\nThroughout this time, the AFP had been in conflict with various elements of the Hukbalahap which, still known as the \"huks\", were reconstituted as the \"Hukbong Mapagpalaya ng Bayan\" (\"Peoples' Liberation Army\")the armed wing of the Marxist\u2013Leninist Partido Komunista ng Pilipinas of 1930 (PKP-1930). This conflict effectively ended in 1954, with the huks becoming a spent force during the presidency of Ramon Magsaysay.\nIn 1966, an AFP battalion was also sent into South Vietnam during the Vietnam War to ameliorate the economic and social conditions of its people there. AFP units were also sent at the same time to the Spratly Islands.\n1963 would see the first women join the ranks of the armed forces with the raising of the Women's Auxiliary Corps.\nMartial law.\nPresident Ferdinand Marcos sought to have a strong personal influence over the Armed Forces as soon as he became president in 1965,\"32\" holding on to the portfolio of defense secretary in the first thirteen months of his presidency to develop what scholars have noted to be \"a patronage system within the defense establishment.\" The portfolio afforded him direct interaction with the AFP's leadership, and to have a hand in the AFP's day-to-day operationalization.\nUpon the declaration of martial law in 1972, Marcos used the AFP as what the Davide Commission Report would later call his \"martial law implementor,\" and \"one of the vital supports of the regime.\" Upon the announcement of Martial Law in 1972, one of their earliest tasks was that of quickly arresting and containing Marcos' political opponents, and Marcos' hold on power was effectively broken once enough of the Military withdrew their support from him in February 1986. Antonio Parlade notes that to get the military to ensure their cooperation, Marcos \"had to expand the military organization and patronize the generals to buy their loyalty.\"\nMarcos oversaw a significant expansion of the AFP, which grew from a force of 57,100 in 1971 to a 97.89 percent increase of 113,000 personnel in 1976 - a significant increase of over a five-year period. He also increased the military budget from P880 million in 1972 to P4 billion in 1976. Marcos also instituted the AFP Self Reliance Defense Posture (SRDP) program, which was supposed to enable the AFP to construct its own weapons, tanks, armored vehicles, ships, gunboats, and aircraft locally instead of buying from foreign sources. This included \"Project Santa Barbara\" under the Philippine Navy, which saw the testing of the Bongbong II MLRS - named after Marcos' son - in 1972. However, the project was discontinued before the Marcos administration ended.\nThe military was given many functions aside from its task of national defense, including assisting in the implementation of price controls imposed on key products like corn and rice, enforcing the rules of the national corn procurement program, assisting in the collection of rural and government bank loans, implementing the agrarian reform law, and various police functions such as collecting unlicensed firearms and enforcing curfews, and suppressing strikes, rallies, and other demonstrations.\nMarcos carried out the \"largest reshuffle in the history of the armed forces\" when he forcibly retired fourteen of the AFP's twenty-five flag officers, including the AFP Chief of Staff, the AFP Vice Chief of Staff, the commanding general of the Philippine Army, the Chief of the Philippine Constabulary, the commanders of all four Constabulary Zones, and one third of all Provincial Commanders of the PC. Other key officers critical of Marcos, such as Commodore Ramon Alcaraz, were compelled to leave the service. In their place, Marcos appointed officers from his home region, the Ilocos, the most significant of whom had familial connections to Marcos \u2013 ensuring their familial and regionalistic loyalties to him.\nAmong the most prominent such appointments were that of General Fabian Ver as commander of the Presidential Security Command in 1965, and AFP chief of staff in 1981; Juan Ponce Enrile as Secretary of Defense from 1970 to 1986; and General Fidel Ramos as chief for the Philippine Constabulary, and later as Armed Forces Vice Chief from 1981 to 1986.\nGenerals loyal to Marcos were allowed to stay in their positions past their supposed retirement age, or were rewarded with civilian government posts. This led to a loss of morale among the middle-ranks of the AFP, because it meant a significant slowdown in promotions and caused many officers to retire with ranks much lower than they would otherwise have earned.\nSeveral cabals of dissatisfied officers eventually formed among the middle-ranks of the AFP, most notably the Reform the Armed Forces Movement in the early 1980s.\nThe Marcos administration is thus considered to have marked a decline for AFP in terms of its traditional values of civilian supremacy and professionalism, leading to a need for security sector reform during later administrations, as per the recommendations of the Davide Commission in 1990 and the Feliciano Commission in 2003.\nCivilian and military historians alike agree that \"human rights abuses by the troops became rampant\" during the Marcos administration, as documented by international monitoring entities such as Amnesty International. Units often specifically cited in these reported incidents include the Metrocom Intelligence and Security Group (MISG), and the 5th Constabulary Security Unit (5CSU) of the Philippine Constabulary, as well as the Intelligence Service Armed Forces of the Philippines (ISAFP). The Presidential Security Unit and the National Intelligence and Security Agency (NISA) were also accused of aiding these activities. Aside from human rights abuses, these units were also accused of hounding media entities, corporate management, and opposition groups with threats, intimidation, and violence.\nThe Marcos administration also marked the beginnings of at least two long-running conflicts that continued to plague later administrations: the Moro conflict and the New People's Army conflict.\nThe Moro conflict, began in earnest in 1968 when short-lived organizations such as the Muslim Independence Movement and the Bangsamoro Liberation Organization formed in reaction to news about the Jabidah Massacre, with many of their forces eventually coalescing as the Moro National Liberation Front was formed in 1972.\nMeanwhile, the Communist Party of the Philippines (CPP) was formed in 1968, while the New People's Army (NPA), founded in 1969, grew nationwide to a 200,000 strong force.\nEDSA Revolution.\nDue to what was popularly believed to be electoral fraud during the 1986 Philippine presidential election, February 1986 saw a period of uncertainty. A boycott movement and plans for massive civilian protests were in place.\nDuring the chaos, the Reform the Armed Forces Movement headed by then Defense Minister Juan Ponce Enrile decided to stage a military coup against Marcos. The plot was uncovered, however, and the forces involved became trapped in Camp Aguinaldo in Quezon City. They then sought and received the support of Philippine Constabulary chief and AFP vice-chief of staff Lt. General Fidel V. Ramos in the neighboring Camp Crame, but even with Ramos' defection, their forces were trapped in the two neighboring camps.\nManila's Catholic Archbishop, Jaime Sin, went on Radio Veritas and called for people to go to the section of Epifanio de los Santos Avenue in between the two camps and help protect the rebel forces. Since civilian groups were already planning massive protests in relation to the election results, a large crowd was able to gather and prevent Marcos' forces from attacking camps Aguinaldo and Crame. This civilian uprising, which would come to be known as the People Power Revolution, led to various units of the AFP refusing orders to fire on the camps and the civilians protecting them, and led to the removal Marcos from power. Corazon Aquino was then installed as the new president of the Philippines.\nShortly after midnight on February 26, five army trucks of troops under the command of Fidel Ramos arrived in Malaca\u00f1ang Palace to secure it after Ferdinand Marcos had left, and various individuals had entered it, marking the end of Marcos' reign, and placing the palace under the control of the Provisional Government of the Philippines until a new constitution could be enacted a year later, in 1987.\nLater 20th century.\nDuring Corazon Aquino's administration, most of the military units remained loyal to her as she dealt with various coup attempts against her, either by military factions that remained loyal to the former dictator,135 or by the Reform the Armed Forces Movement. The 1989 coup attempt, the bloodiest of all coup attempts against her, was crushed with US help.\nFollowing the 1989 coup attempt, President Aquino established a Fact-Finding Commission headed by COMELEC Chairman Hilario Davide Jr. to investigate and provide a full report on the series of coup attempts. When it came out, The Davide Commission Report recommended several short-term and long-term counter-measures, including the establishment of a civilian national police force, a crackdown on corruption in the military, a performance review of appointive government officials, reforms in the process of military promotions, a review of election laws in time for the 1992 presidential elections, and a definitive statement on the part of Aquino on whether she intended to run for re-election in 1992. The publication of the recommendations of the report is considered one of the key starting points of security sector reform in the Philippines.\nThe AFP, during her term also launched a massive campaign against the CPP-NPA after a brief hiatus and also against the Moro National Liberation Front (MNLF) in the south.\nIn 1991, the major services of the AFP were reduced from four to three, when the Philippine Constabulary or PC, an AFP major service tasked to enforce the law and to curb criminality, was formally merged with the country's Integrated National Police, a national police force on the cities and municipalities in the country attached to the PC to become the Philippine National Police, thus removing it from AFP control and it was civilianized by a law passed by Congress, therefore becoming under the Department of the Interior and Local Government as a result.\nContemporary history.\nIn 2000, on President Joseph Estrada's orders, the AFP launched an all-out offensive against the Moro Islamic Liberation Front, a breakaway group of the MNLF that wants to proclaim Mindanao an independent state. The AFP succeeded in capturing the MILF's main headquarters, Camp Abubakar on July 9.\nThe AFP played a key role in the two-day Edsa Dos People Power revolt in 2001; the revolution removed Estrada from power and installed then vice-president Gloria Macapagal Arroyo as president.\nSince 2001, the Armed Forces of the Philippines has been active in supporting the war on terror and has been attacking terrorist groups in Mindanao ever since. In 2012, the AFP Chief of Staff said that there had been no increase in the number of soldiers over a long period, and that the military aimed to hire 30,000 troops in three years.\nIn 2013, the AFP successfully quelled the Zamboanga City attacks of the Moro National Liberation Front, which proclaimed the independence of the short-lived Bangsamoro Republik.\nAfter the signing of the Comprehensive Agreement on the Bangsamoro in 2014, the AFP has played a key part in the normalization process with the MILF, which includes \"the decommissioning of MILF combatants and their weapons and the transformation of several camps into productive and resilient communities,\" developing a close working relationship with the Philippine National Police and the MILF-Bangsamoro Islamic Armed Forces (BIAF) in the pursuit of peace in the Bangsamoro.\nIn 2016, the AFP clashed with the Maute group on Butig on February, late May to early June, and on November of 2016.\nUnder President Rodrigo Duterte in May 2017, the AFP thwarted the ISIS militants' attempt to establish a foothold in the Philippines in the five-month-long siege to retake Marawi from militant occupation. The AFP called President Duterte to declare Martial Law under Proclamation No. 216. Additionally, the AFP and the NTF-ELCAC were at the forefront of Duterte's intensified campaign against the communist rebellion; by the end of Duterte's term, the AFP reported the reduction of NPA guerrilla fronts from 89 to 23, and only 2,000 remained of more than 25,000 \"members, supporters, and sympathizers of the underground movement\".\nIn 2024, the number of active communist rebels in the NPA reached a low of 1,500, with the AFP aiming to neutralize them by the end of the year. As a result of the development, the AFP under the Bongbong Marcos administration has been shifting its focus away from handling internal threats towards defending Philippine territory from external threats such as China's encroachment in the West Philippine Sea.\nOrganization and branches.\nThe 1987 Philippine Constitution placed the AFP under the control of a civilian, the President of the Philippines, who acts as its Commander-in-Chief. All of its branches are part of the Department of National Defense, which is headed by the Secretary of National Defense.\nThe AFP has three major services:\nThese three major services are unified under the Chief of Staff of the Armed Forces of the Philippines (CSAFP) who normally holds the rank of General/Admiral. The AFP Chief of Staff is primarily assisted by:\nBoth normally holding the rank of Lieutenant General/Vice Admiral.\nThe three highest posts of the AFP are also assisted by the Secretary Joint Staff (SJSAFP), who serves as the primary executive officer for the AFP Chief of Staff, the Vice Chief of Staff, and The Deputy Chief of Staff.\nEach of the three major branches and key major commands are headed by an officer with the following titles:\nMeanwhile, the Chief of Staff of the AFP is also assisted by the 10 following office holders carry the rank of Major General/Rear Admiral, who serves as the members of the Joint Staff Divisions, at the General Headquarters in Camp Aguinaldo. These Joint Staff Divisions are also part of the Joint Staff, which is composed of the AFP Chief of Staff, the Vice Chief of Staff and The Deputy Chief of Staff.\nThe AFP also comprises the Special Staff, which is divided into two separate groups. These groups also assist the AFP Chief on their designated fields:\nThe AFP Chief is also assisted by the following office commanding division-sized troops holders carry the rank of Major General/Rear Admiral:\nOn June 19, 2020, under the DND Order no. 174, the AFP had major changes in renaming its positions in high-ranking officials, such as the following:\nHowever, the AFP has deferred these title changes a few months later as President Rodrigo Duterte revoked the usage of the position titles, and decided to maintain the traditional position titles.\nUnified commands.\nUnits from these three services may be assigned to one of six \"Unified Commands\" led by each Commander of the Unified Command; consisting of different branches from the three branches of the AFP, which are multi-service, regional entities. The Unified Commands are responsible in monitoring, securing and defending their specific geographical area of operations within the Philippines. There are currently six Unified Commands in the AFP, with each Commander of the Unified Commands hold the rank of Lieutenant General/Vice Admiral, and reports directly to the office of the Chief of Staff of the Armed Forces of the Philippines.\nAFP-wide service support and separate units.\nSeveral organization-wide support services and separate units report directly to the Armed Forces of the Philippines General Headquarters (AFP GHQ).\nThe units are the:\nFormer branches.\nThe Philippine Constabulary (PC) was a gendarmerie type military-police force of the Philippines established in 1901 by the United States-appointed administrative authority, replacing the Guardia Civil of the Spanish colonial regime. On December 13, 1990, Republic Act No. 6975 was approved, organizing the Philippine National Police (PNP) consisting of the members of the Integrated National Police (INP) and the officers and enlisted personnel of the PC. Upon the effectivity of that Act, the PC ceased to be a major service of the Armed Forces of the Philippines and the INP ceased to be the national police and civil defense force. On January 29, 1991, the PC and the INP were formally retired and the PNP was activated in their place.\nThe Philippine Coast Guard (PCG) is also another attached agency to the Armed Forces of the Philippines, but due to the civilian nature of the PCG functions led to the separation of the Coast Guard from the Philippine Navy on March 30, 1998, by virtue of Executive Order 475 signed by President Fidel Ramos. The Order effectively transferred the PCG from the Department of National Defense to the Office of the President, and eventually to the Department of Transportation and Communications (DOTC) on April 15, 1998, by virtue of Executive Order 477.\nReforms and modernization.\nThe AFP is one of the \"core security actors\" that are the focus of security sector governance and reform in the Philippines, which involves civilianizing, professionalizing, modernizing, and capacitating the Philippine government's security institutions to align them good governance and to principles such as human rights, freedom of information, and the rule of civilian law. This has been a continuing process since the establishment of the Fifth Philippine Republic after the 1986 People Power Revolution, before the concept had even been fully defined internationally in the 1990s.\nCivilianization.\nThe need to assert civilian control of the military was a reform agenda which began being addressed almost as soon as Ferdinand Marcos was deposed by the 1986 People Power Revolution; within a year of Marcos' ouster, the 1987 Constitution of the Philippines enshrined the principle of civilian supremacy over the military. After the various coup attempts of the 1980s, the recommendations of the Davide Commission included the dissolution of the Philippine Constabulary as a service under the AFP, resulting in the eventual creation of the civilian Philippine National Police. In 1998, Executive Orders 475 and 477 asserting the civilian nature of the Philippine Coast Guard and transferring it from the Philippine Navy to the Department of Transportation and Communications (DOTC) were signed by President Fidel Ramos.\nIn a December 2013 paper for the National Defense College of the Philippines\u2019 National Security Review, former Department of National Defense Undersecretary Rodel Cruz identified some aspects of civilianization which need attention under security sector reform as: \nInvolvement of Civil Society.\nFor the most part, oversight of the Philippine state's security actors has fallen on government agencies through the constitutional system of checks and balances - most prominently, congress and the Commission on Human Rights. But civil society organizations have also become involved in civilianizing, professionalizing, modernizing, and capacitating the Philippine state's security institutions, depending on how much emphasis each President, as Commander in Chief, places on civil society engagement.\nGiven a greater emphasis on Philippine Defense Reform (PDR) beginning in 2010, a shift towards engagement with Civil Society Organizations was put in place under the Internal Peace and Security Plan (IPSP) of 2010, and similar principles were enshrined in the 2016 AFP-Development Support and Security Plan (DSSP) of the next administration. However, civil society is no longer identified as a major strategic priority under the 15 year AFP Transformation Roadmap initiated during the Duterte administration, as it had been under the 2003-2016 PDR Program.\nProfessionalization.\nThe AFP went through a number of changes during the 21 years under Ferdinand Marcos, notably in terms of the promotion of officers based on loyalty and connections to the president, and in terms of being given the task of implementing Martial Law, which led to officers being involved in human rights violations and in corruption. The years from 1965 to 1986 are thus considered to have marked a decline for AFP in terms of its traditional values of civilian supremacy and professionalism, leading to a need to actively professionalize the AFP. The 1990 Davide Commission and 2003 Feliciano Commission made recommendations towards the professionalization of the AFP as early as 1990 and 2003, respectively.\nUnder the Philippine Defense Reform (PDR) Program from 2003 to 2016, steps the AFP sought to take towards professionalization included the development of \"Integrity Development Programs\", programmatic efforts to improve the quality of service performance, continuing development programs for commanders and staff, and reforms in the recruitment of enlisted personnel. Alongside capability development, \"professionalization of all ranks\" is one of two strategic priorities identified by the 15 year AFP Transformation Roadmap which replaced the PDR Program during the Duterte administration.\nModernization.\nRepublic Act No. 7898, approved by President Fidel V. Ramos on February 23, 1995, declared it the policy of the State to modernize the AFP to a level where it can effectively and fully perform its constitutional mandate to uphold the sovereignty and preserve the patrimony of the Republic of the Philippines, and mandated specific actions to be taken to achieve this end over a 15-year period ending in 2010. Republic Act No. 10349, approved by President Benigno Aquino III on December 11, 2012, amended RA7898 to establish a revised AFP modernization program lasting another 15 years ending in 2027. The act included new provisions for the acquisition of equipment for all the branches of AFP.\nPhilippine Defense Reform Program (2003-2016).\nIn October 1999, the Joint Defense Assessment (JDA) began as a policy level discussion between the Philippine Secretary of National Defense and the US Secretary of Defense. An initial JDA report in 2001 provided an objective evaluation of Philippine defense capability. During a May 2003 state visit to Washington DC, President Arroyo requested U.S. assistance in conducting a strategic assessment of the Philippine defense system. This led to a follow-up JDA and formulation of recommendations addressing deficiencies found in the Philippine defense structure.\nThe results of the 2003 JDA were devastating. The JDA findings revealed that the AFP was only partially capable of performing its most critical missions. Moreover, the results pointed overwhelmingly toward institutional and strategic deficiencies as being the root cause of most of the shortcomings. A common thread in all: the lack of strategy-based planning that would focus DND/AFP on addressing priority threats and link capability requirements with the acquisition process.\nSpecifically, the 2003 JDA revealed critical deficiencies in the following specific areas:\nDuring a reciprocal visit to the Philippines in October 2003 by U.S. President Bush, he and President Arroyo issued a joint statement expressing their commitment to embark upon a multi-year plan to implement the JDA recommendations. The Philippine Defense Reform (PDR) Program is the result of that agreement.\nThe JDA specifically identified 65 key areas and 207 ancillary areas of concern. These were reduced to ten broad-based and inter-related recommendations that later became the basis for what became known as the PDR Priority Programs. The ten are:\nFrom the perspective of the Philippine Department of National Defense (DND), the framework for reforms is based on an environment of increasing economic prowess and a gradually decreasing threat level over time, and seeks to make the following improvements:\n1. Address AFP capability gaps to enable the AFP to effectively fulfill its mission.\n2. Implement capability for seamless interoperability by developing proficiency in the conduct of joint operations, eliminating crisis handling by individual major services as done previously.\n3. improve effectiveness of internal security operations.\n4. Enhance capability to counter terrorism and other transnational threats.\n5. Provide sustainment and/or long-term viability of acquired capabilities.\n6. Improve cost-effectiveness of operations.\n7. Improve accountability and transparency in the DND.\n8. Increase professionalism in the AFP through reforms in areas such as promotions, assignments, and training.\n9. Increase involvement of AFP in the peace process.\nAccording to the goals stated in the Philippines Defense Reform Handbook: \"The PDR serves as the overall framework to re-engineer our systems and re-tool our personnel.\" The Philippine Defense Reform follows a three-step implementation plan:\n1. Creating the environment for reform (2004\u20132005);\n2. Enabling the defense establishment (2005\u20132007);\n3. Implementing and institutionalizing reform (2007\u20132010).\nOn September 23, 2003, President Arroyo issued Executive Order 240, streamlining procedures for defense contracts for the expeditious implementation of defense projects and the speedy response to security threats while promoting transparency, impartiality, and accountability in government transactions. Executive Order 240, creating the Office of the Undersecretary of Internal Control in the DND, mandated in part to institutionalize reforms in the procurement and fund disbursement systems in the AFP and the DND. On November 30, 2005, the Secretary of National Defense issued Department Order No. 82 (DO 82), creating the PDR Board and formalizing the reform organizational set-up between the DND and the AFP and defining workflow and decision-making processes.\nThe PDR is jointly funded by the U.S. and R.P. governments. From 2004 to 2008, funding amounted to $51.8 million from the U.S. and $514.0 million from the RP. Initial planning assumptioned that the 18-year span of reform would encompass a period of steady rise in economic growth coupled with equally steady decline in the military threat from terrorists and separatists. Neither of these projections have proven accurate. As of 2010[ [update]], at the six-year mark of PDR, the Philippine economy was internally strong, but suffering during a period of recession that crippled Philippine purchasing power. Worse, the threat situation in the Philippines had not improved significantly, or as in the case of the Sulu Archipelago, was deteriorating.\nDuring the Arroyo presidency, deliberate 'Rolodexing' of senior leadership within the DND and AFP constantly put U.S. PDR advocates in a position of re-winning previously won points and positions, and gave U.S. observers a 'two steps forward, one step back' impression of the program. As of 2010[ [update]], U.S. observers were uncertain whether Arroyo's successor, Benigno Aquino III, chosen in Philippine Presidential elections on May 10, 2010, will continue the tradition of rapid turnover of senior leadership.\nU.S. observers have reported that overall progress of the PDR is unmistakable and has clearly struck a wider swath of the Philippine defense establishment than originally hoped. However, they see some troubling signs that the depth of the PDR's impact may not be as significant as originally desired. For example, the Philippine legislature continues to significantly underfund the DND and AFP, currently at 9 percent of GDP, compared to an average of 2 percent worldwide, and a 4 percent outlay by the U.S. Even with full implementation of all the PDR's programs and recommendations, the defense establishment would not be able to sustain itself at current funding levels. While this can be made up by future outlays, as of 2010[ [update]] observers see no outward sign the legislature is planning to do so. One U.S. observer likened PDR process to the progress of a Jeepney on a busy Manila avenue\u2014explaining, \"a Jeepney moves at its own pace, stops unexpectedly, frequently changes passengers, moves inexplicably and abruptly right and left in traffic, but eventually arrives safely.\" President Aquino has promised to implement the PDR program. As of 2011[ [update]], a major Philippine news organization tracking performance on his promises evaluated that one as \"To Be Determined.\"\nThe Mutual Defense Treaty between the Philippines and the United States has not been updated since its signing in 1951. As of 2013[ [update]], discussions were underway for a formal U.S.-Philippine Framework Agreement detail how U.S. forces would be able to \"operate on Philippine military bases and in Philippine territorial waters to help build Philippine military capacity in maritime security and maritime domain awareness.\" In particular, this Framework Agreement would which would increase rotational presence of American forces in the Philippines.\nLongstanding treaties, such as the aforementioned 1951 Mutual Defense Treaty and the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS) of 1982, are of great importance to the Philippines in supporting maritime security in particular; respectively, their legally binding nature provides long-term effectiveness for mutual defense cooperation and for the development of the Philippine maritime and archipelagic domain.\nPhilippine defense operations are supported in part through U.S. Section 1206 ($102.3 million) and 1207 ($16.02 million) funds. These funds are aimed at carrying out security, counterterrorism training and rule of law programs. Overall, the United States is increasing U.S. funding for military education and training programs in Southeast Asia. The most recent U.S. Department of Defense budget for the region includes $90 million for programs, which is a 50 percent increased from four years ago.\nDefense Secretary Voltaire T. Gazmin formally ended the PDR Program on June 23, 2016, because the upcoming administration of Rodrigo Duterte, which would begin its term later that month, had indicated that it wanted to set its own direction for the running of Philippine defense matters.\nFixed Term for key officials.\nOn May 16, 2022, the Malaca\u00f1ang Palace announced that the President Rodrigo Duterte has signed a law, known as Republic Act no. 11709, that enables a three-year fixed term for key officials of the Armed Forces of the Philippines, such as Chief of Staff of the Armed Forces of the Philippines, the Vice Chief of Staff of the Armed Forces of the Philippines, the Deputy Chief of Staff of the Armed Forces of the Philippines, the Commanding General of the Philippine Army, the Commanding General of the Philippine Air Force, the Flag Officer-in-Command of the Philippine Navy, The Inspector General, and for the respective commanders of the Unified Commands. Meanwhile, junior officers ranging from the ranks of second lieutenant/ensign to colonel/captain, as well as enlisted personnel, will be compulsorily retired upon reaching the age of 56 or served a maximum of 30 years of active service, while flag officers who reached the rank of brigadier general/commodore to lieutenant general/vice admiral will have a retirement age of 59, unless named as a commander of the service branch or unified command, as defined in the law. Under the new law, members who will be appointed in the Corps of Professors will be retired upon reaching the age of 60 or the completion of 20 years of active duty, while the Superintendent of the Philippine Military Academy will have a four-year term, and will not be eligible to be placed in a higher position, such as the Chief of Staff, and shall be retired upon reaching the end of their term. The law also enables the President of the Philippines to terminate their respective roles before the expiration of their fixed term, and has the powers to extend the term of the Chief of Staff in times of war, or national emergency matters, with the consent of the Congress of the Philippines. The new law aims to increase the AFP's organizational professionalism and stability in within the institution, and will further enhance the AFP's efficiency, preparedness and effectiveness to the AFP's mandate. The law also aims to lessen the effects of the \"revolving door\" policy and eliminating short-term duties for the commanders within the ranks.\nHowever, the new law encountered many problems within the AFP's organization, which caused some middle ranking officers to raise their concerns regarding the promotions of younger officers within the hierarchy, while addressing concerns for the possible reduction of promoted officers within the ranks of lieutenant colonel to colonel/ lieutenant commander to commander due to reduced tenure limits, and allaying fears of lowering a merit-based promotion system. Additionally, another hurdles also hounded the higher ranks, due to the fixed tenures of various officers, and on the appointment of Bartolome Vicente Bacarro as the AFP Chief of Staff, where in an editorial made by then-AFP Spokesman retired Major General Edgard Arevalo in The Manila Times named \"The fates of two AFP chiefs of staff\", where Bacarro's appointment as AFP Chief was made months prior of General Andres Centino's mandatory retirement age, in which makes Centino's position as the only four star officer in the AFP is still higher than Bacarro's, which prevented Bacarro to be promoted to the next rank. The problems regarding the new law caused rumblings in the AFP's organization, which was also admitted by then DND Officer-in-Charge Carlito Galvez Jr.. After months of deliberations, a new law was made in order to fix the problems caused by Republic Act no. 11709, and on May 17, 2023, the Republic Act no. 11939 was signed by President Bongbong Marcos, which reduced number of officials of having fixed terms to only five, namely the Chief of Staff of the Armed Forces of the Philippines, which will have a maximum of a three-year tenure. Four other high-ranking officers will also have a maximum of a two-year tenure, which consists of the Commanding General of the Philippine Army, the Commanding General of the Philippine Air Force, the Flag Officer-in-Command of the Philippine Navy, and the Superintendent of the Philippine Military Academy. The newly revised law also maintained the powers of the President of the Philippines to terminate their terms at his/her pleasure. On January 7, 2023, General Andres Centino was reappointed as AFP Chief of Staff, replacing Lieutenant General Bartolome Vicente Bacarro, which made Centino the only AFP Chief to be appointed in the same office twice, from November 12, 2021, to August 8, 2022, and on January 6, 2023, to July 19, 2023, and is the only AFP Chief to be appointed in the post by two Presidents.\nNational policies.\nRecent national policies have shifted the strategic direction of the AFP towards external, territorial defense as opposed to previous, internal foci. Some of the challenges with this change in strategic direction include the uneven distribution of maritime security resources among territorial, transnational, environmental, and humanitarian assistance and disaster response (HADR) conflicts. For example, Philippine Executive Order 57, signed in 2011 by President Benigno Aquino III, established a central inter-agency mechanism for enhancing governance in the country's maritime domain. Between 1995 and 2019, the AFP Reserve Manpower in the Philippines totaled 741,937 and 4,384,936 ROTC Cadets. Out of the 700,00+ reservists; 93,062 are (ready reserve) and 610,586 are (standby reserve). There are a total of 20,451 with the affiliated reserve units.\nConflicts over responsibility for maritime surveillance between armed forces continue to underscore the numerous challenges that the TBA faces. For example, following the expulsion of Ferdinand Marcos from the Philippines in 1986, the Philippine Coast Guard separated from the Philippine Navy, resulting in an uneven distribution of resources and jurisdictional confusion.\nRecognition and achievements.\nThroughout the years, the AFP received numerous recognitions and commendation within the local sectors, the national government and in the international community. One example is the Philippine Army shooting team, wherein the unit was the overall champion in a two-week competition held in Australia, in 2013. The Philippine Army shooting team won 14 gold medals, 50 silver medals and two bronze medals in Australian Army Skills at the Arms Meeting (AASAM) in 2014.\nThe 7th Philippine Contingent peacekeepers to the Golan Heights were awarded the prestigious United Nations Service Medal for the performance of their mission.\nRanks.\nThe officer ranks are as follows:\nThese ranks, heavily inspired by those of the United States Armed Forces, are officially used in the Philippine Army, Air Force and Marine Corps. The ranks are more frequently referred and addressed in English rather than in Spanish or Tagalog/Filipino, since English is the working language within the Armed Forces.\nThe ranks in the Philippine Navy are similar to the US Navy ranks, the only difference is the rank of Commodore in the Philippine Navy is equivalent to the Lower Half Rear Admiral of the US Navy.\nThe alternative style of address for the ranks of lieutenant junior grade Lt(jg), lieutenant (Lt), second lieutenant, and first lieutenant are simply \"lieutenant\" in English, or \"tenyente\" or \"teniente\" in Tagalog and Spanish, respectively.\nThe ranks of enlisted personnel in Filipino are the same as their U.S. counterparts, with some differences. Except in the Marine Corps, never used are the ranks of specialist, sergeant first class, and first sergeant. Lance corporal, gunnery sergeant, and master gunnery sergeant are also never used by the Philippine Marine Corps, whose ranks are the same as the Army's. Additionally, sergeant majors in the AFP are only appointments for senior ranked non-commissioned officers (NCOs) rather than ranks, examples of such appointments being the Command Sergeant Major, AFP (held by a first chief master sergeant or a first master chief petty officer) and the Command Master Chief Petty Officer, Philippine Navy (held by an either MCPO or CMS or a SCPO or SMS).\nIn the Philippine Navy, they also use enlisted ranks which come from the U.S. Navy with their specialization, e.g. \"Master Chief and Boatswain's mate Juan Dela Cruz, PN\" (Philippine Navy).\nIn effect, the AFP uses the pre-1955 US military enlisted ranks, with several changes, especially in the Navy and in the senior NCO ranks.\nThere are no warrant officers in between officer ranks and enlisted ranks.\nThe uniqueness of Philippine military ranks can be seen in the current highest ranks of first chief master sergeant (for the Army, Marine Corps and Air Force) and first master chief petty officer (for the Navy), both created in 2004, and since then have become the highest enlisted rank of precedence. Prior, first chief sergeant and master chief petty officer were the highest enlisted ranks and rates, the former being the highest rank of precedence for Army, Air Force and Marine NCOs. Today only the rank of first master chief petty officer is unused, but the rank of first chief master sergeant is now being applied.\nFive-star rank.\nPresident Ferdinand Marcos, who acted also as national defense secretary (from 1965 to 1967 and 1971 to 1972), issued an order conferring the five-star officer rank to the President of the Philippines, making himself as its first rank holder. Since then, the rank of five-star general/admiral became an honorary rank of the commander-in-chief of the armed forces whenever a new president assumes office for a six-year term, thus making the President the most senior military official.\nThe only career military officer who reached the rank of five-star general/admiral \"de jure\" was President Fidel V. Ramos (USMA 1950) (president from 1992 to 1998) who rose from second lieutenant up to commander-in-chief of the armed forces.\nGeneral of the Army Douglas MacArthur was also made Field Marshal of the Philippine Army with five-star rank in 1938, the only person to hold that rank. Emilio Aguinaldo, the first President of the Philippines, holds an equivalent of five-star general under the title \"Generalissimo\" and Minister/Field Marshal as the first commander-in-chief of the AFP.\nThe position is honorary and may be granted to any military officer, especially generals or admirals who had significant contributions and showed heroism, only in times of war and national defense concerns and emergencies. The highest peacetime rank is that of four-star general which is being held only by the AFP Chief of Staff. However, no law specifically establishes the rank of five-star general in the Armed Forces of the Philippines unlike in the United States and other countries.\nRank insignia.\nThe AFP, like the military forces of Singapore and Indonesia, uses unitary rank insignia for enlisted personnel, in the form of raised chevrons increasing by seniority, same for the Philippine Air Force which uses inverted chevrons from Airman 2nd Class onward only since recently. In the Philippine Navy these are supplemented by rating insignia by specialty, similar to the United States Navy. Like the British and Spanish armed services, however, senior ranked NCOs (especially in the Philippine Navy) also wear shoulder rank insignia only on the mess, semi-dress and dress uniforms, and in some cases even collar insignia. Like the US military all NCOs wear sleeve stripes to denote years of service in the enlisted ranks. Sleeve insignia for enlisted personnel in the Army and the Navy are similar but are different from those used in the US while those in the Marine Corps mirror its US counterpart but with special symbols from Master Sergeants onward (adopted in the early 2000s).\nOfficer ranks in the AFP are inspired by revolutionary insignia used by the Philippine Army after the 1898 declaration of independence. These are unitary rank insignia used in the every day, combat, duty and technical uniforms both on shoulders and collars (the latter in the khaki uniforms of the Navy), but in the semi-dress, dress and mess uniforms are different: The Army, Air Force and Marine Corps use unitary rank insignia on the shoulder board but the Navy uses the very same rank insignia format as in the US Navy except for the star (for Ensigns to Captains) in almost all officer uniforms and all general officer and flag officer shoulder boards in the full dress uniform are in gold colored backgrounds with the rank insignia and the AFP seal (the star arrangement is the same in the Army, Air Force and Marines but is different in the Navy). The Navy uses sleeve insignia only on its dress blue uniforms. Lieutenants and Captains wear 1 to 3 triangles (and Navy Ensigns and Lieutenants (junior and senior grades) in their working, duty and combat uniforms) while Majors, Lieutenant Colonels and Colonels wear 1, 2, and 3 suns (both triangles and suns have the ancient baybayin letter \"ka\" (K) in the center) as well as Navy superior officers (Lieutenant Commanders, Commanders and Captains) in their working, duty and combat uniforms respectively.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23449", "revid": "6326132", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23449", "title": "Foreign relations of the Philippines", "text": " \nThe foreign relations of the Philippines are administered by the President of the Philippines and the Department of Foreign Affairs. Philippine international affairs are influenced by ties to its Southeast Asian neighbors, China, the United States, and the Middle East.\nThe Philippines is a founding member of the United Nations; an elected member of the Security Council\nand participant in the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO), International Labour Organization (ILO), UNESCO, and the World Health Organization (WHO). Like most nations, the Philippines is a signatory of Interpol. The Philippines is a member of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations, East Asia Summit and Association of Caribbean States (as an observer). It was formerly a member of the now-defunct Latin Union and the SEATO. Declaring itself as independent of any major power block of nations, the Philippines is a member of the Non-Aligned Movement.\nEconomically, the Philippines is a participant in the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation, Asian Development Bank, the Colombo Plan, Group of 24, G-20, G-77, the World Bank, Next Eleven and the World Trade Organization (WTO).\nForeign policy.\nPhilippine foreign policy is based on the advancement of Filipino ideals and values, which include the advancement of democracy and advocacy for human rights worldwide.\nThe Philippines actively engages with regional neighbors in Southeast Asia through the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (as a founding member) with the intention of strengthening regional harmony, stability, and prosperity. It has been a supporter of East Timor since the latter's independence and has expanded trade links with its traditional allies Indonesia, Malaysia, Singapore, and Thailand. Relations with Vietnam and Cambodia have thawed in the 1990s after their entry into the ASEAN.\nThe Republic of the Philippines considers itself a staunch ally of the United States and has supported many points of American foreign policy. This is evident in the Philippines' participation in the Iraq War and the war on terror. Speaking to this support, U.S. President George W. Bush praised the Philippines as a bastion of democracy in the East and called the Philippines America's oldest ally in Asia. President Bush's speech on October 18, 2003, was only the second U.S. presidential address to the Philippine Congress; U.S. President Dwight D. Eisenhower delivered the first.\nWith a robust relationship to the United States, the administration of former President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo sought to establish closer ties to its earlier colonizer, Spain. This was inspired by the attendance of King Juan Carlos and Queen Sof\u00eda at the June 12, 1998 celebration honoring the centennial of the Philippines' independence from Spain. President Macapagal-Arroyo made two official visits to Spain during her presidency.\nIn recent years, the Philippines attaches great importance in its relations with China, and has established significant cooperation with the country.\nThe Armed Forces of the Philippines has participated in various regional conflicts, including the Korean War and the Vietnam War. Recently, the Philippines sent peacekeeping forces to Iraq, in addition to civilian doctors, nurses and police. The Filipino mission was later recalled as collateral for the release of a Filipino hostage. As part of a UN peacekeeping operation, Philippine Army General Jaime de los Santos became the first commander of troops responsible for maintaining order in East Timor.\nThe Philippines is in tension with rival international claimants to various land and water territories in the South China Sea. The Philippines is currently in dispute with the People's Republic of China over the Camago and Malampaya gas fields. The two countries are also in dispute over the Scarborough Shoal. Additionally, the Philippines has a disputed claim over the Spratly Islands.\nThe Philippines maintains strategic partnerships with Australia, India, Japan, South Korea, and Vietnam.\nDiplomatic relations.\nList of countries which the Philippines maintains diplomatic relations with:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23450", "revid": "48643156", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23450", "title": "Pitcairn Islands", "text": "British Overseas Territory in the South Pacific\nThe Pitcairn Islands ( ; Pitkern: '), officially Pitcairn, Henderson, Ducie and Oeno Islands, are a group of four volcanic islands in the southern Pacific Ocean that form the sole British Overseas Territory in the Pacific Ocean. The four islands\u2014Pitcairn, Henderson, Ducie and Oeno\u2014are scattered across several hundred kilometres (miles) of ocean and have a combined land area of about 47 square kilometres (18 square miles). Henderson Island accounts for 86% of the land area, but only Pitcairn Island is inhabited. The inhabited islands nearest to the Pitcairn Islands are Mangareva (of French Polynesia), 688\u00a0km (428 miles) to the west, as well as Easter Island, 1,929\u00a0km (1199 miles) to the east.\nThe Pitcairn Islanders are descended primarily from nine British HMS \"Bounty\" mutineers and twelve Tahitian women. In 2023, the territory had a permanent population of 35, making it the smallest territory in the world by number of permanent residents. Owing to the island's extreme isolation and small population, incidents of widespread sexual abuse went undetected until 1999, culminating in a high-profile sexual assault trial in 2004.\nHistory.\nPolynesian settlement.\nVarious forms of evidence show the earliest settlers of the Pitcairn Islands were Polynesians who occupied Pitcairn and Henderson for several centuries until the islands were abandoned: Henderson most likely before the 16th century and Pitcairn in the 17th or early 18th century. The islands were uninhabited when they were discovered by Europeans.\nEuropean arrival.\nPortuguese sailor Pedro Fernandes de Queir\u00f3s came upon Ducie and Henderson Islands while sailing for the Spanish Crown, arriving on 26 January 1606. He named them La Encarnaci\u00f3n (\"The Incarnation\") and San Juan Bautista (\"Saint John the Baptist\"), respectively. However, some sources express doubt about exactly which of the islands were visited and named by Queir\u00f3s, suggesting that La Encarnaci\u00f3n may actually have been Henderson Island, and San Juan Bautista may have been Pitcairn Island.\nPitcairn Island was sighted on 3 July 1767 by the crew of the British sloop HMS \"Swallow\", commanded by Captain Philip Carteret. The island was named after midshipman Robert Pitcairn, a 15-year-old crew member who was the first to sight the island. Robert Pitcairn was a son of British Marine Major John Pitcairn, who was later killed at the 1775 Battle of Bunker Hill in the American War of Independence.\nCarteret, who sailed without the newly invented marine chronometer, charted the island at , and although the latitude was reasonably accurate, his recorded longitude was incorrect by about 3\u00b0, putting his coordinates to the west of the actual island. This made Pitcairn difficult to find, as highlighted by the failure of captain James Cook to locate the island in July 1773.\nEuropean settlement.\nIn 1790, nine of the mutineers from the British naval vessel \"HMS Bounty\", along with the native Tahitian men and women who were with them (six men, 11 women, and a baby girl), settled on Pitcairn Island and set fire to the \"Bounty\". Later inhabitants of the island remained aware of the \"Bounty\"'s location, which is still visible underwater in Bounty Bay, but the wreckage gained significant attention in 1957 when documented by \"National Geographic\" explorer Luis Marden. Although the settlers survived by farming and fishing, the initial period of settlement was marked by serious tensions among them. Alcoholism, murder, disease and other ills took the lives of most mutineers and Tahitian men. John Adams and Ned Young turned to the scriptures, using the ship's Bible as their guide for a new and peaceful society. Young eventually died of an asthmatic infection.\nDucie Island was rediscovered in 1791 by Royal Navy captain Edward Edwards aboard , while searching for the \"Bounty\" mutineers. He named it after Francis Reynolds-Moreton, 3rd Baron Ducie, also a captain in the Royal Navy.\nThe Pitcairn islanders reported it was not until 27 December 1795 that the first ship since the \"Bounty\" was seen from the island, but it did not approach the land and they could not make out the nationality. A second ship appeared in 1801, but made no attempt to communicate with them. A third came sufficiently near to see their house, but did not try to send a boat on shore. Finally, the American sealing ship \"Topaz\", under Mayhew Folger, became the first to visit the island, when the crew spent ten hours on Pitcairn in February 1808. Whalers subsequently became regular visitors to the island. The last recorded whaler to visit was the \"James Arnold\" in 1888.\nA report of Folger's discovery was forwarded to the Admiralty, mentioning the mutineers and giving a more precise location of the island: . However, this was not known to Sir Thomas Staines, who commanded a Royal Navy flotilla of two ships, HMS \"Briton\" and HMS \"Tagus\", which found the island at (by meridian observation) on 17 September 1814. Staines sent a party ashore and wrote a detailed report for the Admiralty. By that time, only one mutineer, John Adams, remained alive. He was granted amnesty for his part in the mutiny.\nHenderson Island was rediscovered on 17 January 1819 by British Captain James Henderson of the British East India Company ship \"Hercules\". Captain Henry King, sailing on \"Elizabeth\", landed on 2 March to find the king's colours already flying. His crew scratched the name of their ship into a tree. Oeno Island was discovered on 26 January 1824 by American captain George Worth aboard the whaler .\nIn 1832, having tried and failed to petition the British government and the London Missionary Society, Joshua Hill, an American adventurer, arrived. He reported that by March 1833, he had founded a temperance society to combat drunkenness, a \"Maundy Thursday Society\", a monthly prayer meeting, a juvenile society, a Peace Society and a school.\nBritish colony.\nTraditionally, Pitcairn Islanders consider that their islands officially became a British colony on 30 November 1838, at the same time becoming one of the first territories to extend voting rights to women. By the mid-1850s, the Pitcairn community was outgrowing the island; its leaders appealed to the British government for assistance, and were offered Norfolk Island. On 3 May 1856, the entire population of 193 people set sail for Norfolk on board the \"Morayshire\", arriving on 8 June after a difficult five-week trip. However, just 18 months later, 17 of the Pitcairn Islanders returned to their home island, and another 27 followed five years later.\n visited Pitcairn Island on 18 April 1881 and \"found the people very happy and contented, and in perfect health\". At that time the population was 96, an increase of six since the visit of Admiral de Horsey in September 1878. Stores had recently been delivered from friends in England, including two whale-boats and Portland cement, which was used to make the reservoir watertight. HMS \"Thetis\" gave the islanders of ship's biscuits, of candles, and 100\u00a0lb of soap and clothing to the value of \u00a331, donated by the ship's company. An American trading ship called \"Venus\" had in 1882 bestowed a supply of cotton seed, to provide the islanders with a crop for future trade.\nIn 1886, the Seventh-day Adventist layman John Tay visited Pitcairn and persuaded most of the islanders to accept his faith. He returned in 1890 on the missionary schooner with an ordained minister to perform baptisms. Since then, the majority of Pitcairn Islanders have been Adventists.\nThe islands of Henderson, Oeno and Ducie were annexed by Britain in 1902: Henderson on 1 July, Oeno on 10 July, and Ducie on 19 December. In 1938, the three islands, along with Pitcairn, were incorporated into a single administrative unit called the \"Pitcairn Group of Islands\". The population peaked at 233 in 1937. It has since decreased owing to emigration, primarily to Australia and New Zealand.\nSexual abuse in modern times.\nThree cases of imprisonment for raping underage girls were reported in the 1950s. In 1999, Gail Cox, a police officer from Kent, United Kingdom, served on a temporary assignment on Pitcairn, and uncovered allegations of sexual abuse. When a 15-year-old girl decided to press rape charges in 1999, criminal proceedings (code-named \"Operation Unique\") were set in motion. The charges included 21 counts of rape, 41 of indecent assault, and two of gross indecency with a child under 14. Over the following two years, police officers in Australia, New Zealand and the United Kingdom interviewed every woman who had lived on Pitcairn in the past 20 years, as well as all of the accused men. These interviews revealed stories of girls as young as three being sexually assaulted and as young as 10 being gang-raped. The file was held by Pitcairn's first Public Prosecutor Simon Moore, an Auckland Crown Solicitor appointed to the position by the British government for the purposes of the investigation.\nAustralian Seventh-day Adventist pastor Neville Tosen, who spent two years on Pitcairn around the turn of the millennium, said that on his arrival, he had been taken aback by the conduct of the children, but he had not immediately realised what was happening. \"I noticed worrying signs such as inexplicable mood swings,\" he said. \"It took me three months to realise they were being abused.\" Tosen tried to bring the matter before the Island Council (the legislative body which doubles as the island's court), but was rebuffed. One councillor told him, \"Look, the age of consent has always been 12 and it doesn't hurt them.\" A study of island records confirmed anecdotal evidence that most girls bore their first child between the ages of 12 and 15. \"I think the girls were conditioned to accept that it was a man's world and once they turned 12, they were eligible,\" Tosen said. Mothers and grandmothers were resigned to the situation, telling him that their own childhood experience had been the same; they regarded it as just a part of life on Pitcairn. One grandmother wondered what all the fuss was about.\nTosen was convinced, however, that the early sexual experience was very damaging to the girls, outright stating, \"They can't settle or form solid relationships. They did suffer, no doubt about it.\" In 2016, Mike Warren, Pitcairn mayor from 2008 to 2013, was convicted and sentenced to 20 months imprisonment for possession of child pornography.\nSexual assault trials of 2004.\nIn 2004, charges were laid against seven men living on Pitcairn and six residing abroad. This represented nearly a third of the male population and half of the island's adult males. After extensive trials, most were convicted, some on multiple counts of sexual assaults on children. On 25 October 2004, six men were found guilty, including Steve Christian, the island's mayor at the time.\nIn the same year, the islanders surrendered about 20 firearms ahead of the sexual assault trials. Following the loss of their final appeal, the British government constructed a prison at Bob's Valley to house the convicted men. The men began serving their sentences in late 2006, and by 2010 all had either completed their terms or been granted home detention status.\nGeography.\nThe Pitcairn Islands form the southeasternmost extension of the geological archipelago of the Tuamotus of French Polynesia, and consist of four islands: Pitcairn Island, Oeno Island (atoll with five islets, one of which is Sandy Island), Henderson Island and Ducie Island (atoll with four islets).\nThe Pitcairn Islands were formed by a centre of upwelling magma called the Pitcairn hotspot. Pitcairn Island is a volcanic remnant primarily formed of tuff, where the north side of the cone has been eroded. Pitcairn is the only permanently inhabited island. Adamstown, the main settlement on the island, lies within the volcanic basin. Pitcairn is accessible only by boat through Bounty Bay, due to the island's steep cliffs. Henderson Island, covering about 86% of the territory's total land area and supporting a rich variety of animals in its nearly inaccessible interior, is also capable of supporting a small human population despite its scarce fresh water, but access is difficult, owing to its outer shores being steep limestone cliffs covered by sharp coral. In 1988, this island was designated as a UNESCO World Heritage site. The other islands are at a distance of more than and are not habitable.\nPitcairn Island has no permanent water source; however, the island has three seasonal semi-permanent springs.\n\u2020 Includes reef flat and lagoon of the atolls.\nClimate.\nPitcairn is located just south of the Tropic of Capricorn and experiences year-round warm weather.\nPitcairn Islands Dark Sky Sanctuary.\nIn March 2019 the International Dark-Sky Association approved the Pitcairn Islands as a Dark Sky Sanctuary. The sanctuary encompasses all 4 islands in the Pitcairn Islands Group for a total land area of 43.25\u00a0km2 (16&lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;3\u20444 sq. mi.).\nEcology.\nFlora.\nAbout nine plant species are thought to be endemic to Pitcairn. These include tapau, formerly an important timber resource, and the giant nehe fern. Some, such as red berry (\"Coprosma rapensis\" var. \"Benefica\"), are perilously close to extinction. The plant species \"Glochidion pitcairnense\" is endemic to Pitcairn and Henderson Islands. Pitcairn is part of the Tuamotu tropical moist forests terrestrial ecoregion.\nFauna.\nBetween 1937 and 1951, Irving Johnson, skipper of the brigantine \"Yankee Five\", introduced five Gal\u00e1pagos giant tortoises to Pitcairn. Turpen, also known as Mr Turpen, or Mr. T, is the sole survivor. Turpen usually lives at Tedside by Western Harbour. A protection order makes it an offence should anyone kill, injure, capture, maim, or cause harm or distress to the tortoise.\nThe birds of Pitcairn fall into several groups. These include seabirds, wading birds and a small number of resident land-bird species. Of 20 breeding species, Henderson Island has 16, including the unique flightless Henderson crake; Oeno hosts 12; Ducie 13 and Pitcairn six species. Birds breeding on Pitcairn include the fairy tern, common noddy and red-tailed tropicbird. The Pitcairn reed warbler, known by Pitcairners as a \"sparrow\", is endemic to Pitcairn Island; formerly common, it was added to the endangered species list in 2008.\nA small population of humpback whales migrate to the islands annually, to over-winter and breed.\nImportant bird areas.\nThe four islands in the Pitcairn group have been identified by BirdLife International as separate Important Bird Areas (IBAs). Pitcairn Island is recognised because it is the only nesting site of the Pitcairn reed warbler. Henderson Island is important for its endemic land-birds as well as its breeding seabirds. Oeno's ornithological significance derives principally from its Murphy's petrel colony. Ducie is important for its colonies of Murphy's, herald and Kermadec petrels, and Christmas shearwaters.\nPitcairn Islands Marine Reserve.\nIn March 2015 the British government established one of the largest marine protected areas in the world around the Pitcairn Islands. The reserve covers the islands' entire exclusive economic zone\u2014. The intention is to protect some of the world's most pristine ocean habitat from illegal fishing activities. A satellite \"watchroom\" dubbed Project Eyes on the Seas has been established by the Satellite Applications Catapult and the Pew Charitable Trusts at the Harwell Science and Innovation Campus in Harwell, Oxfordshire to monitor vessel activity and to gather the information needed to prosecute unauthorised trawling.\nPolitics.\nThe Pitcairn Islands are a British overseas territory with a degree of local government. The King of the United Kingdom is represented by a Governor, who also holds office as British High Commissioner to New Zealand and is based in Wellington.\nThe 2010 constitution gives authority for the islands to operate as a representative democracy, with the United Kingdom retaining responsibility for matters such as defence and foreign affairs. The Governor and the Island Council may enact laws for the \"peace, order and good government\" of Pitcairn. The Island Council customarily appoints a Mayor of Pitcairn as a day-to-day head of the local administration.\nSince 2015, same-sex marriage has been legal on Pitcairn Island, although there are no people on the island known to be in such a relationship.\nThe Pitcairn Islands have the smallest population of any democracy in the world.\nThe United Nations Committee on Decolonization includes the Pitcairn Islands on the United Nations list of non-self-governing territories.\nMilitary.\nThe Pitcairn Islands are a British Overseas Territory; defence is the responsibility of the Ministry of Defence and the British Armed Forces. The Royal Navy maintains two offshore patrol vessels in the Indo-Pacific region, and . Either may be periodically employed for sovereignty protection and other duties around Pitcairn and her associated islands.\nEconomy.\nAgriculture.\nThe fertile soil of the Pitcairn valleys, such as Isaac's Valley on the gentle slopes southeast of Adamstown, produces a wide variety of fruits, including bananas (Pitkern: \"plun\"), papaya (\"paw paws\"), pineapples, mangoes, watermelons, cantaloupes, passionfruit, breadfruit, coconuts, avocadoes, and citrus (including mandarin oranges, grapefruit, lemons and limes). Vegetables include sweet potatoes (kumura), carrots, sweet corn, tomatoes, taro, yams, peas, and beans. Arrowroot (\"Maranta arundinacea\") and sugarcane are grown and harvested to produce arrowroot flour and molasses, respectively. Pitcairn Island is remarkably productive and its benign climate supports a wide range of tropical and temperate crops. All land allocation for any use including agriculture is under the discretion of the government. If the government deems agricultural production excessive, then it may tax the land. If the agricultural land has been deemed not up to the standards of the government, it may confiscate and transfer the land without compensation.\nFish are plentiful in the seas around Pitcairn. Spiny lobster and a large variety of fish are caught for meals and for trading aboard passing ships. Almost every day, someone will go fishing, whether it is from the rocks, from a longboat, or diving with a spear gun. There are numerous types of fish around the island. Fish such as nanwee, white fish, moi, and opapa are caught in shallow water, while snapper, big eye, and cod are caught in deep water, and yellow tail and wahoo are caught by trawling.\nMinerals.\nManganese, iron, copper, gold, silver and zinc have been discovered within the exclusive economic zone, which extends offshore and comprises .\nHoney production.\nIn 1998, the UK's overseas aid agency, the Department for International Development, funded an apiculture programme for Pitcairn which included training for Pitcairn's beekeepers and a detailed analysis of Pitcairn's bees and honey with particular regard to the presence or absence of disease. Pitcairn has one of the best examples of disease-free bee populations anywhere in the world and the honey produced was and remains exceptionally high in quality. Pitcairn bees are also a placid variety and, within a short time, beekeepers are able to work with them wearing minimal protection. As a result, Pitcairn exports honey to New Zealand and to the United Kingdom. In London, Fortnum &amp; Mason sells it and it is reportedly a favourite of King Charles and formerly Queen Elizabeth. The Pitcairn Islanders, under the \"Bounty Products\" and \"Delectable Bounty\" brands, also export dried fruit including bananas, papayas, pineapples, and mangoes to New Zealand. Honey production and all honey-related products are a protected monopoly. All funds and management are under the supervision and discretion of the government.\nCuisine.\nCuisine is not very developed because of Pitcairn's small population. The most traditional meal is pota, mash from palm leaves and coconut. Domestic tropical plants are abundantly used. These include basil, breadfruit, sugar cane, coconut, bananas and beans. Meat courses consist mainly of fish and beef. Given that most of the population's ancestry is from the UK, the cuisine is influenced by British cuisine; for example, the meat pie.\nThe cuisine of Norfolk Island is very similar to that of the Pitcairn Islands, as Norfolk Islanders trace their origins to Pitcairn. The local cuisine is a blend of British cuisine and Tahitian cuisine.\nRecipes from Norfolk Island of Pitcairn origin include mudda (green banana dumplings) and kumara pilhi. The island's cuisine also includes foods not found on Pitcairn, such as chopped salads and fruit pies.\nTourism.\nTourism plays a major role on Pitcairn. Tourism is the focus for building the economy. It focuses on small groups coming by charter vessel and staying at \"home stays\". About ten times a year, passengers from expedition-type cruise ships come ashore for a day, weather permitting. As of 2019, the government has been operating the MV \"Silver Supporter\" as the island's only dedicated passenger/cargo vessel, providing adventure tourism holidays to Pitcairn every week. Tourists stay with local families and experience the island's culture while contributing to the local economy. Providing accommodation is a growing source of revenue, and some families have invested in private self-contained units adjacent to their homes for tourists to rent.\nEntry requirements for short stays, up to 14 days, which do not require a visa, and for longer stays, that do require prior clearance, are explained in official documents. All persons under 16 years of age require prior clearance before landing, irrespective of the length of stay.\nCrafts and external sales.\nThe government holds a monopoly over \"any article of whatsoever nature made, manufactured, prepared for sale or produced by any of the inhabitants of Pitcairn Island\". The flow of funds from these revenue sources are from customer to the government to the Pitcairners. The Pitcairners are involved in creating crafts and curios (made out of wood from Henderson). Typical woodcarvings include sharks, fish, whales, dolphins, turtles, vases, birds, walking sticks, book boxes, and models of the \"Bounty\". Miro (\"Thespesia populnea\"), a dark and durable wood, is preferred for carving. Islanders also produce tapa cloth and painted Hattie leaves.\nThe major sources of revenue have been the sale of coins and postage stamps to collectors, .pn domain names, and the sale of handicrafts to passing ships, most of which are on the United Kingdom to New Zealand route via the Panama Canal. The Pitcairn Islands issued their first stamp in 1940. These became very popular with stamp collectors, and their sale became the dominant source of revenue for the community. Profits went into a general fund which enabled the island to be mostly self-sufficient. This fund was used to meet the regular needs of the community, and pay wages. Funds in excess of regular expenses were used to build a school and hire a teacher from New Zealand, the first professional teacher hired on the island. The fund was also used to subsidise imports and travel to New Zealand. At later points, the sale of coins and .pn domain names also contributed to the fund. Towards the end of the 20th century, as writing letters became less common and stamp collecting became less popular, revenue for the fund declined. In 2004, the island went bankrupt, with the British government subsequently providing 90% of its annual budget.\nElectricity.\nDiesel generators provide the island with electricity. A wind power plant was planned to be installed to help reduce the high cost of power generation associated with the import of diesel, but was cancelled in 2013 after a project overrun of three years and a cost of \u00a3250,000.\nAll homes have solar systems generating over 95% of the electricity required for home use.\nThe only qualified high-voltage electrician on Pitcairn, who manages the electricity grid, reached the age of 67 in 2020.\nDemographics.\nThe islands have suffered a substantial population decline since 1940, and the island's community recognise that for the long-term sustainability repopulation is the number one strategic development objective (see , below). The government is committed to attracting migrants.\nOnly two children were born on Pitcairn in the 21 years prior to 2012. However, in this period, other children were born to Pitcairn mothers who travelled to New Zealand to receive increased health care safeguards during pregnancy and childbirth. In 2005, Shirley and Simon Young became the first married outsider couple in history to obtain citizenship on Pitcairn.\nLanguage.\nOver 60% of Pitcairn Islanders are descendants of the \"Bounty\" mutineers and Tahitians (or other Polynesians). Pitkern is a creole language derived from 18th-century English, with elements of the Tahitian language. It is spoken as a first language by the population and is taught alongside English at the island's only school. It is closely related to the creole language Norfuk, spoken on Norfolk Island, because Norfolk was repopulated in the mid-19th century by Pitcairners.\nReligion.\nThe only church building on the island is Seventh-day Adventist. The Seventh-day Adventist Church is not a state religion, as no laws concerning its establishment were passed by the local government. A successful Seventh-day Adventist mission in the 1890s was important in shaping Pitcairn society. In recent years, the church population has declined, and as of 2000[ [update]], eight of the then forty islanders attended services regularly, but most attend church on special occasions. From Friday at sunset until Saturday at sunset, Pitcairners observe a day of rest in observance of the Sabbath, or as a mark of respect for observant Adventists.\nThe church was built in 1954. The Sabbath School meets at 10 am on Saturday mornings, and is followed by Divine Service an hour later. On Tuesday evenings, there is another service in the form of a prayer meeting.\nEducation.\nEducation is free and compulsory between the ages of five and 15. Children up to the age of 12 are taught at Pulau School, while children of 13 and over attend secondary school in New Zealand, or are educated via correspondence school.\nThe island's children have produced a book in Pitkern and English called \"Mi Bas Side orn Pitcairn\" or \"My Favourite Place on Pitcairn\".\nThe school on Pitcairn, Pulau School, provides pre-school and primary education based on the New Zealand syllabus. The teacher is appointed by the governor from qualified applicants who are registered in New Zealand as teachers. The government officially took responsibility for education in 1958; the Seventh-day Adventist Church had done so from the 1890s until 1958. There were ten students in 1999; enrolment was previously 20 in the early 1950s, 28 in 1959, and 36 in 1962. The Pulau School has a residence for teachers built in 2004; there was a previous such facility built in 1950.\nHistorical population.\nPitcairn's population has significantly decreased since its peak of over 200 in the 1930s, to fewer than fifty permanent residents today (2021).\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nStructure of the population.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Hidden begin/styles.css\"/&gt;Population by age group (Census 19.II.2020):\nPopulation decline.\nAs of April\u00a02021[ [update]], the total resident population of the Pitcairn Islands was 47. It is rare for all the residents to be on-island at the same time; it is common for several residents to be off-island for varying lengths of time visiting family, for medical reasons, or to attend international conferences. A diaspora survey completed by Solomon Leonard Ltd in 2014 for the Pitcairn Island Council and the United Kingdom Government projected that by 2045, if nothing were done, only three people of working age would be left on the island, with the rest being very old. In addition, the survey revealed that residents who had left the island over the past decades showed little interest in coming back. Of the hundreds of emigrants contacted, only 33 were willing to participate in the survey and just three expressed a desire to return.\nAs of 2014[ [update]], the labour force consisted of 31 able-bodied persons: 17 males and 14 females between 18 and 64 years of age. Of the 31, just seven are younger than 40, but 18 are over the age of 50. Most of the men undertake the more strenuous physical tasks on the island such as crewing the longboats, cargo handling, and the operation and maintenance of physical assets. Longboat crew retirement age is 58. There were then 12 men aged between 18 and 58 residing on Pitcairn. Each longboat requires a minimum crew of three; of the four longboat coxswains, two were in their late 50s.\nThe Pitcairn government's attempts to attract migrants have met with some success. Since 2015 settlement applications were approved for 8 persons, 3 of whom are living on Pitcairn. The migrants are expected to have at least NZ$30,000 per person in savings and are expected to build their own house at average cost of NZ$140,000. It is also possible to bring off-island builders at an additional cost of between NZ$23,000 and NZ$28,000. The average annual cost of living on the island is NZ$9,464. There is, however, no assurance of the migrant's right to remain on Pitcairn; after their first two years, the council must review and reapprove the migrant's status.\nFreight from Tauranga to Pitcairn on the MV \"Claymore II\" (Pitcairn Island's dedicated passenger and cargo ship chartered by the Pitcairn government) is charged at NZ$350/m3 for Pitcairners and NZ$1,000/m3 for all other freight. Additionally, Pitcairners are charged NZ$500 for a one-way trip; others are charged NZ$5,000.\nIn 2014[ [update]], the government's Pitcairn Islands Economic Report stated that \"[no one] will migrate to Pitcairn Islands for economic reasons as there are limited government jobs, a lack of private sector employment, as well as considerable competition for the tourism dollar.\" The Pitcairners take turns to accommodate those few tourists who occasionally visit the island.\nAs the island remains a British Overseas Territory, the British government may at some stage be required to make a decision about the island's future.\nCulture.\nThe once-strict moral codes, which prohibited dancing, public displays of affection, smoking, and consumption of alcohol, have been relaxed. Islanders and visitors no longer require a six-month licence to purchase, import, and consume alcohol. There is now one licensed caf\u00e9 and bar on the island, and the government store sells alcohol and cigarettes.\nFishing and swimming are two popular recreational activities. A birthday celebration or the arrival of a ship or yacht will involve the entire Pitcairn community in a public dinner in the Square, Adamstown. Tables are covered in a variety of foods, including fish, meat, chicken, pilhi, baked rice, boiled \"plun\" (banana), breadfruit, vegetable dishes, an assortment of pies, bread, breadsticks, an array of desserts, pineapple, and watermelon.\nPaid employees maintain the island's numerous roads and paths. As of 2011[ [update]], the island had a labour force of over 35 men and women.\nBounty Day is an annual public holiday celebrated on Pitcairn on 23 January to commemorate the day in 1790 when the mutineers arrived on the island aboard HMS \"Bounty\".\nSport.\nThere is a tennis court on the island. The Pitcairn Islands are the only member of the Pacific Community that does not take part in the Pacific Games. In 2019, the territory approached the Pacific Games Council about the possibility of membership.\nAustralian National Rugby League player Dylan Walker's mother is from Pitcairn.\nMedia and communications.\nPost.\nThe UK Postcode for directing mail to Pitcairn Island is PCRN 1ZZ.\nNewspapers.\nThe \"Pitcairn Miscellany\" is a monthly newspaper available in print and online editions. \"Dem Tull\" was an online monthly newsletter published between 2007 and 2016.\nTelecommunications.\nPitcairn uses New Zealand's international calling code, +64. It is still on the manual telephone system.\nRadio.\nThere is no broadcast station. Marine band walkie-talkie radios are used to maintain contact among people in different areas of the island. Foreign stations can be picked up on shortwave radio.\nAmateur radio.\nCallsign website QRZ.COM lists six amateur radio operators on the island, using the ITU prefix (assigned through the UK) of VP6, two of whom have a second VR6 callsign. However, two of these 6 are listed by QRZ.COM as deceased, while others are no longer active. Pitcairn Island has one callsign allocated to its Club Station, VP6PAC.\nQRZ.COM lists 29 VP6 callsigns being allocated in total, 20 of them to off-islanders. Of these, five were allocated to temporary residents and ten to individuals visiting. The rest were assigned to the DX-peditions to Pitcairn, one of which took place in 2012[ [update]]. In 2008 and 2018, major DX-peditions visited Ducie Island.\nTelevision.\nPitcairn can receive a number of television channels but only has capacity to broadcast two channels to houses at any one time. The channels are currently switched on a regular basis. The transmitter was installed in 2006.\nInternet.\nThere is one government-sponsored satellite Internet connection, with networking provided to the inhabitants of the island. Pitcairn's country code top-level domain is .pn. Residents pay NZ$120 (about \u00a360) for unlimited data per month. In 2012, a single 1\u00a0Mbit/s link installed provided the islanders with an Internet connection, the 1\u00a0Mbit/s was shared across all families on the island. By December 2017, the British Government implemented a 4G LTE mobile network in Adamstown with shared speeds of 5\u00a0Mbit/s across all islanders. Starlink became available in February 2024.\nTransport.\nAll settlers of the Pitcairn Islands arrived by boat or ship. Pitcairn Island does not have an airport, airstrip or seaport; the islanders rely on longboats to ferry people and goods between visiting ships and shore through Bounty Bay. Access to the rest of the shoreline is restricted by jagged rocks. The island has one shallow harbour with a launch ramp accessible only by small longboats. In 2014, a medical emergency requiring transport to a hospital in Papeete involved a 335 nautical mile (540\u00a0km) trip in an open boat to the island of Mangareva, then an air ambulance flight 975 nautical miles (1570\u00a0km) to Papeete. It was organized by medical authorities in the United Kingdom and New Zealand, and French authorities in Mangareva and Papeete. The British High Commissioner to New Zealand said \"It can be a hazardous sea voyage from Pitcairn to Mangareva. This is especially so for open long boats. However, I'm pleased to say that all went well and both boats arrived safely in Mangareva mid-morning today, New Zealand time.\"\nA dedicated passenger and cargo supply ship chartered by the Pitcairn Island government, the MV \"Claymore II\", was until 2018 the principal transport from Mangareva in the Gambier Islands of French Polynesia. The supply ship was replaced in 2019 by MV \"Silver Supporter\".https://\nTotegegie Airport in Mangareva can be reached by air from the French Polynesian capital Papeete.\nThere is one paved road leading up from Bounty Bay through Adamstown.\nThe main modes of transport on Pitcairn Islands are by four-wheel drive quad bikes and on foot. Much of the road and track network and some of the footpaths of Pitcairn Island are viewable on Google's Street View.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23451", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23451", "title": "Pitcairn Islands/History", "text": ""}
{"id": "23452", "revid": "41087829", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23452", "title": "Geography of the Pitcairn Islands", "text": " \nThe Pitcairn Islands are a group of four islands in the south Pacific Ocean: the group comprises Pitcairn Island (a volcanic island), Henderson Island (an uplifted coral island), and two coral atolls, Oeno Island and Ducie Island.\nThe only inhabited island, Pitcairn, has an area of and a population density of ; it is only accessible by boat through Bounty Bay.\nThe other islands are at a distance of more than .\nLocation.\nThe Pitcairn Islands as a group of islands in Oceania:()\nSituated in the South Pacific Ocean, about one-half of the way from Peru to New Zealand, they are one of the most remote sites of human habitation on Earth.\nThe only inhabited island, Pitcairn, is at 25.04 south, 130.06 west. Pitcairn is about southeast of Tahiti, from Auckland, New Zealand, and over from Panama.\n\"Total:\" \n\"Land:\" \n\"Water:\" \nArea.\nPitcairn Island is about long and wide.\nThis is about &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;3\u204410 of the size of Washington, DC.\nMaritime claims.\n\"Exclusive economic zone:\"\n&lt;br&gt;\"Territorial sea:\"\nClimate.\nThe Pitcairn Islands have a maritime tropical rainforest climate (\"Af\" according to the K\u00f6ppen climate classification), with the climate being warm and humid year-round, with no dry season. The warmest month in Adamstown is February, with a mean of , while the coolest month is August, with a mean of . The highest temperature recorded was during March. Because of its maritime location, the temperature has never dropped below . Adamstown receives of rainfall annually, with the rain being evenly distributed across the year. The climate of the Pitcairn Islands is modified by southeast trade winds.\n&lt;br&gt;\nTerrain.\nThe Pitcairn Islands have a rugged terrain caused by volcanic formation, with a rocky coastline and cliffs.\nElevation extremes.\n\"Lowest point:\"\nPacific Ocean coastline 0 m (sea level)\n&lt;br&gt;\"Highest point:\"\nPawala Valley Ridge \nNatural resources.\nMiro trees (used for handicrafts), fish\n&lt;br&gt;\"Note:\"\nmanganese, iron, copper, gold, silver, and zinc have been discovered offshore\nNatural hazards.\nTropical Cyclones (especially November to May)\nEnvironment \u2013 current issues.\nDeforestation (only a small portion of the original forest remains because of burning and clearing for settlement)\nMaps.\nWorldwide map services show very little detail of the islands, and are even of limited use to show the location of them with respect to each other and to other islands, because they are so small and far apart. However, Mapquest zoom level 1 is a suitable map to see the location between Peru and New Zealand.\nFor the location with respect to French Polynesia, see the inset of .\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23453", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23453", "title": "Pitcairn Islands/People", "text": ""}
{"id": "23454", "revid": "49402000", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23454", "title": "Politics of the Pitcairn Islands", "text": " \nThe Pitcairn Islands are a British Overseas Territory in the South Pacific Ocean, with a population of about 35. The politics of the islands takes place in a framework of a parliamentary representative democratic dependency, whereby the Mayor is the head of government. The territory's constitution is the Local Government Ordinance of 1964. In terms of population, the Pitcairn Islands is the smallest democracy in the world.\nThe government's administrative offices are in Auckland, New Zealand.\nExecutive branch.\nThe King is represented by the Governor of the Pitcairn Islands, who is the British High Commissioner to New Zealand. A non-resident Commissioner, appointed by the Governor, serves as the Governor's Representative to the territory. The Commissioner is responsible for the day-to-day administration of the island as well as for its economic regeneration, and also serves as the liaison between the Governor and the Island Council. As both the Governor and the Commissioner do not live on the island, its daily affairs have since 1999 been taken care of by the mayor of Pitcairn. The Island Magistrate is appointed by the Governor. The Chairman of the Internal Committee is an elected official.\nUntil 30 October 2004, the mayor was Steve Christian; after his rape conviction on 24 October 2004, Christian was dismissed (after refusing to resign). His sister Brenda Christian was selected by the Island Council to be mayor for November and December 2004, until an election was held. Jay Warren was elected on 15 December 2004. The island Mayor is elected by popular vote for a three-year term. The first elected female mayor was Charlene Warren-Peu in 2020.\nAttorney General of the Pitcairn Islands.\nThe Attorney General of the Pitcairn Islands is appointed under Section 35 of the Pitcairn Islands Constitution and serves as the principal legal adviser to the government of Pitcairn for a set term. Initially, the Attorney General was referred to as the Legal Adviser. The Attorney General's powers and responsibilities include handling criminal matters, drafting Pitcairn ordinances, and revising and publishing any laws that pertain to the country. \nLegislative branch.\nThe Pitcairn Islands have a unicameral Island Council (10 seats: the Mayor and the Chairman of the Island Council both hold membership \"ex officio\"; 4 elected by popular vote; 1 co-opted by the Chairman and the 4 other elected members; 2 appointed by the Governor including the Island Secretary \"(ex officio)\"; the tenth seat is reserved for a Commissioner (non-resident) who liaises between the Council and the Governor. Except for the Mayor, who has a three-year term, and the Island Secretary, whose term is indefinite, members serve one-year terms.\nElections are held every two years for councillors and deputy mayor and every three years for the mayor. Before a change in the Constitution, elections were held every year on 24 December. There are no political parties on the islands.\nJudicial branch.\nThe members of the Pitcairn judiciary are all New Zealanders \u2013 as are almost all of the lawyers admitted to the Pitcairn Bar \u2013 and are all either current or former members of the judiciary or legal profession (in the case of the magistrates) in that country.\nCurrently, the members of the judiciary are:\nAdditionally, several magistrates have been appointed from amongst the ranks of the senior members of the legal profession in New Zealand. The Pitcairn Public Prosecutor \u2013 Simon Moore (also the Crown Solicitor at Auckland) and Public Defender \u2013 Paul Dacre \u2013 were also appointed.\nAccording to a 2012 report, there are no lawyers in the Pitcairn Islands. There has been a Public Defender serving the islands since 2003.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23455", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23455", "title": "Pitcairn Islands/Economy", "text": ""}
{"id": "23456", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23456", "title": "Communications on the Pitcairn Islands", "text": ""}
{"id": "23457", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23457", "title": "Transportation on the Pitcairn Islands", "text": ""}
{"id": "23458", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23458", "title": "Pitcairn Islands/Military", "text": ""}
{"id": "23461", "revid": "11700745", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23461", "title": "Geography of Puerto Rico", "text": " \nThe geography of Puerto Rico encompasses the geographical features of Puerto Rico, a Caribbean archipelagic and island nation centered around a collective identity based on its land, history, ethnicity, culture, and language, and organized as a self-governing unincorporated territory of the United States. Located between the Greater and Lesser Antilles in the northeastern Caribbean Sea, east of Hispaniola, west of Saint Thomas, north of Venezuela, and south of the Puerto Rico Trench, it consists of the eponymous main island of Puerto Rico and 142 smaller islands, islets, and cays, including San Juan Islet in the north, Vieques and Culebra islands in the Virgin Islands, and Palominos island and Icacos cay in La Cordillera nature reserve in the east, Caja de Muertos island in Caja de Muertos reserve, and Caracoles and Media Luna cays in La Parguera reserve in the south, and Mona, Monito, and Desecheo islands in the Mona Passage in the west. \nMeasuring 177 km (110 mi; 96 nmi) in length and 65 km (40 mi; 35 nmi) in width with a land area of 8,868 sq km (3,424 sq mi), the main island of Puerto Rico is the 4th largest in the Caribbean, 29th in the Americas, and 81st in the world, making it the 170th largest country or dependency by surface area. With 3.2 million residents, it is also the 4th largest in the Caribbean, 4th in the Americas, and 31st in the world, making it the 136th largest country or dependency by population.\n Puerto Rico (right-center) within the Caribbean as seen from space at night, 2012\nOverview.\nGeologically separated from the Greater Antilles island of Hispaniola by the Mona Passage and from the Lesser Antilles island arc by the Anegada Passage, the main island of Puerto Rico, the Spanish Virgin Islands of Vieques and Culebra, the British Virgin Islands, and the U.S. Virgin Islands except for the southernmost island of Saint Croix all lie on the same carbonate platform and insular shelf, the Puerto Rico Bank, between the Puerto Rico Trench in the North Atlantic Ocean and the Muertos Trough in the northeastern Caribbean Sea. The archipelagos of Puerto Rico and the Virgin Islands except for Saint Croix also lie on the same tectonic plate, the Puerto Rico\u2013Virgin Islands microplate. \nAround 60% mountainous, the main island of Puerto Rico has one principal mountain range covering the central region of the island from west to east, the Cordillera Central. It is divided into three subranges: the eponymous main subrange of \"Cordillera Central\" in the center, the Sierra de Cayey in the southeast, and the Sierra de Luquillo in the northeast. The highest elevation point in Puerto Rico, Cerro de Punta (), is located in the \"Cordillera Central\", while El Yunque, one of the most popular peaks in Puerto Rico, located in the Sierra de Luquillo and part of El Yunque National Forest, has a maximum elevation of .\nThe main island has seven valleys: Caguas, Yabucoa, Lajas, A\u00f1asco, the Coloso and Culebrinas, Cibuco, and Guanajibo. It has two narrow coastal plains: one stretching alongside the northern coast, and the other alongside the southern coast. The capital, San Juan, and its metropolitan area are located on the northern coastal plain in the northeast. It also has one prominent karst formation in its northwestern central region called the Northern Karst Belt, and two prominent batholiths, one in the southeastern municipality of San Lorenzo, and the other in the western municipality of Utuado. The island has 47 major rivers, of which the longest is R\u00edo de la Plata, and 26 reservoirs, lagoons, or lakes, among which is \"Laguna Grande\" (\"big lagoon\"), one of three bioluminescent bays in the archipelago of Puerto Rico located in the far northeastern municipality of Fajardo.\nThe archipelago of Puerto Rico has numerous protected nature areas, including the nature reserves of La Cordillera in the \"Sonda de Vieques\" (Vieques Sound) and \"Media Luna\" (\"half moon\") in Lajas, the wildlife refuge in Cabo Rojo and Desecheo, the estuarine research reserve of Bah\u00eda de Jobos in Salinas, and the national park of the El Yunque forest in Rio Grande. \nTopography.\nPuerto Rico is mostly mountainous with large coastal areas in the north and south. The main mountain range is called Cordillera Central (Central Mountain Range). The highest elevation in Puerto Rico, Cerro de Punta at , is located in this range. Another important peak is El Yunque, the second highest peak in the Sierra de Luquillo at the El Yunque National Forest, with an elevation of .\nGeology.\nPuerto Rico is composed of Cretaceous to Eocene volcanic and plutonic rocks, which are overlain by younger Oligocene to recent carbonates and other sedimentary rocks. Most of the caverns and karst topography on the island occurs in the northern Oligocene to recent carbonates. The oldest rocks are approximately 190 million years old (Jurassic) and are located at Sierra Bermeja along the Lajas Valley in the southwest part of the island. These rocks may represent part of the oceanic crust and are believed to come from the Pacific Ocean realm. Puerto Rico lies at the boundary between the Caribbean and North American plates. This means that it is currently being deformed by the tectonic stresses caused by the interaction of these plates. These stresses may cause earthquakes and tsunamis. These seismic events, along with landslides, represent some of the most dangerous geologic hazards in the island and in the northeastern Caribbean. The most recent major earthquake occurred on October 11, 1918, with seismic moment estimated at 7.5 on the moment magnitude scale. It originated off the coast of Aguadilla and was accompanied by a tsunami.\nLying about north of Puerto Rico in the Atlantic Ocean at the boundary between the Caribbean and North American plates is the Puerto Rico Trench, the largest and deepest trench in the Atlantic. The trench is long and about wide. At its deepest point, named the Milwaukee Depth, it is deep, or about .\nPhysical geography.\nThe archipelago of Puerto Rico is located between the Caribbean Sea and the North Atlantic Ocean, east of the Hispaniola and west of the Virgin Islands. Located in the northeastern Caribbean Sea, Puerto Rico was key to the Spanish Empire since the early years of exploration, conquest and colonization of the New World.\nThe topography of the main island is divided into three major regions: the mountainous region, which includes the Cordillera Central, the Sierra de Luquillo, and the Sierra de Cayey; the coastal plains; and the northern karst region. The \"Cordillera Central\" extends through the entire island, dividing it into the northern and southern regions. The mountain region accounts for approximately 60% of the land area.\nThe archipelago of Culebra, located east of Puerto Rico, north of Vieques, and west of the Virgin Islands, is composed of the island of Culebra and 28 uninhabited islets. Mainly mountainous, the island of Culebra possesses world-renowned beaches.\nClimate.\nLocated in the tropics, Puerto Rico enjoys an average temperature of throughout the year. The seasons do not change very drastically. The temperature in the south is usually a few degrees higher than the north and temperatures in the central interior mountains are always cooler than the rest of the island. The highest temperature record was in the municipality of San Germ\u00e1n with and the minimum registration is in Aibonito. The dry season spans from December to April while the wet season coincides with the Atlantic hurricane season from May to November.\nRivers and lakes.\nPuerto Rico has lakes (none of them natural) and more than 50 rivers. Most of these rivers are born in the \"Cordillera Central\", Puerto Rico's principal mountain range located across the center of the island. The rivers in the north of the island are bigger and with higher flow capacity than those of the south. The south is thus drier and hotter than the north. These rivers make up 60 watersheds throughout the island, where over 95% of the runoff goes back to sea. With a length of length of approximately 74 kilometres (46 mi) La Plata River is the longest, while Lo\u00edza is the largest by discharge volume with a hydrological basin of .\nFlora and fauna.\nAs of 1998, 239 plants, 16 birds and 39 amphibians/reptiles have been discovered that are endemic to the archipelago of Puerto Rico. The majority of these (234, 12 and 33 respectively) are found on the main island. The most recognizable endemic species and a symbol of Puerto Rican pride are the coquis (\"Eleutherodactylus\" spp.), small frogs easily recognized by the sound from which they get their name. El Yunque National Forest, a tropical rainforest, is home to the majority (13 of 16) of species of coqui. It is also home to more than 240 plants, 26 of which are endemic, and 50 bird species, including the critically endangered Puerto Rican amazon (\"Amazona vittata\").\nForests.\nForests of Puerto Rico are well represented by the flora of the Luquillo Experimental Forest (LEF), a Long Term Ecological Research Network site managed by the United States Forest Service and University of Puerto Rico. At this site, there are four main life zones, delineated on the basis of temperature and precipitation (Holdridge System), in the Sierra de Luquillo: subtropical wet and subtropical rain forests are found at low and mid elevations, lower montane rain and lower montane wet forests at high elevations. There is also an area of subtropical moist forest at low elevations on the southwest slope.\nTabonuco forest, so named for the dominant tabonuco tree (\"Dacryodes excelsa\"), covers lower slopes to about . In well-developed stands the larger trees exceed in height, there is a fairly continuous canopy at , and the shaded understory is moderately dense. Tabonuco trees are especially large on ridges, where they are firmly rooted in the rocky substrate and connected by root grafts with each other. There are about 168 tree species in the tabonuco forest.\nThe palo Colorado forest, named for the large \"palo colorado\" tree (\"Cyrilla racemiflora\"), begins above the tabonuco forest and extends up to about . Its canopy reaches only about . Soils are saturated and root mats above the soil are common. There are some 53 tree species in this forest type. At this same elevation, but in especially steep and wet areas, is palm forest, heavily dominated by the sierra palm tree (\"Prestoea montana\"). Patches of palm forest are also found in saturated riparian areas in the tabonuco forest. The palm forest reaches about 15 m in height.\nAt the highest elevations is dwarf forest, a dense forest as short as , on saturated soils. Here the trees are covered with epiphytic mosses and vascular plants, especially bromeliads, and these also cover large areas of the ground. Ascending the Luquillo mountains through these forest types, the average tree height and diameter, number of tree species, and basal area (cross sectional area of tree stems) tend to decrease, while stem density increases.\nThere are more than 89 tree species in the LEF. The most common are \"Prestoea acuminata\", \"Casearia arborea\", \"Dacryodes excelsa\", \"Manilkara bidentata\", \"Inga laurina\", and \"Sloanea berteroana\". Common shrub species are \"Palicourea croceoides\", \"Psychotria berteriana\", and \"Piper glabrescens\". Grasses, ferns, and forbs are frequent on the ground, especially in canopy gaps; epiphytes are fairly common, and vines are uncommon.\nPuerto Rican dry forests are dominated by plants in the families Rubiaceae, Euphorbiaceae, and Myrtaceae. In this regard they are similar to Jamaican dry forests, but differ sharply from dry forests on the mainland of South and Central America, which are dominated by Fabaceae and Bignoniaceae.\nMario Javier Fernandez-Vega is a Puerto Rican forester who uses silvicultural techniques. Fernandez is currently developing cutting edge forestry methods known as the \"Borincano Model\". The model capitalizes on the diversity of ecological niches in Puerto Rican forests and native disturbance regimes to formulate practices uniquely suited to the forests of the archipelago. About his model Fernandez has been known to comment, \"Soy de aqu\u00ed como el coqu\u00ed\" (I am from here just like the coqui), a common patriotic axiom that is used to demonstrate their native ties to the island. The coqui and its unique vocalizations are indigenous to the island of Puerto Rico. However, there are thriving populations of coquis that, like the people of Puerto Rico, have been transported to Hawaii. The coqui is viewed as an ecological menace in Hawaii where its song of \"co kee co kee\" is found to be an irritant by many. Needless to say that efforts to eradicate its presence in Hawaii is not a popular issue among Puerto Ricans.\nAdministrative geography.\nOverview.\nAs an unincorporated territory of the United States, Puerto Rico does not have any first-order administrative divisions as defined by the U.S. Government, but there are 78 municipalities at the second level. Municipalities are further subdivided into \"barrios\". Each municipality has a mayor and a municipal legislature elected for a 4-year term.\nHistory.\nThe first permanent municipality of Puerto Rico, San Juan, was founded in 1521. In the 16th century two more municipalities were permanently established, Coamo (1570) and San Germ\u00e1n (1570). Three more municipalities were established in the 17th century. These were Arecibo (1614), Aguada (1692) and Ponce (1692). The 18th and 19th century saw an increase in settlement in Puerto Rico with 30 municipalities being established in the 18th century and 34 more in the 19th century. Only six municipalities were founded in the 20th century with the last, Florida, being founded in 1971.\nUnder Spanish rule, as of the 1880s, Puerto Rico was subdivided into regional districts (or \"departamentos\") that contained smaller ayuntamientos (municipalities).\nStrategic geography.\nSince the European colonization of Puerto Rico in the early 1500s, the geographic location of the main island has been recognized for its strategic significance and accessibility. During the Age of Exploration and Sail, Puerto Rico was known to the Spanish as \"La Llave de las Indias\" (The Key to the Indies), as it was the closest European-settled major area of land in the Americas to both continental Europe and Africa with open access to the Atlantic Ocean. The northeast trade winds, coupled with the canary and north equatorial ocean currents, naturally made the main island the first major location to encounter en route to the Caribbean, North America, Central America, and South America, regions where the Spanish established their territories, often simply called the \"Indias\" (Indies). \nIn 1640, King Philip IV of Spain described Puerto Rico as:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"\u2026siendo frente y vanguardia de todas mis Indias Occidentales, y respecto de sus consecuencias la m\u00e1s apreciada de ellas, y codiciada de los enemigos.\"\n\"Rey Felipe IV de Espa\u00f1a, 16 de Mayo de 1640\"\nwhich, translated in English, reads as:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"\u2026being the front and vanguard of all my West Indies, and with respect to its consequences, the most appreciated of them and coveted by the enemies.\"\n\"King Phillip IV of Spain, May 16, 1640\"\nIn 1643, the king reiterated the importance of Puerto Rico to the Spanish Empire as:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"\u2026primera de las pobladas y principal custodia y llave de todas\u2026\"\n\"Rey Felipe IV de Espa\u00f1a, 20 de Agosto de 1643\"\nwhich, translated in English, reads as:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"\u2026first of the populated ones and principal custodian and key of all\u2026\"\n\"King Philip IV of Spain, August 20, 1643\"\nAs an unincorporated territory of the United States, the geostrategic location of Puerto Rico was paramount in the construction of the Panama Canal, and the defense of the Western Hemesphere against Nazi Operation Neuland in the Battle of the Caribbean during WWII. Puerto Rico is known as an American Gibraltar, or the \"Gibraltar of the Caribbean\", as it stands guard over the entrance to the Caribbean Sea, itself a passageway into North, Central, and South America, just as British Gibraltar stands guard over the Strait of Gibraltar, the entrance to the Mediterranean Sea from the Atlantic Ocean. Like Hawaii in the middle of the Pacific Ocean, Puerto Rico in the middle of the Atlantic Ocean is an important part for the continuation of American power abroad.\nExclusive economic zone.\nSince 2007, the Dominican Republic in Hispaniola considers itself an archipelagic state, encroaching the long-established median or equidistance line dividing the EEZ of the Dominican Republic and Puerto Rico, and claiming portion of the EEZ claimed by the United States in relation to the archipelago of Puerto Rico, itself an unincorporated U.S. territory. The United States does not accept the archipelagic status and maritime boundaries claimed by the Dominican Republic. Victor Prescott, an authority in the field of maritime boundaries, argues that, as the coasts of both states are short coastlines with few offshore islands, an equidistance line is appropriate.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23462", "revid": "50618746", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23462", "title": "Demographics of Puerto Rico", "text": "The population of Puerto Rico has been shaped by native American settlement, European colonization especially under the Spanish Empire, slavery and economic migration. Demographic features of the population of Puerto Rico include population density, ethnicity, education of the populace, health of the populace, economic status, religious affiliations and other aspects of the population.\nPopulation size and structure.\nAt the 2020 census Puerto Rico had a population of 3.3 million, down from 3.7 million in 2010. The highest population was reached around the year 2000 (3.8 million) and has been decreasing since, due to low fertility and emigration.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nStructure of the population.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Hidden begin/styles.css\"/&gt;Population Estimates by Sex and Age Group (01.VII.2012) (Including armed forces stationed in the area. Based on the results of the\n2010 Population Census.):\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Hidden begin/styles.css\"/&gt;Population Estimates by Sex and Age Group (01.VII.2019) (Including armed forces stationed in the area. Post-censal estimates.): \nMigration.\nSometime between 400 B.C. and A.D. 100, the Arawak group of Amerindians inhabited Puerto Rico. Around A.D. 600, the Arawaks no longer lived on the island, perhaps because they had integrated with another culture or perhaps because they had been killed by illness. By A.D. 1000, the indigenous Ta\u00edno inhabited the island. They called the island Borik\u00e9n, which is popularly said to mean \"land of the valiant one\". This is where the alternative name for Puerto Rico, Borinquen, comes from. Since the late 18th century Puerto Ricans have called themselves some variation of \"boricua\", \"borincano\" and \"borinque\u00f1o\" to embrace their indigenous identity. In the 15th century, the Carib lived on nearby islands and periodically invaded Ta\u00edno villages.\nHistorical Immigration.\nThe Spanish conquered the island, assuming government in 1508, colonized it, and assumed hegemony over the natives. The Ta\u00edno population dwindled due to disease, tribal warfare, and forced labor, so the Spanish began importing large numbers of slaves from Africa. Spanish men arrived on the island disproportionately to Spanish women; African and Ta\u00edno women would sometimes marry them, resulting in a mixed tri-racial ethnicity.\nIn the late 18th century, the number of African slaves began to dwindle on the island. The British ban on slavery resulted in slave raids on Puerto Rico. Many slaves also escaped to neighboring islands.\nDuring the 19th century large numbers of immigrants from Spain, as well as numerous Spaniards living in former Spanish colonies in South America, also arrived in Puerto Rico (See Spanish immigration to Puerto Rico). Large numbers of Canary Islanders (Isle\u00f1os) also arrived in great numbers to the island; their influence can be seen today in Puerto Rico's culture, cuisine and most notably in the variety of Spanish that is spoken in Puerto Rico.\nAlthough the vast majority of settlers came from Spain, Catholics from France, Ireland, Corsica, Italy, Germany and other European countries were also granted land by Spain as one of the provisions of the \"Real C\u00e9dula de Gracias de 1815\" (Royal Decree of Graces of 1815). These immigrants were allowed to settle on the island, with a certain amount of free land and enslaved persons granted to them. In return, they had to profess fealty to the Spanish Crown. During the early 20th century Jews began to settle in Puerto Rico. The first large group of Jews to settle in Puerto Rico were European refugees fleeing German\u2013occupied Europe in the late 1930s. Puerto Rico's economic boom of the 1950s attracted a considerable number of Jewish families from the U.S. mainland, who were joined after 1959 by an influx of Jewish emigres from Fidel Castro's Cuba.\nThe mass immigration that occurred during the 19th century helped the population grow from 155,000 in 1800 to almost 1,000,000 at the close of the century.\nModern Immigration.\nPuerto Rico has continued to receive immigrants in the present-day, especially coming from neighboring countries. According to the 2020 census, by ancestry or birth, there were 53,677 Dominicans, 11,701 Cubans, 5,628 Spaniards, 5,010 Colombians, 4,975 Mexicans, 3,131 Venezuelans, 1,366 Peruvians, and 1,331 Argentineans. People who self identified as Hispanic, Latino, Spanish, Spanish American, and Afro-Latino numbered 8,141 and may be of mixed-Hispanic background, and all other Latin American origin groups numbered 6,344. There were also 29,913 English, 9,700 Italians, 6,307, Germans, 5,024 French, 4,561 Irish, 1,361 Portuguese, and 8,556 all other European-origin groups, a large portion is made up of white Americans of such ancestries. There were also 8,417 African Americans, 2,873 Asian Indians, 2,462 Chinese, and all other groups numbering about 6,000.\nSome illegal immigrants, particularly from Haiti, Dominican Republic, and Cuba use Puerto Rico as a temporary stop-over point to get to the US mainland. Non-hispanic people only made up 1.1% of the population of Puerto Rico, the majority of which are made up of U.S. citizens especially White Americans, and to a lesser degree Black Americans. Some non-Puerto Rican Hispanics are U.S.-born. Ethnic Puerto Ricans numbered 3,139,035, representing 95.5% of Puerto Rico's population. Some Puerto Ricans engage in Circular migration.\nEmigration.\nEmigration has been a major part of Puerto Rico's recent history as well. Starting in the post-World War II period waves of Puerto Ricans moved to the continental United States, particularly to New York City, Yonkers, Buffalo, Rochester New York; Newark, Jersey City, Paterson, and Camden, New Jersey; Providence, Rhode Island; Boston, Springfield, Massachusetts; Hartford and New Haven, Connecticut; Cleveland, Ohio; Orlando, Jacksonville, and Tampa, Miami, Florida; Philadelphia, Allentown, Reading, Pennsylvania; and Chicago, Illinois. This continued even as Puerto Rico's economy improved and its birth rate declined.\nVital statistics.\n&lt;includeonly&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chart/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;/includeonly&gt;\n&lt;includeonly&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chart/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;/includeonly&gt;\n&lt;includeonly&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chart/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;/includeonly&gt;\nLife expectancy.\nSource: \"UN World Population Prospects\"\nEthnic groups.\nRace and ethnicity.\nBackground.\nIn the late 1700s, Puerto Rico had laws like the \"Regla del Sacar\" or \"Gracias al Sacar\" where a person of mixed ancestry could be considered legally white so long as they could prove that at least one person per generation in the last four generations had also been legally white. Therefore, people of mixed ancestry with known white lineage were classified as white, the opposite of the \"one-drop rule\" in the United States.\nA strong wave of European immigration and the large importation of slaves from Africa increased the population of Puerto Rico sixfold during the 19th century. No major immigration wave occurred during the 20th century.\nThe federal Naturalization Act, signed into law on March 26, 1790, by President Washington stated that immigrants to the United States had to be White according to the definition under the British Common Law, which the United States inherited. The legal definition of Whiteness differed greatly from White Society's informal definition, thus Jews, Romani Peoples, Middle Eastern Peoples and those of the Indian Subcontinent were before 1917 classified as White for Immigration purposes but not considered White by the society at large. The Naturalization Act of 1870, passed during Reconstruction, allowed for peoples of African descent to become U.S. Citizens but it excluded other nonwhites. The U.S. Supreme Court in the case United States v. Wong Kim Ark, 169 U.S. 649 (1898) declared that all nonwhites who were born in the United States were eligible for citizenship via the Citizenship Clause of the 14th Amendment. U.S. Immigration Policy was first restricted toward Chinese with the Chinese Exclusion Act of 1882, the Gentleman's Agreement of 1907 in which Japan voluntarily barred emigration to the United States and the Immigration Act of 1917 or the Asiatic Barred Zone which barred immigrants from all of the Middle East, the Steppes and the Orient, excluding the Philippines which was then a US Colony. European Jews and Romani, although of Asiatic Ancestry, were not affected by the Asiatic Barred Zone, as they held European Citizenship. The Johnson-Reed act of 1924 applied only to the Eastern Hemisphere. The Act imposed immigration quotas on Europe, which allowed for easy immigration from Northern and Western Europe, but almost excluded the Southern and Eastern European Nations. Africa and Asia were excluded altogether. The Western Hemisphere remained unrestricted to immigrate to the United States. Thus under the Immigration Act of 1924 all Hispanics and Caribbeans could immigrate to the United States, but a White family from Poland or Russia could not immigrate. Puerto Rican Citizenship was created under the Foraker Act, Pub.L. 56\u2013191, 31 Stat. 77 but it wasn't until 1917 that Puerto Ricans were granted full American Citizenship under the Jones\u2013Shafroth Act (Pub.L. 64\u2013368, 39 Stat. 951). Puerto Ricans, excluding those of obvious African ancestry, were like most Hispanics formally classified as White under U.S. Law.\nCensuses.\nThe first census by the United States in 1899 reported a population of 953,243 inhabitants, 61.8% of them classified as white, 31.9% as mixed, and 6.3% as black.\nAccording to the 1920 Puerto Rico census, 2,505 individuals immigrated to Puerto Rico between 1910 and 1920. Of these, 2,270 were classified as \"white\" in the 1920 census (1,205 from Spain, 280 from Venezuela, 180 from Cuba, and 135 from the Dominican Republic).\nDuring the same 10-year period, 7,873 Puerto Ricans emigrated to the U.S. Of these, 6,561 were listed as \"white\" on the U.S mainland census, 909 as \"Spanish white\" and 403 as \"black\".\nUntil 1950, the U.S. Bureau of the Census attempted to quantify the racial composition of the island's population, while experimenting with various racial taxonomies. In 1960 the census dropped the racial identification question for Puerto Rico but included it again in the year 2000. The only category that remained constant over time was white, even as other racial labels shifted greatly\u2014from \"colored\" to \"Black\", \"mulatto\" and \"other\".\nRegardless of the precise terminology, the census reported that the majority of the Puerto Rican population was white from 1899 to 2000.\nAccording to the 2015 Race and Hispanic Origin estimate (2011\u20132015 American Community Survey) published by the US Census Bureau, the data for Puerto Rico was as follows:\nIn 2020, the Census Bureau reported the following data:\nIn the 2020 census, the percentage of the population identifying as white dropped to 17.1%, down from 75.8% in the 2010 census. A similar drop in identification as white was seen among Hispanics in the 50 states and Washington, D.C., where the percentage of Hispanics identifying as white dropped from 53.0% to 20.3%. The change has been attributed to the wording of the Spanish-language version of the census questionnaire.\nGenetic studies.\nPuerto Ricans, on average, have genetic contributions from Europeans, West Africans, and Native Americans of approximately 66%, 18%, and 16%, respectively. showed 66% of Puerto Ricans could trace their ancestry to male European ancestors, 18% could trace it to male African ancestors, and 16% could trace it to male Native American ancestors.\nNon-Hispanic population.\nIn 2020, non-Hispanic residents of Puerto Rico made up 1.1% of the population, up from 1.0% in 2010. Their highest concentrations are in Culebra (10.8%), Vieques (8.0%), Rinc\u00f3n (5.1%), Dorado (3.4%), Luquillo (2.9%), San Juan (2.2%) Guaynabo (2.1%) and Humacao (2.0%).\nWomen in the diaspora.\nIn a study done on Puerto Rican women (of all races) born on the island but living in New York by Carolina Bonilla, Mark D. Shriver and Esteban Parra in 2004, the ancestry proportions corresponding to the three parental populations were found to be 53.3\u00b12.8% European, 29.1\u00b12.3% West African, and 17.6\u00b12.4% Native American based on autosomal ancestry informative markers. Although autosomal markers tests seem to draw a more broad picture than that of single, gender-based mtDNA and Y-Chromosome tests, the problem with autosomal DNA is in the archaic categories used: \"European\", \"Sub-Saharan African\", \"East Asian\" &amp; \"Native American\". \"Asian\" (South, North or East) &amp; \"North African\" are not included. These generalized categories may not take into account the complexity of migratory patterns across the Old World. The study also found that, from the women sampled, 98% had European ancestry markers, 87% had African ancestry markers, 84% had Native American ancestry markers, 5% showed only African and European markers, 4% showed mostly Native American and European markers, 2% showed only African markers, and 2% showed mostly European markers.\nReligion.\nThere are many religious beliefs represented in the island with Christianity as the religion indicated by the majority in 2010.\nReligious breakdown in Puerto Rico (2010):\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Pie chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\nChristians.\nA recent report providing a full breakdown as to specific religions is not available; the most recent was for 2006.\nThe Christian Denominational Breakdown was as follows in 2006:\nCatholics.\nThe Catholic Church has been historically the most dominant religion of the majority of Puerto Ricans, with Puerto Rico having the first dioceses in the Americas. This religion was brought by Spanish colonists. The first dioceses in the Americas, including that of Puerto Rico, were authorized by Pope Julius\u00a0II in 1511. One Pope, John Paul\u00a0II, visited Puerto Rico in October 1984. All municipalities in Puerto Rico have at least one Catholic Church, most of which are located at the town center or \"plaza\".\nAn Associated Press article in March 2014 stated that \"more than 70 percent of whom identify themselves as Catholic\" but provided no source for this information. (It may have been using the 2010 Pew Research Center data.)\nThe CIA World Factbook however, reports that 85% of the population of Puerto Rico identifies as Roman Catholic, while 15% identify as Protestant and Other. Neither a date or a source for that information is provided and may not be recent.\nIn November 2014, a Pew Research report, with the sub-title \"Widespread Change in a Historically Catholic Region\", indicated that only 56% of Puerto Ricans were Catholic and that 33% were Protestant. This survey was completed between October 2013 and February 2014.\nProtestants.\nProtestantism in Puerto Rico was suppressed under Spanish rule. Prior to the Spanish\u2013American War there was only one Protestant church on the island, the Holy Trinity Anglican Church, which was established in 1872 and served the British expatriate community in Ponce. The church was forbidden from ringing its bell, using its front door, or holding services in Spanish until 1898, when American troops landed in Ponce and established freedom of worship. This was the first non-Catholic church in the Spanish Empire in the Americas.\nProtestantism grew under American sovereignty due to the work of American missionaries, making contemporary Puerto Rico more interconfessional than in previous centuries, although Catholicism continues to be the dominant religion.\nMuslims.\nIn 2007, there were over 5,000 Muslims in Puerto Rico, representing about 0.13% of the population. There are eight Islamic mosques spread throughout the island, with most Muslims living in R\u00edo Piedras. Puerto Rican converts to Islam continue to occur. \"Ties between Latinos and Islam are more than just spiritual, but date back to Spanish history. Many people do not realize that Muslims conquered Spain\". And at times not just individuals, but whole families convert. However, lack of Muslim education in the Island forces some Puerto Rican Muslims to migrate to the States. Islam was brought into Puerto Rico mainly via the Palestinian migration of the 1950s and '60s. Thus, today there is a strong Palestinian presence among Muslims in Puerto Rico. \"They are economically strong and are thus able to pay for a full-time Imaam\".\nJews.\nPuerto Rico is also home to the largest Jewish community in the Caribbean, with 3,000 Jewish inhabitants. Some Puerto Ricans have converted, not only as individuals but as entire families. Puerto Rico is the only Caribbean island in which the Conservative, Reform and Orthodox Jewish movements are represented.\nOther religious practices.\nTa\u00edno religious practices have been rediscovered/reinvented by a handful of advocates. According to some sources, starting in about 1840, there have been attempts to create a quasi-indigenous Ta\u00edno identity in rural areas of Puerto Rico. This trend accelerated among the Puerto Rican community in the mainland United States in the 1960s. In the 2010 U.S. census, 9,399 people are identified as \"Ta\u00edno.\"\nVarious African religious practices have been present since the arrival of enslaved Africans. In particular, the Yoruba beliefs of Santer\u00eda and/or If\u00e1, and the Kongo-derived Palo Mayombe (sometimes called an African belief system, but rather a way of Bantu lifestyle of Congo origin) find adherence among the few individuals who practice some form of African traditional religion.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23463", "revid": "40153758", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23463", "title": "Politics of Puerto Rico", "text": " \nThe politics of Puerto Rico take place in the framework of a democratic republic form of government that is under the jurisdiction and sovereignty of the United States Congress as an organized unincorporated territory. Since the 1898 invasion of Puerto Rico by the United States during the Spanish\u2013American War, politics in Puerto Rico have been significantly shaped by its status as territory of the United States. The nature of Puerto Rico's political relationship with the United States is the subject of ongoing debate in Puerto Rico, in the United States, the United Nations and the international community, with all major political parties in the archipelago calling it a colonial relationship.\nThe government of the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico is divided into three branches: executive, legislative and judicial, as established by the Constitution of Puerto Rico. The executive power is exercised by the executive branch, which is headed by the governor, advised by a cabinet of secretaries that are independent of the legislature. Legislative power is vested upon the Legislature. Judicial power is exercised by the judiciary, consisting of the Tribunal Supremo de Puerto Rico, the Tribunal de Apelaciones (English: Court of Appeals), and Tribunal de Primera Instancia (English: Courts of First Instance). There is also a Federal Court to hear cases of a federal nature or with federal jurisdiction.\nPuerto Rico's governor, who is the head of government, and the members of the legislature are elected every four years by popular vote. Puerto Rico's legislature is a bicameral body consisting of a Senate and a House. The members of the judicial branch are appointed by the Governor with the approval of the Senate to serve until they reach age 70. Due to the status of Puerto Rico as a territory of the United States, its residents cannot vote in the U.S. presidential elections.\nPolitics in Puerto Rico revolve around a multi-party political system. The politics of Puerto Rico are dominated by three political parties: the Partido Nuevo Progresista (PNP), the Partido Popular Democratico (PPD), and, to a lesser extent, the Partido Independentista Puertorrique\u00f1o (PIP).\nPolitical history and political parties.\n19th century.\nOne year after the United States invasion of the island, Dr. Jos\u00e9 Celso Barbosa embraced the idea of annexation as a U.S. state as a solution to the colonial situation and founded the Partido Republicano Puertorrique\u00f1o in 1899.\nCelso Barbosa had been the leader in the Autonomist Party that favored a republican government for Spain. For much of the 19th Century, the principal parties favored Puerto Rico becoming another of the Spanish provinces on equal footing with the mainland provinces in Spanish Europe; such standing was given twice to Puerto Rico and other Spanish overseas territories under liberal governments, but it was revoked many times - before the establishment of the Spanish constitutional monarchy - every time the Spanish monarchs were successful in regaining their royal power during the first half of the 19th century. \nIn this context, and following the U.S. annexation of Puerto Rico at the end of the Spanish American War of 1898, Dr. Barbosa returned to the original idea of equal footing, but this time as a full constituent member of the American Republic.\nIn contrast, Roman Baldorioty de Castro, had been the leader of another faction inside the Autonomist Party, supported a territorial governance for Puerto Rico under Spain, similar to the Canadian model developed by the British. Before Baldorioty de Castro, other leaders had mentioned the possibility of autonomy, generally as an answer to the Spanish insistence in instituting special laws to govern the Spanish territories and overseas provinces.\nDuring the last twenty years under the Spanish flag, the majority of the local parties, with the exception of the Partido Incondicional Espa\u00f1ol (Unconditional Spanish Party) embraced the idea of autonomy. The Incondicionales accepted whatever Spain had for Puerto Rico and the Crown duly recognized their support by giving aristocratic titles to their party's leaders.\n20th century.\n1900-1940.\nThe Partido Republicano Puertorrique\u00f1o won the elections in 1900 and again in 1902. The new government of Puerto Rico, organized under the Foraker Act of 1900, was a mixture of the British and the American system, somewhat similar to that established for the territory of Orleans after the Louisiana Purchase. The House of Delegates was elected directly by the voters (male, propertied) and the equivalent to the Senate was the Cabinet appointed by the Governor and by the President of the United States. Mu\u00f1oz-Rivera exiled himself to New York after the defeat, but returned once the Federal Party was no longer useful and joined Rosendo Matienzo Cintr\u00f3n in organizing the Union Party, also with them was Jos\u00e9 de Diego.\nMatienzo Cintr\u00f3n had been a Republican, supporting statehood. But two years into the new government, he realized that statehood would not be granted and the desired equality as citizens was not feasible under the United States. He brought with him other former Republicans and practically all of Mu\u00f1oz-Rivera's Federalists into a party that was to bring about the union of all political groups. He was successful, they won the elections of 1904 and all subsequent elections until the 1920s when another defection of Republicans allowed for the creation of yet another party bringing into it persons supporting a status change.\nThe Union Party, initially supported statehood or an autonomous government, it then later added independence. In fact, Matienzo-Cintr\u00f3n went from statehood advocate to autonomist to independence advocate as a result of eight years of American civil government in Puerto Rico. The Union Party, from the very beginning, was against the colonial government established under the \"Foraker Act\". Rosendo Matienzo Cintr\u00f3n, Manuel Zeno Gand\u00eda, Luis Llor\u00e9ns Torres, Eugenio Ben\u00edtez Casta\u00f1o, and Pedro Franceschi started to organize the Independence Party in 1912, which paved the path for similar movements. The Union Party quickly gained the attention of the colonial governors, all Republicans, who were willing to work closely with them because of their control of the House of Delegates. The local Republicans protested bitterly and, at one point, they took statehood out of their platform \u2013 not reinstating it until the early 1920s. Many in the Union Party leadership were lawyers who had contracts with the sugar operations recently bought out and enlarged by the new American owners, thus establishing a close relationship between the nascent middle classes and the American corporate interests.\nA coalition between the pro-independence Union Party presided by Antonio R. Barcel\u00f3 and the pro-statehood Partido Republicano Puertorrique\u00f1o presided by Jos\u00e9 Tous Soto called the \"Alianza Puertorrique\u00f1a\" was formed. Differences between Barcel\u00f3 and Tous Soto and F\u00e9lix C\u00f3rdova D\u00e1vila, the resident commissioner of Puerto Rico in Washington, as to the goals of the alliance became apparent. The Unionist sector of the alliance decided to disaffiliate themselves from the \"Alliance.\" Because of legal reasons, Barcel\u00f3 was unable to use the name \"Union Party\" and in 1932, founded the \"Liberal Party of Puerto Rico\". The Liberal Party's political agenda was the same as the original Union Party's agenda and urged independence as a final political solution for Puerto Rico. After the Liberal Party was defeated in the 1936 elections, an assembly was held in Naranjales on May 31, 1937, in which Luis Mu\u00f1oz Mar\u00edn presented his ideas as to how the party should be run, however, the majority of the party members objected and blamed him for their defeat. Mu\u00f1oz Mar\u00edn considered this action the same as having been expelled from the party. Mu\u00f1oz Mar\u00edn and his followers, among which were included Felisa Rincon de Gautier and Ernesto Ramos Antonini, held an assembly in the town of Arecibo founded the \"Partido Liberal, Neto, Aut\u00e9ntico y Completo\" (\"Clear, Authentic and Complete Liberal Party\"), claiming to be the true Liberal Party. The Partido Liberal, Neto, Aut\u00e9ntico y Completo, an independent political party, later became the Popular Democratic Party (PPD) which would ironically end up promoting the \"Estado Libre Associado\" (Free Associated State) status that Barcel\u00f3, as president of Union Party, had asked for in 1923 under Campbell Bill and which Mu\u00f1oz Mar\u00edn had always opposed, instead of independence.\nThe Puerto Rican Nationalist Party was founded in 1922. It strongly criticized the American colonial regime for its menace to the Spanish and Latin American roots of the Puerto Rican culture. It also advocated for complete independence. The PNP began to grow with the leadership of Dr. Pedro Albizu Campos, who was later jailed by the colonial regime under charges as a subversive leader. On March 21, 1937, a peaceful march was organized in the southern city of Ponce by the nationalists after receiving authorization from the pertinent authorities. The march was organized to commemorate the abolition of slavery and to demand the release of Albizu Campos from federal prison. The permit, however, was revoked by the U.S.-appointed governor of the Island Blanton Winship minutes before the march was to start. The march turned into a bloody event when the Insular Police (\"a force somewhat resembling the National Guard of the typical U.S. state\" and which answered to governor Winship) opened fire upon, what a U.S. Congressman and others reported were unarmed and defenseless cadets and bystanders alike killing 19 and badly wounding over 200 more, many in their backs while running away. It came to be known as the Ponce massacre.\n1940\u20131968.\nLuis Mu\u00f1oz Mar\u00edn founded the Popular Democratic Party (PPD) in 1940. Their slogan was \"Pan, Tierra y Libertad\" (Bread, Land and Liberty). The party favored independence from the United States in its initial stages but social and economic reform were priorities in their political agenda.\nThe Puerto Rican Independence Party was formed six years later by dissidents who saw the PPD moving away from the ideal of independence. During that period, the colonial regime appointed the first Puerto Rican governor, Jes\u00fas T. Pi\u00f1ero, until 1948 when the people elected Luis Mu\u00f1oz Mar\u00edn, the first elected governor.\nThe years of 1944\u20131948 were crucial ones in the direction of the country. Luis Mu\u00f1oz Mar\u00edn shifted his goals from independence to state-like autonomy to accommodate better economic circumstances. This led to the U.S. Congress to enact the Public Law 81-600 which led to the Congressional approval of a local constitution drafted by a constitutional assembly elected by Puerto Rico and the renaming of the United States unincorporated territory of Puerto Rico as the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, using the same official name as the commonwealths of the U.S. states of Kentucky, Massachusetts, Pennsylvania and Virginia, as well as that of other sovereign nation countries such as Australia. The alternative pro-independence Tydings bill had languished in Congress.\nIn the 1950s, the Puerto Rican Nationalist Party denounced the Constitution and Mu\u00f1oz Mar\u00edn support as a sham, and staged a series of uprisings in 1950, known as the Puerto Rican Nationalist Party Revolts of the 1950s, of which the most notable were the ones in Jayuya, Utuado and San Juan, plus the attack on Blair House, and the United States House of Representatives in 1954. Twenty-three people were killed and more than 50 were injured.\nGovernor Mu\u00f1oz Mar\u00edn inaugurated the new status called \"Estado Libre Asociado\"\u2014or \" Free Associated State\" in English\u2014and raised the Puerto Rican flag along with La Borinque\u00f1a, the official anthem of Puerto Rico, for the first time on July 25, 1952\u2014date in which Puerto Ricans celebrate the Constitution of Puerto Rico.\n1968\u20131999.\nThe New Progressive Party (PNP) was founded in August 1967 by Luis A. Ferr\u00e9, a month after the July 23, 1967, local plebiscite and the year before the PNP won the 1968 elections. The party saw the ideology of annexation as a U.S. state as a civil rights issue. The creation of the New Progressive Party polarized the political arena to a great degree as radical independence groups were formed in the 1970s and the Puerto Rican Socialist Party (PSP), a Marxist and Cuba-friendly party, was created. Two of the radical groups were labeled as terrorist groups by the U.S. Government, Los Macheteros and the Armed Forces of National Liberation (FALN). These groups were viewed by many pro-independence followers as freedom fighters.\nIn 1972, the PNP lost to a reunified Popular Democratic Party (PPD). Rafael Hern\u00e1ndez Col\u00f3n became the undisputed leader of the PPD at age 36. He was, as the fourth elected governor, in favor of adding more powers to the commonwealth status. One of his projects was the Puerto Rican owned marine transportation. In order to control the costs of marine transport in Puerto Rico, the marine company \"Sea Land\" was bought to form \"Navieras of Puerto Rico\" in 1974.\nThe fifth governor was Carlos Romero Barcel\u00f3, a supporter of annexation as the U.S. state of Puerto Rico. Under his administration, Section 936 of the U.S. Internal Revenue Tax Code (26\u00a0U.S.C.\u00a0https://) was implemented as an economic incentive. This allowed American companies to profit in the island without paying taxes. His administration was shadowed by the Cerro Maravilla (Maravilla Hill) affair, where two independence activists were killed by police agents. This created a Watergate-like scandal that was later investigated by the Senate.\nIn 1980, Romero Barcelo was reelected Governor by a controversial 0.2% margin, but lost control of the Senate and, a year later, the House of Representatives to the PPD. Independence radical groups placed bombs on 11 jet fighters in 1981 in the Mu\u00f1iz Base (a U.S. military base), and the U.S. removed all of its fighter aircraft from Puerto Rico. Rafael Hern\u00e1ndez Col\u00f3n became the head of government for the second time in 1984, was reelected in 1988 and remained in power until 1992.\nPedro Rossell\u00f3 became the sixth elected Governor in 1992. He pushed the political status dilemma in Washington, D.C., and sponsored two local non-binding referendums, one in 1993 and another in 1998. While he was elected to a second term, his last four years were met with mounting allegations of corruption. After Rossell\u00f3's second term ended, former Speaker of the House Edison Misla Aldarondo (PNP) was jailed as well as many members of Rossell\u00f3's party. Most of the corruption allegations were based on extortion and appropriation of public funds.\n21st century.\n2000s.\nThe corruption led the PNP to lose the 2000 election and the Governorship when he ran again in 2004. In 2000, Sila Mar\u00eda Calder\u00f3n (PPD) was elected, becoming the first female governor of Puerto Rico, also gaining control of the Senate, presided over by Antonio Fas Alzamora and the House of Representatives, headed by Speaker Carlos Vizcarrondo. The PPD also elected An\u00edbal Acevedo Vil\u00e1 as the island's non-voting delegate in Congress.\nIn 2004, An\u00edbal Acevedo Vil\u00e1 (PPD) was declared the winner by the Supreme Court of Puerto Rico as governor by about 3,000 votes, but his party lost control of the Senate, which elected PNP Senator Kenneth McClintock as its president, and the House of Representatives, which chose the PNP's Jos\u00e9 Aponte as Speaker, and Puerto Rico's seat in Congress, due to the election of Luis Fortu\u00f1o.\nDuring the 2005\u20132008 term, former Gov. Rossell\u00f3's unsuccessful attempt to unseat Senate President McClintock split the New Progressive Party, a split that continued as Rossell\u00f3 initiated a fourth bid for the governorship against Resident Commissioner Fortu\u00f1o in an internal primary that was held March 9, 2008, and which he lost. On the PPD side, Acevedo's rocky relationship with the PNP-controlled Legislature was compounded with Federal investigations and unsuccessful indictments of his past political fundraising by grand juries in Philadelphia and San Juan, Puerto Rico.\nIn 2008, Luis Fortu\u00f1o (PNP) was elected governor, giving the New Progressive Party its largest victory in history and beating incumbent Gov. An\u00edbal Acevedo Vil\u00e1 of the Popular Democratic Party (PPD) by more than 223,000 votes. Also the PNP won supermajorities in the Commonwealth's House of Representatives and Senate.\n2010s.\nThe PNP won the seat for Puerto Rico's sole delegate to Congress, because of the election of Pedro Pierluisi. Alejandro Garc\u00eda Padilla (PPD) was elected as the eleventh Governor of Puerto Rico, by a narrow (0.6%) margin, defeating Fortu\u00f1o 47.73% to 47.13% in the 2012 gubernatorial elections. On November 8, 2016, Ricardo Rossell\u00f3, the son of former governor Pedro Rossell\u00f3 (PNP) received 41% of the vote defeating five other gubernatorial candidates and was elected the twelfth Governor of Puerto Rico. He was sworn in on January 2, 2017. He resigned in 2019 after mass protest as a result of the Telegramgate.\n2020s.\nIn the 2020 elections Pedro Pierluisi (PNP) was elected governor with 33% of the vote. The elections marked the first time third-party candidates other than Puerto Rican Independence Party won seats. In the 2020 elections the Popular Democratic Party took a slight majority of the seats in the Puerto Rico House of Representatives.\nIn April 2023, Puerto Rico's Status Act, which seeks to resolve its territorial status and relationship with the United States through a binding plebiscite at the federal level, was reintroduced in the House by Democrats.\nIn 2020 and 2024 there were referendums on Statehood, in both cases a majority of favored Statehood.\nPolitical status.\nIn 1950, the U.S. Congress gave Puerto Ricans the right to organize a constitutional convention, contingent on the results of a referendum, where the electorate would determine if they wished to organize their own government pursuant to a constitution of their own choosing. Puerto Ricans expressed their support for this measure in a 1951 referendum, which gave voters a yes-or-no choice for the commonwealth status, defined as a 'permanent association with a federal union' but not choice for independence or statehood. A second referendum was held to ratify the constitution, which was adopted in 1952.\nBefore approving the new constitution, the Constitutional Convention specified the name by which the body politic would be known. On February 4, 1952, the convention approved Resolution 22 which chose in English the word \"Commonwealth\", meaning a \"politically organized community\" or \"state\", which is simultaneously connected by a compact or treaty to another political system. The convention adopted a translation into Spanish of the term, inspired by the Irish saorst\u00e1t (Free State) of \"Estado Libre Asociado\" (ELA) to represent the agreement adopted \"in the nature of a compact\" between the people of Puerto Rico and the U.S. literally translated into English, the phrase means \"Associated Free State.\"\nIn 1967, the Legislative Assembly tested the political interests of the Puerto Rican people by passing a plebiscite Act that allowed a vote on the status of Puerto Rico. This constituted the first plebiscite by the Legislature for a choice on three political status options. Puerto Rican leaders had lobbied for such an opportunity repeatedly, in 1898, 1912, 1914, 1919, 1923, 1929, 1932, 1939, 1943, 1944, 1948, 1956, and 1960. The Commonwealth option, represented by the PPD, won with an overwhelming majority of 60.4% of the votes. The Partido Republicano Puertorrique\u00f1o and the Puerto Rican Independence Party boycotted the plebiscite.\nAfter the plebiscite, efforts in the 1970s to enact legislation to address the status issue died in Congressional committees. In the 1993 plebiscite, in which Congress played a more substantial role, Commonwealth status was again upheld. In the 1998 plebiscite, all the options were rejected when 50.3% of voters chose the \"none of the above\" option, favoring the commonwealth status quo by default.\nInternational status.\nOn November 27, 1953, shortly after the establishment of the Commonwealth, the General Assembly of the United Nations approved Resolution 748, removing Puerto Rico's classification as a non-self-governing territory under article 73(e) of the UN Charter. This made it possible for the United States to stop publicly transmitting information on Puerto Rico. However, as was pointed out by delegates from countries such as Indonesia and Guatemala during the discussions over the vote, the General Assembly did not apply its full list of \"factors\" to Puerto Rico to determine if it had achieved self-governing status. These and other delegates argued that Puerto Rico had not attained fully self-governing status.\nIn August 1977, the Chairman of the Democratic Party of Puerto Rico, Franklin Delano L\u00f3pez, testified before the UN Decolonization Committee denouncing the colonial nature of the Commonwealth Status. As a result of his statement, many other statehooders and commonwealth supporters went to the United Nations requesting the end of the colonial status.\nPolitical status within the United States.\nUnder the Constitution of Puerto Rico, Puerto Rico is described as a Commonwealth and Puerto Ricans have a degree of administrative autonomy similar to that of a U.S. state.\nPuerto Ricans were collectively made U.S. citizens in 1917 as a result of the Jones\u2013Shafroth Act. The act was signed into law by President Woodrow Wilson on March 2, 1917. U.S. Federal law \u00a0https:// approved by the President Harry S. Truman on June 27, 1952, declared all persons born in Puerto Rico on or after January 13, 1941, to be citizens of the U.S. at birth and all persons born in Puerto Rico between April 11, 1899, and January 12, 1941, and meeting certain other technical requirements, and not citizens of the United States under any other Act, were declared to be citizens of the U.S. as of January 13, 1941.\nOnly the \"fundamental rights\" under the federal constitution apply to Puerto Rico like the Privileges and Immunities Clause (U.S. Constitution, Article IV, Section 2, Clause 1, also known as the 'Comity Clause') that prevents a state from treating citizens of other states in a discriminatory manner, with regard to basic civil rights. The clause also embraces a right to travel, so that a citizen of one state can go and enjoy privileges and immunities in any other state; this constitutional clause was expressly extended to Puerto Rico by the U.S. Congress through the federal law \u00a0https:// and signed by the President Harry S. Truman in 1947. Other fundamental rights like the Due Process Clause and the equal protection guarantee of the Fourteenth Amendment was expressly extended to Puerto Rico by the U.S. Supreme Court. In a brief concurrence in the judgment of \"Torres v. Puerto Rico\", U.S. Supreme Court Justice Brennan, argued that any implicit limits from the Insular Cases on the basic rights granted by the Constitution (including especially the Bill of Rights) were anachronistic in the 1970s.\nPresident George H. W. Bush issued a memorandum on November 30, 1992, to heads of executive departments and agencies establishing the current administrative relationship between the federal government and the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico. This memorandum directs all federal departments, agencies, and officials to treat Puerto Rico administratively as if it were a state, insofar as doing so would not disrupt federal programs or operations.\nPuerto Rico does participate in the internal political process of both the Democratic and Republican parties in the U.S., accorded equal-proportional representation in both parties, and delegates from the islands vote in each party's national presidential convention.\nPuerto Ricans may enlist in the U.S. military. Since 1917, Puerto Ricans have been included in the compulsory draft whenever it has been in effect and more than 400,000 Puerto Ricans have served in the United States Armed Forces. Puerto Ricans have participated in all U.S. wars since 1898, most notably World War I, World War II, the Korean and Vietnam wars, as well as the current Middle Eastern conflicts. Several Puerto Ricans became notable commanders, five have been awarded the Medal of Honor, the highest military decoration in the United States, also several Puerto Ricans have attained the rank of General or Admiral, which requires a Presidential nomination and Senate confirmation. In World War II, the Korean War and the Vietnam War Puerto Ricans were the most decorated Hispanic soldiers and in some cases they were the first to die in combat.\nPuerto Rico has not yet become an independent nation or a state of the Union. It remains a territory of the United States of America. The action of Congress in authorizing and approving, The Commonwealth Constitution is adopted pursuant to the constitutional power of Congress to make necessary rules and regulations concerning the territory of the United States of America. The foreign relations of Puerto Rico, like those of other territories and states, continue to be conducted by the United States of America. Internal government and administration, Puerto Rico occupies a unique position among the territories and states of the United States of America. in requesting Congress to authorize the drafting and adoption of a constitution. Congress has agreed that Puerto Rico shall, under this constitution, be free from any control or interference by Congress in matters relating to internal government and administration, subject only to compliance with the applicable provisions of the federal constitution of the United States of America. Laws that directed or authorized direct interference by the United States federal government in local government affairs, prior to 1952, have been repealed.\nImplications of the current political status.\nPuerto Rico is an organized unincorporated U.S. territory which has been given internal self-governing powers which, taken together, are referred to as \"Commonwealth\" status. Puerto Rico has more latitude over its internal affairs than the U.S. territories of Guam, the U.S. Virgin Islands, or American Samoa.\nPuerto Rico has approximately the same degree of authority over its internal affairs as an American state. However, it does not have the sovereignty that a state of the Union has, given that Puerto Rico is a possession of the United States and it is, thus, not protected by the US Constitution to the same degree that states are.\nSome differences between Puerto Rico and a state of the American Union are:\nDespite the fact that the U.S. Federal Government holds ultimate sovereignty over all U.S. citizens and the territory of Puerto Rico, residents of Puerto Rico are without an effective voice in the Federal government. This is not because Puerto Rico residents do not have the right to vote, but rather because the territory itself does not have voting representation in the United States Congress, nor is it represented in the United States Electoral College. Puerto Ricans do, however, play an indirect role in electing the President of the United States, since both the Republican Party and the Democratic Party hold primaries in Puerto Rico, giving Puerto Ricans a voice selecting each party's presidential nominee.\nBoth the Puerto Rican Independence Party and the New Progressive Party outright reject the status quo that permits disfranchisement. The remaining political organization, the Popular Democratic Party, is less active in its opposition of this case of disfranchisement but has officially stated that it favors fixing the remaining \"deficits of democracy\" that the Bill Clinton and George W. Bush Administrations have publicly recognized in writing through Presidential Task Force Reports.\nPresidential politics in Puerto Rico.\nAlthough the Republican Party and Democratic Party chapters in Puerto Rico have selected voting delegates to the national nominating conventions since the early 1900s, public interest in these processes heightened as a result of the efforts of a group of Democratic statehooders led by Franklin Delano L\u00f3pez in 1976 to elect delegates supporting former Georgia Gov. Jimmy Carter to that year's Democratic National Convention. On October 23, 1979, the first primary of a party affiliated to the Democratic National Committee was held in Puerto Rico. Franklin Delano L\u00f3pez was elected Chairman of the New Democratic Party of Puerto Rico by the direct votes of 374,000 American citizens residing on the Island. Lopez then moved the Puerto Rican Legislature to adopt a Presidential Primary Law. During the discussion of the Presidential primary Law, Lopez managed to persuade Presidential Chief of Staff, Hamilton Jordan and Timothy Kraft to grant Puerto Rico the right for a more robust delegation, the inclusion of Puerto Rico after Pennsylvania in the roll call of the state in exchange of eliminating from the bill that Puerto Rico was going to be the first Presidential Primary in the Nation. As a result of that effort, the Puerto Rico Legislature approved a law regulating presidential primaries in 1979, the first of which was held in 1980, with George H. W. Bush winning the Republican primary and President Carter beating Senator Edward \"Ted\" Kennedy in a hard-fought Democratic primary. More than 1.2 million American citizens residing in Puerto Rico participated in the primaries.\nIn the first internal primary of a National political party, the new slate of statehooders, headed by Franklin Delano L\u00f3pez took control of the local Democratic party chapter. In January 1980 after clashing with Governor Carlos Romero Barcel\u00f3, Lopez was forced to resign the chairmanship of the New Democratic Party in exchange of the Governor becoming the President of Carter's campaign in Puerto Rico and throwing the New Progressive Party behind the president's re-election efforts. Lopez' fight with Governor Romero, on behalf of President Carter, paid off and was appointed Deputy Campaign Manager of President Carter national campaign. Lopez efforts moved to Puerto Rico and the status issue at the forefront of the National political discussion. Subsequently, both the statehood faction and the commonwealth shared control on a 50-50 basis from 1984 to 1988 and lost control that year as a result of their defeat in an internal primary that year between PPD forces led by then Senate president Miguel Hern\u00e1ndez Agosto and PNP forces led by former Gov. Carlos Romero Barcel\u00f3. While the PPD Democratic faction controls the Democratic party chapter under the state chairmanship of former senator Roberto Prats, two of the five DNC members residing in Puerto Rico, Senate president Kenneth McClintock and Francisco Domenech are statehooders.\nOn the Republican side PNP-affiliated statehood Republicans control the GOP local chapter (Republican Party of Puerto Rico), headed by state chair and Aguadilla mayor Carlos M\u00e9ndez, Republican National Committeeman and Governor Luis Fortu\u00f1o and Republican National Committeewoman Zoraida Fonalledas.\nThe 2008 Republican presidential primary was slated to be held in February, while Democrats held their primary in June. Then Senate President and Democratic National Committeeman Kenneth McClintock, former Sen. Roberto Prats, Puerto Rico's Democratic State Chair and former PPD gubernatorial candidate Jos\u00e9 Alfredo Hern\u00e1ndez Mayoral were appointed co-chairs of Sen. Hillary Clinton's National Hispanic Leadership Council while Young Democrats of America Democratic National Committeeman Francisco Domenech co-chaired Clinton's young professionals organization. Prats and McClintock subsequently co-chaired Clinton's Puerto Rico campaign, while Francisco Domenech became the Deputy Campaign Manager. Senator Clinton won the Puerto Rico Primary by a 68% to 32% margin. Being the last big primary before the last two states voted on June 3, Puerto Rico's Democratic presidential primary attracted historic levels of national media coverage.\nSeveral local politicians have expressed concern that Puerto Rico has become a \"piggy bank\" for presidential campaigns. Recent examples include Vice President Dick Cheney's whirlwind two-hour visit to collect $300,000 in 2006 and Senator Barack Obama's 50% longer three-hour trip in November, 2007 to collect $200,000\nSpeculation, which began in late 2009 by a national media blog and by Grover Norquist, a well-known Republican commentator, mentioned Gov. Fortu\u00f1o as a long-shot inclusion in a national political ticket.\n21st Century.\nAccording to a December 2005 report by the President's Task Force on Puerto Rico's Status, it is not possible \"to bind future (U.S.) Congresses to any particular arrangement for Puerto Rico as a Commonwealth\". This determination was based on articles in the U.S. Constitution regarding territories. Prominent leaders in the pro-statehood and pro-independence political movements agree with this assessment. In 2005 and 2007, two reports were issued by the U.S. President's Task Force on Puerto Rico's Status. Both reports conclude that Puerto Rico continues to be a territory of U.S. under the plenary powers of the U.S. Congress. Reactions from Puerto Rico's two major political parties were mixed. The Popular Democratic Party (PPD) challenged the task force's report and committed to validating the current status in all international forums, including the United Nations. It also rejects any \"colonial or territorial status\" as a status option, and vows to keep working for the enhanced Commonwealth status that was approved by the PPD in 1998 which included sovereignty, an association based on \"respect and dignity between both nations\", and common citizenship. The New Progressive Party (PNP) supported the White House Report's conclusions and supported bills to provide for a democratic referendum process among Puerto Rico voters. It stated that the U.S. Justice Department in 1959 reiterated that Congress held power over Puerto Rico pursuant to the Territorial Clause of the U.S. Constitution. In a 1996 report on a Puerto Rico status political bill, the \"U.S. House Committee on Resources stated that PR's current status does not meet the criteria for any of the options for full self-government\". It concluded that Puerto Rico is still an unincorporated territory of the U.S. under the territorial clause, that the establishment of local self-government with the consent of the people can be unilaterally revoked by the U.S. Congress, and that U.S. Congress can also withdraw the U.S. citizenship of Puerto Rican residents of Puerto Rico at any time, for a legitimate Federal purpose. The application of the Constitution to Puerto Rico is limited by the Insular Cases.\nOn December 21, 2007, the Bush Administration's Task Force on Puerto Rico's Status reiterated and confirmed that Puerto Rico continues to be a territory of the U.S. under the plenary powers of the U.S. Congress, a position shared by the remaining two-major parties: New Progressive Party and the Puerto Rican Independence Party.\nOn June 15, 2009, the United Nations Special Committee on Decolonization approved a draft resolution calling on the Government of the United States to expedite a process that would allow the Puerto Rican people to exercise fully their inalienable right to self-determination and independence.\nFollowing the reports recommendations the 2009 bill (), was introduced in the United States House of Representatives on May 19, 2009, by Pedro Pierluisi (D-Puerto Rico). The bill would have provided for a referendum giving Puerto Ricans the choice between the options of retaining their present political status, or choosing a new status. If the former option won, the referendum would have been held again every 8 years. If the latter option won, a separate referendum would be held where Puerto Ricans would have been given the option of being admitted as a US State \"on equal footing with the other states\", or becoming a \"sovereign nation, either fully independent from or in free association with the United States.\" The bill enjoyed bi-partisan support in the House of Representatives, with 182 co-sponsors and was reported out of the House Resources Committee on a 30\u20138 vote. The measure was passed by the House on April 29, 2010. The bill did not pass in the Senate.\nOn March 16, 2011, the President's Task Force on Puerto Rico's Status issued a third report that reaffirmed the legal position adopted by the three previous presidents over nearly a quarter century that Puerto Rico remains today \"subject to the Territory Clause of the U.S. Constitution (see Report at p.\u00a026), that the territory's long-term economic well-being would be enhanced by an early resolution of the political status problem (p.\u00a033) and devotes most of the report to extensive economic analysis and recommendations.\nOn December 11, 2012, the Legislative Assembly of Puerto Rico enacted a concurrent resolution to request the President and the Congress of the United States to respond diligently and effectively, and to act on the demand of the people of Puerto Rico, as freely and democratically expressed in the plebiscite held on November 6, 2012, to end, once and for all, its current form of territorial status and to begin the process to admit Puerto Rico to the Union as a State.\nOn May 15, 2013, headed by non-voting Resident Commissioner Pedro Pierluisi, a group of 119 Democratic and 12 Republican members of Congress introduced H.R. 2000, the Puerto Rico Status Resolution Act to Congress, requesting a process for voting to admit Puerto Rico as a State to be approved and a vote to ratify Puerto Rico as a state. It did not receive a vote in the House.\nThe nature of Puerto Rico's political relationship with the United States is the subject of ongoing debate in the United Nations and the International Community. According to two consecutive Bush Administration President's Task Force Reports, the latest of which was issued on December 21, 2007 Puerto Rico is an unincorporated organized territory of the United States, subject to the plenary powers of the United States government. The Popular Democratic Party has challenged the Bush Administration's Task Force Reports stating that in 1953 Puerto Rico achieved a compact of association between both nations that was recognized by the United Nations. Nonetheless, the aforementioned U.S. Presidential and Congressional Reports state that the current prerogatives assumed by the Puerto Rico government are delegated by the U.S. Congress and may be amended or eliminated at its sole behest.\nIn a letter sent by the former governor of Puerto Rico to the former U.S. Secretary of State, Condoleezza Rice and the Co-Chairs of the White House's Presidential Task Force on Puerto Rico's Status on the Bush administration, former governor Acevedo Vil\u00e1 stated:\n\"My Administration's position is very clear: if the Task Force and the Bush Administration stand by their 2005 conclusions, then for over 50 years the U.S Government has perpetuated a 'monumental hoax' on the people of Puerto Rico, on the people of the United States and on the international community. If the 2005 report articulates the new official position of the United States, the time has come now for the State Department to formally notify the United Nations of this new position and assume the international legal consequences. You cannot have a legal and constitutional interpretation for local, political purposes and a different one for the international community. If it is a serious, relevant document, the report must have international consequences. Alternatively, the Task Force may review and amend the 2005 conclusions to make them consistent with legal and historical precedent, and therefore allow future status developments based on a binding compact.\"\nOn December 15, 2022, the U.S. House of Representatives voted in favor of the Puerto Rico Status Act. The act sought to resolve Puerto Rico's status and its relationship to the United States through a binding plebiscite.\nIn September 2023, Roger Wicker reintroduced legislation in the United States Congress on the territorial status of Puerto Rico. a two-round consultation process. The first vote is scheduled for August 4, 2024, where Puerto Ricans will have the choice between four alternatives: annexation to the United States, independence, sovereignty in free association, and a free state associated with the United States.\nIn July 2024, Governor Pedro Pierluisi calls a plebiscite on the status of Puerto Rico in November 2024. For the first time, the island's current status as a U.S. territory will not be an option during the non-binding plebiscite. The executive order follows the U.S. House of Representatives' approval in 2022 of a bill to help Puerto Rico move toward a change in territorial status. Voters have a choice between statehood, independence, or independence with free association, the terms of which would be negotiated regarding foreign affairs, U.S. citizenship, and use of the U.S. dollar. There were three choices: statehood, independence, and independence with free association with the United States (There was no option to maintain status). The top choice was 57% voted for Statehood (as part of the USA) from 528 thousand votes.\nOn February 13, 2025, the Puerto Rico House of Representatives approved a resolution on the legal territorial status of Puerto Rico. \"Concurrent Senate Resolution 0001 requests that 'the President and Congress of the United States of America respond promptly and act in accordance with the demands of the citizens of Puerto Rico.'\"\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23465", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23465", "title": "Telecommunications in Puerto Rico", "text": " \nTelecommunications in Puerto Rico includes radio, television, fixed and mobile telephones, and the Internet.\nBroadcasting in Puerto Rico is regulated by the US Federal Communications Commission (FCC).\nHistory.\nTelegraph service was inaugurated in 1869, responding to an 1864 order by Spanish Governor Felix Maria Mesian. By 1872, the entire island had telegraph service as well as international connections to the rest of the Caribbean and Europe.\nThe Puerto Rico Communications Authority () was created with Law No. 212, on May 12, 1942. Five years later, the department was located at 1314 Juan Ponce de Le\u00f3n Avenue in Santurce.\nTelevision.\nWIPR-TV (\"Wonderful Island of Puerto Rico\") was inaugurated on January 26, 1949.\nInternet.\nHurricane Maria destroyed the internet systems in Puerto Rico in September 2017. Then in 2019, the US Federal Communications Commission stated $950 million had been approved for the rebuilding and strengthening of Puerto Rico's and the Virgin Island's internet infrastructure.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23466", "revid": "48643156", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23466", "title": "Transportation in Puerto Rico", "text": " \nTransportation in Puerto Rico includes a system of roads, highways, freeways, airports, ports and harbors, and railway systems, serving a population of approximately 4 million year-round. It is funded primarily with both local and federal government funds.\nAirports.\nPuerto Rico has a total of 30 airports (3 of which are international), including one in each of the smaller islands of Vieques and Culebra. The largest airport in terms of passenger traffic is Luis Mu\u00f1oz Mar\u00edn International Airport, and consists of two runways and three concourses. It is by far the busiest airport in Puerto Rico, with direct connections to most major cities in the mainland United States, Latin America, Canada, the Caribbean, and Spain.\nAirlines based in Puerto Rico.\nThe following are current and former passenger and cargo airlines based in Puerto Rico or with flights to Puerto Rico:\nCurrently or recently operating/licensed.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nSeaports &amp; harbors.\nSea-based transportation of any merchandise or persons shipped entirely or even partly by water between U.S. points\u2014either directly or indirectly via one or any number of foreign points\u2014U.S. Federal Law requires that said items or persons must travel in U.S.-built, U.S.-crewed, U.S.-citizen owned vessels that are U.S.-documented by the Coast Guard for such maritime \"cabotage\" carriage. This transportation/trade restriction includes Puerto Rico under the Jones Act of 1920 (Merchant Marine Act of 1920). The Jones Act and various other United States laws that govern the domestic and domestic-foreign-domestic transportation of merchandise and passengers by water between two points in the United States, including Puerto Rico, have been extended to that island-territory since the initial years of United States' political relations. Currently, the only providers who ship from the United States to Puerto Rico are Crowley Maritime, TOTE Maritime, and Trailer Bridge.\nStrictly construed, the Jones Act refers only to Section 27 of the Merchant Marine Act of 1920, (\u00a0https://; 19 CFR 4.80 and 4.80(b)), which has come to bear the name of its original sponsor, Sen. Wesley L. Jones. Another law that was enacted in 1886 requires essentially the same standards for the transport of passengers between U.S. points, directly or indirectly transported through foreign ports or foreign points (46 App. U.S.C. 289; 19 CFR 4.80(a)). However, since the mid-1980s, as part of a joint effort between the cruise ship industry that serves Puerto Rico and Puerto Rican politicians such as then Resident Commissioner, U.S. non-voting Representative Baltasar Corrada del R\u00edo, obtained a limited-exception since no U.S. cruise ships that were Jones Act-eligible were participating in said market.\nThe application of these coastwise shipping laws and their imposition on Puerto Rico consist in a serious restriction of free trade and have been under scrutiny and controversy due to the apparent contradictory rhetoric involving the United States Government's sponsorship of free trade policies around the world, while its own national shipping policy (cabotage law) is essentially mercantilist and based on notions foreign to free-trade principles.\nMajor ports.\nIn July 2025, is confirmed by the Department of Puerto Rico, the creation of an interactive map of the logistics and freight ecosystem in Puerto Rico, a tool that aims to centralize information on the sector and position the island as a competitive logistics hub on a global scale, compared to other leading jurisdictions in Latin America, Europe and Asia.\nMinor ports and harbors.\nThe following are minor ports and harbors used for small freight/cargo ships, fishing vessels, and private boats/yachts: Gu\u00e1nica, Guayanilla, Guayama, Fajardo, Culebra, and Vieques.\nThere are ferries between Ceiba-Culebra and Ceiba-Vieques; between San Juan and Cata\u00f1o; and between Ponce and Caja de Muertos (Coffin Island).\nThere are several private marinas in Puerto Rico for boats and yachts, the largest being Puerto del Rey in Fajardo and Club Na\u00fatico de Ponce.\nFederal restrictions.\nThe Merchant Marine Act of 1920 (also known as the Jones Act) prevents foreign-flagged ships from carrying cargo between two American ports (a practice known as cabotage). Because of the Jones Act, foreign ships inbound with goods from Central and South America, Western Europe, and Africa cannot stop in Puerto Rico, offload Puerto Rico-bound goods, load mainland-bound Puerto Rico-manufactured goods, and continue to U.S. ports. Instead, they must proceed directly to U.S. ports, where distributors break bulk and send Puerto Rico-bound manufactured goods to Puerto Rico across the ocean by U.S.-flagged ships.\nPuerto Rican consumers ultimately bear the expense of transporting goods again across the Atlantic and Caribbean Sea on U.S.-flagged ships subject to the extremely high operating costs imposed by the Jones Act. This also makes Puerto Rico less competitive with Caribbean ports as a shopping destination for tourists from home countries with much higher taxes (like mainland states) even though prices for non-American manufactured goods in theory should be cheaper since Puerto Rico is much closer to Central and South America, Western Europe, and Africa.\nThe local government of Puerto Rico has requested several times to the U.S. Congress to exclude Puerto Rico from the Jones Act restrictions without success. The most recent measure has been taken by the 17th Legislative Assembly of Puerto Rico through http://. These measures have always received support from all the major local political parties. In 2013 the Government Accountability Office published a report which concluded that \"repealing or amending the Jones Act cabotage law might cut Puerto Rico shipping costs\" and that \"shippers believed that opening the trade to non-U.S.-flag competition could lower costs.\" The report, however, concluded that the effects of modifying the application of the Jones Act for Puerto Rico are highly uncertain for both Puerto Rico and the United States, particularly for the U.S. shipping industry and the military preparedness of the United States.\nIn February 2025, Governor Jennifer Gonzalez-Col\u00f3n announced a request by the government of Puerto Rico for a permanent exemption from air cabotage laws in Puerto Rico.\nRail transportation.\nDefunct systems.\nThe Puerto Rico train system flourished during the late 19th and early 20th century due to a large sugar cane industry there. Most, if not all, of these system were privately owned. Vieques, an island-municipality, also had the system connecting its sugar cane plantations.\nDuring the 1870s and 1890s, Puerto Rico did not have a national railroad system, but the city of Mayag\u00fcez did have a small passenger rail system for transporting its residents mainly along the Mendez Vigo Avenue.\nThe main system can be traced back to 1891, when the northern line was built between San Juan (Mart\u00edn Pe\u00f1a sector) and Manat\u00ed. The system was expanded to include all the western coastal towns, providing a link which would allow passengers to travel between the northern and southern parts of the island in less than a day for the first time in its history. Before its downfall, the Puerto Rico railroad system operated in all major cities, with tracks and stations along most of the coastal towns and direct lines to all major sugar refineries.\nHowever, when Puerto Rico changed its mostly agricultural economy to an industrialized one, and the U.S. and Puerto Rican governments started investing heavily in interstate highways and freeways, the railroad business soon collapsed. Passenger travel ceased in 1953, while the commercial train system (mostly for the sugar cane industry) continued operating until 1957.\nRoad transportation.\nPuerto Rico has an extensive system of roads and highways featuring tolled freeways (\"autopistas\"). Some are designated as Interstate Highways; although these routes do not connect to the contiguous United States, and are unsigned as such, they still receive funding in a similar fashion to the other Interstates on the U.S. mainland. In total, there are more than 8,950 miles (14,400\u00a0km, 1999 est.) of paved road. Some of the major highways are:\nUrban transportation.\nTransportation in Puerto Rico is heavily dependent on automobile transportation. Nevertheless, the government has increased investment in public transportation in an attempt to decrease vehicle dependency and road congestion. The island's metro area is serviced with three major public transportation systems:\nMost cities and towns also have a Jitney-type taxi system locally called \"Carros P\u00fablicos\". Each town has a central taxi terminal usually within walking distance of the town's central plaza where taxis are stationed, and they provide transportation through local and islandwide routes. In February 2014, the islandwide system of Carros P\u00fablicos consisted of over 3,000 vehicles authorized by the \"Comisi\u00f3n de Servico P\u00fablico\" (Public Service Commission), and it covered almost 500 routes. At approximately 130,000 passengers per day, in 2014 the P\u00fablicos system handled over five times the daily passenger volume of the island's largest international airport, the Luis Mu\u00f1oz Mar\u00edn.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23467", "revid": "6290920", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23467", "title": "Military of Puerto Rico", "text": "Military defense of Puerto Rico\nThe military defense of Puerto Rico is the responsibility of the United States as part of the Treaty of Paris. Locally, Puerto Rico has its own National Guard, the Puerto Rico National Guard, and its own state defense force, the Puerto Rico State Guard, which, by local law, is under the authority of the Puerto Rico National Guard. The commander-in-chief of both forces is the governor of Puerto Rico, currently Jenniffer Gonzalez-Col\u00f3n, who delegates his authority to the Puerto Rico Adjutant General, currently Major General Jos\u00e9 J. Reyes. The Adjutant General, in turn, delegates the authority over the State Guard to another officer but retains the authority over the Puerto Rico National Guard as a whole. At the national level, the commander-in-chief is the President of the United States, currently Donald J. Trump.\nA branch of the U.S. Army National Guard is stationed in Puerto Rico \u2014known as the Puerto Rico Army National Guard\u2014 which performs missions equivalent to those of the Army National Guards of the different states of the United States, including ground defense, disaster relief, and control of civil unrest. The local National Guard also incorporates a branch of the U.S. Air National Guard \u2014known as the Puerto Rico Air National Guard\u2014 which performs missions equivalent to those of the Air National Guards of the U.S. states.\nMilitary facilities in Puerto Rico.\nCurrently Operational:\nThe former Ramey Air Force Base in Aguadilla has been closed for decades, and no other Air Force Bases or Naval Air Stations remain. The Puerto Rico Air National Guard no longer has any fighter planes within its jurisdiction. On January 12, 1981, a group called the Boricua Popular Army, better known as \"Los Macheteros\", claimed responsibility for blowing up six A-7 Corsair II aircraft at the Mu\u00f1iz Air National Guard Base; a Puerto Rico Air National Guard base at a loss of $40 million. Responsibility for the air defense of Puerto Rico now rests with USAF or US Navy fighters that would be flown in, in the event of a military emergency.\nAt different times in the 20th century, the U.S. had about 25 military or naval installations in Puerto Rico, some very small ones, as well as large installations. The largest of these installations were the former Roosevelt Roads Naval Station in Ceiba, the Roosevelt Roads Naval Station, and the Atlantic Fleet Weapons Training Facility (AFWTF) on Vieques (all now closed), the National Guard training facility at Camp Santiago in Salinas, Fort Allen in Juana Diaz, the Army's Fort Buchanan in San Juan, the former U.S. Air Force Ramey Air Force Base in Aguadilla, and the Puerto Rico Air National Guard at Mu\u00f1iz Air Force base in San Juan.\nThe former U.S. Navy facilities at Roosevelt Roads, Vieques, and Sabana Seca have been deactivated and partially turned over to the local government. Other than U.S. Coast Guard and Puerto Rico National Guard facilities, there are only two remaining military installations in Puerto Rico, the U.S. Army's small Ft. Buchanan (supporting local veterans and reserve units) and the PRANG(Puerto Rico Air National Guard) Mu\u00f1iz Air Base (the C-130 Fleet). In recent years, the U.S. Congress has considered their deactivations, but these have been opposed by diverse public and private entities in Puerto Rico - such as retired military who rely on Ft. Buchanan for the services available there.\nThe coastal defense of Puerto Rico is the responsibility of the U.S. Navy from ships at sea, and the U.S. Coast Guard.\nThe U.S. Coast Guard has a significant presence in Puerto Rico. Located on what was formerly Ramey Air Force Base, the Coast Guard maintains what is now referred to as \"Coast Guard Air Station Borinquen\". HH-65C helicopters operate out of Borinquen performing search-and-rescue as well as law-enforcement missions. On a continual basis, Coast Guard fixed-wing airplanes, such as the C-130 Hercules search-and-rescue plane, stationed primarily in Florida fly to Puerto Rico to support these missions.\nU.S. Coast Guard cutters visit Puerto Rican waters periodically in their missions of coastal patrol and search-and-rescue. U.S. Navy ships visit Puerto Rican waters on an as-required basis, just like they visit all American waters, international oceans, and foreign ones, too.\nOn \"La Puntilla\" in Old San Juan the Coast Guard base its small, but capable surface fleet of several long cutters and other patrol boats. These boats and cutters work hand in hand with the air station responding to any mission that they may be called upon to perform.\nMilitary personnel in Puerto Rico.\nA significant number of Puerto Ricans participate as members and work for the U.S. Armed Forces, largely as National Guard members and civilian employees. The size of the overall military-related community in Puerto Rico is estimated to be 100,000 individuals. This includes retired personnel.\nFort Buchanan has about 4,000 military and civilian personnel. In addition, approximately 17,000 people are members of the Puerto Rico Army and Puerto Rico Air National Guard, or the U.S. Reserve forces. Puerto Rican soldiers have served in every US military conflict from World War I to the current military engagement known by the United States and its allies as the War against Terrorism.\nA number of Puerto Rican colleges and universities have the Reserve Officers' Training Corps (ROTC) programs. Army ROTC programs are offered at the American University of Puerto Rico, the Caribbean University, the University of Puerto Rico - Arecibo, the University of Puerto Rico \u2013 Bayamon Technological University College, the University of Puerto Rico \u2013 Carolina Regional College, the University of Puerto Rico - Cayey, the University of Puerto Rico - Mayag\u00fcez, and the University of Puerto Rico - Rio Piedras. Air Force ROTC programs are offered at the University of Puerto Rico - Bayamon Technological University College, the University of Puerto Rico - Mayag\u00fcez, and the University of Puerto Rico - Rio Piedras.\nThe U.S. Military has sought to form alliances with Hispanic organizations to promote military recruitment. In January 1999, leaders of National Hispanic organizations in collaboration with the U.S. Army held the Hispanic Leadership Summit '99. The \"Education and Career Opportunities for Hispanic Youth in America's Army\" summit included the participation of leaders of the US Army as well as leaders of national Hispanic organizations including ASPIRA, the Hispanic Association of Colleges and Universities (HACU), the League of United Latin American Citizens (LULAC), the National Association of Hispanic Publications (NAHP), the National Association of Latino Elected and Appointed Officials (NALEO), the National Council of La Raza (NCLR), SER jops for progress, and the members of the Congressional Hispanic Caucus. At the summit, the director of the LULAC National Educational Service Center (LNESC), Richard Royball commented, \"Based on our mutually beneficial partnership, we would encourage other Hispanic organizations to ally themselves with the US Army.\" LNESC promotes military recruitment in educational service centers in several US cities and in Puerto Rico.\nMilitary and Naval uses of Puerto Rico.\nThe US military installations in Puerto Rico are part of the US Northern Command (USNORTHCOM). USNORTHCOM has authority over all US military operations that take place throughout the Northern Area of Responsibility. US Fleet Forces Command has authority over all US Naval activity in the waters of the Caribbean. Air Forces North has authority over all US military flights and air operations over the Caribbean. Marine Forces North has authority over all USMC operations in the Caribbean, while US Army North has authority over all US Army operations in the Caribbean. US Special Operations North has authority over all special operations in the Caribbean. With the closing of the Roosevelt Roads and Vieques Island training facilities, the US Navy has basically exited from Puerto Rico, except for the ships that steam by, and the only significant military naval presence in the island is the U.S. Navy Reserve Naval Operational Support Center Puerto Rico (NOSC Puerto Rico) at Fort Buchanan, the Puerto Rican Army and Air National Guards. The U.S. Coast Guard maintains presence at Coast Guard Air Station Borinquen and Coast Guard Station San Juan.\nThe U.S. Navy's largest training area for the U.S. Atlantic Fleet used to be in Puerto Rico and in the Atlantic Ocean surrounding the island, but this was ended after President George W. Bush ordered the closure of the Roosevelt Roads Naval Station and the Vieques Island training grounds.\nThrough the years, the United States had conducted several military training exercises in Puerto Rico, the largest of these being Operation Springboard and Operation Readex. These exercises included thousands of personnel and involve air, sea, and land operations, and include training with live ammunition.\nOn top of training exercises, the US used Puerto Rico as a base to rehearse and launch military operations in Latin America and throughout the world. Operations launched from Puerto Rico include the 1954 intervention in Guatemala; the 1965 invasion of the Dominican Republic; the 1983 invasion of Grenada; the 1989 invasion of Panama; support of Salvadoran military; preparation for operation Desert Storm and Desert Fox in Iraq; and preparation for the War in Yugoslavia.\nNear Aguada the United States Marine Corps operates an LF-transmitter with a 367.3 meters tall guyed mast, the tallest man-made object in the Caribbean area https://.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23468", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23468", "title": "Puerto Rico/Transnational issues", "text": ""}
{"id": "23470", "revid": "35839912", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23470", "title": "Polyhedron", "text": "Three-dimensional shape with flat faces, straight edges, and sharp corners\nIn geometry, a polyhedron (pl.: polyhedra or polyhedrons; from el \" \"\u03c0\u03bf\u03bb\u03cd\" (poly-) \"\u00a0'many' and \" \"\u1f15\u03b4\u03c1\u03bf\u03bd\" (-hedron) \"\u00a0'base, seat') is a three-dimensional figure with flat polygonal faces, straight edges and sharp corners or vertices. The term \"polyhedron\" may refer either to a solid figure or to its boundary surface. The terms solid polyhedron and polyhedral surface are commonly used to distinguish the two concepts. Also, the term \"polyhedron\" is often used to refer implicitly to the whole structure formed by a solid polyhedron, its polyhedral surface, its faces, its edges, and its vertices.\nThere are many definitions of polyhedra, not all of which are equivalent. Under any definition, polyhedra are typically understood to generalize two-dimensional polygons and to be the three-dimensional specialization of polytopes (a more general concept in any number of dimensions). Polyhedra have several general characteristics that include the number of faces, topological classification by Euler characteristic, duality, vertex figures, surface area, volume, interior lines, Dehn invariant, and symmetry. A symmetry of a polyhedron means that the polyhedron's appearance is unchanged by the transformation such as rotating and reflecting.\nThe \"convex polyhedra\" are a well defined class of polyhedra with several equivalent standard definitions. Every convex polyhedron is the convex hull of its vertices, and the convex hull of a finite set of points is a polyhedron. Many common families of polyhedra, such as cubes and pyramids, are convex.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nDefinition.\nConvex polyhedra are well-defined, with several equivalent standard definitions. However, the formal mathematical definition of polyhedra that are not required to be convex has been problematic.\nMany definitions of \"polyhedron\" have been given within particular contexts, some more rigorous than others, and there is no universal agreement over which of these to choose.\nSome of these definitions exclude shapes that have often been counted as polyhedra (such as the self-crossing polyhedra) or include\nshapes that are often not considered as valid polyhedra (such as solids whose boundaries are not manifolds). As Branko Gr\u00fcnbaum observed,\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nNevertheless, there is general agreement that a polyhedron is a solid or surface that can be described by its vertices (corner points), edges (line segments connecting certain pairs of vertices),\nfaces (two-dimensional polygons), and that it sometimes can be said to have a particular three-dimensional interior volume.\nOne can distinguish among these different definitions according to whether they describe the polyhedron as a solid, whether they describe it as a surface, or whether they describe it more abstractly based on its incidence geometry.\nIn all of these definitions, a polyhedron is typically understood as a three-dimensional example of the more general polytope in any number of dimensions. For example, a polygon has a two-dimensional body and no faces, while a 4-polytope has a four-dimensional body and an additional set of three-dimensional \"cells\".\nHowever, some of the literature on higher-dimensional geometry uses the term \"polyhedron\" to mean something else: not a three-dimensional polytope, but a shape that is different from a polytope in some way. For instance, some sources define a convex polyhedron to be the intersection of finitely many half-spaces, and a polytope to be a bounded polyhedron. The remainder of this article considers only three-dimensional polyhedra.\nGeneral characteristics.\nNumber of faces.\nPolyhedra may be classified and are often named according to the number of faces. The naming system is based on Classical Greek, and combines a prefix counting the faces with the suffix \"hedron\", meaning \"base\" or \"seat\" and referring to the faces. For example a tetrahedron is a polyhedron with four faces, a pentahedron is a polyhedron with five faces, a hexahedron is a polyhedron with six faces, etc. For a complete list of the Greek numeral prefixes see , in the column for Greek cardinal numbers. The names of tetrahedra, hexahedra, octahedra (eight-sided polyhedra), dodecahedra (twelve-sided polyhedra), and icosahedra (twenty-sided polyhedra) are sometimes used without additional qualification to refer to the Platonic solids, and sometimes used to refer more generally to polyhedra with the given number of sides without any assumption of symmetry.\nTopological classification.\nSome polyhedra have two distinct sides to their surface. For example, the inside and outside of a convex polyhedron paper model can each be given a different colour (although the inside colour will be hidden from view). These polyhedra are orientable. The same is true for non-convex polyhedra without self-crossings. Some non-convex self-crossing polyhedra can be coloured in the same way but have regions turned \"inside out\" so that both colours appear on the outside in different places; these are still considered to be orientable. However, for some other self-crossing polyhedra with simple-polygon faces, such as the tetrahemihexahedron, it is not possible to colour the two sides of each face with two different colours so that adjacent faces have consistent colours.\nIn this case the polyhedron is said to be non-orientable. For polyhedra with self-crossing faces, it may not be clear what it means for adjacent faces to be consistently coloured, but for these polyhedra it is still possible to determine whether it is orientable or non-orientable by considering a topological cell complex with the same incidences between its vertices, edges, and faces.\nA more subtle distinction between polyhedron surfaces is given by their Euler characteristic, which combines the numbers of vertices formula_1, edges formula_2, and faces formula_3 of a polyhedron into a single number formula_4 defined by the formula\nformula_5\nThe same formula is also used for the Euler characteristic of other kinds of topological surfaces. It is an invariant of the surface, meaning that when a single surface is subdivided into vertices, edges, and faces in more than one way, the Euler characteristic will be the same for these subdivisions. For a convex polyhedron, or more generally any simply connected polyhedron with the surface of a topological sphere, it always equals 2. For more complicated shapes, the Euler characteristic relates to the number of toroidal holes, handles or cross-caps in the surface and will be less than 2.\nAll polyhedra with odd-numbered Euler characteristics are non-orientable. A given figure with even Euler characteristic may or may not be orientable. For example, the one-holed toroid and the Klein bottle both have formula_6, with the first being orientable and the other not.\nFor many (but not all) ways of defining polyhedra, the surface of the polyhedron is required to be a manifold. This means that every edge is part of the boundary of exactly two faces (disallowing shapes like the union of two cubes that meet only along a shared edge) and that every vertex is incident to a single alternating cycle of edges and faces (disallowing shapes like the union of two cubes sharing only a single vertex). For polyhedra defined in these ways, the classification of manifolds implies that the topological type of the surface is completely determined by the combination of its Euler characteristic and orientability. For example, every polyhedron whose surface is an orientable manifold and whose Euler characteristic is 2 must be a topological sphere.\nA toroidal polyhedron is a polyhedron whose Euler characteristic is less than or equal to 0, or equivalently whose genus is 1 or greater. Topologically, the surfaces of such polyhedra are torus surfaces having one or more holes through the middle. A notable example is the Szilassi polyhedron, which geometrically realizes the Heawood map.\nDuality.\nFor every convex polyhedron, there exists a dual polyhedron having\nThe dual of a convex polyhedron can be obtained by the process of polar reciprocation. Dual polyhedra exist in pairs, and the dual of a dual is just the original polyhedron again. Some polyhedra are self-dual, meaning that the dual of the polyhedron is congruent to the original polyhedron.\nAbstract polyhedra also have duals, obtained by reversing the partial order defining the polyhedron to obtain its dual or opposite order. These have the same Euler characteristic and orientability as the initial polyhedron. However, this form of duality does not describe the shape of a dual polyhedron, but only its combinatorial structure. For some definitions of non-convex geometric polyhedra, there exist polyhedra whose abstract duals cannot be realized as geometric polyhedra under the same definition.\nVertex figures.\nFor every vertex one can define a vertex figure, which describes the local structure of the polyhedron around the vertex. Precise definitions vary, but a vertex figure can be thought of as the polygon exposed where a slice through the polyhedron cuts off a vertex. For the Platonic solids and other highly-symmetric polyhedra, this slice may be chosen to pass through the midpoints of each edge incident to the vertex, but other polyhedra may not have a plane through these points. For convex polyhedra, and more generally for polyhedra whose vertices are in convex position, this slice can be chosen as any plane separating the vertex from the other vertices. When the polyhedron has a center of symmetry, it is standard to choose this plane to be perpendicular to the line through the given vertex and the center; with this choice, the shape of the vertex figure is determined up to scaling. When the vertices of a polyhedron are not in convex position, there will not always be a plane separating each vertex from the rest. In this case, it is common instead to slice the polyhedron by a small sphere centered at the vertex. Again, this produces a shape for the vertex figure that is invariant up to scaling. All of these choices lead to vertex figures with the same combinatorial structure, for the polyhedra to which they can be applied, but they may give them different geometric shapes.\nSurface area and lines inside polyhedra.\nThe surface area of a polyhedron is the sum of the areas of its faces, for definitions of polyhedra for which the area of a face is well-defined.\nThe geodesic distance between any two points on the surface of a polyhedron measures the length of the shortest curve that connects the two points, remaining within the surface. By Alexandrov's uniqueness theorem, every convex polyhedron is uniquely determined by the metric space of geodesic distances on its surface. However, non-convex polyhedra can have the same surface distances as each other, or the same as certain convex polyhedra.\nWhen a line segment connect two vertices that are not in the same face, it forms a diagonal line of the polyhedron. Not all polyhedra have diagonal lines, as in the family of pyramids. The Sch\u00f6nhardt polyhedron has three diagonal lines, all of which lie entirely outside of it, and the Cs\u00e1sz\u00e1r polyhedron has no diagonal lines (rather, every pair of vertices is connected by an edge).\nVolume.\nPolyhedral solids have an associated quantity called volume that measures how much space they occupy. Simple families of solids may have simple formulas for their volumes; for example, the volumes of pyramids, prisms, and parallelepipeds can easily be expressed in terms of their edge lengths or other coordinates. (See Volume \u00a7 Volume formulas for a list that includes many of these formulas.)\nVolumes of more complicated polyhedra may not have simple formulas. The volumes of such polyhedra may be computed by subdividing the polyhedron into smaller pieces (for example, by triangulation). For example, the volume of a Platonic solid can be computed by dividing it into congruent pyramids, with each pyramid having a face of the polyhedron as its base and the centre of the polyhedron as its apex.\nIn general, it can be derived from the divergence theorem that the volume of a polyhedral solid is given by\nformula_7\nwhere the sum is over faces formula_8 of the polyhedron, formula_9 is an arbitrary point on face formula_8, formula_11 is the unit vector perpendicular to formula_8 pointing outside the solid, and the multiplication dot is the dot product. In higher dimensions, volume computation may be challenging, in part because of the difficulty of listing the faces of a convex polyhedron specified only by its vertices, and there exist specialized algorithms to determine the volume in these cases.\nDehn invariant.\nIn two dimensions, the Bolyai\u2013Gerwien theorem asserts that any polygon may be transformed into any other polygon of the same area by cutting it up into finitely many polygonal pieces and rearranging them. The analogous question for polyhedra was the subject of Hilbert's third problem. Max Dehn solved this problem by showing that, unlike in the 2-D case, there exist polyhedra of the same volume that cannot be cut into smaller polyhedra and reassembled into each other. To prove this Dehn discovered another value associated with a polyhedron, the Dehn invariant, such that two polyhedra can only be dissected into each other when they have the same volume and the same Dehn invariant. It was later proven by Sydler that this is the only obstacle to dissection: every two Euclidean polyhedra with the same volumes and Dehn invariants can be cut up and reassembled into each other. The Dehn invariant is not a number, but a vector in an infinite-dimensional vector space, determined from the lengths and dihedral angles of a polyhedron's edges.\nAnother of Hilbert's problems, Hilbert's eighteenth problem, concerns (among other things) polyhedra that tile space. Every such polyhedron must have Dehn invariant zero. The Dehn invariant has also been connected to flexible polyhedra by the strong bellows theorem, which states that the Dehn invariant of any flexible polyhedron remains invariant as it flexes.\nSymmetries.\nMany of the most studied polyhedra are highly symmetrical. Their appearance is unchanged by some reflection by plane or rotation around the axes passing through two opposite vertices, edges, or faces in space. Each symmetry may change the location of a given element, but the set of all vertices (likewise faces and edges) is unchanged. The collection of symmetries of a polyhedron is called its symmetry group.\nBy elements of polyhedron.\nAll the elements (vertex, face, and edge) that can be superimposed on each other by symmetries are said to form a symmetry orbit. If these elements lie in the same orbit, the figure may be transitive on the orbit. Individually, they are isohedral (or face-transitive, meaning the symmetry transformations involve the polyhedra's faces in orbit), isotoxal (or edge-transitive, which involves the edge's polyhedra), and isogonal (or vertex-transitive, which involves the polyhedra's vertices). For example, the cube in which all the faces are in one orbit and involving the rotation and reflections in the orbit remains unchanged in its appearance; hence, the cube is face-transitive. The cube also has the other two such symmetries.\nWhen three such symmetries belong to a polyhedron, it is known as a regular polyhedron. There are nine regular polyhedra: five Platonic solids (cube, octahedron, icosahedron, tetrahedron, and dodecahedron\u2014all of which have regular polygonal faces) and four Kepler\u2013Poinsot polyhedrons. Nevertheless, some polyhedrons may not possess one or two of those symmetries:\nSome polyhedra have no reflection symmetry, so that they have two enantiomorph forms, which are reflections of each other. Examples include the snub cuboctahedron and snub icosidodecahedron. In this case the polyhedron is said to be chiral.\nBy point group in three dimensions.\nThe point group of polyhedra means a mathematical group endowed with its symmetry operations so that the appearance of polyhedra remains preserved while transforming in three-dimensional space. The indicated transformation here includes the rotation around the axes, reflection through the plane, inversion through a center point, and a combination of these three.\nThe polyhedral group is the symmetry group originally derived from the three Platonic solids: tetrahedron, octahedron, and icosahedron. These three have point groups respectively known as tetrahedral symmetry, octahedral symmetry, and icosahedral symmetry. Each of these focuses on the rotation group of polyhedra, known as the \"chiral polyhedral group\", whereas the additional reflection symmetry is known as the \"full polyhedral group\". One point group, pyritohedral symmetry, includes the rotation of tetrahedral symmetry and additionally has three planes of reflection symmetry and some rotoreflections. Overall, the mentioned polyhedral groups are summarized in the following bullets:\nPoint groups in three dimensions may also allow the preservation of polyhedra's appearance by the circulation around an axis. There are three various of these point groups:\nA point group formula_23 consists of rotating around the axis of symmetry and reflection on the horizontal plane. In the case of formula_24, the symmetry group only preserves the symmetry by a full rotation solely, ordinarily denoting formula_25. Polyhedra may have rotation only to preserve the symmetry, and the symmetry group may be considered as the cyclic group formula_26. Polyhedra with the rotoreflection and the rotation by the cyclic group is the point group formula_27.\nConvex polyhedra.\nAs mentioned above, the convex polyhedra are well-defined, with several equivalent standard definitions. They are often defined as bounded intersections of finitely many half-spaces, or as the convex hull of finitely many points, restricted in either case to intersections or hulls that have nonzero volume.\nImportant classes of convex polyhedra include the family of prismatoids, the Platonic solids, the Archimedean solids and their duals the Catalan solids, and the Johnson solids. Prismatoids are the polyhedra whose vertices lie on two parallel planes and their faces are likely to be trapezoids and triangles. Examples of prismatoids are pyramids, wedges, parallelipipeds, prisms, antiprisms, cupolas, and frustums. Platonic solids are the five ancient polyhedra\u2014tetrahedron, octahedron, icosahedron, cube, and dodecahedron\u2014described by Plato in the \"Timaeus\". Archimedean solids are the class of thirteen polyhedra whose faces are all regular polygons and whose vertices are symmetric to each other; their dual polyhedra are the Catalan solids. Johnson solids are the class of convex polyhedra whose faces are all regular polygons. These include the convex deltahedra, strictly convex polyhedra whose faces are all equilateral triangles.\nConvex polyhedra can be categorized into elementary polyhedra or composite polyhedra. Elementary polyhedra are convex regular-faced polyhedra that cannot be produced into two or more polyhedra by slicing them with a plane. Quite opposite to composite polyhedra, they can be alternatively defined as polyhedra constructed by attaching more elementary polyhedra. For example, triaugmented triangular prism is composite since it can be constructed by attaching three equilateral square pyramids onto the square faces of a triangular prism; the square pyramids and the triangular prism are elementaries.\nSome convex polyhedra possess a midsphere, a sphere tangent to each of their edges, which is intermediate in radius between the insphere and circumsphere for polyhedra in which all these spheres are present. Every convex polyhedron is combinatorially equivalent to a \"canonical polyhedron\", a polyhedron that has a midsphere whose center coincides with the centroid of its tangent points with edges. The shape of the canonical polyhedron (but not its scale or position) is uniquely determined by the combinatorial structure of the given polyhedron.\nBy forgetting the face structure, any polyhedron gives rise to a graph, called the skeleton of the polyhedron, with corresponding vertices and edges. Such figures have a long history: Leonardo da Vinci devised frame models of the regular solids, which he drew for Pacioli's book \"Divina Proportione\", and similar wire-frame polyhedra appear in M.C. Escher's print \"Stars\". One highlight of this approach is Steinitz's theorem, which gives a purely graph-theoretic characterization of the skeletons of convex polyhedra: it states that the skeleton of every convex polyhedron is a planar graph with three-connected, and every such graph is the skeleton of some convex polyhedron.\nProminent non-convex polyhedra include the star polyhedra. The regular star polyhedra, also known as the Kepler\u2013Poinsot polyhedra, are constructible via stellation or faceting of regular convex polyhedra. Stellation is the process of extending the faces (within their planes) so that they meet. Faceting is the process of removing parts of a polyhedron to create new faces (or facets) without creating any new vertices). A facet of a polyhedron is any polygon whose corners are vertices of the polyhedron, and is not a \"face\"; for example, a polygon involving diagonals (face diagonals or space diagonals). The stellation and faceting are inverse or reciprocal processes: the dual of some stellation is a faceting of the dual to the original polyhedron. Other examples are the Chazelle polyhedron and toroidal polyhedra.\nOther families of polyhedra.\nSpace-filling polyhedra.\nA space-filling polyhedron is one that can be packed together with copies of itself to completely fill space. Such a close-packing or space-filling is often called a \"tessellation\" of space or a \"honeycomb\". These include the parallelohedra (or Federov polyhedra), each of which forms a tessellation using copies of itself translated without rotation; the plesiohedra, defined as the Voronoi cells of symmetric Delone sets; and the Hill tetrahedra, a family of space-filling tetrahedra. Parallelohedra and plesiohedra are examples of stereohedra, which tile space isohedrally. Every space-filling polyhedron must have its Dehn invariant equal to zero.\nSome honeycombs involve more than one kind of polyhedron, such as a tiling of octahedra and tetrahedra and octahedra and cuboctahedra.\nFlexible polyhedra.\nSome polyhedra can change their overall shape, while keeping the shapes of their faces the same, by varying the angles of their edges. A polyhedron that can do this is called a flexible polyhedron. By Cauchy's rigidity theorem, flexible polyhedra must be non-convex. The volume of a flexible polyhedron must remain constant as it flexes; this result is known as the bellows theorem. Three examples are Steffen's polyhedron, Bricard octahedron, and Kokotsakis polyhedron.\nIdeal polyhedron.\nConvex polyhedra can be defined in three-dimensional hyperbolic space in the same way as in Euclidean space, as the convex hulls of finite sets of points. However, in hyperbolic space, it is also possible to consider ideal points and the points within the space. An ideal polyhedron is the convex hull of a finite set of ideal points. Its faces are ideal polygons, but its edges are defined by entire hyperbolic lines rather than line segments, and its vertices (the ideal points of which it is the convex hull) do not lie within the hyperbolic space.\nLattice polyhedron.\nConvex polyhedra in which all vertices have integer coordinates are called lattice polyhedra or integral polyhedra. The Ehrhart polynomial of lattice a polyhedron counts how many points with integer coordinates lie within a scaled copy of the polyhedron, as a function of the scale factor. The study of these polynomials lies at the intersection of combinatorics and commutative algebra. An example is Reeve tetrahedron.\nThere is a far-reaching equivalence between lattice polyhedra and certain algebraic varieties called toric varieties. This was used by Stanley to prove the Dehn\u2013Sommerville equations for simplicial polytopes.\nPolyhedral compound.\nA polyhedral compound is made of two or more polyhedra sharing a common centre. Symmetrical compounds often share the same vertices as other well-known polyhedra and may often also be formed by stellation. Some are listed in the list of Wenninger polyhedron models.\nZonohedron.\nA zonohedron is a convex polyhedron in which every face is a polygon that is symmetric under rotations through 180\u00b0. Zonohedra can also be characterized as the Minkowski sums of line segments, and include several important space-filling polyhedra.\nOrthogonal polyhedron.\nPolyhedra are said to be orthogonal because all of their edges are parallel to the axes of a Cartesian coordinate system. This implies that all faces meet at right angles, but this condition is weaker: Jessen's icosahedron has faces meeting at right angles, but does not have axis-parallel edges. Aside from the rectangular cuboids, orthogonal polyhedra are nonconvex. They are the three-dimensional analogs of two-dimensional orthogonal polygons, also known as rectilinear polygons. Orthogonal polyhedra are used in computational geometry, where their constrained structure has enabled advances in problems unsolved for arbitrary polyhedra, for example, unfolding the surface of a polyhedron to a polygonal net. Polycubes are a special case of orthogonal polyhedra that can be decomposed into identical cubes, and are three-dimensional analogues of planar polyominoes.\nGeneralisations.\nThe name 'polyhedron' has come to be used for a variety of objects having similar structural properties to traditional polyhedra.\nApeirohedra.\nA classical polyhedral surface has a finite number of faces, joined in pairs along edges. The apeirohedra form a related class of objects with infinitely many faces. Examples of apeirohedra include:\nComplex polyhedra.\nThere are objects called complex polyhedra, for which the underlying space is a complex Hilbert space rather than real Euclidean space. Precise definitions exist only for the regular complex polyhedra, whose symmetry groups are complex reflection groups. The complex polyhedra are mathematically more closely related to configurations than to real polyhedra.\nCurved polyhedra.\nSome fields of study allow polyhedra to have curved faces and edges. Curved faces can allow digonal faces to exist with a positive area.\nHigher-dimensional polyhedra.\nFrom the latter half of the twentieth century, various mathematical constructs have been found to have properties also present in traditional polyhedra. Rather than confining the term \"polyhedron\" to describe a three-dimensional polytope, it has been adopted to describe various related but distinct kinds of structure.\nA polyhedron has been defined as a set of points in real affine (or Euclidean) space of any dimension \"n\" that has flat sides. It may alternatively be defined as the intersection of finitely many half-spaces. Unlike a conventional polyhedron, it may be bounded or unbounded. In this meaning, a polytope is a bounded polyhedron.\nAnalytically, such a convex polyhedron is expressed as the solution set for a system of linear inequalities. Defining polyhedra in this way provides a geometric perspective for problems in linear programming.\nHistory.\nBefore the Greeks.\nPolyhedra appeared in early architectural forms such as cubes and cuboids, with the earliest four-sided Egyptian pyramids dating from the 27th century BC. The Moscow Mathematical Papyrus from approximately 1800\u20131650 BC includes an early written study of polyhedra and their volumes (specifically, the volume of a frustum). The mathematics of the Old Babylonian Empire, from roughly the same time period as the Moscow Papyrus, also included calculations of the volumes of cuboids (and of non-polyhedral cylinders), and calculations of the height of such a shape needed to attain a given volume.\nThe Etruscans preceded the Greeks in their awareness of at least some of the regular polyhedra, as evidenced by the discovery of an Etruscan dodecahedron made of soapstone on Monte Loffa. Its faces were marked with different designs, suggesting to some scholars that it may have been used as a gaming die.\nAncient Greece.\nAncient Greek mathematicians discovered and studied the convex regular polyhedra, which came to be known as the Platonic solids. Their first written description is in the \"Timaeus\" of Plato (circa 360 BC), which associates four of them with the four elements and the fifth to the overall shape of the universe. A more mathematical treatment of these five polyhedra was written soon after in the \"Elements\" of Euclid. An early commentator on Euclid (possibly Geminus) writes that the attribution of these shapes to Plato is incorrect: Pythagoras knew the tetrahedron, cube, and dodecahedron, and Theaetetus (circa 417 BC) discovered the other two, the octahedron and icosahedron. Later, Archimedes expanded his study to the convex uniform polyhedra which now bear his name. His original work is lost and his solids come down to us through Pappus.\nAncient China.\nBoth cubical dice and 14-sided dice in the shape of a truncated octahedron in China have been dated back as early as the Warring States period.\nBy 236 AD, Liu Hui was describing the dissection of the cube into its characteristic tetrahedron (orthoscheme) and related solids, using assemblages of these solids as the basis for calculating volumes of earth to be moved during engineering excavations.\nMedieval Islam.\nAfter the end of the Classical era, scholars in the Islamic civilisation continued to take the Greek knowledge forward (see Mathematics in medieval Islam). The 9th century scholar Thabit ibn Qurra included the calculation of volumes in his studies, and wrote a work on the cuboctahedron. Then in the 10th century Abu'l Wafa described the convex regular and quasiregular spherical polyhedra.\nRenaissance.\nAs with other areas of Greek thought maintained and enhanced by Islamic scholars, Western interest in polyhedra revived during the Italian Renaissance. Artists constructed skeletal polyhedra, depicting them from life as a part of their investigations into perspective. Toroidal polyhedra, made of wood and used to support headgear, became a common exercise in perspective drawing, and were depicted in marquetry panels of the period as a symbol of geometry. Piero della Francesca wrote about constructing perspective views of polyhedra, and rediscovered many of the Archimedean solids. Leonardo da Vinci illustrated skeletal models of several polyhedra for a book by Luca Pacioli, with text largely plagiarized from della Francesca. Polyhedral nets make an appearance in the work of Albrecht D\u00fcrer.\nSeveral works from this time investigate star polyhedra, and other elaborations of the basic Platonic forms. A marble tarsia in the floor of St. Mark's Basilica, Venice, designed by Paolo Uccello, depicts a stellated dodecahedron. As the Renaissance spread beyond Italy, later artists such as Wenzel Jamnitzer, D\u00fcrer and others also depicted polyhedra of increasing complexity, many of them novel, in imaginative etchings. Johannes Kepler (1571\u20131630) used star polygons, typically pentagrams, to build star polyhedra. Some of these figures may have been discovered before Kepler's time, but he was the first to recognize that they could be considered \"regular\" if one removed the restriction that regular polyhedra must be convex.\nIn the same period, Euler's polyhedral formula, a linear equation relating the numbers of vertices, edges, and faces of a polyhedron, was stated for the Platonic solids in 1537 in an unpublished manuscript by Francesco Maurolico.\n17th\u201319th centuries.\nRen\u00e9 Descartes, in around 1630, wrote his book \"De solidorum elementis\" studying convex polyhedra as a general concept, not limited to the Platonic solids and their elaborations. The work was lost, and not rediscovered until the 19th century. One of its contributions was Descartes' theorem on total angular defect, which is closely related to Euler's polyhedral formula. Leonhard Euler, for whom the formula is named, introduced it in 1758 for convex polyhedra more generally, albeit with an incorrect proof. Euler's work (together with his earlier solution to the puzzle of the Seven Bridges of K\u00f6nigsberg) became the foundation of the new field of topology. The core concepts of this field, including generalizations of the polyhedral formula, were developed in the late nineteenth century by Henri Poincar\u00e9, Enrico Betti, Bernhard Riemann, and others.\nIn the early 19th century, Louis Poinsot extended Kepler's work, and discovered the remaining two regular star polyhedra. Soon after, Augustin-Louis Cauchy proved Poinsot's list complete, subject to an unstated assumption that the sequence of vertices and edges of each polygonal side cannot admit repetitions (an assumption that had been considered but rejected in the earlier work of A. F. L. Meister). They became known as the Kepler\u2013Poinsot polyhedra, and their usual names were given by Arthur Cayley. Meanwhile, the discovery of higher dimensions in the early 19th century led Ludwig Schl\u00e4fli by 1853 to the idea of higher-dimensional polytopes. Additionally, in the late 19th century, Russian crystallographer Evgraf Fedorov completed the classification of parallelohedra, convex polyhedra that tile space by translations.\n20th\u201321st centuries.\nMathematics in the 20th century dawned with Hilbert's problems, one of which, Hilbert's third problem, concerned polyhedra and their dissections. It was quickly solved by Hilbert's student Max Dehn, introducing the Dehn invariant of polyhedra. Steinitz's theorem, published by Ernst Steinitz in 1992, characterized the graphs of convex polyhedra, bringing modern ideas from graph theory and combinatorics into the study of polyhedra.\nThe Kepler\u2013Poinsot polyhedra may be constructed from the Platonic solids by a process called stellation. Most stellations are not regular. The study of stellations of the Platonic solids was given a big push by H.S.M. Coxeter and others in 1938, with the now famous paper \"The Fifty-Nine Icosahedra\". Coxeter's analysis signaled a rebirth of interest in geometry. Coxeter himself went on to enumerate the star uniform polyhedra for the first time, to treat tilings of the plane as polyhedra, to discover the regular skew polyhedra and to develop the theory of complex polyhedra first discovered by Shephard in 1952, as well as making fundamental contributions to many other areas of geometry.\nIn the second part of the twentieth century, both Branko Gr\u00fcnbaum and Imre Lakatos pointed out the tendency among mathematicians to define a \"polyhedron\" in different and sometimes incompatible ways to suit the needs of the moment. In a series of papers, Gr\u00fcnbaum broadened the accepted definition of a polyhedron, discovering many new regular polyhedra. At the close of the twentieth century, these latter ideas merged with other work on incidence complexes to create the modern idea of an abstract polyhedron (as an abstract 3-polytope), notably presented by McMullen and Schulte.\nPolyhedra have been discovered in many fields of science. The Platonic solids appeared in biological creatures, as in The \"Braarudosphaera bigelowii\" has a regular dodecahedral structure. Ernst Haeckel described a number of species of radiolarians, some of whose shells are shaped like various regular polyhedra. The outer protein shells of many viruses form regular polyhedra. For example, HIV is enclosed in a regular icosahedron, as is the head of a typical myovirus. The regular icosahedron may also appeared in the applications of cartography when R. Buckminster Fuller used its net to his project known as Dymaxion map, frustatedly realized that the Greenland size is smaller than the South America.\nPolyhedra make a frequent appearance in modern computational geometry, computer graphics, and geometric design with topics including the reconstruction of polyhedral surfaces or surface meshes from scattered data points, geodesics on polyhedral surfaces, visibility and illumination in polyhedral scenes, polycubes and other non-convex polyhedra with axis-parallel sides, algorithmic forms of Steinitz's theorem, and the still-unsolved problem of the existence of polyhedral nets for convex polyhedra.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23471", "revid": "6727347", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23471", "title": "Polytope", "text": "Geometric object with flat sides\nIn elementary geometry, a polytope is a geometric object with flat sides (\"faces\"). Polytopes are the generalization of three-dimensional polyhedra to any number of dimensions. Polytopes may exist in any general number of dimensions n as an n-dimensional polytope or n-polytope. For example, a two-dimensional polygon is a 2-polytope and a three-dimensional polyhedron is a 3-polytope. In this context, \"flat sides\" means that the sides of a (\"k\" + 1)-polytope consist of k-polytopes that may have (\"k\" \u2212 1)-polytopes in common.\nSome theories further generalize the idea to include such objects as unbounded apeirotopes and tessellations, decompositions or tilings of curved manifolds including spherical polyhedra, and set-theoretic abstract polytopes.\nPolytopes of more than three dimensions were first discovered by Ludwig Schl\u00e4fli before 1853, who called such a figure a polyschem. The German term \"Polytop\" was coined by the mathematician Reinhold Hoppe, and was introduced to English mathematicians as \"polytope\" by Alicia Boole Stott.\nDefinitions and terminology.\nNowadays, the term \"polytope\" is a broad term that covers a wide class of objects, and various definitions appear in the mathematical literature. Many of these definitions are not equivalent to each other, resulting in different overlapping sets of objects being called \"polytopes\". They represent different approaches to generalizing the convex polytopes to include other objects with similar properties.\nThe original approach broadly followed by Ludwig Schl\u00e4fli, Thorold Gosset and others begins with the extension by analogy into four or more dimensions, of the idea of a polygon and polyhedron respectively in two and three dimensions.\nAttempts to generalise the Euler characteristic of polyhedra to higher-dimensional polytopes led to the development of topology and the treatment of a decomposition or CW-complex as analogous to a polytope. In this approach, a polytope may be regarded as a tessellation or decomposition of some given manifold. An example of this approach defines a polytope as a set of points that admits a simplicial decomposition. In this definition, a polytope is the union of finitely many simplices, with the additional property that, for any two simplices that have a nonempty intersection, their intersection is a vertex, edge, or higher dimensional face of the two. However this definition does not allow star polytopes with interior structures, and so is restricted to certain areas of mathematics.\nThe discovery of star polyhedra and other unusual constructions led to the idea of a polyhedron as a bounding surface, ignoring its interior. In this light convex polytopes in \"p\"-space are equivalent to tilings of the (\"p\"\u22121)-sphere, while others may be tilings of other elliptic, flat or toroidal (\"p\"\u22121)-surfaces \u2013 see elliptic tiling and toroidal polyhedron. A polyhedron is understood as a surface whose faces are polygons, a 4-polytope as a hypersurface whose facets (cells) are polyhedra, and so forth.\nThe idea of constructing a higher polytope from those of lower dimension is also sometimes extended downwards in dimension, with an (edge) seen as a 1-polytope bounded by a point pair, and a point or vertex as a 0-polytope. This approach is used for example in the theory of abstract polytopes.\nIn certain fields of mathematics, the terms \"polytope\" and \"polyhedron\" are used in a different sense: a \"polyhedron\" (or \"\"n\"-dimensional polyhedron) is the generic (bounded or unbounded) object in any dimension (referred to as \"polytope\" in this article) and \"polytope\" means a bounded polyhedron. This terminology is typically confined to polytopes and polyhedra that are convex. With this terminology, a convex polyhedron is the intersection of a finite number of halfspaces and is defined by its sides while a convex polytope is the convex hull of a finite number of points and is defined by its vertices.\nPolytopes in lower numbers of dimensions have standard names:\nElements.\nA polytope comprises elements of different dimensionality such as vertices, edges, faces, cells and so on. Terminology for these is not fully consistent across different authors. For example, some authors use \"face\" to refer to an (\"n\"\u00a0\u2212\u00a01)-dimensional element while others use \"face\" to denote a 2-face specifically. Authors may use \"j\"-face or \"j\"-facet to indicate an element of \"j\" dimensions. Some use \"edge\" to refer to a ridge, while H. S. M. Coxeter uses \"cell\" to denote an (\"n\"\u00a0\u2212\u00a01)-dimensional element. \nThe terms adopted in this article are given in the table below:\nAn \"n\"-dimensional polytope is bounded by a number of (\"n\"\u00a0\u2212\u00a01)-dimensional \"facets\". These facets are themselves polytopes, whose facets are (\"n\"\u00a0\u2212\u00a02)-dimensional \"ridges\" of the original polytope. Every ridge arises as the intersection of two facets (but the intersection of two facets need not be a ridge). Ridges are once again polytopes whose facets give rise to (\"n\"\u00a0\u2212\u00a03)-dimensional boundaries of the original polytope, and so on. These bounding sub-polytopes may be referred to as faces, or specifically \"j\"-dimensional faces or \"j\"-faces. A 0-dimensional face is called a \"vertex\", and consists of a single point. A 1-dimensional face is called an \"edge\", and consists of a line segment. A 2-dimensional face consists of a polygon, and a 3-dimensional face, sometimes called a \"cell\", consists of a polyhedron.\nImportant classes of polytopes.\nConvex polytopes.\nA polytope may be \"convex\". The convex polytopes are the simplest kind of polytopes, and form the basis for several different generalizations of the concept of polytopes. A convex polytope is sometimes defined as the intersection of a set of half-spaces. This definition allows a polytope to be neither bounded nor finite. Polytopes are defined in this way, e.g., in linear programming. A polytope is \"bounded\" if there is a ball of finite radius that contains it. A polytope is said to be \"pointed\" if it contains at least one vertex. Every bounded nonempty polytope is pointed. An example of a non-pointed polytope is the set formula_1. A polytope is \"finite\" if it is defined in terms of a finite number of objects, e.g., as an intersection of a finite number of half-planes.\nIt is an integral polytope if all of its vertices have integer coordinates.\nA certain class of convex polytopes are \"reflexive\" polytopes. An integral formula_2-polytope formula_3 is reflexive if for some integral matrix formula_4, formula_5, where formula_6 denotes a vector of all ones, and the inequality is component-wise. It follows from this definition that formula_3 is reflexive if and only if formula_8 for all formula_9. In other words, a formula_10-dilate of formula_3 differs, in terms of integer lattice points, from a formula_12-dilate of formula_3 only by lattice points gained on the boundary. Equivalently, formula_3 is reflexive if and only if its dual polytope formula_15 is an integral polytope.\nRegular polytopes.\nRegular polytopes have the highest degree of symmetry of all polytopes. The symmetry group of a regular polytope acts transitively on its flags; hence, the dual polytope of a regular polytope is also regular.\nThere are three main classes of regular polytope which occur in any number of dimensions:\nDimensions two, three and four include regular figures which have fivefold symmetries and some of which are non-convex stars, and in two dimensions there are infinitely many regular polygons of \"n\"-fold symmetry, both convex and (for \"n\" \u2265 5) star. But in higher dimensions there are no other regular polytopes.\nIn three dimensions the convex Platonic solids include the fivefold-symmetric dodecahedron and icosahedron, and there are also four star Kepler-Poinsot polyhedra with fivefold symmetry, bringing the total to nine regular polyhedra.\nIn four dimensions the regular 4-polytopes include one additional convex solid with fourfold symmetry and two with fivefold symmetry. There are ten star Schl\u00e4fli-Hess 4-polytopes, all with fivefold symmetry, giving in all sixteen regular 4-polytopes.\nStar polytopes.\nA non-convex polytope may be self-intersecting; this class of polytopes include the star polytopes. Some regular polytopes are stars.\nProperties.\nEuler characteristic.\nSince a (filled) convex polytope \"P\" in formula_2 dimensions is contractible to a point, the Euler characteristic formula_17 of its boundary \u2202P is given by the alternating sum:\nformula_18, where formula_19 is the number of formula_20-dimensional faces.\nThis generalizes Euler's formula for polyhedra.\nInternal angles.\nThe Gram\u2013Euler theorem similarly generalizes the alternating sum of internal angles formula_21 for convex polyhedra to higher-dimensional polytopes:\n formula_22\nGeneralisations of a polytope.\nInfinite polytopes.\nNot all manifolds are finite. Where a polytope is understood as a tiling or decomposition of a manifold, this idea may be extended to infinite manifolds. plane tilings, space-filling (honeycombs) and hyperbolic tilings are in this sense polytopes, and are sometimes called apeirotopes because they have infinitely many cells.\nAmong these, there are regular forms including the regular skew polyhedra and the infinite series of tilings represented by the regular apeirogon, square tiling, cubic honeycomb, and so on.\nAbstract polytopes.\nThe theory of abstract polytopes attempts to detach polytopes from the space containing them, considering their purely combinatorial properties. This allows the definition of the term to be extended to include objects for which it is difficult to define an intuitive underlying space, such as the 11-cell.\nAn abstract polytope is a partially ordered set of elements or members, which obeys certain rules. It is a purely algebraic structure, and the theory was developed in order to avoid some of the issues which make it difficult to reconcile the various geometric classes within a consistent mathematical framework. A geometric polytope is said to be a realization in some real space of the associated abstract polytope.\nComplex polytopes.\nStructures analogous to polytopes exist in complex Hilbert spaces formula_23 where \"n\" real dimensions are accompanied by \"n\" imaginary ones. Regular complex polytopes are more appropriately treated as configurations.\nDuality.\nEvery \"n\"-polytope has a dual structure, obtained by interchanging its vertices for facets, edges for ridges, and so on generally interchanging its (\"j\"\u00a0\u2212\u00a01)-dimensional elements for (\"n\"\u00a0\u2212\u00a0\"j\")-dimensional elements (for \"j\"\u00a0=\u00a01 to \"n\"\u00a0\u2212\u00a01), while retaining the connectivity or incidence between elements.\nFor an abstract polytope, this simply reverses the ordering of the set. This reversal is seen in the Schl\u00e4fli symbols for regular polytopes, where the symbol for the dual polytope is simply the reverse of the original. For example, {4,\u00a03,\u00a03} is dual to\u00a0{3,\u00a03,\u00a04}.\nIn the case of a geometric polytope, some geometric rule for dualising is necessary, see for example the rules described for dual polyhedra. Depending on circumstance, the dual figure may or may not be another geometric polytope.\nIf the dual is reversed, then the original polytope is recovered. Thus, polytopes exist in dual pairs.\nSelf-dual polytopes.\nIf a polytope has the same number of vertices as facets, of edges as ridges, and so forth, and the same connectivities, then the dual figure will be similar to the original and the polytope is self-dual.\nSome common self-dual polytopes include:\nHistory.\nPolygons and polyhedra have been known since ancient times.\nAn early hint of higher dimensions came in 1827 when August Ferdinand M\u00f6bius discovered that two mirror-image solids can be superimposed by rotating one of them through a fourth mathematical dimension. By the 1850s, a handful of other mathematicians such as Arthur Cayley and Hermann Grassmann had also considered higher dimensions.\nLudwig Schl\u00e4fli was the first to consider analogues of polygons and polyhedra in these higher spaces. He described the six convex regular 4-polytopes in 1852 but his work was not published until 1901, six years after his death. By 1854, Bernhard Riemann's \"Habilitationsschrift\" had firmly established the geometry of higher dimensions, and thus the concept of \"n\"-dimensional polytopes was made acceptable. Schl\u00e4fli's polytopes were rediscovered many times in the following decades, even during his lifetime.\nIn 1882 Reinhold Hoppe, writing in German, coined the word \"\" to refer to this more general concept of polygons and polyhedra. In due course Alicia Boole Stott, daughter of logician George Boole, introduced the anglicised \"polytope\" into the English language.\nIn 1895, Thorold Gosset not only rediscovered Schl\u00e4fli's regular polytopes but also investigated the ideas of semiregular polytopes and space-filling tessellations in higher dimensions. Polytopes also began to be studied in non-Euclidean spaces such as hyperbolic space.\nAn important milestone was reached in 1948 with H. S. M. Coxeter's book \"Regular Polytopes\", summarizing work to date and adding new findings of his own.\nMeanwhile, the French mathematician Henri Poincar\u00e9 had developed the topological idea of a polytope as the piecewise decomposition (e.g. CW-complex) of a manifold. Branko Gr\u00fcnbaum published his influential work on \"Convex Polytopes\" in 1967.\nIn 1952 Geoffrey Colin Shephard generalised the idea as complex polytopes in complex space, where each real dimension has an imaginary one associated with it. Coxeter developed the theory further.\nThe conceptual issues raised by complex polytopes, non-convexity, duality and other phenomena led Gr\u00fcnbaum and others to the more general study of abstract combinatorial properties relating vertices, edges, faces and so on. A related idea was that of incidence complexes, which studied the incidence or connection of the various elements with one another. These developments led eventually to the theory of abstract polytopes as partially ordered sets, or posets, of such elements. Peter McMullen and Egon Schulte published their book \"Abstract Regular Polytopes\" in 2002.\nEnumerating the uniform polytopes, convex and nonconvex, in four or more dimensions remains an outstanding problem. The convex uniform 4-polytopes were fully enumerated by John Conway and Michael Guy using a computer in 1965; in higher dimensions this problem was still open as of 1997. The full enumeration for nonconvex uniform polytopes is not known in dimensions four and higher as of 2008.\nIn modern times, polytopes and related concepts have found many important applications in fields as diverse as computer graphics, optimization, search engines, cosmology, quantum mechanics and numerous other fields. In 2013 the amplituhedron was discovered as a simplifying construct in certain calculations of theoretical physics.\nApplications.\nIn the field of optimization, linear programming studies the maxima and minima of linear functions; these maxima and minima occur on the boundary of an \"n\"-dimensional polytope. In linear programming, polytopes occur in the use of generalized barycentric coordinates and slack variables.\nIn twistor theory, a branch of theoretical physics, a polytope called the amplituhedron is used in to calculate the scattering amplitudes of subatomic particles when they collide. The construct is purely theoretical with no known physical manifestation, but is said to greatly simplify certain calculations.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23472", "revid": "382591", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23472", "title": "Paper-and-pencil game", "text": "Game only requiring writing\nPaper-and-pencil games or paper-and-pen games (or some variation on those terms) are games that can be played solely with paper and pencils (or other writing implements), usually without erasing. They may be played to pass the time, as icebreakers, or for brain training. In recent times, they have been supplanted by mobile games. Some popular examples of pencil-and-paper games include tic-tac-toe, sprouts, dots and boxes, hangman, MASH, paper soccer, and spellbinder. The term is unrelated to the use in role-playing games to differentiate tabletop games from role-playing video games.\nBoard games where pieces are never moved or removed from the board once being played, particularly abstract strategy games like Gomoku and Connect Four, can also be played as pencil-and-paper games.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23473", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23473", "title": "Paleomap", "text": "Map of continents and mountain ranges in the past based on plate reconstructions\nPaleomaps are maps of continents and mountain ranges in the past based on plate reconstructions. Until the 1960s, paleomaps were not very satisfactory, since it was difficult to understand many quite distinctive features. For example, huge river deltas seemed to be associated with what must have been rather small drainage basins. With the discovery of plate tectonics, it became apparent that land masses move relative to one another over time. Ancient geologic features started to make far more sense. It is now possible to construct maps that are probably fairly accurate for continental positions over several hundred million years. Before the Cambrian Period, it becomes much more difficult since there are fewer rock exposures preserved. The state of large regions of the Earth becomes unknowable in the distant past. Where rocks are exposed, latitudes can often be determined from the orientation of preserved magnetic fields (see paleomagnetism) but longitudes are based on projections that are increasingly uncertain as one gets further from the present.\nMany published maps are associated in one way or another with the work of Christopher Scotese. The maps are useful since it is usually quite difficult to describe the location and orientation of geographical features using words alone."}
{"id": "23474", "revid": "47689075", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23474", "title": "Problem of universals", "text": "Philosophical question\nThe problem of universals is an ancient question from metaphysics that has inspired a range of philosophical topics and disputes: \"Should the properties an object has in common with other objects, such as color and shape, be considered to exist beyond those objects? And if a property exists separately from objects, what is the nature of that existence?\"\nThe problem of universals relates to various inquiries closely related to metaphysics, logic, and epistemology, as far back as Plato and Aristotle, in efforts to define the mental connections humans make when understanding a property such as shape or color to be the same in nonidentical objects.\nUniversals are qualities or relations found in two or more entities. As an example, if all cup holders are \"circular\" in some way, \"circularity\" may be considered a universal property of cup holders. Further, if two daughters can be considered \"female offspring of Frank\", the qualities of being \"female\", \"offspring\", and \"of Frank\", are universal properties of the two daughters. Many properties can be universal: being human, red, male or female, liquid or solid, big or small, etc.\nPhilosophers agree that human beings can talk and think about universals, but disagree on whether universals exist in reality beyond mere thought and speech.\nAncient philosophy.\nThe problem of universals is considered a central issue in traditional metaphysics and can be traced back to Plato and Aristotle's philosophy, particularly in their attempt to explain the nature and status of forms. These philosophers explored the problem through predication.\nPlato.\nPlato believed that there was a sharp distinction between the world of perceivable objects and the world of universals or forms (\"eide;\" sg. \"eidos\"): one can have only mere opinions about the former, but one can have true knowledge about the latter. For Plato, it was not possible to have knowledge of anything that could change or was particular, since knowledge had to be forever unfailing and general; thus, the world of the forms is the real world, like objects seen in sunlight, while the sensible world is only imperfectly or partially real, like the shadows cast by those objects. This Platonic realism, however, in denying that the eternal Forms are mental artifacts, differs sharply with modern forms of idealism.\nOne of the first nominalist critiques of Plato's realism was that of Diogenes of Sinope, who said \"I've seen Plato's cups and table, but not his 'cupness' and 'tableness'.\"\nAristotle.\nPlato's student Aristotle disagreed with his tutor. Aristotle transformed Plato's forms into \"formal causes\", the blueprints or essences of individual things. Whereas Plato idealized geometry, Aristotle emphasized nature and related disciplines, and therefore much of his thinking concerns living beings and their properties. The nature of universals in Aristotle's philosophy therefore hinges upon his view of natural kinds. Instead of categorizing \"being\" according to the structure of thought, he proposed that categorical analysis be directed at the structure of the natural world. He used the principle of predication in his \"Categories\", wherein he established that universal terms are involved in a \"relation of predication\" if some facts expressed by ordinary sentences hold.\nIn his work \"On Interpretation\", he explains that a \"universal\" is that which may be predicated of many, whereas that which is \"singular\" may not be. For instance, \"man\" is a universal, whereas \"Callias\" is a singular; both universals (e.g., a \"genus,\" such as \"animal\", and/or \"species\", such as \"man\") and singulars may be predicated of an individual man (e.g., Callias is both a man \"and\" Callias). The philosopher posited that what is most universal is also most real; consider, for example, a particular oak tree. This is a member of a species; it has much in common with other oak trees, past, present and future. Its universal\u2014its \"oakness\"\u2014is a part of it; hence, one can study oak trees and learn about \"oakness\", and, more generally, about the intelligible order within the sensible world. Accordingly, Aristotle was more confident than Plato about coming to know the sensible world; he was a prototypical empiricist and a founder of induction. Aristotle was a new, moderate sort of realist about universals.\nMedieval philosophy.\nBoethius.\nThe problem was introduced to the medieval world by Boethius (c.\u2009AD 480\u00a0\u2013 524), in his translation of Porphyry's \"Isagoge\". It begins:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I shall omit to speak about genera and species, as to whether they subsist (in the nature of things) or in mere conceptions only; whether also if subsistent, they are bodies or incorporeal, and whether they are separate from, or in, sensibles, and subsist about these, for such a treatise is most profound, and requires another more extensive investigation.\nBoethius, in his commentaries on the aforementioned translation, says that a universal\u2014if it were to exist\u2014has to fulfill several criteria: it must be wholly present in each of several particulars, simultaneously and not in a temporal succession, and in an identical manner in each. He further reasons that universals cannot be mind-independent (i.e., cannot have a real existence), because a quality cannot be both one thing \"and\" common to many particulars in such a way that it forms part of a particular's substance, as it would then be partaking of both universality and particularity at once\u2014an apparent contradiction. However, he also reasons that universals cannot be solely of the mind, since a mental construct of some quality is an abstraction and understanding of something outside of the mind; thus, either this representation is a true understanding of the quality\u2014in which case we revert to the earlier problem faced by those who believe universals are real\u2014or, if the mental abstraction was not a true understanding, then \"what is understood otherwise than the thing is false.\"\nBoethius' solution to this problem was to propose that the mind is able to separate in thought that which is not, necessarily, so separable in reality; he cites the human mind's ability to abstract from concrete particulars as an instance of this. This, according to Boethius, avoids the problem of Platonic universals being out there in the real world, but also the problem of their being purely constructs of the mind: universals are simply the mind thinking about particulars in an abstract, universal way. \nMedieval realism.\nBoethius mostly stayed close to Aristotle in his thinking about universals. Realism's biggest proponents in the Middle Ages, however, came to be Thomas Aquinas and Duns Scotus. Aquinas argued that both the essence of a thing and its existence were clearly distinct; in this regard he is also Aristotelian.\nDuns Scotus argues that in a thing there is no real distinction between the essence and the existence; instead, there is only a formal distinction. Scotus believed that universals exist only inside the things that they exemplify, and that they \"contract\" with the haecceity of the thing to create the individual. As a result of his realist position, he argued strongly against both nominalism and conceptualism, arguing instead for Scotist realism, a medieval response to the conceptualism of Abelard. That is to say, Scotus believed that such properties as 'redness' and 'roundness' exist in reality and are mind-independent entities.\nFurthermore, Duns Scotus wrote about this problem in his own commentary (\"Quaestiones\") on Porphyry's \"Isagoge\", as Boethius had done. Scotus was interested in how the mind forms universals, and he believed this to be 'caused by the intellect'. This intellect acts on the basis that the nature of, say, 'humanity' that is found in other humans and also that the quality is attributable to other individual humans.\nMedieval nominalism.\nThe opposing view to realism is one called nominalism, which at its strongest maintains that universals are verbal constructs and that they do not inhere in objects or pre-exist them. Therefore, universals in this view are something which are peculiar to human cognition and language. The French philosopher and theologian Roscellinus (1050\u20131125) was an early, prominent proponent of this view. His particular view was that universals are little more than vocal utterances (\"voces\").\nWilliam of Ockham (1285\u20131347) wrote extensively on this topic. He argued strongly that universals are a product of abstract human thought. According to Ockham, universals are just words or concepts (at best) that only exist in the mind and have no real place in the external world. His opposition to universals was not based on his eponymous Razor, but rather he found that regarding them as real was contradictory in some sense. An early work has Ockham stating that 'no thing outside the soul is universal, either through itself or through anything real or rational added on, no matter how it is considered or understood'. Nevertheless, his position did shift away from an outright opposition to accommodating them in his later works such as the \"Summae Logicae\" (albeit in a modified way that would not classify him as a complete realist).\nModern and contemporary philosophy.\nHegel.\nThe 19th-century German philosopher Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel discussed the relation of universals and particulars throughout his works. Hegel posited that both exist in a dialectical relationship to one another; that is, one exists only in relation and in reference to the other.\nHe stated the following on the issue:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The parts are diverse and independent of each other. They are, however, only parts in their identical relation to each other, or insofar as they, taken together, constitute the whole. But this togetherness is the opposite of the part.\u2014\u200a\nMill.\nThe 19th-century British philosopher John Stuart Mill discussed the problem of universals in the course of a book that eviscerated the philosophy of Sir William Hamilton. Mill wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The formation of a concept does not consist in separating the attributes which are said to compose it from all other attributes of the same object and enabling us to conceive those attributes, disjoined from any others. We neither conceive them, nor think them, nor cognize them in any way, as a thing apart, but solely as forming, in combination with numerous other attributes, the idea of an individual object.\u2014\u200a\nHowever, he then proceeds to, seemingly, concede the existence of abstract universals\u2014at least, insofar as they may be conceptualized\u2014in stating the following:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;But, though meaning them only as part of a larger agglomeration, we have the power of fixing our attention on them, to the neglect of the other attributes with which we think them combined. While the concentration of attention lasts, if it is sufficiently intense, we may be temporarily unconscious of any of the other attributes and may really, for a brief interval, have nothing present to our mind but the attributes constituent of the concept.\u2014\u200a\nIn other words, we may be \"temporarily unconscious\" of whether an image is white, black, yellow, or purple, and concentrate our attention upon the fact that it is (e.g.) a man, and upon just those attributes necessary to identify it as a man\u2014but not as any particular one. That which we thus conceive may then have the significance of a universal of manhood.\nPeirce.\nThe 19th-century American logician Charles Sanders Peirce, known as the father of pragmatism, developed his own views on the problem of universals in the course of a review of an edition of the writings of George Berkeley. Peirce begins with the observation that \"Berkeley's metaphysical theories have at first sight an air of paradox and levity very unbecoming to a bishop.\" He includes among these paradoxical doctrines Berkeley's denial of \"the possibility of forming the simplest general conception\", while at the same time \"admit[ting] the existence of Platonic ideas\". Peirce wrote that if there is some mental fact that works \"in practice\" the way that a universal would, that fact \"is\" a universal:\nIf I have learned a formula in gibberish which in any way jogs my memory so as to enable me in each single case to act as though I had a general idea, what possible utility is there in distinguishing between such a gibberish and formula and an idea?\nPeirce also held, as a matter of ontology, that what he called \"Thirdness\"\u2014generalities, laws, general facts about the world\u2014are extra-mental realities.\nJames.\nWilliam James learned about pragmatism from his friend Peirce (though the understanding thereof at which he ultimately arrived was not to Peirce's taste: he came to complain that James had \"kidnapped\" the term, and to call himself a \"pragmaticist\" instead). Though James certainly agreed with Peirce and against Berkeley that general ideas exist as a psychological fact, he was an anti-realist\u2014conceptualist\u2014in his ontology:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt; Our doctrine, therefore, of the 'fringe' leads to a perfectly satisfactory decision of the nominalistic and conceptualistic controversy, so far as it touches psychology. We must decide in favor of the conceptualists, and affirm that the power to think things, qualities, relations, or whatever other elements there may be, isolated and abstracted from the total experience in which they appear, is the most indisputable function of our thought. [...] After abstractions, universals! The 'fringe,' which lets us believe in the one, lets us believe in the other too.\nWhy, from Plato and Aristotle, philosophers should have vied with each other in scorn of the knowledge of the particular and in adoration of that of the general, is hard to understand, seeing that [...] the things of worth are all concretes and singulars. The only value of universal characters is that they help us, by reasoning, to know new truths about individual things.\u2014\u200a\nThere are at least three ways in which a realist might try to answer James' challenge of explaining the reason why universal conceptions are more lofty than those of particulars: the moral\u2013political answer, the mathematical\u2013scientific answer, and the anti-paradoxical answer. Each has contemporary or near-contemporary advocates.\nWeaver.\nThe moral or political response is given by the conservative philosopher Richard M. Weaver in \"Ideas Have Consequences\" (1948), where he describes how the acceptance of \"the fateful doctrine of nominalism\" was \"the crucial event in the history of Western culture; from this flowed those acts which issue now in modern decadence\".\nQuine.\nThe noted American philosopher W. V. O. Quine addressed the problem of universals throughout his career. In his 1947 paper 'On Universals', he writes that the problem of universals is chiefly to be understood as a question of ontology\u2014concerning the existence (or lack thereof) of universals \"as entities\"\u2014rather than as a linguistic matter, concerning only our \"naming\" of universals. He explains the Platonist position as motivated by a belief that our ability to form general conceptions is inexplicable unless universals exist outside of the mind; the nominalist, in contrast, finds that appeal to such entities is \"empty verbalism, devoid of explanatory value.\" Quine himself does not propose to resolve this particular debate; what he does say, however, is that certain types of discourse \"explicitly\" presuppose universals (viz., propositions that quantify over universals, and which cannot be rephrased to use variables of quantification that refer only to concrete individuals): nominalists must, therefore, give these up. Quine's approach is therefore something of an epistemological one\u2014i.e., about what can be known\u2014rather than a metaphysical one, i.e. about what is real.\nCocchiarella.\nNino Cocchiarella put forward the idea that realism is the best response to certain logical paradoxes to which nominalism leads (\"Nominalism and Conceptualism as Predicative Second Order Theories of Predication\", \"Notre Dame Journal of Formal Logic\", vol. 21 (1980)). It is noted that, in a sense, Cocchiarella has adopted Platonism for anti-Platonic reasons: Plato, as seen in the dialogue \"Parmenides\", was willing to accept a certain amount of paradox to have his Forms; Cocchiarella adopts the forms to \"avoid\" paradox.\nArmstrong.\nThe Australian philosopher David Malet Armstrong has been one of the leading realists in the twentieth century, and has used a concept of universals to build a naturalistic and scientifically realist ontology. In both \"Universals and Scientific Realism\" (1978) and \"Universals: An Opinionated Introduction\" (1989), Armstrong describes the relative merits of a number of nominalist theories which appeal either to \"natural classes\" (a view he ascribes to Anthony Quinton), concepts, resemblance relations or predicates, and also discusses non-realist \"trope\" accounts (which he describes in the \"Universals and Scientific Realism\" volumes as \"particularism\"). He gives a number of reasons to reject all of these, but also dismisses a number of realist accounts.\nPenrose.\nRoger Penrose contends that the foundations of mathematics can't be understood without the Platonic view that \"mathematical truth is absolute, external and eternal, and not based on man-made criteria ... mathematical objects have a timeless existence of their own...\"\nIndian philosophy.\nNy\u0101ya-Vai\u015be\u1e63ika (Realist position).\nIndian philosophers raise the problem of universals in relation to semantics. Universals are postulated as referents for the meanings of general terms.\nThe Ny\u0101ya-Vai\u015be\u1e63ika school conceives of universals as perceptible eternal entities, existing independently of our minds. Ny\u0101ya postulates the existence of universals based on our experience of a common characteristic among particulars. Thus, the meaning of a word is understood as a particular further characterized by a universal. For example, the meaning of the term 'cow' refers to a particular cow characterized by the universal of 'cowness'. Ny\u0101ya holds that although universals are apprehended differently from particulars, they are not separate, given their inherence in the particulars.\nNot every term, however, corresponds to a universal. Ud\u0101yana puts forward six conditions for identifying genuine universals.\nM\u012bma\u1e43s\u00e3 (Realist position).\nLike the Ny\u0101ya-Vai\u015be\u1e63ika school, M\u012bma\u1e43s\u00e3 characterizes universals as referents for words. The fundamental difference between Bh\u0101\u1e6d\u1e6da M\u012bma\u1e43s\u0101's and Ny\u0101ya is that Bh\u0101\u1e6d\u1e6da M\u012bma\u1e43sa rejects the Ny\u0101ya understanding of the universals' relation of inherence to the particulars. The Hindu philosopher Kum\u0101rila Bha\u1e6d\u1e6da argues that if inherence is different from the terms of the relation, it would continuously require another common relation, and if the inherence is non-different, it would be superfluous.\nBuddhist Nominalism.\nBuddhist ontology regards the world as consisting of momentary particulars and mentally constructed universals. In contrast to the realist schools of Indian philosophy, Buddhist logicians put forward a positive theory of nominalism, known as the apoha theory, which denies the existence of universals.\nThe apoha theory identifies particulars through double negation, not requiring for a general shared essence between terms. For instance, the term 'cow' can be understood as referring to every entity of its exclusion class 'non-cow'.\nPositions.\nThere are many philosophical positions regarding universals.\nTaking \"beauty\" as example, the following statements correspond, respectively, to each of the above positions:\nRealism.\n\"Realist\" approaches posit some sort of mind-independent existence for universals. Two major forms of metaphysical realism are Platonic realism (, \"universals before things\"), and Aristotelian realism (, \"universals in things\"). \"Platonic realism\" is the view that universals are real entities, existing independently of any particulars which may (or may not) exemplify them; \"Aristotelian realism\", on the other hand, is the view that universals are real entities, but their existence is dependent on\u2014they exist only within\u2014the particulars that exemplify them.\nRealists tend to argue that universals must be posited as distinct entities in order to account for various phenomena. For example, a common realist argument is that universals are required for certain general words to have meaning, and for the sentences in which they occur to be true or false. Take the sentence \"Djivan Gasparyan is a musician\", for instance: the realist may claim that this sentence is only meaningful, and only expresses a truth, because the term \"musician\" has a referent (i.e., musicianship); if the term does \"not\" refer\u2014corresponds to no actual, distinct quality\u2014how are we to understand such sentences?\nSimilarly, the realist may argue that it is in virtue of such universal qualities (e.g. musicianship, wisdom, redness, and so on) that our experiences of concepts such as \"similarity\" and \"commonality\" may be explained: absent distinct properties that are shared by\u2014but separate from\u2014the individuals that appear to exemplify them, how are we to understand a sentence such as \"both of these apples are red\"; how is it that one and the same quality (viz., \"redness,\" in this case) may be predicated of multiple individuals?\nNominalism.\nNominalists assert that only individuals or particulars exist and deny that universals are real (i.e. that they exist as entities or beings; \"universalia post res\"). The term \"nominalism\" comes from the Latin \"nomen\" (\"name\"). Four major forms of nominalism are predicate nominalism, resemblance nominalism, trope nominalism, and conceptualism. One with a nominalist view claims that we predicate the same property of/to multiple entities, but argues that the entities only share a name and do not have a real quality in common.\nNominalists often argue this view by claiming that nominalism can account for all the relevant phenomena, and therefore\u2014by Occam's razor, and its principle of simplicity\u2014nominalism is preferable, since it posits fewer entities. Different variants and versions of nominalism have been endorsed or defended by many, including Chrysippus, Ibn Taymiyyah, William of Ockham, Ibn Khaldun, Rudolf Carnap, Nelson Goodman, David Lewis, H. H. Price, and D. C. Williams.\nConceptualism.\nConceptualism is a position that is\u2014in a sense\u2014part of the way between realism and nominalism, though it is usually considered to have more in common with the latter. Conceptualists believe that universals do exist, but only as concepts within the mind. Conceptualists argue that these \"concepts\" of universals are not mere \"inventions but are reflections of similarities among particular things themselves.\" For example, the concept of \"man\" ultimately reflects a similarity between Socrates and Kant.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes and references.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23475", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23475", "title": "Pipeline (disambiguation)", "text": "Pipeline is a system for the long-distance transportation of a liquid or gas.\nIt may also refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "23476", "revid": "46723094", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23476", "title": "Plea bargain", "text": "Agreement in a criminal case between the prosecutor and defendantA plea bargain, also known as a plea agreement or plea deal, is a legal arrangement in criminal law where the defendant agrees to plead guilty or no contest to a charge in exchange for concessions from the prosecutor. These concessions can include a reduction in the severity of the charges, the dismissal of some charges, or a more lenient sentencing recommendation. Plea bargaining serves as a mechanism to expedite the resolution of criminal cases, allowing both the prosecution and the defense to avoid the time, expense, and uncertainty of a trial. It is a prevalent practice in the United States, where it resolves the vast majority of criminal cases, and has been adopted in various forms in other legal systems worldwide. \nPlea bargains can take different forms, such as \"charge bargaining\", where a defendant pleads guilty to a lesser offense, or \"sentence bargaining\", where the expected sentence is agreed upon before a guilty plea. In addition, count bargaining involves pleading guilty to a subset of multiple charges. While plea bargaining can reduce the burden on courts and offer defendants a chance for lighter sentences, it has been subject to criticism. Detractors argue that it may encourage defendants, including the innocent, to plead guilty out of fear of harsher penalties if convicted at trial. Proponents, however, emphasize its role in conserving judicial resources and providing a degree of certainty for all parties involved.\nThe practice of plea bargaining has spread globally across common law jurisdictions, like the US and UK, but varies significantly based on local legal traditions and regulations. In civil law jurisdictions, plea bargaining is generally not permitted or is highly regulated.\nIn some jurisdictions where plea bargaining is allowed, the judiciary retains the final authority to approve or reject plea agreements, ensuring that any proposed sentence aligns with public interest and justice standards. The use of plea bargains remains controversial.\nAdvantages.\nPlea bargaining has been defended as a voluntary exchange that leaves both parties better off, in that defendants have many procedural and substantive rights, including a right to trial and to appeal a guilty verdict. By pleading guilty, defendants waive those rights in exchange for a commitment from the prosecutor, such as a reduced charge or more favorable sentence. For a defendant who believes that conviction is almost certain, a discount to the sentence is more useful than an unlikely chance of acquittal. The prosecutor secures a conviction while avoiding the need to commit time and resources to trial preparation and a possible trial. Plea bargaining similarly helps preserve money and resources for the court in which the prosecution occurs. It also means that victims and witnesses do not have to testify at the trial, which in some cases may be traumatic.\nDisadvantages and issues.\nScope for coercive manipulation.\nPlea bargaining is criticized, particularly outside the United States, on the grounds that its close relationship with rewards, threats and coercion potentially endanger the correct legal outcome.\nAuthor Martin Yant discusses the use of coercion in plea bargaining:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Even when the charges are more serious, prosecutors often can still bluff defense attorneys and their clients into pleading guilty to a lesser offense. As a result, people who might have been acquitted because of lack of evidence, but also who are in fact truly innocent, will often plead guilty to the charge. Why? In a word, fear. And the more numerous and serious the charges, studies have shown, the greater the fear. That explains why prosecutors sometimes seem to file every charge imaginable against defendants.\nThis tactic is prohibited in some other countries\u2014for example in the United Kingdom the prosecutor's code states:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Prosecutors should never go ahead with more charges than are necessary just to encourage a defendant to plead guilty to a few. In the same way, they should never go ahead with a more serious charge just to encourage a defendant to plead guilty to a less serious one.\nalthough it adds that in some kinds of complex cases such as major fraud trials:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The over-riding duty of the prosecutor is\u00a0... to see that justice is done. The procedures must command public and judicial confidence. Many defendants in serious and complex fraud cases are represented by solicitors experienced in commercial litigation, including negotiation. This means that the defendant is usually protected from being put under improper pressure to plead. The main danger to be guarded against in these cases is that the prosecutor is persuaded to agree to a plea or a basis that is not in the public interest and interests of justice because it does not adequately reflect the seriousness of the offending\u00a0... Any plea agreement must reflect the seriousness and extent of the offending and give the court adequate sentencing powers. It must consider the impact of an agreement on victims and also the wider public, whilst respecting the rights of defendants.\nJohn H. Langbein argues that the modern American system of plea bargaining is comparable to the medieval European system of judicial torture:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;There is, of course, a difference between having your limbs crushed if you refuse to confess, or suffering some extra years of imprisonment if you refuse to confess, but the difference is of degree, not kind. Plea bargaining, like torture, is coercive. Like the medieval Europeans, the Americans are now operating a procedural system that engages in condemnation without adjudication.\nConsequences for innocent accused.\nTheoretical work based on the prisoner's dilemma is one reason that, in many countries, plea bargaining is forbidden. Often, precisely the prisoner's dilemma scenario applies: it is in the interest of both suspects to confess and testify against the other suspect, irrespective of the innocence of the accused. Arguably, the worst case is when only one party is guilty: here, the innocent one has no incentive to confess, while the guilty one has a strong incentive to confess and give testimony (including \"false\" testimony) against the innocent.\nA 2009 study by the European Association of Law and Economics observed that innocent defendants are consistently more likely than guilty defendants to reject otherwise-favorable pleas proposals, even when theoretically disadvantageous to do so, because of perceived unfairness, and would do so even if the expected sanction would be worse if they proceeded to trial. The study concluded that \"[t]his somewhat counterintuitive 'cost of innocence', where the preferences of innocents lead them collectively to fare worse than their guilty counterparts, is further increased by the practice of imposing much harsher sentences at trial on defendants who contest the charges. This 'trial penalty' seeks to facilitate guilty pleas by guilty defendants [... and ironically] disproportionately, collectively, penalizes innocents, who reject on fairness grounds some offers their guilty counterparts accept.\"\nThe extent to which innocent people will accept a plea bargain and plead guilty is contentious and has been subjected to considerable research. Much research has focused on the relatively few actual cases where innocence was subsequently proven, such as successful appeals for murder and rape based upon DNA evidence, which tend to be atypical of trials as a whole (being by their nature only the most serious kinds of crime). Other studies have focused on presenting hypothetical situations to subjects and asking what choice they would make. More recently some studies have attempted to examine actual reactions of innocent persons generally, when faced with actual plea bargain decisions. A study by Dervan and Edkins (2013) attempted to recreate a real-life controlled plea bargain situation, rather than merely asking theoretical responses to a theoretical situation\u2014a common approach in previous research. It placed subjects in a situation where an accusation of academic fraud (cheating) could be made, of which some subjects were in fact by design actually guilty (and knew this), and some were innocent but faced seemingly strong evidence of guilt and no verifiable proof of innocence. Each subject was presented with the evidence of guilt and offered a choice between facing an academic ethics board and potentially a heavy penalty in terms of extra courses and other forfeits, or admitting guilt and accepting a lighter \"sentence\". The study found that as expected from court statistics, around 90% of accused subjects who were actually guilty chose to take the plea-bargain and plead guilty. It also found that around 56% of subjects who were actually innocent (and privately knew it) also take up the plea-bargain and plead guilty, for reasons including avoiding formal quasi-legal processes, uncertainty, possibility of greater harm to personal future plans, or deprivation of home environment due to remedial courses. The authors stated:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Previous research has argued that the innocence problem is minimal because defendants are risk-prone and willing to defend themselves before a tribunal. Our research, however, demonstrates that when study participants are placed in real, rather than hypothetical, bargaining situations and are presented with accurate information regarding their statistical probability of success, just as they might be so informed by their attorney or the government during a criminal plea negotiation, innocent defendants are highly risk-averse.\nMore pressure to plea bargain may be applied in weak cases (where there is less certainty of both guilt and jury conviction) than strong cases. Prosecutors tend to be strongly motivated by conviction rates, and \"there are many indications that prosecutors are willing to go a long way to avoid losing cases, [and that] when prosecutors decide to proceed with such weak cases they are often willing to go a long way to assure that a plea bargain is struck\". Prosecutors often have great power to procure a desired level of incentive, as they select the charges to be presented. For this reason,\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;[P]lea bargains are just as likely in strong and weak cases. Prosecutors only need to adjust the offer to the probability of conviction in order to reach an agreement. Thus, weaker cases result in more lenient plea bargains, and stronger ones in relative harshness, but both result in an agreement. [... W]hen the case is weak, the parties must rely on charge bargaining ... But [charge bargaining] is hardly an obstacle. Charge bargaining in weak cases is not the exception; it is the norm all around the country. Thus, even if the evidence against innocent defendants is, on average, weaker, the likelihood of plea bargains is not dependent on guilt.\nAnother situation in which an innocent defendant may plead guilty is in the case of a defendant who cannot raise money for a bail bond, and who is being held in custody in a jail or detention facility. Because it may take months, or even years, for criminal cases to come to trial or even indictment in some jurisdictions, an innocent defendant who is offered a plea bargain that includes a sentence of less time than they would otherwise spend in jail awaiting an indictment or a trial may choose to accept the plea arrangement and plead guilty.\nMisalignment of goals and incentives.\nAgency problems may arise in plea bargaining as, although the prosecutor represents the people and the defense attorney represents the defendant, these agents' goals may not be congruent with those of their principles. For example, prosecutors and defense attorneys may seek to maintain good relations with one another, creating a potential conflict with the parties they represent. A defense attorney may receive a flat fee for representing a client, or may not receive additional money for taking a case to trial, creating an incentive for the defense attorney to settle a case to increase profits or to avoid a financial loss.\nA prosecutor may want to maintain a high conviction rate or avoid a losing high-profile trials, creating the potential that they will enter into a plea bargain that furthers their interests but reduces the potential of the prosecution and sentence to deter crime. Prosecutors may also make charging decisions that significantly affect a defendant's sentence, and may file charges or offer plea deals that cause even an innocent defendant to consider or accept a plea bargain.\nIssues related to cost of justice.\nAnother argument against plea bargaining is that it may not actually reduce the costs of administering justice. For example, if a prosecutor has only a 25% chance of winning a case and sending a defendant away to prison for 10 years, they may make a plea agreement for a sentence of one year; but if plea bargaining is unavailable, a prosecutor may drop the case completely.\nUsage in common law countries.\nCanada.\nIn Canada, the courts always have the final say with regard to sentencing. Nevertheless, plea bargaining has become an accepted part of the criminal justice system although judges and Crown attorneys are often reluctant to refer to it as such. In most Canadian criminal proceedings, the Crown has the ability to recommend a lighter sentence than it would seek following a guilty verdict in exchange for a guilty plea.\nLike other common law jurisdictions, the Crown can also agree to withdraw some charges against the defendant in exchange for a guilty plea. This has become standard procedure for certain offences such as impaired driving. In the case of hybrid offences, the Crown must make a binding decision as to whether to proceed summarily or by indictment prior to the defendant making his or her plea. If the Crown elects to proceed summarily and the defendant then pleads not guilty, the Crown cannot change its election. Therefore, the Crown is not in a position to offer to proceed summarily in exchange for a guilty plea.\nCanadian judges are not bound by the Crown's sentencing recommendations and could impose harsher (or more lenient) penalties. Therefore, the Crown and the defence will often make a \"joint submission\" with respect to sentencing. While a joint submission can entail both the Crown and defence recommending exactly the same disposition of a case, this is not common except in cases that are sufficiently minor that the Crown is willing to recommend a discharge. In more serious cases, a joint submission normally call for a sentence within relatively narrow range, with the Crown arguing for a sentence at the upper end of the range and the defence arguing for a sentence at the lower end, so as to maintain the visibility of the judge's ability to exercise discretion.\nJudges are not bound to impose a sentence within the range of a joint submission, and a judge's disregard for a joint submission is not in itself grounds for the sentence to be altered on appeal. However, if a judge routinely disregards joint submissions, that judge would compromise the ability of the Crown to offer meaningful incentives for defendants to plead guilty. Defence lawyers would become reluctant to enter into joint submissions if they were thought to be of little value with a particular judge, which would thus result in otherwise avoidable trials. For these reasons, Canadian judges will normally impose a sentence within the range of any joint submission.\nFollowing a Supreme Court of Canada ruling that imposes strict time limits on the resolution of criminal cases (eighteen months for cases in provincial court and thirty months for cases in Superior Court), several provinces have initiated and intensified measures intended to maximize the number of minor criminal cases resolved by a plea bargain.\nLargely particular to the Canadian justice system is that further negotiations concerning the final disposition of a criminal case may also arise even after a sentence has been passed. This is because in Canada the Crown has (by common law standards) a very broad right to appeal acquittals, and also a right to appeal for harsher sentences except in cases where the sentence imposed was maximum allowed. Therefore, in Canada, after sentencing the defence sometimes has an incentive to try to persuade the Crown to not appeal a case, in exchange for the defence also declining to appeal. While, strictly speaking, this is not plea bargaining, it is done for largely the same reasons.\nEngland and Wales.\nIn England and Wales, plea bargaining, in the sense of seeking a particular sentence in exchange for dropping some charges, is not permitted; only the judge or magistrates have the power to determine sentence, and an agreement between the prosecution and defence cannot bind the court. The Crown Prosecution Service is required to prosecute an offence only where there is a realistic prospect of conviction, so greater charges cannot lawfully be used in bad faith to intimidate the defendant into accepting the charge actually sought.\nA defendant is permitted to plead guilty to some charges listed on the charge sheet or indictment and deny others, and the prosecution may agree to accept this plea and drop the denied charges; such an agreement will generally be accepted by the court as it serves the public interest, as well as the defendant's and victims' interests, to avoid the expense and stress of a trial. The defendant may also plead guilty on the basis of accepted facts that may affect sentencing while denying others, but the Sentencing Council stresses that the prosecution should accept such a plea only if it enables the court to impose a sentence and make other ancillary orders that are appropriate for the seriousness of the offence, and never merely for the sake of convenience. The prosecution must also take the victims' views into account.\nIn cases before the Crown Court, the defendant can request an indication from the judge of the likely maximum sentence that would be imposed should the defendant decide to plead guilty. Following the rule in \"R v Goodyear\", it is only appropriate to give such an indication if requested by the defence with the defendant's written authorization; such indication is treated as binding on the court, but only if the defendant actually pleads guilty, and cannot prevent the sentence being appealed as unduly lenient.\nIn the case of either way offences, the decision whether to deal with a case in a magistrates' court or the Crown Court is not made by magistrates until after a plea has been entered. A defendant is thus unable to plead guilty in exchange for having a case dealt with in magistrates' court (which has lesser sentencing powers).\nWhere the defendant pleads guilty or indicates an intention to do so, the guidelines set by the Sentencing Council typically require that they receive a discount on the sentence, with the amount of discount depending on the timing:\nThe discount can sometimes involve changing the type of punishment, such as substituting a prison sentence for community service. For some offences where a mandatory minimum sentence applies, section 73 of the Sentencing Act 2020 permits the sentence to be reduced this way up to 20 percent below the minimum.\nSection 73 requires the court to take into account the circumstances under which an indication to plead guilty was made in addition to its timing.\nIndia.\nPlea bargaining was introduced in India by \"The Criminal Law (Amendment) Act, 2005\", which amended the Code of Criminal Procedure and introduced a new chapter, XXI(A), in the code, enforceable from July 5, 2006. It allows plea bargaining for cases in which the maximum punishment is imprisonment for seven years or less; however, offenses affecting the socio-economic condition of the country and offenses committed against a woman or a child below 14 are excluded.\nIn 2007, the Sakharam Bandekar case became the first such case in India where the accused, Sakharam Bandekar, requested lesser punishment in return for confessing to his crime (using plea bargaining). However, the court rejected his plea and accepted the CBI's argument that the accused was facing serious charges of corruption. Finally, the court convicted Bandekar and sentenced him to three years' imprisonment.\nIn December 2023, Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita (BNSS) was passed, to replace Code of Criminal Procedure by July 2024, which allows first time offender to be given relaxed punishment (one-fourth and one-sixth of such punishment) in plea bargaining.\nPakistan.\nPlea bargaining as a formal legal provision was introduced in Pakistan by the National Accountability Ordinance 1999, an anti-corruption law. A special feature of this plea bargain is that the accused applies for it, accepting guilt, and offers to return the proceeds of corruption as determined by investigators and prosecutors. After an endorsement by the Chairman National Accountability Bureau, the request is presented before the court, which decides whether it should be accepted or not. If the request for plea bargain is accepted by the court, the accused stands convicted but neither is sentenced if in trial nor undergoes any sentence previously pronounced by a lower court if in appeal. The accused is disqualified to take part in elections, hold any public office, or obtain a loan from any bank; the accused is also dismissed from service if a government official.\nIn other cases, formal plea bargains in Pakistan are limited, but the prosecutor has the authority to drop a case or a charge in a case and, in practice, often does so, in return for a defendant pleading guilty on some lesser charge. No bargaining takes place over the penalty, which is the court's sole privilege.\nUnited States.\nPlea bargaining is a significant part of the criminal justice system in the United States; the vast majority (roughly 90%) of criminal cases in the United States are settled by plea bargain rather than by a jury trial. Plea bargains are subject to the approval of the court, and different states and jurisdictions have different rules. The Federal Sentencing Guidelines are followed in federal cases and have been created to ensure a standard of uniformity in all cases decided in the federal courts. A two- or three-level offense level reduction is usually available for those who accept responsibility by not holding the prosecution to the burden of proving its case; this usually amounts to a complete sentence reduction had they gone to trial and lost.\nThe Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure provide for two main types of plea agreements. An 11(c)(1)(B) agreement does not bind the court; the prosecutor's recommendation is merely advisory, and the defendant cannot withdraw their plea if the court decides to impose a sentence other than what was stipulated in the agreement. An 11(c)(1)(C) agreement, however, binds the court once the court accepts the agreement. When such an agreement is proposed, the court can reject it if it disagrees with the proposed sentence, in which case the defendant has an opportunity to withdraw their plea.\nPlea bargains are so common in the Superior Courts of California (the general trial courts) that the Judicial Council of California has published an optional seven-page form (containing all mandatory advisements required by federal and state law) to help prosecutors and defense attorneys reduce such bargains into written plea agreements.\nCertain aspects of the American justice system serve to promote plea bargaining. For example, the adversarial nature of the U.S. criminal justice system puts judges in a passive role, in which they have no independent access to information with which to assess the strength of the case against the defendant. The prosecutor and defense may thus control the outcome of a case through plea bargaining. The court must approve a plea bargain as being within the interests of justice.\nThe lack of compulsory prosecution also gives prosecutors greater discretion as well as the inability of crime victims to mount a private prosecution and their limited ability to influence plea agreements. Defendants who are held in custody\u2014who either do not have the right to bail or cannot afford bail, or who do not qualify for release on their own recognizance\u2014may get out of jail immediately following the judge's acceptance of a plea.\nGenerally, once a plea bargain is made and accepted by the courts, the matter is final and cannot be appealed. However, a defendant may withdraw his plea for certain legal reasons, and a defendant may agree to a \"conditional\" plea bargain, whereby they plead guilty and accept a sentence, but reserve the right to appeal a specific matter (such as violation of a constitutional right). If the defendant does not win on appeal the agreement is carried out; if the defendant is successful on appeal the bargain is terminated. The defendant in \"Doggett v. United States\" made such a bargain, reserving the right to appeal solely on the grounds that he was not given a speedy trial as required by the United States Constitution; Doggett's claim was upheld by the United States Supreme Court and he was freed.\nOther common law jurisdictions.\nIn some common law jurisdictions, such as Singapore and the Australian state of Victoria, plea bargaining is practiced only to the extent that the prosecution and the defense can agree that the defendant will plead guilty to some charges or to reduced charges in exchange for the prosecutor withdrawing the remaining or more serious charges. In New South Wales, a 10-25% discount on the sentence is customarily given in exchange for an early guilty plea, but this concession is expected to be granted by the judge as a way of recognizing the utilitarian value of an early guilty plea to the justice system, and is never negotiated with a prosecutor. The courts in these jurisdictions have made it plain that they will always decide what the appropriate penalty is to be. No bargaining takes place between the prosecution and the defence over criminal penalties.\nUse in civil law countries.\nPlea bargaining is extremely difficult in jurisdictions based on the civil law. This is because, unlike common law systems, civil law systems have no concept of plea: if the defendant confesses, a confession is entered into evidence, but the prosecution is not absolved of the duty to present a full case. A court may decide that a defendant is innocent even though they presented a full confession. Also, unlike common law systems, prosecutors in civil law countries may have limited or no power to drop or reduce charges after a case has been filed, and in some countries their power to drop or reduce charges \"before\" a case has been filed is limited, making plea bargaining impossible. Since the 1980s, some civil law nations have adapted their systems to allow for plea bargaining.\nBrazil.\nIn 2013 Brazil passed a law allowing plea bargains, which have been used in the political corruption trials taking place since then.\nCentral African Republic.\nIn the Central African Republic, witchcraft carries heavy penalties but those accused of it typically confess in exchange for a modest sentence.\nChina.\nIn China, a plea bargaining pilot scheme was introduced by the Standing Committee of the National People's Congress in 2016. For defendants that face jail terms of three years or fewer, agrees to plead guilty voluntarily and agree with prosecutors' crime and sentencing proposals are given mitigated punishments.\nDenmark.\nIn 2009, in a case about whether witness testimony originating from a plea deal in the United States was admissible in a Danish criminal trial \"(297/2008 H)\", the Supreme Court of Denmark (Danish: H\u00f8jesteret) unanimously ruled that plea bargains are \"prima facie\" not legal under Danish law, but that the witnesses in the particular case would be allowed to testify regardless (with the caveat that the lower court consider the possibility that the testimony was untrue or at least influenced by the benefits of the plea bargain). The Supreme Court did, however, point out that Danish law contains mechanisms similar to plea bargains, such as \u00a7 82, nr. 10 of the Danish Penal Code (Danish: \"Straffeloven\") which states that a sentence may be reduced if the perpetrator of a crime provides information that helps solve a crime perpetrated by others, or \u00a7 23 a of the Danish Competition Law (Danish: \"Konkurrenceloven\") which states that someone can apply to avoid being fined or prosecuted for participating in a cartel if they provide information about the cartel that the authorities did not know at the time.\nIf a defendant admits to having committed a crime, the prosecution does not have to file charges against them, and the case can be heard as a so-called \"admission case\" (Danish: \"tilst\u00e5elsessag\") under \u00a7 831 of the Law on the Administration of Justice (Danish: \"Retsplejeloven\") provided that: the confession is supported by other pieces of evidence (meaning that a confession is not enough to convict someone on its own); both the defendant and the prosecutor consent to it; the court does not have any objections; \u00a7\u00a7 68, 69, 70 and 73 of the penal code do not apply to the case.\nFrance.\nThe introduction of a limited form of plea bargaining (\"comparution sur reconnaissance pr\u00e9alable de culpabilit\u00e9\" or CRPC, often summarized as \"plaider coupable\") in 2004 was highly controversial in France. In this system, the public prosecutor could propose to suspects of relatively minor crimes a penalty not exceeding one year in prison; the deal, if accepted, had to be accepted by a judge. Opponents, usually lawyers and leftist political parties, argued that plea bargaining would greatly infringe on the rights of defense, the long-standing constitutional right of presumption of innocence, the rights of suspects in police custody, and the right to a fair trial.\nFor instance, Robert Badinter argued that plea bargaining would give too much power to the public prosecutor and would encourage defendants to accept a sentence only to avoid the risk of a bigger sentence in a trial, even if they did not really deserve it. Only a minority of criminal cases are settled by that method: in 2009, 77,500 out of the 673,700 or 11.5% of the decisions by the correctional courts.\nGeorgia.\nPlea bargaining (Georgian: \u10e1\u10d0\u10de\u10e0\u10dd\u10ea\u10d4\u10e1\u10dd \u10e8\u10d4\u10d7\u10d0\u10dc\u10ee\u10db\u10d4\u10d1\u10d0, literally \"plea agreement\") was introduced in Georgia in 2004. The substance of the Georgian plea bargaining is similar to the United States and other common law jurisdictions.\nA plea bargaining, also called a plea agreement or negotiated plea, is an alternative and consensual way of criminal case settlement. A plea agreement means settlement of case without main hearing when the defendant agrees to plead guilty in exchange for a lesser charge or for a more lenient sentence or for dismissal of certain related charges. (Article 209 of the Criminal Procedure Code of Georgia)\nDefendants' rights during plea bargaining.\nThe main principle of the plea bargaining is that it must be based on the free will of the defendant, equality of the parties and advanced protection of the rights of the defendant:\nObligations of the prosecutor while concluding the plea agreement.\nWhile concluding the plea agreement, the prosecutor is obliged to take into consideration public interest, severity of the penalty, and personal characteristics of the defendant. (Article 210 of the Criminal Procedure Code of Georgia)\nTo avoid abuse of powers, legislation foresees written consent of the supervisory prosecutor as necessary precondition to conclude plea agreement and to amend its provisions. (Article 210 of the Criminal Procedure Code of Georgia)\nOversight over the plea agreement.\nPlea agreement without the approval of the court does not have the legal effect. \nThe court must satisfy itself that the plea agreement is concluded on the basis of the free will of the defendant, that the defendant fully acknowledges the essence of the plea agreement and its consequences. (Article 212 of the Criminal Procedure Code of Georgia)\nA guilty plea of the defendant is not enough to render a guilty judgment. (Article 212 of the Criminal Procedure Code of Georgia) Consequently, the court is obliged to discuss two issues:\nAfter both criteria are satisfied the court additionally checks whether formalities related to the legislative requirements are followed and only then makes its decision.\nIf the court finds that presented evidence is not sufficient to support the charges or that a motion to render a judgment without substantial consideration of a case is submitted in violation of the requirements stipulated by the Criminal Procedure Code of Georgia, it shall return the case to the prosecution. The court before returning the case to the prosecutor offers the parties to change the terms of the agreement. If the changed terms do not satisfy the court, then it shall return the case to the prosecution. (Article 213 of the Criminal Procedure Code of Georgia).\nIf the court satisfies itself that the defendant fully acknowledges the consequences of the plea agreement, and he or she was represented by the defense council, his or her will is expressed in full compliance with the legislative requirements without deception and coercion, also if there is enough body of doubtless evidence for the conviction and the agreement is reached on legitimate sentence - the court approves the plea agreement and renders guilty judgment. If any of the abovementioned requirements are not satisfied, the court rejects to approve the plea agreement and returns the case to the prosecutor. (Article 213 of the Criminal Procedure Code of Georgia).\nRole of the victim in plea agreement negotiations.\nThe plea agreement is concluded between the parties - the prosecutor and the defendant. Notwithstanding the fact that the victim is not party to the criminal case and the prosecutor is not a tool in the hands of the victim to obtain revenge against the offender, the attitude of the victim in relation to the plea agreement is still important.\nUnder Article 217 of the Criminal Procedure Code of Georgia, the prosecutor is obliged to consult with the victim prior to concluding the plea agreement and inform him or her about this. In addition, under the Guidelines of the Prosecution Service of Georgia, the prosecutor is obliged to take into consideration the interests of the victim and as a rule conclude the plea agreement after the damage is compensated.\nGermany.\nPlea agreements have made a limited appearance in Germany. However, there is no exact equivalent of a guilty plea in German criminal procedure. In practice, the criminal justice system relied on negotiations behind closed doors for many years, before \u00a7 257c StPO \"Negotiated Agreement\" was introduced. In case the court decides to initiate an agreement, prosecution and defense can negotiate on the terms. \"A confession is,\" not strictly required, but \"as a rule, to form an integral part of each negotiated agreement\". The goal of the trial remains unchanged: discovery of material truth - which means that all evidence has to be considered. Contrary to the plea bargain in common law, the \"negotiated agreement\" is limited in many ways. The taboo of negotiating the verdict of guilty and measures of reform and prevention, exact sentences, and an obligation to document agreements (whether successful or not), are just few of the requirements. The German Federal Constitution Court (Bundesverfassungsgericht) acknowledged in the \"Landau-decision\" in 2013, that plenty of cases were not following \u00a7 257c StPO and relied on \"Gentlemen's agreements\" - informal agreements, circumventing several protections put in place by legislators. In any case, the introduction of \u00a7 257c has been mostly welcomed, but criticized for its inability to sufficiently address problems of criminal proceedings in German courts, mainly due to aspects of efficiency. \nItaly.\nItaly has a form of bargaining, popularly known as \"patteggiamento\" but that has a technical name of penalty application under request of the parts. In fact, the bargaining is not about the charges, but about the penalty applied in sentence, reduced up to one third.\nWhen the defendant deems that the punishment that would, concretely, be handed down is less than a five-year imprisonment (or that it would just be a fine), the defendant may request to plea bargain with the prosecutor. The defendant is rewarded with a reduction on the sentence and has other advantages (such as that the defendant does not pay the fees on the proceeding). The defendant must accept the penalty for the charges (even if the plea-bargained sentence has some particular matters in further compensation proceedings), no matter how serious the charges are.\nSometimes, the prosecutor agrees to reduce a charge or to drop some of multiple charges in exchange for the defendant's acceptance of the penalty. The defendant, in the request, could argue with the penalty and aggravating and extenuating circumstancing with the prosecutor, that can accept or refuse. The request could also be made by the prosecutor. The plea bargaining could be granted if the penalty that could be concretely applied is, after the reduction of one third, inferior to five-year imprisonment (so called \"patteggiamento allargato\", wide bargaining); When the penalty applied, after the reduction of one third, is inferior of two years imprisonment or is only a fine (so called \"patteggiamento ristretto\" limited bargaining), the defendant can have other advantages, like sentence suspended and the effacement of the crime if in five year of the sentence, the defendant does not commit a similar crime.\nIn the request, when it could be applied the conditional suspension of the penalty according to the article 163 and following of the Italian penal code, the defendant could subordinate the request to the grant of the suspension; if the judge rejects the suspension, the bargaining is refused. When both the prosecutor and the defendant have come to an agreement, the proposal is submitted to the judge, who can refuse or accept the plea bargaining.\nAccording to Italian law, a bargain does not need a guilty plea (in Italy there is no plea declaration); for this reason, a bargaining sentence is only an acceptance of the penalty in exchange with the stop of investigation and trial and has no binding cogency in other trials, especially in civil trials in which parts argue of the same facts at the effects of civil liability and in other criminal trials in which are processed the accomplices of the defendant that had requested and got a bargaining sentence.\nJapan.\nIn Japan, plea bargaining was previously forbidden by law, although sources reported that prosecutors illegally offered defendants plea bargains in exchange for their confessions.\nPlea bargaining was introduced in Japan in June 2018. The first case of plea bargaining under this system, in July 2018, involved allegations of bribery by Mitsubishi Hitachi Power Systems in Thailand. The second case was a November 2018 deal to obtain evidence of accounting and securities law violations against Nissan executives Carlos Ghosn and Greg Kelly.\nUnder the Japanese system, formally known as the , plea bargaining is available in prosecutions for organized crime, competition law violations, and economic crimes such as securities law violations. The prosecutor, defendant, and defense counsel each sign a written agreement, which must then be admitted into evidence in a public court without delay.\nPoland.\nPoland also adopted a limited form of plea bargaining, which is applicable only to minor felonies (punishable by no more than 15 years of imprisonment). The procedure is called \"voluntary submission to a penalty\" and allows the court to pass an agreed sentence without reviewing the evidence, which significantly shortens the trial.\nThere are some specific conditions that have to be simultaneously met:\nHowever, the court may object to the terms of proposed plea agreement (even if already agreed between the defendant, victim and prosecutor) and suggest changes (not specific but rather general). If the defendant accepts these suggestions and changes his penalty proposition, the court approves it and passes the verdict according to the plea agreement. In spite of the agreement, all the parties of the trial: prosecution, defendant and the victim as an auxiliary prosecutor (in Poland, the victim may declare that he wants to act as an \"auxiliary prosecutor\" and consequently gains the rights similar to official prosecutor) - have the right to appeal.\nSpain.\nSpain has relatively recently adopted a limited form of plea bargaining and the procedure is called a \"conformity sentence\" meaning the accused is in agreement and can only be used in minor charges but not in serious charges where nine or more years of prison may be imposed.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23477", "revid": "199747", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23477", "title": "Protest song", "text": "Song associated with a movement for social change\n \nA protest song is a song that is associated with a movement for protest and social change and hence part of the broader category of \"topical\" songs (or songs connected to current events). It may be folk, classical, or commercial in genre.\nAmong social movements that have an associated body of songs are the abolition movement, prohibition, women's suffrage, the labour movement, the human rights movement, civil rights, the Native American rights movement, the Jewish rights movement, disability rights, the anti-war movement and 1960s counterculture, art repatriation, opposition against blood diamonds, abortion rights, the feminist movement, the sexual revolution, the LGBT rights movement, masculism, animal rights movement, vegetarianism and veganism, gun rights, legalization of marijuana and environmentalism.\nProtest songs are often situational, having been associated with a social movement through context. \"Goodnight Irene\", for example, acquired the aura of a protest song because it was written by Lead Belly, a black convict and social outcast, although on its face it is a love song. Or they may be abstract, expressing, in more general terms, opposition to injustice and support for peace, or free thought, but audiences usually know what is being referred to. Ludwig van Beethoven's \"Ode to Joy\", a song in support of universal brotherhood, is a song of this kind. It is a setting of a poem by Friedrich Schiller celebrating the continuum of living beings (who are united in their capacity for feeling pain and pleasure and hence for empathy), to which Beethoven himself added the lines that all men are brothers. Songs which support the status quo do not qualify as protest songs.\nProtest song texts may have significant specific content. The labour movement musical \"Pins and Needles\" articulated a definition of a protest song in a number called \"Sing Me a Song of Social Significance\". Phil Ochs once explained, \"A protest song is a song that's so specific that you cannot mistake it for BS.\" Some researchers have argued that protest songs must express opposition or, at the very least, offer some alternative solutions if they are limited to drawing attention to social issues. A broad definition, which does not exclude any upcoming form of creativity, defines a protest song as one performed by protesters.\nAn 18th-century example of a topical song intended as a feminist protest song is \"Rights of Woman\" (1795), sung to the tune of \"God Save the King\", written anonymously by \"A Lady\" and published in the \"Philadelphia Minerva\", October 17, 1795. There is no evidence that it was ever sung as a movement song, however.\nTypes.\nThe sociologist R. Serge Denisoff saw protest songs rather narrowly in terms of their function, as forms of persuasion or propaganda. Denisoff saw the protest song tradition as originating in the \"psalms\" or songs of grassroots Protestant religious revival movements, terming these hymns \"protest-propaganda\", as well.\nDenisoff subdivided protest songs as either \"magnetic\" or \"rhetorical\". \"Magnetic\" protest songs were aimed at attracting people to the movement and promoting group solidarity and commitment \u2013 for example, \"Keep Your Eyes on the Prize\" and \"We Shall Overcome\". \"Rhetorical\" protest songs, on the other hand, are often characterized by individual indignation and offer a straightforward political message designed to change political opinion. Denisoff argued that although \"rhetorical\" songs often are not overtly connected to building a larger movement, they should nevertheless be considered as \"protest-propaganda\". Examples include Bob Dylan's \"Masters of War\" (which contains the lines \"I hope that you die / And your death'll come soon\") and \"What's Going On\" by Marvin Gaye.\nRon Eyerman and Andrew Jamison, in \"Music and Social Movements: Mobilizing Tradition in the Twentieth Century\" (1998), take issue with what they consider Denisoff's reductive approach to the history and function of song (and particularly traditional song) in social movements. They point out that Denisoff had paid little attention to the song tunes of protest music, considered them strictly subordinate to the texts, a means to the message. It is true that in the highly text-oriented western European song tradition, tunes can be subordinate, interchangeable, and even limited in number (as in Portuguese \"fado\", which only has 64 tunes), nevertheless, Eyerman and Jamison point out that some of the most effective protest songs gain power through their appropriation of tunes that are bearers of strong cultural traditions. They also note that:There is more to music and movements than can be captured within a functional perspective, such as Denisoff's, which focuses on the use made of music within already-existing movements. Music, and song, we suggest, can maintain a movement even when it no longer has a visible presence in the form of organizations, leaders, and demonstrations, and can be a vital force in preparing the emergence of a new movement. Here the role and place of music needs to be interpreted through a broader framework in which tradition and ritual are understood as processes of identity and identification, as encoded and embodied forms of collective meaning and memory.\nMartin Luther King Jr. described the freedom songs this way: \"They invigorate the movement in a most significant way... these freedom songs serve to give unity to a movement.\"\nAfrica.\nAlgeria.\nRa\u00ef () is a form of folk music, originated in Oran, Algeria from Bedouin shepherds, mixed with Spanish, French, African and Arabic musical forms. Its origins date back to the 1920s and has been primarily evolved by the women referred to as cheikhas, who performed in cafes, bars or bordellos, often for men. A typical performance included the cheikhas accompanied by two to four male instrumentalists playing a gasba (a wooden flute) and gallal (a metal drum). Rai was considered a rejection of the traditional Algerian music of the time, and the cheikhas \" . . . used lewd lyrics focusing on the hardships of life facing peasant women in a big city, the pain of love, the lure of alcohol, immigration, and mourning.\"\nBy the 1950s, and through the 1960s, male musicians began performing rai music and incorporated the use of what was considered to be modern musical instruments of that time, such as the violin, the accordion, the lute, and the trumpet. As the genre evolved over time, it continued to have associations with political movements and organizations, such as the Algerian Freedom Fighters who rallied against the French occupation. Even after Algeria achieved independence in 1962, Rai continued to have an adverse relationship with the Algerian government, which exerted a tight grip upon its culture. In fact, Ra\u00ef had been banned from broadcast media, though it thrived in underground spaces, such as cabarets. It was forbidden to the point of one popular singer, Cheb Hasni, being assassinated. However, since the government lifted its restrictions on rai in the 1980s, it has enjoyed some considerable success.\nThe song \"Parisien Du Nord\" by Cheb Mami is a recent example of how the genre has been used as a form of protest, as the song was written as a protest against the racial tensions that sparked the 2005 French riots. According to Memi: It is a song against racism, so I wanted to sing it with a North African who was born in France... Because of that and because of his talent, I chose K-Mel. In the song, we say, 'In your eyes, I feel like foreigner.' It's like the kids who were born in France but they have Arab faces. They are French, and they should be considered French.\"Rai continues to be regarded, as Al-Neen states, \"[the] music of rebellion and the symbol of cynicism. Rai has emerged as an outlet for voicing the frustrations of youths and placing greater emphasis on freedom and liberty.\"\nEgypt.\nAhmed Fouad Negm is considered a key dissident figure whose poetry in colloquial Arabic gave voice to the underclass in Egypt, and inspired protesters. He teamed up in the 1960s with composer Sheikh Imam Eissa who gave music to his verses, the partnership lasting for twenty years. Lines from Negm's poem \"Who Are They, and Who Are We?\" were chanted at Tahrir Square in 2011 during protests against President Hosni Mubarak.\nMusic played a key role in mobilizing the 2011 protests at Tahrir Square against President Hosni Mubarak which led to the Egyptian revolution. \"Ezzay,\" meaning \"How come?\" by Egyptian singer and actor Mohamed Mounir is considered one of the most popular songs associated with the protests. \"Irhal,\" meaning \"Leave\", by Ramy Essam became an internet hit, and was subsequently described in the media as having become an anthem for the revolution.\nSouth Africa.\nAnti-apartheid.\nThe majority of South African protest music of the 20th century concerned itself with apartheid, a system of legalized racial segregation in which blacks were stripped of their citizenship and rights from 1948 to 1994. As the apartheid regime forced Africans into townships and industrial centres, people sang about leaving their homes, the horror of the coal mines and the degradation of working as domestic servants. Examples of which include Benedict Wallet Vilakazi's \"Meadowlands\", the \"Toyi-toyi\" chant and \"Bring Him Back Home\" (1987) by Hugh Masekela, which became an anthem for the movement to free Nelson Mandela. The Special AKA wrote a song on Nelson Mandela called \"Free Nelson Mandela\". The track is upbeat and celebratory, drawing on musical influence from South Africa, was immensely popular in Africa. Masekela's song \"Soweto Blues\", sung by his former wife, Miriam Makeba, is a blues/jazz piece that mourns the carnage of the Soweto riots in 1976. Basil Coetzee and Abdullah Ibrahim's \"Mannenberg\" became an unofficial soundtrack to the anti-apartheid resistance.\nIn Afrikaans, the 1989 Vo\u00eblvry movement led by Johannes Kerkorrel, Koos Kombuis, and Bernoldus Niemand, provided a voice of opposition from within the white Afrikaner community. These musicians sought to redefine Afrikaner identity, and although met with opposition from the authorities, Vo\u00eblvry played to large crowds at Afrikaans university campuses and was quite popular among Afrikaner youth.\nPost-apartheid.\nFollowing apartheid's demise, most Afrikaans writers and musicians followed public sentiments by embracing the new South Africa, but cracks soon emerged in the dream of the \"rainbow nation\" and criticism started to emerge, criticism that has grown in frequency and intensity in recent years. Violent crime put South Africa in the top category of most dangerous country in the world, along with poverty, government corruption, and the AIDS pandemic. For this reason, writers and musicians in which some of them veterans of anti-apartheid movements, are once again protesting against what they consider to be a government failing to uphold the promise of 'peace, democracy and freedom for all' that Nelson Mandela made upon his release from prison. By 2000, Johannes Kerkorrel claimed in the song \"Die stad bloei vanaand\" [The city bleeds tonight]: \"the dream was promised, but just another lie has been sold.\"\nTwo Afrikaans compilation albums of predominantly protest music were released recently: \"Genoeg is genoeg\" [\"Enough is enough\"] (2007) and \"Vaderland\" [\"Fatherland\"] (2008), and Koos Kombuis also released a CD called \"Bloedrivier\" [\"Blood River\"] (2008), which is primarily a protest album. One track, \"Waar is Mandela\" [\"Where is Mandela\"] asks, \"Where is Mandela when the shadows descend\u00a0... Where is the rainbow, where is the glory?\" and another, \"Die fokkol\" song [\"The Nothing\"] song, tells tourists who visit South Africa for the 2010 Football World Cup that there is nothing in South Africa; no jobs, no petrol, no electric power, not even jokes. However, these compilations only represent the tip of the iceberg, as many prominent musicians have included protest songs on recent albums, including Bok van Blerk, Fokofpolisiekar, and KOBUS!.\nThe reality of the New South Africa is decidedly violent and crime is a well-known theme in post-apartheid Afrikaans protest music. The punk group Fokofpolisiekar (which translates to \"fuck off police car\") sings in \"Brand Suid-Afrika\" [Burn South Africa]: \"For you knives lie in wait, in the garden outside you house,\" and Radio Suid-Afrika sings in \"Bid\" [Pray]: \"Pray that no-one will be waiting in the garden, pray for strength and for mercy in each dark day.\" Theirs is a country of \"murder and child rape\" where the only respite is alcohol abuse. In \"Blaas hom\" [Blow him away] by the industrial band Battery9, the narrator sings how he gleefully unloads his gun on a burglar after being robbed for the third time, and in \"Siek bliksems\" [Sick bastards] Kristoe Strauss asks God to help against the \"sick bastards\" responsible for hijackings. The metal band KOBUS! pleads for a reinstatement of the death penalty in \"Doodstraf\", because they feel the promise of peace has not been realized. In \"Reconciliation Day\", Koos Kombuis sings: \"Our streets run with blood, every day a funeral procession, they steal all our goods, on Reconciliation Day.\" Elsewhere he states, \"we're in a state of war.\" The video of this song features a lawless microcosm of theft, rape and abuse \u2013 a lawlessness reflected in Valiant Swart's \"Sodom en Gomorra\": \"two cities in the north, without laws, without order, too wonderful for words.\" Hanru Niemand rewrites the traditional Afrikaans song Sarie Marais, turning it into a murder ballad speculating on where Sarie's body will be found. The new protest musicians also parody Vo\u00eblvry's music: Johannes Kerkorrel's \"Sit dit af\" [Switch it off] \u2013 a satire on P. W. Botha of the apartheid regime \u2013 is turned into \"Sit dit aan\" [Switch it on] by Koos Kombuis, now a song protesting mismanagement resulting in chronic power failures.\nMuch of the protest by Afrikaans musicians concerns the legacy of apartheid: In \"Blameer dit op apartheid\" [Blame it on apartheid] Koos Kombuis sings how \"the whole country is evil,\" yet the situation is blamed on apartheid. Klopjag, in \"Ek sal nie langer\" [I will no longer] sings that they will no longer apologize for apartheid, a theme echoed by many others, including Koos Kombuis in \"Hoe lank moet ons nog sorry s\u00ea\" [For how long do we still have to say sorry]. Piet Paraat sings in \"Toema Jacob Zuma\" [Never mind Jacob Zuma]: \"My whole life I'm punished for the sins of my father.\" There is also a distinct feeling that the Afrikaner is being marginalized by the ANC government: Fokofpolisiekar sings in \"Antibiotika\" [Antibiotics], \"I'm just a tourist in the country of my birth,\" Bok van Blerk sings in \"Die kleur van my vel\" [The colour of my skin] that the country does not want him despite his willingness to work, because he is white, even though white South Africans have the lowest rate of unemployment, and in \"Bloekomboom\" Rian Malan uses the metaphor of a blue gum tree (an alien species) to plead that Afrikaners should not be regarded as settlers, but as part of the nation. Steve Hofmeyr has incorrectly expressed concern about the statistically high murders of Afrikaner farmers, and has also appealed in several speeches to remember Afrikaner heritage. His songs \"Ons Sal Dit Oorleef\" (We will survive this) and \"My Kreed\" (My Cry) also echoes many Afrikaners' fears of losing their culture and rights. The appeals by these musicians, and several others, to be included follows a sense of exclusion manifested in the political, linguistic and economic realms, an exclusion depicted particularly vividly by Bok van Blerk's \"Kaplyn\" [Cut line], a song that laments that fallen South African soldiers have been omitted in one of the country's show-case memorials, the Freedom Park Memorial, despite official claims of it being a memorial for all who had fought for the country.\nTunisia.\nEmel Mathlouthi composed songs since a young age which called for freedom and dignity in a Tunisia ruled by the dictator Zine El Abidine Ben Ali, earning her scrutiny from internal security forces and forcing her to retreat to Paris. Banned from the official airwaves, her protest songs found listeners on social media. In late 2010 and early 2011, Tunisian protesters referred to her song Kelmti Horra (my word is free) as an anthem of the Tunisian Revolution.\nAsia.\nChina.\nChinese-Korean Cui Jian's 1986 song \"Nothing to My Name\" was popular with protesters in Tiananmen Square.\nChinese singer Li Zhi made references to the Tiananmen Square massacre in his songs and were subsequently banned from China in 2019. Three years later, during the anti-lockdown protests in China, this was used as a protest song across YouTube.\nHong Kong.\nHong Kong rock band Beyond's \"Boundless Oceans Vast Skies\" (1993) and \"Glory Days\" (\u5149\u8f1d\u6b72\u6708) (1990) have been considered as protest anthems in various social movements.\nDuring the 2019\u201320 Hong Kong protests, Les Mis\u00e9rables' \"Do You Hear The People Sing\" (1980) and Thomas dgx yhl's \"Glory to Hong Kong\" (2019) were sung in support of the movement. The latter has been widely adopted as the anthem of these protests, with some even regarding it as the \"national anthem of Hong Kong\".\nIndia.\nCultural activism in India has always been considered one of the most effective tools to mobilise people into making a social change since pre-independence times. India provided many examples of protest songs throughout its struggle for freedom from Britain.\nIndian rapper Raftaar's \"Mantoiyat\" lashes out at corrupt politicians and police and brings to light injustices that plague the country. In the song he talks about deep rooted issues and brings light to the hypocrisy of the people and the government. Artists such as Poojan Sahil, Seedhe Maut, Vishkyun, Prabh Deep, Rapper Shaz, Sumit Roy &amp; Ahmer usually talk about social issues in their songs. The rock fusion band Indian Ocean's song \"Chitu\" was one of their first and prominent songs, a tribal anthem that Ram had come across over the course of being involved in the Narmada Movement.\nIn 2019, India's citizenship Law led to a mass protest all over the country. Artists like Varun Grover, Poojan Sahil, Rapper Shaz &amp; Madara joined the cause with their own sonic protest.\nIn more contemporary times, protest music has been a regular feature of movements in India. The Dalit rights movement especially uses music to further its goals. The Kabir Kala Manch is one such well known troupe of singers who used their performances to raise awareness and support for their cause. The widely acclaimed documentary film, Jai Bhim Comrade, highlighted the work of Kabir Kala Manch and presented this form of protest music to both Indian as well as international audiences. Similar, albeit less known, Dalit musical groups exist in various parts of India.\nThe leftist movements of India too use protest music along with street plays as a means to propagate their message amongst the masses. Protest music was a big feature of plays organized by the Indian People's Theatre Association (IPTA). Similar organisations formed after the break-up of IPTA and highly influenced by its work, like the Jana Natya Manch (JANAM), also made protest music a regular feature of their plays. In recent decades, however, the Left's cultural activism has increasingly been relegated to the margins of the cultural sphere. Some attribute this to the political decline of the mainstream Left in India, as well as a shift in focus to local movements and languages as identity politics took a greater hold of Indian Polity.\nProtest music also features regularly in protests held by other mainstream national parties of India.\nIran.\nFereydoun Farokhzad's \"Sad Eastern\"\u2014which its title is referring to Iranian people\u2014is considered as one of the first Iranian protest songs. Due to the free speech limitations at the time of the song was first sang (1969 or 1970), it is a light protest song talking about \"freedom\" and \"not giving up of our land\" Iran.\nSince it is illegal to criticize the government and social issues in Iran after the 1979 Iranian Revolution, most of the Iranian artists who make protest songs live abroad. Protest songs in Iran have a long history due to the long history of Human rights violations by the Islamic Republic of Iran.\nOne of the most important protest songs of Iran is Hichkas's \"A Good Day Will Come\" which is often considered as the most influential Iranian protest song. \"A Good Day Will Come\" was released a year after the 2009 Iranian presidential election protests, one of the most violent protests in Iran.\n\"Iran Iran\" which is the debut single of rapper Fadaei, was also released a year after the 2009 Iranian presidential election protests mentioning the killing of Neda Agha-Soltan and the 2009 Kahrizak Detention Center disaster.\nAfter the death of over 1500 protesters in the 2019\u20132020 Iranian protests \u2014which is best known as \"Bloody November\" due to its massive brutality\u2014 Iranian artists who live abroad released many protest songs include Hichkas's \"Clenched His Fists\" \u2014which was released one month after the start of the protests\u2014 and \"Hit\", Fadaei's \"Overthrow\" (also mentions 2021 Sistan and Baluchestan protests) and \"From Karaj to Langerud\" (Inspired by the death of Pezhman Gholipour). As of now, \"Bloody November\" has been mentioned many times in protest songs.\nAfter the death of Mahsa Amini on September 16, 2022, who was arrested for alleged wearing her Hijab improperly and later died after she had been \u2014according to eyewitnesses\u2014 severely beaten by religious morality police officers, a massive global protests sparked all around the world and many Iranian artists released protest songs. Among all of the songs, Shervin Hajipour's \"For\" \u2014which was released twelve days after Amini's death\u2014 became an instant hit and immediately turned into the unofficial \"anthem\" of the uprising. It was widely used during gatherings, from schools and universities to streets, both nationwide and across the globe. It was broadly circulated in social media and foreign TV channels and radio stations as well. The song also served as the backdrop for several other forms of art such as video works, graphic design and performance art. On November 11, 2022, Roxana Saberi reported the song as \"the most viral tune to ever come out of Iran\". Since its release, \"For\" has become the single most covered protest song in Iran's history. Hajipour was later arrested for the song and released on bail five days later, banned from any musical activity.\nOther Iranian notable protest songs which were released during Mahsa Amini protests includes Mehdi Yarrahi's \"Woman's Anthem\", \"Life's Anthem\" and \"Cage is Enough\", Hichkas's \"This One Is Also For\", Fadaei's heavy political theme album \"\"Righ\"t\" \u2014which includes \"Tawaf\" and \"Blood\" protest songs\u2014 and \"Conquer\" (Inspired by the execution of Majidreza Rahnavard), Shapur's \"Death to the Whole System\", Toomaj Salehi's \"Battleground\" and \"Omen\", Ethnic Musician's \"Freedom's Anthem\", Koorosh and Sami Low's \"Us\", Shahin Najafi's \"Gen Z\" and \"The Morning of Revenge\".\nMajid Entezami's \"Khorramshahr Symphony\" \u2014which was re-released on October 13, 2022, and its title is referring to Khorramshahr's 1980 and 1982 battles\u2014 was also used multiple times on protest videos including women cutting their hair and calls for protests.\nMany artists have been arrested in Iran after releasing protest songs following the 2022 Mahsa Amini protests includes Shervin Hajipour, Mona Borzouei (Lyricist of Mehdi Yarrahi's \"Woman's Anthem\") and Toomaj Salehi. Salehi was arrested on October 30, 2022, for his social awareness activities on his social media and releasing the two protest songs \"Battleground\" and \"Omen\" during the Mahsa Amini protests. On November 27, 2022, Iranian media revealed that Salehi was charged with \"corruption on Earth\", an offense which could carry the death penalty.\nIn March 2023, rapper Fadaei released another protest song associated with the 2022\u20132023 Iranian protests titled \"Black\". The song was very controversial due to its Maddahi singing style mixed with pop music. It also contains heavy protest lyrics and Chaharshanbe Suri-Muharram-Nowruz themes.\nIsrael.\nIsrael's protest music has often become associated with different political factions.\nDuring the 1967 war, Naomi Shemer added a third verse to her song \"Jerusalem of Gold\", sung by Shuli Natan, about the recapturing of Jerusalem after 2,000 years. Later on that year, a different point of view of the song was introduced by the folk singer Meir Ariel, who recorded an anti-war version and named it \"Jerusalem of Iron\".\nGush Emunim supporters have taken a repertoire of old religious songs and invested them with political meaning. An example is the song \"Utsu Etsu VeTufar\" (They gave counsel but their counsel was violated). The song signifies the ultimate rightness of those steadfast in their beliefs, suggesting the rightness of Gush Emunim's struggle against anti-settlement policy by the government.\nMinutes before Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin was murdered at a political rally in November 1995, Israeli folk singer Miri Aloni sang the Israeli pop song \"Shir Lashalom\" (\"Song for Peace\"). This song, originally written in 1969 and performed extensively at the time by an Israeli military performing group, has become one of the anthems of the Israeli peace camp.\nDuring the Arab uprising known as the First Intifada, Israeli singer Si Heyman sang \"Yorim VeBokhim\" (\"Shoot and Weep\") to protest Israeli policy in the territories. Pink Floyd's \"Another Brick in the Wall\" is used as a protest song by some opponents of Israel's barrier in the West Bank. The lyrics were adapted to: \"We don't need no occupation. We don't need no racist wall.\"\nSince the onset of the Oslo Process and, more recently, Israel's unilateral disengagement plan, protest songs became a major avenue for opposition activists to express sentiments. Songs protesting these policies were written and performed by Israeli musicians such as Ariel Zilber, Aharon Razel, and others.\nMyanmar.\nDuring the 8888 Uprising, Burmese composer Naing Myanmar penned \"Kabar Makyay Bu\" (\u1000\u1019\u1039\u1018\u102c\u1019\u1000\u103b\u1031\u1018\u1030\u1038), rendered in English as \"We Won't Be Satisfied till the End of the World\" as a protest song. Set to the tune of Kansas' \"Dust in the Wind\", the song quickly gained popularity across the country, as an emotional appeal for freedom. The song was recorded and distributed on cassette tapes, reaching millions of Burmese eventually becoming an anthem of the 8888 Uprising.\nIn the aftermath of the 2021 Myanmar coup d'etat, the country's nascent civil disobedience movement has revitalized this song, performing it during protests and acts of civil disobedience.\nPalestine.\nPalestinian music () deals with the conflict with Israel, the longing for peace, and the love of the Palestinians' land. A typical example of such a song is \"Biladi, Biladi\" (My Country, My Country), which has become the unofficial Palestinian national anthem. Additionally, there are very few Palestinian peace songs that do not indict Israel, and outwardly militaristic.\nAnother example is the song \"Al-Quds (Jerusalem) our Land\", with words by Sharif Sabri. The song, sung by Amr Diab from Port Said, Egypt, won first prize in 2003 in a contest in Egypt for video clips produced in the West Bank and Gaza. DAM is an Arabic hip-hop group, rapping in Arabic and Hebrew about the problems faced by Palestinians under occupation and calling for change. Kamilya Jubran's song \"Ghareeba\", a setting of a poem by Khalil Gibran, deals with a sense of isolation and loneliness felt by the Palestinian woman.\nPakistan.\nProtest music in Pakistan has been deeply inspired by South Asian traditions since pre-independence times.\nThe song \"Hum Dekhenge\" is just one example of protest music from Pakistan. Faiz Ahmed, a poet and a prominent Pakistani Marxist, originally penned the poem with the same title as a response to General Zia ul Haq's repressive dictatorship. The poem is considered a critical commentary of Zia's brand of authoritarian Islam. His political beliefs set him up as a natural critic of General Zia Ul Haq. In 1985, as part of Zia's programme of forced Islamicization, the sari, part of the traditional attire for women on the subcontinent was banned. That year, Iqbal Bano, one of Pakistan's best-loved singers and artists, sang Hum Dekhenge to an audience of 50,000 people in a Lahore stadium wearing a black sari. The recording was smuggled out and distributed on bootleg cassette tapes across the country. Cries of \"Inquilab Zindabad\" (\"Long Live Revolution\") and thunderous applause from the audience can be heard on the https:// on YouTube. Faiz was in prison at the time.\nThe song has, since the fall of the Zia dictatorship, regularly featured in protests in Pakistan. More recently, a newer rendition of the song by Pakistani singer, Rahat Fateh Ali Khan, was used as the title song for the political party, Pakistan Tehreek-e-Insaf, in the 2013 Pakistani general election, and in the Azadi march of 2014.\nThe international anthem \"girti hui deewaron ko aik dhakka aur do\" by famous poet Ali Arshad Mir created in the 1970s found profound place in various protests. This revolutionary anthem is still in use in resistance movements against oppressive political regimes and failing institutions by politicians and common people alike.\nPhilippines.\nFrom the revolutionary songs of the Katipunan to the songs being sung by the New People's Army, Filipino protest music deals with poverty, oppression as well as anti-imperialism and independence. A typical example was during the American era, as Jose Corazon de Jesus created a well-known protest song entitled \"Bayan Ko\", which calls for redeeming the nation against oppression, mainly colonialism, and also became popular as a song against the Marcos regime.\nDuring the 1960s, Filipino protest music became aligned with the ideas of Communism as well as of revolution. The protest song \"\"Ang Linyang Masa\" came from Mao Zedong and his Mass Line and \"Papuri sa Pag-aaral\"\" was from Bertolt Brecht. These songs, although Filipinized, rose to become another part of Filipino protest music known as Revolutionary songs that became popular during protests and campaign struggles.\nSouth Korea.\nCommonly, protest songs in South Korea are known as \"Minjung Gayo\" (, literally \"People's song\"), and the genre of protest songs is called \"Norae Undong\", translating to the literal meaning \"song movement\". The starting point of Korean protest songs was the music culture of Korean students movements around 1970. It was common in the 1970s~1980s, especially before and after of the June Democracy Movement in 1987, and associated with against the military governments of presidents Park Chung Hee and Chun Doo Hwan reflecting the will of crowd and voices of criticism of the day. From the middle of the 1990s, following the democratization of South Korea, Korean protest songs have lost their popularity. There has been a resurgence of protest songs due to the 2024 South Korean martial law crisis.\nTaiwan.\n\"Island's Sunrise\" (Chinese: \u5cf6\u5dbc\u5929\u5149) is the theme song of 2014 Sunflower Student Movement in Taiwan. Also, the theme song of Lan Ling Wang TV drama series \"Into The Array Song\" (Chinese: \u5165\u9663\u66f2), sung by Mayday, expressed all the social and political controversies during Taiwan under the president Ma Ying-jeou administration.\nThailand.\nIn Thailand, protest songs are known as \"Phleng phuea chiwit\" (, ; lit. \"songs for life\"), a music genre that originated in the '70s, by famous artists such as Caravan, Carabao, Pongthep Kradonchamnan and Pongsit Kamphee.\nTurkey.\nThe roots of the rebellious/protest music in Anatolia goes back to the 16th century. Asiks who lived in that era, like Pir Sultan Abdal, Koroglu and Dadalo\u011flu who lived in the 18th century are still the inspirations. The tradition of rebellion have gone for centuries and have given many song to this geography's culture. The message in Turkish protest music has been against inequality, lack of freedom, poverty, and the freedom of expression. Milder elements in this style are referred to as progressive, while some die-hard protest musicians have been prosecuted, and sometimes persecuted, in the 20th century Turkey. More than a few Turkish singers have been forced to exile, most notably Cem Karaca, who later returned to Turkey during freer conditions and atmosphere. Typically, protest music bands are leftist bands with a huge following, especially in high schools and universities. The music is a crossover between folk and rock and the lyrics are about freedom, repression and uprising, capitalism and the oppressed, and the revolution that never comes. It's customary to say anti-American slogans here and there. The male singers always have what is called a Davidian voice (meaning deep and husky a la Barry White) and the females usually sing nasally with a high pitch. Some popular examples are Duman, Grup Yorum and Selda Bagcan.\nEurope.\nBelarus.\nThe first famous Belarusian protest songs were created at the beginning of the 20th century during the rise of the Belarusian People's Republic and war for independence from the Russian Empire and Soviet Russia. This period includes such protest songs as \"Advieku My Spali\" (\"We've slept enough\", also known as Belarusian Marselliese) and \"Vaja\u0107ki Mar\u0161\" (\"March of the Warriors\"), which was an anthem of the Belarusian People's Republic. The next period of protest songs was in the 1990s, with many created by such bands as NRM, Novaje Nieba and others, which led to the unspoken prohibition of these musicians. As an example, Lavon Volski, frontman of NRM, Mroja and Krambambulia, had issues with officials at the majority of his concert due to the criticism of the Belarusian political system. One of the most famous bands of Belarus, Lyapis Trubetskoy, was forbidden from performing in the country due to being critical of Aleksandr Lukashenka in his lyrics. These prohibitions lead most \"forbidden\" bands to organize concerts in Vilnius, which, though situated in modern Lithuania, is considered to be a Belarusian historical capital because less than a hundred years ago most dwellers of Vilnius (Vilnia, as it was called before it was given to Lithuania) were Belarusians. But in the middle of the 2010s, the situation began to change a bit and many protest bands started to organize concerts in Belarus.\nEstonia.\nMany of the songs performed at the Estonian Laulupidu are protest songs, particularly those written during the Singing Revolution. Due to the official position of the Soviet Union at the time, the lyrics are frequently allusive, rather than explicitly anti-Soviet, such as T\u00f5nis M\u00e4gi's song \"Koit\". In contrast, \"Eestlane olen ja eestlaseks j\u00e4\u00e4n\", sung by Ivo Linna and the group In Spe is explicitly in favour of an Estonian identity.\nFinland.\nFinland has a tradition of socialist and communist protest songs going back to the Finnish Civil War, most of which were imported and translated from Soviet Russia. In the 21st century the socialist protest song tradition is somewhat continued by left wing rap artists and to lesser degree in more traditional Taistoist form by KOM-theatre choir.\nFrance.\n\"The Internationale\" (\"L'Internationale\" in French) is a socialist, anarchist, communist, and social-democratic anthem.\n\"The Internationale\" became the anthem of international socialism. Its original French refrain is \"C'est la lutte finale/ Groupons-nous et demain/ L'Internationale/ Sera le genre humain.\" (Freely translated: \"This is the final struggle/ Let us join together and tomorrow/ The Internationale/ Will be the human race.\") The \"Internationale\" has been translated into most of the world's languages. Traditionally it is sung with the hand raised in a clenched fist salute. \"The Internationale\" is sung not only by communists but also (in many countries) by socialists or social democrats. The Chinese version was also a rallying song of the students and workers at the Tiananmen Square protests of 1989.\nThere is not so much a protest song trend in France, but rather of a permanent background of criticism and contestation, and individuals who personify it. World War II and its horrors forced French singers to think more critically about war in general, forcing them to question their governments and the powers who ruled their society.\nJazz trumpeter and singer Boris Vian's was one of the first to protest against the Algerian war with his anti-war song \"Le d\u00e9serteur\" (The deserter), which was banned by the government.\nSeveral French songwriters, such as L\u00e9o Ferr\u00e9 (1916\u20131993), Georges Brassens (1921\u20131981), Jacques Brel (1929\u20131978) (actually a Belgian singer), Maxime Le Forestier (born 1949) or interpreters (Yves Montand, Marcel Mouloudji, Serge Reggiani, Graeme Allwright ...) often wrote or sang songs aligned against majority ideas and political powers. Because racial tensions did not rise to the same levels as those in the United States, criticism was focused more toward bourgeoisie, power, religion, and songs defending liberty of thought, speech and action. After 1945, immigration became a source of inspiration for some singers: Pierre Perret (born 1934), well known for his humorous songs, started writing several more \"serious\" and committed songs against racism (\"Lily\", 1977), which critically pointed out everyday racist behaviour in French society.\nBrassens wrote several songs protesting war, hate, intolerance (\"Les Deux Oncles\" [\"The Two Uncles\"], \"La Guerre de 14\u201318\" [\"14\u201318 War\"], \"Mourir pour des id\u00e9es\" [\"To Die for Ideas\"] \"Les Patriotes\" [\"The Patriots\"] ...), against chauvinism (\"La Ballade des gens qui sont n\u00e9s quelque part\" [\"Ballad of People Who Are Born Somewhere\"]), against bourgeoisie (\"La Mauvaise R\u00e9putation\" [\"The bad reputation\"], \"Les Philistins\" [\"The Philistines\"] ...). He was often called \"anarchist\" because of his songs on representatives of law and order (and religion) (\"Le Gorille\" [\"The gorilla\"] \"H\u00e9catombe\" [\"Slaughter\"] \"Le Nombril des femmes d'agents\" [\"The navel of cops wives\"], \"Le M\u00e9cr\u00e9ant\" [\"The miscreant\"] ...).\nFerr\u00e9 was also called an \"anarchist\". He sang against consumerism (\"Vitrines\" [\"Shop Fronts\"], \"Chanson m\u00e9canis\u00e9e\" [\"Mechanized Song\"], \"Il n'y a plus rien\" [\"There is nothing left\"] ...), against French war (\"Miss gu\u00e9guerre\" [\"Miss Squabble\"], \"Pacific blues\", \"Regardez-les\" [\"Look at them\"], \"Mon g\u00e9n\u00e9ral\" [\"My general\"], \"Les Temps difficiles\" [\"Hard Times\"], \"La Marseillaise\"), death penalty (\"Ni Dieu ni ma\u00eetre\" [\"No God no Master\"], \"La Mort des loups\" [\"The Death of the Wolves\"]), Estate control (\"La Gueuse\", \"La Complainte de la t\u00e9l\u00e9\" [\"Lament of TV\"], \"La R\u00e9volution\" [\"Revolution\"], \"Le Conditionnel de vari\u00e9t\u00e9s\" [\"Middle of the road music conditional mood\"]), illusion of representative democracy (\"Ils ont vot\u00e9\" [\"They voted\"], \"La Gr\u00e8ve\" [\"Strike\"]), dictatorships (\"Franco la muerte\", \"Allende\", \"La Violence et l'Ennui\" [\"Words ... Words ... Words ... \"]), sexual hypocrisy and freedom (\"Le Chien\" [\"The Dog\"], \"Le Mal\" [\"Evil\"], \"Ton style\" [\"Your style\"], \"La Damnation\" [\"Damnation\"] ...).\nBrel's work is another ode to freedom (\"Ces gens-l\u00e0\" [\"These people\"], \"Les Bourgeois\" [\"The Bourgeois\"], \"Jaur\u00e8s\", \"Les Bigotes\" [\"The bigots\"], \"Le Colonel\" [\"The colonel\"], \"Le Caporal Casse-Pompon\" [\"Corporal Break-Nots\"]).\nGermany.\nTon Steine Scherben, one of the first and most influential German language rock bands of the 1970s and early 1980s, were well known for the highly political lyrics of vocalist Rio Reiser. The band became a musical mouthpiece of new left movements, such as the squatting movement, during that time in Germany and their hometown of West Berlin in particular. Their lyrics were, at the beginning, anti-capitalist and anarchist, and the band had connections to members of the German Red Army Faction movement before they became illegal. Later songs were about more complex issues such as unemployment (\"Mole Hill Rockers\") or homosexuality (\"Mama war so\"). They also contributed to plays and two full-length concept albums about homosexuality by the Hamburg theatre group Br\u00fchwarm (literally: boiling warm).\nA dissatisfied German youth in the late 1970s and early 1980s resulted in a strand of highly politicized German-language Punkrock (\"Deutschpunk\"), which mostly concerned itself with politically radical left-wing lyrics, mostly influenced by the Cold War. Probably the most important German-language punk band was Slime from Hamburg, who were the first band whose LP was banned because of political topics. Their songs \"Deutschland\" (\"Germany\"), \"Bullenschweine\", \"Polizei SA/SS\", and the anti-imperialist \"Yankees raus\" (\"Yankees out\") were banned, some of them are still banned today, because they propagated the use of violence against the police or compared the police to the SA and SS of Nazi Germany.\nThe Cologne-based rock group BAP is known for their committed and intelligently written lyrics, dealing with discrimination and the power games of Germany's political elites in many of their songs. The song \"Kristallnaach\" (1982) is a point in case. It analyses the corruptibility of the present-day masses for new forms of fascism, while referring to the \"Night of Broken Glass\" that took place in 1938.\nIn East Germany, protesting against the state was often prohibited. Despite this, the song Ermutigung by Wolf Biermann became a widely popular protest song against the SED government.\nIreland.\nIrish rebel songs.\nIrish rebel music is a subgenre of Irish folk music, played on typically Irish instruments (such as the Fiddle, tin whistle, Uilleann pipes, accordion, bodhr\u00e1n etc.) and acoustic guitars. The lyrics deal with the fight for Irish independence, people who were involved in liberation movements, the persecution and violence during Northern Ireland's Troubles and the history of Ireland's numerous rebellions.\nAmong the many examples of the genre, some of the most famous are \"A Nation Once Again\", \"Come out Ye Black and Tans\", \"Erin go Bragh\", \"The Fields of Athenry\", \"The Men Behind the Wire\" and the Republic of Ireland's national anthem \"Amhr\u00e1n na bhFiann\" (\"The Soldier's Song\"). Music of this genre has often courted controversy, and some of the more outwardly anti-British songs have been effectively banned from the airwaves in both England and the Republic of Ireland.\nPaul McCartney also made a contribution to the genre with his 1972 single \"Give Ireland Back to the Irish\", which he wrote as a reaction to Bloody Sunday in Northern Ireland on January 30, 1972. The song also faced an all-out ban in the UK, and has never been re-released or appeared on any Paul McCartney or Wings best-ofs. The same year McCartney's former colleague John Lennon released two protest songs concerning the hardships of war-torn Northern Ireland: \"Sunday Bloody Sunday\", written shortly after the 1972 massacre of Irish civil rights activists (which differs from U2's 1983 song of the same title in that it directly supports the Irish Republican cause and does not call for peace), and \"The Luck of the Irish\", both from his album \"Some Time in New York City\" (1972).\nThe Wolfe Tones have become legendary in Ireland for their contribution to the Irish rebel genre. The band has been recording since 1963 and has attracted worldwide fame and attention through their renditions of traditional Irish songs and originals, dealing with the former conflict in Northern Ireland. In 2002 the Wolfe Tones' version of \"A Nation Once Again\", a nationalist song from the 19th century, was voted the greatest song in the world in a poll conducted by the BBC World Service.\nAn Irish alternative rock/post punk band from Dublin, U2 broke with the rebel musical tradition when in 1983 they wrote their song \"Sunday Bloody Sunday\". The song makes reference to two separate massacres in Irish history of civilians by British forces \u2013 Bloody Sunday (1920) and Bloody Sunday 1972 \u2013 however, unlike other songs dealing with those events, the lyrics call for peace as opposed to revenge.\nThe Cranberries' hit \"Zombie\", written during their English tour in 1993, is in memory of two boys, Jonathan Ball and Tim Parry, who were killed in an IRA bombing in Warrington.\nNetherlands.\nIn 1626 the Dutch national anthem \u201cWilhelmus\u201d was composed, it was a song in support of Willem van Oranje who lead the Dutch against the Spaniards in the Eighty Years War.\nIn 1966 Boudewijn de Groot released \"Welterusten meneer de president\" (\"Good night mister president\"), a song about the Vietnam War. The song spent 12 weeks in the Dutch Top 40 and to this day it remains an important song in nederpop and among Dutch protest songs. Following \"Welterusten meneer de president\", Boudewijn de Groot and Lennaert Nijgh, a Dutch lyricist, made more protest songs. The couple inspired other Dutch musicians, namely Armand and Robert Long. 'Tweede Kamer' by Sophie Straat and Goldband is a ska protest song against the lack of female leadership in the Netherlands, urging Dutch voters to 'vote for a woman'.\nPortugal.\nThe protest songs in Portugal were mostly associated with the antifascist movement and developed chiefly among students and activists. The best known are songs by Paulo de Carvalho and Jos\u00e9 Afonso, respectively \"E Depois do Adeus\" (And After the Goodbye) and \"Gr\u00e2ndola Vila Morena\"(Gr\u00e2ndola Swarthy Town). They were chosen as a code to start the Carnation Revolution that would successfully triumph against the dictatorial regime. The first was written out of letters that the author, then fighting to maintain the colonies (a war that the general public was against) sent to his wife. Hence the title refers to his departure \"goodbye\" to the war. The other song was very explicit regarding his objective: \"O Povo \u00e9 quem mais ordena / dentro de ti oh cidade\" (The people is the one who orders the most/ inside of you oh city). \"E Depois do Adeus\" was vague enough to elude the censorship and pass as an \"end of love\" song, which also accounts for the order of the broadcast.\nOf the two, Zeca Afonso was more prolific and more identified with the movement, so much so that another of his songs was the first choice for the code \"Venham mais 5\" (Let 5 more come). Other artists also used some craft to hide their meanings in the song or went into exile. One example is Adriano Correia de Oliveira that masked the explicit lyrics with the vocal tone making it difficult to distinguish the critical verse, from the refrain or even other verses. In no other song is this more noted that the ballad \"Trova do Vento que Passa\" (Song/Poem of the Passing Wind), whose lyrics by the writer Manuel Alegre were a direct criticism of the state. The music was by Ant\u00f3nio Portugal but Correia used a typical Fado rhythm to hide such provocative verses as \"Mesmo na noite mais triste/em tempo de sevid\u00e3o/h\u00e1 sempre algu\u00e9m que resiste/h\u00e1 sempre algu\u00e9m que diz n\u00e3o\" (even in the saddest night/in time of servitude/there is always someone who stands up/there is always someone who says No).\nNot only men but also women had an active participation, albeit in lesser numbers. Ermelinda Duarte, one of those women, wrote the song \"Somos Livres\" (We Are Free), for a 1972 theatre play called \"Lisboa 72\", masking a deep meaning with catchy children's music. Although the version of her singing the tune is the best known it was only recorded \"after\" the carnation revolution.\nMany other songwriters and singers, to generate awareness, used their talents to act in all of Portugal, sometimes without pay or transport. Fausto Bordalo Dias once sang into a mike so poorly made it needed a plastic cup to work. Other singers included the priest Francisco Fanhais, the writer Jos\u00e9 Jorge Letria; Fernando Tordo; Lu\u00eds C\u00edlia; Am\u00e9lia Muge; Janita Salom\u00e9; Manuel Freire; Jos\u00e9 Barata-Moura; the poet Ary dos Santos; Jos\u00e9 M\u00e1rio Branco, S\u00e9rgio Godinho, Carlos Alberto Moniz, Maria do Amparo and Samuel.\nPoland.\nProtest songs in Poland were mostly associated with anti-communist movement and developed in the 1970s and 1980s. One of the most important artists was Jacek Kaczmarski, author of such famous songs as \"Mury\" (\"The Walls\"), \"Przedszkole\" (\"The Kindergarten\") and \"Zbroja\" (\"The Armor\"), criticizing both the totalitarian communist government and the opposition. Another famous Polish folk singer, Jan Pietrzak, wrote one of the best-known Polish patriotic protest songs, \"\u017beby Polska by\u0142a Polsk\u0105\" (\"Make Poland Polish\"), in which he reminded the most heroic moments of Polish history, including Ko\u015bciuszko Uprising, and called people to fight the communists as they fought other enemies of Poland before. He also recorded a musical version of the Jonasz Kofta's poem \"Pami\u0119tajcie o ogrodach\" (\"Remember the Gardens\"), protesting against the industrialism of life promoted by the communist propaganda. Other Polish artists well known for writing protest songs include Kazimierz Staszewski and Przemys\u0142aw Gintrowski.\nAs Rhythms of Resistance groups operated in many cities during the 2000s, rhythm predominated protests, and protesters tended not to sing. As Poland moved closer to authoritarian rule, protest song writing and performance became a staple of social movements, and singing was incorporated into street demonstrations. The song's melodies, lyrics, and performance style all alluded to earlier social struggles and political traditions that the protest was referencing and strove to uphold.\nIn the second decade of the 21st century, urban movements established choirs of activists, i.e. the Warsaw Revolutionary Choir \"Warszawianka\", the Krakow Revolutionary Choir, the TAK [Tricity Women's Action] Choir in Gda\u0144sk, which supported street protests. The song repertoire consisted largely of reconstructions of protest songs from the late 19th and early 20th centuries. In \u0141\u00f3d\u017a, \"Warszawianka\" was sung en masse during the celebrations marking the 110th and 111th anniversaries of the insurrection of 1905.\nIn 2016, singing workshops for women were conducted during some Black Protest demonstrations. The protest song https:// on YouTube with the participation of activists showed how important they find this method of communication.\nAs a tribute to Piotr Szcz\u0119sny, who used public self-immolation to condemn \"the ruling party for the systematic violation of the law, inspiring discrimination against minorities, and deliberately destroying the country's nature and educational system,\" protest songs were written in 2017. In order to convince Andrzej Duda to oppose constitutional amendments, activists later that year performed a https:// on YouTube of the Christmas carol \"Przybie\u017celi do Betlejem\" in the places the Polish president visited.\nMany protest songs were performed in Poland in 2019 during the largest teachers' strike in the country's history. Many schools, even in small towns or villages produced protest songs. Recordings of group performances were posted on social media. Numerous songs were based on tunes from the 1980s of the 20th century, specifically from the time of martial law that put an end to the 'carnival of solidarity' in 1980\u20131981.\nMany protest songs were played during the Women's Strike demonstrations in 2020 and 2021. One was https:// on YouTube to the tune of \"Bella ciao\". This song became a symbol of the demonstrations against the government and the Catholic church as they both tried to increase restrictions on the right to abortion.\nRussia.\nThe most famous source of Russian protest music in the 20th century has been those known locally as bards. The term (\u0431\u0430\u0440\u0434 in Russian) came to be used in the Soviet Union in the early 1960s, and continues to be used in Russia today, to refer to singer-songwriters who wrote songs outside the Soviet establishment. Many of the most famous bards wrote numerous songs about war, particularly The Great Patriotic War (World War II). Bards had various reasons for writing and singing songs about war. Bulat Okudzhava, who actually fought in the war, used his sad and emotional style to illustrate the futility of war in songs such as \"The Paper Soldier\" (\"\u0411\u0443\u043c\u0430\u0436\u043d\u044b\u0439 \u0421\u043e\u043b\u0434\u0430\u0442\").\nMany political songs were written by bards under Soviet rule, and the genre varied from acutely political, \"anti-Soviet\" songs, to witty satire in the best traditions of Aesop. Some of Bulat Okudzhava's songs provide examples of political songs written on these themes. Vladimir Vysotsky was perceived as a political songwriter, but later he gradually made his way into more mainstream culture. It was not so with Alexander Galich, who was forced to emigrate\u2014owning a tape with his songs could mean a prison term in the USSR. Before emigration, he suffered from KGB persecution, as did another bard, Yuliy Kim. Others, like Evgeny Kliachkin and Aleksander Dolsky, maintained a balance between outright anti-Soviet and plain romantic material.\nProtest rhetoric can also be traced in the works of such rock bands as Grazhdanskaya Oborona, Naive, Tarakany!, Pilot, Noize MC, Lumen and Louna. Later, during the Soviet-Afghan War in the 1980s, Kino (band) released an album, Gruppa krovi, which its main song, \"Blood Type\" (\u0413\u0440\u0443\u043f\u043f\u0430 \u041a\u0440\u043e\u0432\u0438) is a protest song about the Soviet-Afghan War. In Grand Theft Auto IV, it was part of the soundtrack before its ten-year license expired in 2018. In 2019, twenty-nine years and a day after the group's last performance at Luzhniki Stadium, Metallica held a concert there and sang \"Blood Type\".\nIn the 21st century, the feminist punk band Pussy Riot in particular has had frequent run-ins with the Putin presidency and the Russian Orthodox Church.\nSpain.\nSpain saw a brief period of protest singers in the 1970s, in the final years of Franco's dictatorship, mainly challenging the regime's censorship. They include some mainstream Spanish artists of the era, as Joan Manuel Serrat and V\u00edctor Manuel, but also many others as Jos\u00e9 Antonio Labordeta, Raimon, Luis Eduardo Aute, Rosa Le\u00f3n or Llu\u00eds Llach. The Catalan language, then a non-official language in the country, was often used as a vehicle of protest in itself, to highlight the cultural discrimination towards non-Castilian Spanish native speakers in Spain.\nMost of the protest songs were in a folk style with social themes, and were popular among the (then banned) left-wing and their supporters, as well with many young students in main universities. Some notable songs were \"Al Alba\" (\"At Dawn\") by Aute, \"Al vent\" (\"To The Wind\") by Raimon, and \"L'Estaca\" (\"The Stake\") by Llach.\nThe movement come to an end after the Spanish transition to democracy, years after Franco's death. In 1997, singer Ismael Serrano briefly revamped the style, being his song \"Pap\u00e1 cu\u00e9ntame otra vez\" (\"Dad, tell me again\") a nostalgic hymn to the 1970s protests.\nUnited Kingdom.\n14th\u201319th century.\nEnglish folk songs from the late medieval and early modern period reflect the social upheavals of their day. In 1944 the Marxist scholar A. L. Lloyd claimed that \"The Cutty Wren\" song constituted a coded anthem against feudal oppression and actually dated back to the English peasants' revolt of 1381, making it the oldest extant European protest song. He offered no evidence for his assertion, however and no trace of the song has been found before the 18th century. Despite Lloyd's dubious claim about its origins, however, the \"Cutty Wren\" was revived and used as a protest song in the 1950s folk revival, an example of what may be considered a protest song. In contrast, the rhyme, \"When Adam delved and Eve span, who was then the gentleman?\", is attested as authentically originating in the 1381 Peasant Revolt, though no tune associated with it has survived. Ballads celebrating social bandits like Robin Hood, from the 14th century onwards, can be seen as expressions of a desire for social justice, though although social criticism is implied and there is no overt questioning of the status quo.\nThe era of civil and religious wars of the 17th century in Britain gave rise to the radical communistic millenarian Levellers and Diggers' movements and their associated ballads and hymns, as, for example, the \"Diggers' Song\". with the incendiary verse:\n&lt;poem&gt;\nBut the Gentry must come down,\nand the poor shall wear the crown.\nStand up now, Diggers all!&lt;/poem&gt;\nThe Digger movement was violently crushed, and so it is not surprising if few overt protest songs associated with it have survived. From roughly the same period, however, songs protesting wars and the human suffering they inflict abound, though such songs do not generally explicitly condemn the wars or the leaders who wage them. For example, \"The Maunding Souldier\" or \"The Fruits of Warre is Beggery\", framed as a begging appeal from a crippled soldier of the Thirty Years' War. Such songs have been known, strictly speaking, as songs of complaint rather than of protest, since they offered no solution or hint of rebellion against the status quo.\nThe advent of industrialization in the 18th and early 19th centuries was accompanied by a series of protest movements and a corresponding increase in the number of topical social protest songs and ballads. An important example is \"The Triumph of General Ludd\", which built a fictional persona for the alleged leader of the early 19th century anti-technological Luddite movement in the cloth industry of the north midlands, and which made explicit reference to the Robin Hood tradition. A surprising English folk hero immortalized in song is Napoleon Bonaparte, the military figure most often the subject of popular ballads, many of them treating him as the champion of the common working man in songs such as the \"Bonny Bunch of Roses\" and \"Napoleon's Dream\". As labour became more organized songs were used as anthems and propaganda, for miners with songs such as \"The Black Leg Miner\", and for factory workers with songs such as \"The Factory Bell\".\nThese industrial protest songs were largely ignored during the first English folk revival of the later 19th and early 20th century, which had focused on songs that had been collected in rural areas where they were still being sung and on music education. They were revived in the 1960s and performed by figures such as A. L. Lloyd on his album \"The Iron Muse\" (1963). In the 1980s the anarchist rock band Chumbawamba recorded several versions of traditional English protest songs as \"English Rebel Songs 1381\u20131914\".\n20th century.\nColin Irwin, a journalist for \"The Guardian\", believes the modern British protest movement started in 1958 when the Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament organized a 53-mile march from Trafalgar Square to Aldermaston, to protest Britain's participation in the arms race and recent testing of the H-bomb. The protest \"fired up young musicians to write campaigning new songs to argue the case against the bomb and whip up support along the way. Suddenly many of those in skiffle groups playing American songs were changing course and writing fierce topical songs to back direct action.\" A song composed for the march, \"The H-Bomb's Thunder\", set the words of a poem by novelist John Brunner to the tune of \"Miner's Lifeguard\":\n&lt;poem&gt;\nMen and women, stand together\nDo not heed the men of war\nMake your minds up now or never\nBan the bomb for evermore.&lt;/poem&gt;\nFolk singer Ewan MacColl was for some time one of the principal musical figures of the British nuclear disarmament movement. A former agitprop actor and playwright. MacColl, a prolific songwriter and committed leftist, some years earlier had penned \"The Ballad of Ho Chi Minh\" (1953), issued as single on Topic Records, and \"The Ballad of Stalin\" (1954), commemorating the death of that leader. Neither record has ever been reissued.\nAccording to Irwin, MacColl, when interviewed in the \"Daily Worker\" in 1958, declared that:There are now more new songs being written than at any other time in the past eighty years\u2014young people are finding out for themselves that folk songs are tailor-made for expressing their thoughts and comments on contemporary topics, dreams, and worries,\nIn 1965, folk-rock singer Donovan's cover of Buffy Sainte-Marie's \"Universal Soldier\" was a hit on the charts. His anti-Vietnam War song \"The War Drags On\" appeared that same year. This was a common trend in popular music of the 1960s and 1970s. The romantic lyrics of pop songs in the 1950s gave way to words of protest.\nAs their fame and prestige increased in the late 1960s, The Beatles\u2014and John Lennon in particular\u2014added their voices to the anti-war movement. In the documentary \"The US Versus John Lennon\", Tariq Ali attributes the Beatles' activism to the fact that, in his opinion, \"The whole culture had been radicalized: [Lennon] was engaged with the world, and the world was changing him.\" \"Revolution\", 1968, commemorated the worldwide student uprisings. In 1969, when Lennon and Yoko Ono were married, they staged a week-long \"bed-in for peace\" in the Amsterdam Hilton, attracting worldwide media coverage. At the second \"Bed-in\" in Montreal, in June 1969, they recorded \"Give Peace a Chance\" in their hotel room. The song was sung by over half a million demonstrators in Washington, DC, at the second Vietnam Moratorium Day, on October 15, 1969. In 1972 Lennon's most controversial protest song LP was released, \"Some Time in New York City\", the title of whose lead single \"Woman Is the Nigger of the World\", a phrase coined by Ono in the late 1960s to protest sexism, set off a storm of controversy, and in consequence received little airplay and much banning. The Lennons went to great lengths (including a press conference attended by staff from \"Jet\" and \"Ebony\" magazines) to explain that they had used the word \"nigger\" in a symbolic sense and not as an affront to African Americans. The album also included \"Attica State\", about the Attica Prison riots of September 9, 1971; \"Sunday Bloody Sunday\" and \"The Luck Of The Irish\", about the massacre of demonstrators in Northern Ireland and \"Angela\", in support of black activist Angela Davis. Lennon also performed at the \"Free John Sinclair\" benefit concert in Ann Arbor, Michigan, on December 10, 1971, on behalf of the imprisoned antiwar activist and poet who was serving 10 years in state prison for selling two joints of marijuana to an undercover cop. On this occasion Lennon and Ono appeared on stage with among others singers Phil Ochs and Stevie Wonder, plus antiwar activists Jerry Rubin and Bobby Seale of the Black Panthers party. Lennon's song \"John Sinclair\" (which can be heard on his \"Some Time in New York City\" album), calls on the authorities to \"Let him be, set him free, let him be like you and me\". The benefit was attended by some 20,000 people, and three days later the State of Michigan released Sinclair from prison.\nThe 1970s saw a number of notable songs by British acts that protested against war, including \"Peace Train\" by Cat Stevens (1971), and \"War Pigs\" by Black Sabbath (1970). Sabbath also protested environmental destruction, describing people leaving a ruined Earth (\"Into the Void\" including, \"Iron Man\"). Renaissance added political repression as a protest theme with \"Mother Russia\" being based on \"One Day in the Life of Ivan Denisovich\" and being joined on the second side of their 1974 album \"Turn of the Cards\" by two other protest songs in \"Cold Is Being\" (about ecological destruction) and \"Black Flame\" (about the Vietnam War).\nAs the 1970s progressed, the louder, more aggressive punk movement became the strongest voice of protest, particularly in the UK, featuring anti-war, anti-state, and anti-capitalist themes. The punk culture, in stark contrast with the 1960s' sense of power through union, concerned itself with individual freedom, often incorporating concepts of individualism, free thought and even anarchism. According to \"Search and Destroy\" founder V. Vale, \"Punk was a total cultural revolt. It was a hardcore confrontation with the black side of history and culture, right-wing imagery, sexual taboos, a delving into it that had never been done before by any generation in such a thorough way.\" The most significant protest songs of the movement included \"God Save the Queen\" (1977) by the Sex Pistols, \"If the Kids are United\" by Sham 69, \"Career Opportunities\" (1977) (protesting the political and economic situation in England at the time, especially the lack of jobs available to the youth), and \"White Riot\" (1977) (about class economics and race issues) by The Clash, and \"Right to Work\" by Chelsea. See also Punk ideology.\nWar was still the prevalent theme of British protest songs of the 1980s \u2013 such as Kate Bush's \"Army Dreamers\" (1980), which deals with the traumas of a mother whose son dies while away at war. Indeed, the early 1980s was a remarkable period for anti-nuclear and anti-war UK political pop, much of it inspired directly or indirectly by the punk movement: 1980 saw '22 such Top 75 hits, by 18 different artists. For almost th[at] entire year ... (47 weeks), the UK singles charts contained at least one hit song that spoke of antiwar or antinuclear concerns, and usually more than one.' Further George McKay argues that 'it really is quite extraordinary to note that one-third of the year 1984 (17 weeks) had some kind of political pop song at the top of the British charts. Viewed from that lofty perspective, 1984 must be seen as a peak protest music time in Britain, most of it in the context of antiwar and antinuclear sentiment.'\nHowever, as the 1980s progressed, it was British prime minister Margaret Thatcher who came under the greatest degree of criticism from native protest singers, mostly for her strong stance against trade unions, and especially for her handling of the UK miners' strike (1984\u20131985), the subject of Sting's \"We Work the Black Seam\". The leading voice of protest in Thatcherite Britain in the 1980s was Billy Bragg, whose style of protest song and grass-roots political activism was mostly reminiscent of those of Woody Guthrie, however with themes that were relevant to the contemporary Briton. He summarized his stance in \"Between the Wars\" (1985), in which he sings: \"I'll give my consent to any government that does not deny a man a living wage.\"\nAlso in the 1980s the band Frankie Goes to Hollywood released a political pop protest song Two Tribes a relentless bass-driven track depicting the futility and starkness of nuclear weapons and the Cold War. The video for the song depicted a wrestling match between then-President Ronald Reagan and then-Soviet leader Konstantin Chernenko for the benefit of group members and an eagerly belligerent assembly of representatives from the world's nations, the event ultimately degenerating into complete global destruction. This video was played several times at the 1984 Democratic National Convention. Due to some violent scenes (\"Reagan\" biting \"Chernenko\"'s ear, etc.), the unedited video could not be shown on MTV, and an edited version was substituted. The single quickly hit the number one spot in the United Kingdom.\nSeveral mixes of the track feature actor Patrick Allen, who recreated his narration from the Protect and Survive public information films for certain 12-inch mixes (the original Protect and Survive soundtracks were sampled for the 7-inch mixes).\nNorth America.\nCuba.\nA type of Cuban protest music started in the mid-1960s when a movement in Cuban music emerged that combined traditional folk music idioms with progressive and often politicized lyrics. This movement of protest music came to be known as \"Nueva trova\", and was somewhat similar to that of Nueva canci\u00f3n, however with the advantage of support from the Cuban government, as it promoted the Cuban Revolution \u2013 and thus part of revolutionary song.\nPuerto Rico.\nThough originally and still largely Cuban, nueva trova has become popular across Latin America, especially in Puerto Rico. The movements biggest stars included Puerto Ricans such as Roy Brown, Andr\u00e9s Jim\u00e9nez, Antonio Cab\u00e1n Vale and the group Haciendo Punto en Otro Son.\nIn response to Telegramgate, Puerto Rican musicians Bad Bunny, Residente, and iLE released the protest song \"Afilando los cuchillos\" on July 17, 2019. It is a diss track calling for the resignation of Ricardo Rossell\u00f3.\nOceania.\nAustralia.\nIndigenous issues feature prominently in politically inspired Australian music and include the topics of land rights and aboriginal deaths in custody. One of the most prominent Australian bands to confront these issues is Yothu Yindi. Other Australian bands to have confronted indigenous issues include Tiddas, Kev Carmody, Archie Roach, Christine Anu, The Herd, Neil Murray, Blue King Brown, the John Butler Trio, Midnight Oil, Warumpi Band, Paul Kelly, Powderfinger and Xavier Rudd.\nIn addition to Indigenous issues, many Australian protest singers have sung about the futility of war. Notable anti-war songs include \"And The Band Played Waltzing Matilda\" (1972) by Eric Bogle, and \"A Walk in the Light Green\" (1983) by Redgum, most often remembered by its chorus \"I was only nineteen\".\nMany songs have also been composed about environmental issues, protests and campaigns. These include \"Rip Rip Woodchip\" (1989) by John Williamson, and \"Let the Franklin Flow\" (1983) by Goanna. Numerous songs were written and performed by protesters during anti-logging blockades in northern New South Wales, including \"Behind Enemy Lines\", \"Tonka Toys\" and \"Hey Terania\".\nNew Zealand.\nOne of the earliest protest songs in New Zealand was John Hanlon's \"Damn the Dam\", recorded in 1973 in support of the Save Manapouri Campaign.\nDuring the bitterly divisive 1981 Springbok Tour, Blam Blam Blam's \"There Is No Depression in New Zealand\" became a favourite among anti-tour protesters. Reggae band Herbs wrote and performed songs criticising French nuclear testing in the Pacific Ocean.\nSouth America.\nArgentina.\nIn Argentina, protest songs have been a powerful tool for political and social change, particularly during the military dictatorship and the ongoing struggle for human rights. Notable protest songs include Le\u00f3n Gieco's \"Los Libros de la Buena Memoria,\" which addresses the horrors of the Dirty War, Patricio Rey y sus Redonditos de Ricota's \"Que Ves el Cielo,\" critiquing societal inequality, and Charly Garc\u00eda's \"La Memoria,\" reflecting on the dictatorship's impact. Other significant artists like V\u00edctor Heredia (\"Soy el Mar\") and Mercedes Sosa (\"Desapariciones\") have used their music to mourn victims of political repression and call for justice, making protest music a vital part of Argentina's cultural resistance.\nChile.\nWhile the protest song was enjoying its Golden Age in America in the 1960s, it also saw many detractors overseas who saw it as having been commercialized. Chilean singer-songwriter V\u00edctor Jara, who played a pivotal role in the folkloric renaissance that led to the \"Nueva Canci\u00f3n Chilena\" (New Chilean Song) movement, which created a revolution in the popular music of his country, criticized the \"commercialized\" American protest song phenomenon that had been imported into Chile. He criticized it thus:\nThe cultural invasion is like a leafy tree which prevents us from seeing our own sun, sky and stars. Therefore in order to be able to see the sky above our heads, our task is to cut this tree off at the roots. US imperialism understands very well the magic of communication through music and persists in filling our young people with all sorts of commercial tripe. With professional expertise they have taken certain measures: first, the commercialization of the so-called 'protest music'; second, the creation of 'idols' of protest music who obey the same rules and suffer from the same constraints as the other idols of the consumer music industry \u2013 they last a little while and then disappear. Meanwhile, they are useful in neutralizing the innate spirit of rebellion of young people. The term 'protest song' is no longer valid because it is ambiguous and has been misused. I prefer the term 'revolutionary song'.\nNueva canci\u00f3n (literally \"new song\" in Spanish) was a type of protest/social song in Latin American music which took root in South America, especially Chile and other Andean countries, and gained extreme popularity throughout Latin America. It combined traditional Latin American folk music idioms (played on the quena, zampo\u00f1a, charango or caj\u00f3n with guitar accompaniment) with some popular (esp. British) rock music, and was characterized by its progressive and often politicized lyrics. It is sometimes considered a precursor to rock en espa\u00f1ol. The lyrics are typically in Spanish, with some indigenous or local words mixed in.\nIn 2019, \"A Rapist in Your Path\" () was first performed in Chile to protest rape culture and victim shaming. Videos of the song and its accompanying dance went viral, spreading across the world.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23478", "revid": "16185737", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23478", "title": "Professor Griff", "text": "Richard Duane Griffin (born August 1, 1960), better known by his stage name Professor Griff, is an American spoken word artist, and lecturer currently residing in Atlanta. He was a member of the hip-hop group Public Enemy, serving as the group's \"Minister of Information\".\nDuring his time with Public Enemy, he was an adherent of the ideas espoused by Nation of Islam leader Louis Farrakhan, which informed both Griffin's and Public Enemy's ideological views. Having served in the U.S. Army and cultivating an interest in martial arts, he trained the S1W security team that toured with Public Enemy dressed in military uniforms, doing choreographed military step drills on stage.\nControversies.\nAntisemitism and departure from Public Enemy.\nBefore the release of \"It Takes a Nation of Millions to Hold Us Back\", Professor Griff, in his role as Minister of Information, gave interviews to UK magazines on behalf of Public Enemy, during which he made homophobic and anti-Semitic remarks. In a 1988 issue of \"Melody Maker\" he stated, \"There's no place for gays. When God destroyed Sodom and Gomorrah, it was for that sort of behaviour\" and \"If the Palestinians took up arms, went into Israel and killed all the Jews, it'd be all right.\" However, there was little controversy until May 22, 1989, when Griffin was interviewed by \"The Washington Times\". At the time, Public Enemy enjoyed unprecedented mainstream attention with the single \"Fight the Power\" from the soundtrack of Spike Lee's film \"Do the Right Thing\".\nDuring the 1989 interview with David Mills, Griffin made numerous statements such as \"Jews are responsible for the majority of the wickedness in the world\". When the interview was published, a media firestorm emerged, and the band found itself under intense scrutiny.\nIn a series of press conferences, Griffin was either fired, quit, or demoted. Def Jam co-founder Rick Rubin had already left the label by then; taking his place alongside Russell Simmons was Lyor Cohen, the son of Israeli immigrants who had run Rush Artist Management since 1985. Before the dust settled, Cohen claims to have arranged for a Holocaust museum to give the band a private tour.\nIn an attempt to defuse the situation, Public Enemy frontman Chuck D first expressed an apology on Griffin's behalf, and fired Griffin soon thereafter. Griffin later rejoined the group, provoking more protests, causing Chuck D to briefly disband the group. When Public Enemy reformed, due to increasing attention from the press and pressure from Def Jam hierarchy, Griffin was no longer with the group.\nGriffin later publicly expressed remorse for his statements after a meeting with the National Holocaust Awareness Student Organization in 1990.\nIn his 2009 book \"Analytixz\", Griffin once again admitted the faults in his 1989 statement: \"To say the Jews are responsible for the majority of wickedness that went on around the globe, I would have to know about the majority of wickedness that went on around the globe, which is impossible...I'm not the best knower\u2014God is. Then, not only knowing that, I would have to know who is at the crux of all of the problems in the world and then blame Jewish people, which is not correct.\" Griff also said that not only were his words taken out of context, but that the recording was never released to the public for an unbiased listen. In a YouTube interview on August 2, 2018, Griffin recalled one of his many long conversations with record executive Lyor Cohen he said he used to have respectful debates about history: \"I told him about the history of him and his people about the Ashkenazi, the Ashke-Nazis, and when I laid it on him he couldn't handle it and I'm like, all right, which is common knowledge today everybody talking about it, you understand what I'm saying people are making books about it.\"\nIn June 2020, Griffin was a guest on the podcast \"Cannon's Class\" by rapper and television host Nick Cannon. During the podcast, Cannon and Griffin stated antisemitic conspiracy theories about Jewish control of finance and the Rothschild family and \"black people as the 'true Hebrews'\".\nAfrocentrism.\nGriffin embraces a form of Afrocentrism. He is a member of the Nation of Islam.\nAfter his departure from Public Enemy, Griffin formed his own group, the Last Asiatic Disciples. Griffin's albums were of an Islamic (NOI) and Afrocentric style, combined with increasingly spoken word lyrics.\nHis lyrics and record titles as a solo artist referenced his allegiance to the Nation of Islam. Another general theme in his lyrics is the New World Order conspiracy theory.\nPersonal life.\nOn August 27, 2017, Griffin married rapper Sol\u00e9. The couple met 23 years earlier and resumed their relationship after Sol\u00e9 and Ginuwine divorced.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23479", "revid": "1319713170", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23479", "title": "Physicalism", "text": "Metaphysical thesis\nIn philosophy (metaphysics), physicalism or physical logicism is the view that \"everything is physical\", that there is \"nothing over and above\" the physical, or that everything supervenes on the physical. It is opposed to idealism, according to which the world arises from the mind. Physicalism is a form of ontological monism\u2014a \"one substance\" view of the nature of reality, unlike \"two-substance\" (mind\u2013body dualism) or \"many-substance\" (pluralism) views. Both the definition of \"physical\" and the meaning of physicalism have been debated. Physicalism is often treated as equivalent to naturalism but there are important distinctions between them.\nPhysicalism is closely related to materialism, and has evolved from materialism with advancements in the physical sciences in explaining observed phenomena. The terms \"physicalism\" and \"materialism\" are often used interchangeably, but can be distinguished on the basis that physics describes more than just matter. Physicalism encompasses matter, but also energy, physical laws, space, time, spacetime, exotic matter, structure, physical processes, information, state, and forces, among other things, as described by physics and other sciences, all within a monistic framework.\nAccording to a 2020 survey, physicalism holds a slight majority view among philosophers at 51.9%, while there also remains significant opposition to physicalism.\nOutside of philosophy, physicalism can also refer to the preference or viewpoint that physics should be considered the best and only way to render truth about the world or reality.\nDefinition of physicalism in philosophy.\nThe word \"physicalism\" was introduced into philosophy in the 1930s by Otto Neurath and Rudolf Carnap.\nThe use of \"physical\" in physicalism is a philosophical concept and can be distinguished from alternative definitions found in the literature (e.g., Karl Popper defined a physical proposition as one that can at least in theory be denied by observation). A \"physical property\", in this context, may be a metaphysical or logical combination of properties which are not physical in the ordinary sense. It is common to express the notion of \"metaphysical or logical combination of properties\" using the notion of supervenience. Supervenience is the idea that there cannot be two events alike in all physical respects but differing in some mental respect, or that an object cannot alter in some mental respect without altering in some physical respect. The reason to introduce supervenience is that physicalists usually suppose the existence of various abstract concepts that are non-physical in the ordinary sense of the word.\nType physicalism.\nType physicalism, also known as mind-body identity theory, holds that mental events can be grouped into types that correlate with types of physical events. For instance, one type of mental events, such as pain, correlates with a particular type of physical events, such as C-fiber firings. On this account, all instances of pain correspond to situations where C-fibers are firing. Type physicalism can be understood as the position that there is an identity between types: any mental type is identical with some physical type.\nA common argument against type physicalism is the problem of multiple realizability. Multiple realizability posits that the same mental state can be realized by different physical states. Another way to put it is that there is a many-to-one mapping from physical states to mental states.\nToken physicalism.\nToken physicalism is the proposition that every particular mental event is a particular physical event (token physical event) but that there is no type-to-type mapping between mental events and physical events. The most common example of token physicalism is Davidson's anomalous monism. One of token physicalism's strengths is that it is compatible with multiple realizability. Mental states such as pain may be realized in any number of widely different physical events, without any type-like similarity between these physical events.\nReductive and non-reductive physicalism.\nReductionism.\nIn the philosophy of mind, reductionism is commonly understood as the reduction of psychological phenomena to physics and chemistry. In a simplified form, reductionism implies that a system is nothing but the sum of its parts. There are both reductive and non-reductive versions of physicalism (reductive physicalism and non-reductive physicalism). Reductive physicalism is the view that mental states are nothing over and above physical states and are reducible to physical states.\nEmergence.\nEmergentism is a theory that became popular in the early 20th century. Notions of strong emergence are commonly found in accounts of non-reductive physicalism. A property of a system is said to be emergent if it is a new outcome of some of the system's other properties and their interaction while it is itself different from them. Emergentism emphasizes that the whole is more than the sum of its parts. In the context of the philosophy of mind, emergence is often thought to entail property dualism.\nArguments against physicalism.\nKnowledge argument.\nThough there have been many objections to physicalism throughout its history, many of them are concerned with the apparent contradiction of the existence of qualia in an entirely physical world. The most popular argument of this kind is the so-called knowledge argument as formulated by Frank Jackson, titled \"Mary's room\".\nThe argument asks us to consider Mary, a girl who has been forced to discover the world from a black-and-white room via a black-and-white television monitor throughout her life. She has access to books containing all physical knowledge. During her time in the room, she learns all the physical facts about the world, including all the physical facts about color. To a physicalist, it would seem that this entails Mary knowing everything about the world. But once she is let out of the room and into the world, it becomes apparent that there were things Mary did not know about the world, such as the \"feeling\" or \"experience\" of seeing color. If Mary did not have such knowledge, how can it be said that everything supervenes upon the physical?\nPhysicalist response.\nOne response, developed by Lawrence Nemerow and David Lewis, is known as the ability hypothesis. The ability hypothesis distinguishes between propositional knowledge, such as \"Mary knows that the sky is typically blue during the day\", and knowledge-how, such as \"Mary knows how to climb a mountain\", and says that all Mary gains from seeing the world in color is knowledge-how. According to this response, Mary does gain knowledge from her experience, but it is not the propositional knowledge required for the knowledge argument to be logically sound.\nArgument from philosophical zombies.\nOne commonly issued challenge to a priori physicalism and physicalism in general is the \"conceivability argument\", or zombie argument. The conceivability argument runs roughly as follows:\nThe possibility of philosophical zombies (p-zombies) entails that mental states do not supervene upon physical states, and thus that physicalism is false. Australian philosopher David Chalmers argues that the conceivability of a zombie entails a metaphysical possibility. \nPhysicalist response.\nGalen Strawson argues that it is impossible to establish the conceivability of zombies, so the argument, lacking its first premise, fails.\nDaniel Dennett argues that \"when philosophers claim that zombies are conceivable, they invariably underestimate the task of conception (or imagination), and end up imagining something that violates their own definition\". He coined the term \"zimboes\"\u2014p-zombies that have second-order beliefs\u2014in arguing that p-zombies are incoherent: \"Zimboes thinkZ they are conscious, thinkZ they have qualia, thinkZ they suffer pains\u2014they are just 'wrong' (according to this lamentable tradition), in ways that neither they nor we could ever discover!\" In \"The Unimagined Preposterousness of Zombies\" (1995), Dennett compares consciousness to health.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Supposing that by an act of stipulative imagination you can remove consciousness while leaving all cognitive systems intact\u2014a quite standard but entirely bogus feat of imagination\u2014is like supposing that by an act of stipulative imagination, you can remove health while leaving all bodily functions and powers intact. ... Health isn't that sort of thing, and neither is consciousness.Michael Lynch argues that the zombie conceivability argument forces us to either question whether we actually have consciousness or accept that zombies are impossible. If zombies falsely believe they are conscious, how can we be sure we are not zombies? We may believe we have conscious mental states when in fact we merely hold a false belief. Lynch thinks denying the possibility of zombies is more reasonable than questioning our own consciousness.\nDaniel Stoljar has proposed what he calls \"the phenomenal concept strategy\". Roughly, the phenomenal concept strategy attempts to show that only the \"concept\" of consciousness\u2014not the \"property\"\u2014is in some way \"special\" or sui generis.\nHempel's Dilemma.\nPhysicalists have traditionally opted for a \"theory-based\" characterization of the physical in terms of either current physics or a future (ideal) physics. Hempel's Dilemma (named after the philosopher of science Carl Gustav Hempel) attacks physicalism by arguing that both of these approaches are problematic. If, on the one hand, we define the physical by reference to current physics, then physicalism is very likely to be false because it is very likely (by pessimistic meta-induction) that much of current physics is false. If, on the other hand, we define the physical in terms of a future (ideal) or completed physics, then physicalism is hopelessly vague or indeterminate.\nPhysicalist response.\nSome physicalists, like Andre Melnyk, accept the dilemma's first horn: they accept that the current definition of physicalism is very likely false as long it is more plausible than any currently formulated rival proposition, such as dualism. Melnyk maintains that this is the attitude most scientists hold toward scientific theories anyway. For example, a defender of evolutionary theory may well accept that its current formulation is likely to be revised in the future but defend it because they believe current evolutionary theory is more likely than any current rival idea, such as creationism. Thus Melnyk holds that one should define physicalism in relation to current physics and have a similar attitude toward its truth as most scientists have toward the truth of currently accepted scientific theories.\nSome physicalists defend physicalism via alternative characterizations of physicalism. Frank Jackson, for example, has argued for an \"object-based\" conception of the physical. David Papineau and Barbara Montero have argued for a \"via negativa\" characterization of the physical. The gist of this approach is characterize the physical in terms of what it is not: the mental. In other words, the via negativa strategy understands the physical as the non-mental.\nArgument from overdetermination.\nJaegwon Kim objects to non-reductive physicalism based on the problem of overdetermination. He proposes (using the chart on the right) that \"M1\" causes \"M2\" (these are mental events) and \"P1\" causes \"P2\" (these are physical events). \"M1\" has \"P1\" as its supervenience base (P1 realizes M1), and \"M2\" has \"P2\" as its supervenience base (P2 realizes M2). If \"P1\" causes \"P2\" and M1 causes M2, then we have a case of causal overdetermination. To avoid this causal overdetermination, either M1 or P1 must be eliminated as a cause of P2. Because of the principle of the causal closure of the physical, M1 is excluded. The non-reductive physicalist is then forced to choose between two unappealing options: accept overdetermination or embrace epiphenomenalism. Kim thus argues that mental causation can be preserved only by embracing a reductionist view, whereby mental properties are considered causally efficacious by being reduced to physical properties.\nArgument from first-person perspectives.\nChristian List argues that the existence of first-person perspectives, i.e., one existing as oneself and not as someone else, refutes physicalism. He argues that since first-personal facts cannot supervene on physical facts, this refutes not only physicalism, but also most forms of dualism that have purely third-personal metaphysics. List also argues that there is a \"quadrilemma\" for theories of consciousness: that at most three of the following metaphysical claims can be true: \"first-person realism\", \"non-solipsism\", \"non-fragmentation\", and \"one world\"\u2014and thus at least one of them must be false. He has proposed a model he calls the \"many-worlds theory of consciousness\" to reconcile the subjective nature of consciousness without lapsing into solipsism. These ideas are related to the vertiginous question proposed by Benj Hellie.\nOther views.\nRealistic physicalism.\nGalen Strawson's realistic physicalism or realistic monism is the view that physicalism entails panpsychism \u2013 or at least micropsychism. Strawson argues that \"many\u2014perhaps most\u2014of those who call themselves physicalists or materialists [are mistakenly] committed to the thesis that physical stuff is, in itself, in its fundamental nature, something wholly and utterly non-experiential... even when they are prepared to admit with Eddington that physical stuff has, in itself, 'a nature capable of manifesting itself as mental activity', i.e. as experience or consciousness\". Because experiential phenomena allegedly cannot be emergent from wholly non-experiential phenomena, philosophers are driven to substance dualism, property dualism, eliminative materialism and \"all other crazy attempts at wholesale mental-to-non-mental reduction\".\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Real physicalists must accept that at least some ultimates are intrinsically experience-involving. They must at least embrace \"micropsychism\". Given that everything concrete is physical, and that everything physical is constituted out of physical ultimates, and that experience is part of concrete reality, it seems the only reasonable position, more than just an 'inference to the best explanation'... Micropsychism is not yet panpsychism, for as things stand realistic physicalists can conjecture that only some types of ultimates are intrinsically experiential. But they must allow that panpsychism may be true, and the big step has already been taken with micropsychism, the admission that at least some ultimates must be experiential. 'And were the inmost essence of things laid open to us' I think that the idea that some but not all physical ultimates are experiential would look like the idea that some but not all physical ultimates are spatio-temporal (on the assumption that spacetime is indeed a fundamental feature of reality). I would bet a lot against there being such radical heterogeneity at the very bottom of things. In fact (to disagree with my earlier self) it is hard to see why this view would not count as a form of dualism... So now I can say that physicalism, i.e. real physicalism, entails panexperientialism or panpsychism. All physical stuff is energy, in one form or another, and all energy, I trow, is an experience-involving phenomenon. This sounded crazy to me for a long time, but I am quite used to it, now that I know that there is no alternative short of 'substance dualism'... Real physicalism, realistic physicalism, entails panpsychism, and whatever problems are raised by this fact are problems a real physicalist must face.\u2014\u200a\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23481", "revid": "3922229", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23481", "title": "Philosophical view", "text": ""}
{"id": "23482", "revid": "44786610", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23482", "title": "Parallelism", "text": "Parallelism may refer to:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "23483", "revid": "47905414", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23483", "title": "Philosophy of perception", "text": "Branch of philosophy\nThe philosophy of perception is concerned with the nature of perceptual experience and the status of perceptual data, in particular how they relate to beliefs about, or knowledge of, the world. Any explicit account of perception requires a commitment to one of a variety of ontological or metaphysical views. Philosophers distinguish internalist accounts, which assume that perceptions of objects, and knowledge or beliefs about them, are aspects of an individual's mind, and externalist accounts, which state that they constitute real aspects of the world external to the individual. The position of na\u00efve realism\u2014the 'everyday' impression of physical objects constituting what is perceived\u2014is to some extent contradicted by the occurrence of perceptual illusions and hallucinations and the relativity of perceptual experience as well as certain insights in science. Realist conceptions include phenomenalism and direct and indirect realism. Anti-realist conceptions include idealism and skepticism. Recent philosophical work have expanded on the philosophical features of perception by going beyond the single paradigm of vision (for instance, by investigating the uniqueness of olfaction).\nScientific accounts of perception.\nAn object at some distance from an observer will reflect light in all directions, some of which will fall upon the corneae of the eyes, where it will be focussed upon each retina, forming an image. The disparity between the electrical output of these two slightly different images is resolved either at the level of the lateral geniculate nucleus or in a part of the visual cortex called 'V1'. The resolved data is further processed in the visual cortex where some areas have specialised functions, for instance area V5 is involved in the modelling of motion and V4 in adding colour. The resulting single image that subjects report as their experience is called a 'percept'. Studies involving rapidly changing scenes show the percept derives from numerous processes that involve time delays. Recent fMRI studies show that dreams, imaginings and perceptions of things such as faces are accompanied by activity in many of the same areas of brain as are involved with physical sight. Imagery that originates from the senses and internally generated imagery may have a shared ontology at higher levels of cortical processing.\nSound is analyzed in term of pressure waves sensed by the cochlea in the ear. Data from the eyes and ears is combined to form a 'bound' percept. The problem of how this is produced, known as the binding problem.\nPerception is analyzed as a cognitive process in which information processing is used to transfer information into the mind where it is related to other information. Some psychologists propose that this processing gives rise to particular mental states (cognitivism) whilst others envisage a direct path back into the external world in the form of action (radical behaviourism). Behaviourists such as John B. Watson and B.F. Skinner have proposed that perception acts largely as a process between a stimulus and a response but have noted that Gilbert Ryle's \"ghost in the machine of the brain\" still seems to exist. \"The objection to inner states is not that they do not exist, but that they are not relevant in a functional analysis\". This view, in which experience is thought to be an incidental by-product of information processing, is known as epiphenomenalism.\nContrary to the behaviouralist approach to understanding the elements of cognitive processes, gestalt psychology sought to understand their organization as a whole, studying perception as a process of figure and ground.\nProblem of Perception.\nImportant philosophical problems derive from the epistemology of perception\u2014how we can gain knowledge via perception\u2014such as the question of the nature of qualia. Within the biological study of perception naive realism is unusable. However, outside biology modified forms of naive realism are defended. Thomas Reid, the eighteenth-century founder of the Scottish School of Common Sense, formulated the idea that sensation was composed of a set of data transfers but also declared that there is still a direct connection between perception and the world. This idea, called direct realism, has again become popular in recent years with the rise of postmodernism.\nThe succession of data transfers involved in perception suggests that sense data are somehow available to a perceiving subject that is the substrate of the percept. Indirect realism, the view held by John Locke and Nicolas Malebranche, proposes that we can only be aware of mental representations of objects. However, this may imply an infinite regress (a perceiver within a perceiver within a perceiver...), though a finite regress is perfectly possible. It also assumes that perception is entirely due to data transfer and information processing, an argument that can be avoided by proposing that the percept does not depend wholly upon the transfer and rearrangement of data. This still involves basic ontological issues of the sort raised by Leibniz, Locke, Hume, Whitehead and others, which remain outstanding particularly in relation to the binding problem, the question of how different perceptions (e.g. color and contour in vision) are \"bound\" to the same object when they are processed by separate areas of the brain.\nIndirect realism (representational views) provides an account of issues such as perceptual contents, qualia, dreams, imaginings, hallucinations, illusions, the resolution of binocular rivalry, the resolution of multistable perception, the modelling of motion that allows us to watch TV, the sensations that result from direct brain stimulation, the update of the mental image by saccades of the eyes and the referral of events backwards in time. Direct realists must either argue that these experiences do not occur or else refuse to define them as perceptions.\nIdealism holds that reality is limited to mental qualities while skepticism challenges our ability to know anything outside our minds. One of the most influential proponents of idealism was George Berkeley who maintained that everything was mind or dependent upon mind. Berkeley's idealism has two main strands, phenomenalism in which physical events are viewed as a special kind of mental event and subjective idealism. David Hume is probably the most influential proponent of skepticism.\nA fourth theory of perception in opposition to naive realism, enactivism, attempts to find a middle path between direct realist and indirect realist theories, positing that cognition is a process of dynamic interplay between an organism's sensory-motor capabilities and the environment it brings forth. Instead of seeing perception as a passive process determined entirely by the features of an independently existing world, enactivism suggests that organism and environment are structurally coupled and co-determining. The theory was first formalized by Francisco Varela, Evan Thompson, and Eleanor Rosch in \"The Embodied Mind\".\nSpatial representation.\nAn aspect of perception that is common to both realists and anti-realists is the idea of mental or perceptual space. David Hume concluded that things appear extended because they have attributes of colour and solidity. A popular modern philosophical view is that the brain cannot contain images so our sense of space must be due to the actual space occupied by physical things. However, as Ren\u00e9 Descartes noticed, perceptual space has a projective geometry, things within it appear as if they are viewed from a point. The phenomenon of perspective was closely studied by artists and architects in the Renaissance, who relied mainly on the 11th century polymath, Alhazen (Ibn al-Haytham), who affirmed the visibility of perceptual space in geometric structuring projections. Mathematicians now know of many types of projective geometry such as complex Minkowski space that might describe the layout of things in perception (see Peters (2000)) and it has also emerged that parts of the brain contain patterns of electrical activity that correspond closely to the layout of the retinal image (this is known as retinotopy). How or whether these become conscious experience is still unknown (see McGinn (1995)).\nBeyond spatial representation.\nTraditionally, the philosophical investigation of perception has focused on the sense of vision as the paradigm of sensory perception. However, studies on the other sensory modalities, such as the sense of smell, can challenge what we consider characteristic or essential features of perception. Take olfaction as an example. Spatial representation relies on a \"mapping\" paradigm that maps the spatial structures of the stimuli onto discrete neural structures and representations. However, olfactory science has shown us that perception is also a matter of associative learning, observational refinement, and a decision-making process that is context-dependent. One of the consequences of these discoveries on the philosophy of perception is that common perceptual effects such as conceptual imagery turn more on the neural architecture and its development than the topology of the stimulus itself.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23484", "revid": "378390", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23484", "title": "Proper name (philosophy)", "text": "Name which is taken to uniquely identify its referent in the world\nIn the philosophy of language, a proper name\u00a0\u2013 examples include a name of a specific person or place\u00a0\u2013 is a name which ordinarily is taken to uniquely identify its referent in the world. As such it presents particular challenges for theories of meaning, and it has become a central problem in analytic philosophy. The common-sense view was originally formulated by John Stuart Mill in \"A System of Logic\" (1843), where he defines it as \"a word that answers the purpose of showing what thing it is that we are talking about but not of telling anything about it\". This view was criticized when philosophers applied principles of formal logic to linguistic propositions. Gottlob Frege pointed out that proper names may apply to imaginary or nonexistent entities, without becoming meaningless, and he showed that sometimes more than one proper name may identify the same entity without having the same \"sense\", so that the phrase \"Homer believed the morning star was the evening star\" could be meaningful and not tautological in spite of the fact that the morning star and the evening star identifies the same referent. This example became known as \"Frege's puzzle\" and is a central issue in the theory of proper names.\nBertrand Russell was the first to propose a descriptivist theory of names, which held that a proper name refers not to a referent, but to a set of true propositions that uniquely describe a referent \u2013 for example, \"Aristotle\" refers to \"the teacher of Alexander the Great\". Rejecting descriptivism, Saul Kripke and Keith Donnellan instead advanced causal-historical theories of reference, which hold that names come to be associated with individual referents because social groups who link the name to its reference in a naming event (e.g. a baptism), which henceforth fixes the value of the name to the specific referent within that community. Today a direct reference theory is common, which holds that proper names refer to their referents without attributing any additional information, connotative or of sense, about them.\nProblems.\nThe problems of proper names arise within a theory of meaning that is based on truth values and propositional logic, when trying to ascertain the criteria with which to determine if propositions that include proper names are true or false.\nFor example, in the proposition \"Cicero is Roman\", it is unclear what semantic content the proper name \"Cicero\" provides to the proposition. One may intuitively assume that the name refers to a person who may or may not be Roman, and that the truth value depends on whether or not that is the case. But from the point of view of a theory of meaning the question is \"how\" the word \"Cicero\" establishes its referent.\nAnother problem, known as \"Frege's puzzle\", asks why it can be the case that the two names can refer to the same referent, yet not necessarily be considered entirely synonymous. His example is that the proposition \"Hesperus is Hesperus\" (Hesperus being the Greek name of the evening star) is tautological and vacuous while the proposition \"Hesperus is Phosphorus\" (Phosphorus or Eosphorus being the Greek name of the morning star) conveys information. This puzzle suggests that there is something more to the meaning of the proper name than simply pointing out its referent.\nTheories.\nMany theories have been proposed about proper names, each attempting to solve the problems of reference and identity inherent in the concept.\nMillian theory.\nJohn Stuart Mill distinguished between connotative and denotative meaning, and argued that proper names included no other semantic content to a proposition than identifying the referent of the name and were hence purely denotative. Some contemporary proponents of a Millian theory of proper names argue that the process through which something becomes a proper name is exactly the gradual loss of connotation for pure denotation\u00a0\u2013 such as the process that turned the descriptive propositions \"long island\" into the proper name Long Island.\nSense-based theory of names.\nGotlob Frege argued that one had to distinguish between the sense (\"Sinn\") and the reference of the name, and that different names for the same entity might identify the same referent without being formally synonymous. For example, although the morning star and the evening star are the same astronomical object, the proposition \"the morning star is the evening star\" is not a tautology, but provides actual information to someone who did not know this. Hence, to Frege, the two names for the object must have a different sense. Philosophers such as John McDowell have elaborated on Frege's theory of proper names.\nDescriptive theory.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"The only kind of word that is theoretically capable of standing for a particular is a proper name, and the whole matter of proper names is rather curious.\"\nBertrand Russell, \"Logic and Knowledge\", 1988\nThe \"descriptive\" theory of proper names is the view that the meaning of a given use of a proper name is a set of properties that can be expressed as a description that picks out an object that satisfies the description. \nBertrand Russell espoused such a view arguing that the name refers to a description, and that description, like a definition, \"picks out\" the bearer of the name. The name then functions as an abbreviation or a truncated form of the description. The distinction between the embedded description and the bearer itself is similar to that between the \"extension\" and the \"intension\" (Frege's terms) of a general term, or between connotation and denotation (Mill's terms).\nJohn Searle elaborated Russell's theory, suggesting that the proper name refers to a cluster of propositions that in combination pick out a unique referent. This was meant to deal with the objection by some critics of Russell's theory that a descriptive theory of meaning would make the referent of a name dependent on the knowledge that the person saying the name has about the referent.\nIn 1973, Tyler Burge proposed a metalinguistic descriptivist theory of proper names which holds that names have the meaning that corresponds to the description of the individual entities to whom the name is applied. This, however, opens up the possibility that names are not proper, when, for example, more than one person shares the same name. This leads Burge to argue that plural usages of names, such as \"all the Alfreds I know have red hair\", support this view.\nCausal theory of names.\nThe causal-historical theory originated by Saul Kripke in \"Naming and Necessity\", building on work by, among others, Keith Donnellan, combines the referential view with the idea that a name's referent is fixed by a baptismal act, whereupon the name becomes a rigid designator of the referent. Kripke did not emphasize causality, but rather the historical relation between the naming event and the community of speakers within which it circulates, but in spite of this the theory is often called \"a causal theory of naming\".\nThe pragmatic naming theory of Charles Sanders Peirce is sometimes considered a precursor of causal-historical naming theory. He described proper names in the following terms: \"A proper name, when one meets with it for the first time, is existentially connected with some percept or other equivalent individual knowledge of the individual it names. It is then, and then only, a genuine Index. The next time one meets with it, one regards it as an Icon of that Index. The habitual acquaintance with it having been acquired, it becomes a Symbol whose Interpretant represents it as an Icon of an Index of the Individual named.\" Here he notes out that the baptismal event takes place for each person when a proper name is first associated with a referent (for example by pointing and saying \"this is John\", establishing an indexical relation between the name and the person) who is henceforth considered to be a conventional (\"symbolic\" in Peircean terms) references to the referent. [ \"who is...a conventional...references to the referent\" is grammatically incorrect, rendering the whole sentence incoherent]\nDirect reference theories.\nRejecting sense-based, descriptivist and causal-historical theories of naming, theories of direct reference hold that names together with demonstratives are a class of words that refer directly to their referent.\nIn the \"Tractatus Logico Philosophicus,\" Ludwig Wittgenstein also held a direct reference position, arguing that names refer to a particular directly, and that this referent is its only meaning. In his later work, however, he has been attributed a cluster-descriptivist position based on the idea of family resemblances (for example by Kripke), although it has been argued that this misconstrues Wittgenstein's argument. Particularly, his later view has been compared to that of Kripke's own view which recognizes names as stemming from a social convention and pragmatic principles of understanding others utterances.\nDirect reference theory is similar to Mill's theory in that it proposes that the only meaning of a proper name is its referent. Modern proposals such as those by David Kaplan, which distinguish between Fregean and non-Fregean terms, the former which have both sense and reference and the latter which include proper names and have only reference.\nContinental philosophy.\nOutside of the analytic tradition, few continental philosophers have approached the proper name as a philosophical problem. In \"Of Grammatology,\" Jacques Derrida specifically refutes the idea that proper names stand outside of the social construct of language as a binary relation between referent and sign. Rather, he argues the proper name as all words are caught up in a context of social, spatial, and temporal differences that make it meaningful. He also notes that there are subjective elements of meaning in proper names, since they connect the bearer of a name with the sign of their own identity.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23485", "revid": "84591", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23485", "title": "Prolog", "text": "Programming language that uses first order logic\nProlog is a logic programming language that has its origins in artificial intelligence, automated theorem proving, and computational linguistics.\nProlog has its roots in first-order logic, a formal logic. Unlike many other programming languages, Prolog is intended primarily as a declarative programming language: the program is a set of facts and rules, which define relations. A computation is initiated by running a \"query\" over the program.\nProlog was one of the first logic programming languages and remains the most popular such language today, with several free and commercial implementations available. The language has been used for theorem proving, expert systems, term rewriting, type systems, automated planning, and question answering as well as its original intended field of use, natural language processing.\nProlog is a Turing-complete, general-purpose programming language, which is well-suited for intelligent knowledge-processing applications.\nHistory.\nThe name \"Prolog\" was chosen by Philippe Roussel, at the suggestion of his wife, as an abbreviation for ' (French for \"Programming in logic\"). It was created around 1972 by Alain Colmerauer with Philippe Roussel, from the \"Artificial Intelligence Group\" of the Faculty of Sciences of Luminy of Aix-Marseille II University of France. It was based on Robert Kowalski's procedural interpretation of Horn clauses, and it was motivated in part by the desire to reconcile the use of logic as a declarative knowledge representation language with the procedural representation of knowledge that was popular in North America in the late 1960s and early 1970s. According to Robert Kowalski, the first Prolog system was developed in 1972 by Colmerauer and Phillipe Roussel. The first implementation of Prolog was an interpreter written in Fortran by Gerard Battani and Henri Meloni. David H. D. Warren took this interpreter to the University of Edinburgh, and there implemented an alternative front-end, which came to define the \"Edinburgh Prolog\" syntax used by most modern implementations. Warren also implemented the first compiler for Prolog, creating the influential DEC-10 Prolog in collaboration with Fernando Pereira. Warren later generalised the ideas behind DEC-10 Prolog, to create the Warren Abstract Machine (WAM).\nEuropean AI researchers favored Prolog while Americans favored Lisp, reportedly causing many nationalistic debates on the merits of the languages. Much of the modern development of Prolog came from the impetus of the Fifth Generation Computer Systems project (FGCS), which developed a variant of Prolog named \"Kernel Language\" for its first operating system.\nPure Prolog was originally restricted to the use of a resolution theorem prover with Horn clauses of the form:\n H :- B1, ..., Bn.\nThe application of the theorem-prover treats such clauses as procedures:\n to show/solve H, show/solve B1 and ... and Bn.\nPure Prolog was soon extended, however, to include negation as failure, in which negative conditions of the form not(Bi) are shown by trying and failing to solve the corresponding positive conditions Bi.\nSubsequent extensions of Prolog by the original team introduced constraint logic programming abilities into the implementations.\nImpact.\nAlthough Prolog is widely used in research and education, Prolog and other logic programming languages have not had a significant impact on the computer industry in general. Most applications are small by industrial standards, with few exceeding 100,000 lines of code. Programming in the large is considered to be complex because not all Prolog compilers support modules, and there are compatibility problems between the module systems of the major Prolog compilers. Portability of Prolog code across implementations has also been a problem, but developments since 2007 have meant: \"the portability within the family of Edinburgh/Quintus derived Prolog implementations is good enough to allow for maintaining portable real-world applications.\"\nSoftware developed in Prolog has been criticised for having a high performance penalty compared to conventional programming languages. In particular, Prolog's non-deterministic evaluation strategy can be problematic when programming deterministic computations, or when even using \"don't care non-determinism\" (where a single choice is made instead of backtracking over all possibilities). Cuts and other language constructs may have to be used to achieve desirable performance, destroying one of Prolog's main attractions, the ability to run programs \"backwards and forwards\".\nProlog is not purely declarative: because of constructs like the cut operator, a procedural reading of a Prolog program is needed to understand it. The order of clauses in a Prolog program is significant, as the execution strategy of the language depends on it. Other logic programming languages, such as Datalog, are truly declarative but restrict the language. As a result, many practical Prolog programs are written to conform to Prolog's depth-first search order, rather than as purely declarative logic programs.\nUse in industry.\nProlog has been used in Watson. Watson uses IBM's DeepQA software and the Apache UIMA (Unstructured Information Management Architecture) framework. The system was written in various languages, including Java, C++, and Prolog, and runs on the SUSE Linux Enterprise Server 11 operating system using Apache Hadoop framework to provide distributed computing. Prolog is used for pattern matching over natural language parse trees. The developers have stated: \"We required a language in which we could conveniently express pattern matching rules over the parse trees and other annotations (such as named entity recognition results), and a technology that could execute these rules very efficiently. We found that Prolog was the ideal choice for the language due to its simplicity and expressiveness.\" Prolog is being used in the Low-Code Development Platform GeneXus, which is focused around AI. Open source graph database TerminusDB is implemented in Prolog. TerminusDB is designed for collaboratively building and curating knowledge graphs.\nSyntax and semantics.\nIn Prolog, program logic is expressed in terms of relations, and a computation is initiated by running a \"query\" over these relations. Relations and queries are constructed using Prolog's single data type, the \"term\". Relations are defined by \"clauses\". Given a query, the Prolog engine attempts to find a resolution refutation of the negated query. If the negated query can be refuted, i.e., an instantiation for all free variables is found that makes the union of clauses and the singleton set consisting of the negated query false, it follows that the original query, with the found instantiation applied, is a logical consequence of the program. This makes Prolog (and other logic programming languages) particularly useful for database, symbolic mathematics, and language parsing applications. Because Prolog allows impure predicates, checking the truth value of certain special predicates may have some deliberate side effect, such as printing a value to the screen. Because of this, the programmer is permitted to use some amount of conventional imperative programming when the logical paradigm is inconvenient. It has a purely logical subset, called \"pure Prolog\", as well as a number of extralogical features.\nData types.\nProlog's single data type is the \"term\". Terms are either \"atoms\", \"numbers\", \"variables\" or \"compound terms\".\nSpecial cases of compound terms:\nRules and facts.\nProlog programs describe relations, defined by means of clauses. Pure Prolog is restricted to Horn clauses. Two types of Horn clauses are used to define Prolog programs: rules and facts. A rule is of the form\nHead :- Body.\nand is read as \"Head is true if Body is true\". A rule's body consists of calls to predicates, which are called the rule's goals. The built-in logical operator codice_12 (meaning an arity 2 operator with name codice_13) denotes conjunction of goals, and codice_14 denotes disjunction. Conjunctions and disjunctions can only appear in the body, not in the head of a rule.\nClauses with empty bodies are called facts. An example of a fact is:\nhuman(socrates).\nwhich is equivalent to the rule:\nhuman(socrates) :- true.\nThe built-in predicate codice_15 is always true.\nGiven the above fact, one can ask:\n\"is socrates a human?\"\n ?- human(socrates).\n Yes\n\"what things are humans?\"\n ?- human(X).\n X = socrates\nClauses with bodies are called rules. An example of a rule is:\nmortal(X) :- human(X).\nIf we add that rule and ask \"what things are mortals?\"\n ?- mortal(X).\n X = socrates\nPredicates and programs.\nA \"predicate\" (or \"procedure definition\") is a collection of clauses whose heads have the same name and arity. We use the notation \"name/arity\" to refer to predicates. A \"logic program\" is a set of predicates. For example, the following Prolog program, which defines some family relations, has four predicates: \nmother_child(trude, sally).\nfather_child(tom, sally).\nfather_child(tom, erica).\nfather_child(mike, tom).\nsibling(X, Y) :- parent_child(Z, X), parent_child(Z, Y), not(X = Y).\nparent_child(X, Y) :- father_child(X, Y).\nparent_child(X, Y) :- mother_child(X, Y).\nPredicate codice_16 has three clauses, all of which are facts, and predicate codice_17 has two clauses, both are rules.\nDue to the relational nature of many built-in predicates, they can typically be used in several directions. For example, codice_18 can be used to determine the length of a list (codice_19, given a list codice_20), and to generate a list skeleton of a given length (codice_21), and to generate both list skeletons and their lengths together (codice_22). Similarly, codice_23 can be used both to append two lists (codice_24 given lists codice_25 and codice_26), and to split a given list into parts (codice_27, given a list codice_20). For this reason, a comparatively small set of library predicates suffices for many Prolog programs.\nAs a general purpose language, Prolog also provides various built-in predicates to perform routine activities like input/output, using graphics and otherwise communicating with the operating system. These predicates are not given a relational meaning and are only useful for the side-effects they exhibit on the system. For example, the predicate codice_29 displays a term on the screen.\nLoops and recursion.\nIterative algorithms can be implemented by means of recursive predicates.\nConsider the codice_17 predicate defined in the family relation program above. The following Prolog program defines the \"ancestor\" relation:\nancestor(X, Y) :- parent_child(X, Y).\nancestor(X, Y) :- parent_child(X, Z), ancestor(Z, Y).\nIt expresses that X is an ancestor of Y if X is parent of Y or X is parent of an ancestor of Y. It is recursive because it is defined in terms of itself (there is a call to predicate codice_31 in the body of the second clause). \nExecution.\nExecution of a Prolog program is initiated by the user's posting of a single goal, called the query. Logically, the Prolog engine tries to find a resolution refutation of the negated query. The resolution method used by Prolog is called SLD resolution. If the negated query can be refuted, it follows that the query, with the appropriate variable bindings in place, is a logical consequence of the program. In that case, all generated variable bindings are reported to the user, and the query is said to have succeeded. Operationally, Prolog's execution strategy can be thought of as a generalization of function calls in other languages, one difference being that multiple clause heads can match a given call. In that case, the system creates a choice-point, unifies the goal with the clause head of the first alternative, and continues with the goals of that first alternative. If any goal fails in the course of executing the program, all variable bindings that were made since the most recent choice-point was created are undone, and execution continues with the next alternative of that choice-point. This execution strategy is called chronological backtracking. For example, given the family relation program defined above, the following query will be evaluated to true:\n ?- sibling(sally, erica).\n Yes\nThis is obtained as follows: Initially, the only matching clause-head for the query codice_32 is the first one, so proving the query is equivalent to proving the body of that clause with the appropriate variable bindings in place, i.e., the conjunction codice_33. The next goal to be proved is the leftmost one of this conjunction, i.e., codice_34. Two clause heads match this goal. The system creates a choice-point and tries the first alternative, whose body is codice_35. This goal can be proved using the fact codice_36, so the binding codice_37 is generated, and the next goal to be proved is the second part of the above conjunction: codice_38. Again, this can be proved by the corresponding fact. Since all goals could be proved, the query succeeds. Since the query contained no variables, no bindings are reported to the user. A query with variables, like:\n?- father_child(Father, Child).\nenumerates all valid answers on backtracking.\nNotice that with the code as stated above, the query codice_39 also succeeds. One would insert additional goals to describe the relevant restrictions, if desired.\nNegation.\nThe built-in Prolog predicate codice_40 provides negation as failure, which allows for non-monotonic reasoning. The goal codice_41 in the rule\nlegal(X) :- \\+ illegal(X).\nis evaluated as follows: Prolog attempts to prove codice_42. If a proof for that goal can be found, the original goal (i.e., codice_41) fails. If no proof can be found, the original goal succeeds. Therefore, the codice_40 prefix operator is called the \"not provable\" operator, since the query codice_45 succeeds if Goal is not provable. This kind of negation is sound if its argument is \"ground\" (i.e. contains no variables). Soundness is lost if the argument contains variables and the proof procedure is complete. In particular, the query codice_46 now cannot be used to enumerate all things that are legal.\nProgramming in Prolog.\nIn Prolog, loading code is referred to as \"consulting\". Prolog can be used interactively by entering queries at the Prolog prompt codice_47. If there is no solution, Prolog writes codice_48. If a solution exists then it is printed. If there are multiple solutions to the query, then these can be requested by entering a semi-colon codice_49. There are guidelines on good programming practice to improve code efficiency, readability and maintainability.\nHere follow some example programs written in Prolog.\nHello World.\nExample of a basic query in a couple of popular Prolog dialects:\nThis comparison shows the prompt (\"?-\" vs \"| ?-\") and resolution status (\"true\". vs \"yes\", \"false\". vs \"no\") can differ from one Prolog implementation to another.\nCompiler optimization.\nAny computation can be expressed declaratively as a sequence of state transitions. As an example, an optimizing compiler with three optimization passes could be implemented as a relation between an initial program and its optimized form:\nprogram_optimized(Prog0, Prog) :-\n optimization_pass_1(Prog0, Prog1),\n optimization_pass_2(Prog1, Prog2),\n optimization_pass_3(Prog2, Prog).\nor equivalently using DCG notation:\nprogram_optimized --&gt; optimization_pass_1, optimization_pass_2, optimization_pass_3.\nQuicksort.\nThe quicksort sorting algorithm, relating a list to its sorted version:\npartition([], _, [], []).\npartition([X|Xs], Pivot, Smalls, Bigs) :-\n ( X @&lt; Pivot -&gt;\n Smalls = [X|Rest],\n partition(Xs, Pivot, Rest, Bigs)\n ; Bigs = [X|Rest],\n partition(Xs, Pivot, Smalls, Rest)\nquicksort([]) --&gt; [].\nquicksort([X|Xs]) --&gt;\n { partition(Xs, X, Smaller, Bigger) },\n quicksort(Smaller), [X], quicksort(Bigger).\nDesign patterns of Prolog.\nA design pattern is a general reusable solution to a commonly occurring problem in software design. Some design patterns in Prolog are skeletons, techniques, cliches, program schemata, logic description schemata, and higher-order programming.\nHigher-order programming.\nA higher-order predicate is a predicate that takes one or more other predicates as arguments. Although support for higher-order programming takes Prolog outside the domain of first-order logic, which does not allow quantification over predicates, ISO Prolog now has some built-in higher-order predicates such as codice_50, codice_51, codice_52, codice_53, codice_54, and codice_55. Furthermore, since arbitrary Prolog goals can be constructed and evaluated at run-time, it is easy to write higher-order predicates like codice_56, which applies an arbitrary predicate to each member of a given list, and codice_57, which filters elements that satisfy a given predicate, also allowing for currying.\nTo convert solutions from temporal representation (answer substitutions on backtracking) to spatial representation (terms), Prolog has various all-solutions predicates that collect all answer substitutions of a given query in a list. This can be used for list comprehension. For example, perfect numbers equal the sum of their proper divisors:\n perfect(N) :-\n between(1, inf, N), U is N // 2,\n findall(D, (between(1,U,D), N mod D =:= 0), Ds),\n sumlist(Ds, N).\nThis can be used to enumerate perfect numbers, and to check if a number is perfect.\nAs another example, the predicate codice_58 applies a predicate codice_59 to all corresponding positions in a pair of lists:\nmaplist(_, [], []).\nmaplist(P, [X|Xs], [Y|Ys]) :-\n call(P, X, Y),\n maplist(P, Xs, Ys).\nWhen codice_59 is a predicate that for all codice_61, codice_62 unifies codice_63 with a single unique value, codice_64 is equivalent to applying the map function in functional programming as codice_65.\nHigher-order programming style in Prolog was pioneered in HiLog and \u03bbProlog.\nModules.\nFor programming in the large, Prolog provides a module system, which is in the ISO Standard.\nHowever, while most Prolog systems support structuring the code into modules, virtually no implementation adheres to the modules part of the ISO standard. Instead, most Prolog systems have decided to support as \"de-facto\" module standard the Quintus/SICStus module system. However, further convenience predicates concerning modules are provided by some implementations only and often have subtle differences in their semantics.\nSome systems chose to implement module concepts as source-to-source compilation into base ISO Prolog, as is the case of Logtalk. GNU Prolog initially diverted from ISO modules, opting instead for Contextual Logic Programming, in which unit (module) loading and unloading can be made dynamically. Ciao designed a strict module system that, while being basically compatible with the \"de-facto\" standard used by other Prolog systems, is amenable to precise static analysis, supports term hiding, and facilitates programming in the large. XSB takes a different approach and offers an \"atom-based\" module system. The latter two Prolog systems allow controlling the \"visibility of terms\" in addition to that of predicates.\nParsing.\nThere is a special notation called definite clause grammars (DCGs). A rule defined via codice_66 instead of codice_67 is expanded by the preprocessor (codice_68, a facility analogous to macros in other languages) according to a few straightforward rewriting rules, resulting in ordinary Prolog clauses. Most notably, the rewriting equips the predicate with two additional arguments, which can be used to implicitly thread state around, analogous to monads in other languages. DCGs are often used to write parsers or list generators, as they also provide a convenient interface to difference lists.\nMeta-interpreters and reflection.\nProlog is a homoiconic language and provides many facilities for reflective programming (reflection). Its implicit execution strategy makes it possible to write a concise meta-circular evaluator (also called \"meta-interpreter\") for pure Prolog code:\nsolve(true).\nsolve((Subgoal1,Subgoal2)) :-\n solve(Subgoal1),\n solve(Subgoal2).\nsolve(Head) :-\n clause(Head, Body),\n solve(Body).\nwhere codice_69 represents an empty conjunction, and codice_70 unifies with clauses in the database of the form codice_71.\nSince Prolog programs are themselves sequences of Prolog terms (codice_67 is an infix operator) that are easily read and inspected using built-in mechanisms (like codice_73), it is possible to write customized interpreters that augment Prolog with domain-specific features. For example, Sterling and Shapiro present a meta-interpreter that performs reasoning with uncertainty, reproduced here with slight modifications:\nsolve(true, 1) :- !.\nsolve((Subgoal1,Subgoal2), Certainty) :-\n solve(Subgoal1, Certainty1),\n solve(Subgoal2, Certainty2),\n Certainty is min(Certainty1, Certainty2).\nsolve(Goal, 1) :-\n builtin(Goal), !,\n Goal.\nsolve(Head, Certainty) :-\n clause_cf(Head, Body, Certainty1),\n solve(Body, Certainty2),\n Certainty is Certainty1 * Certainty2.\nThis interpreter uses a table of built-in Prolog predicates of the form\nbuiltin(A is B).\nbuiltin(read(X)).\n% etc.\nand clauses represented as codice_74. Given those, it can be called as codice_75 to execute codice_76 and obtain a measure of certainty about the result.\nTuring completeness.\nPure Prolog is based on a subset of first-order predicate logic, Horn clauses, which is Turing-complete. Turing completeness of Prolog can be shown by using it to simulate a Turing machine:\nturing(Tape0, Tape) :-\n perform(q0, [], Ls, Tape0, Rs),\n reverse(Ls, Ls1),\n append(Ls1, Rs, Tape).\nperform(qf, Ls, Ls, Rs, Rs) :- !.\nperform(Q0, Ls0, Ls, Rs0, Rs) :-\n symbol(Rs0, Sym, RsRest),\n once(rule(Q0, Sym, Q1, NewSym, Action)),\n action(Action, Ls0, Ls1, [NewSym|RsRest], Rs1),\n perform(Q1, Ls1, Ls, Rs1, Rs).\nsymbol([], b, []).\nsymbol([Sym|Rs], Sym, Rs).\naction(left, Ls0, Ls, Rs0, Rs) :- left(Ls0, Ls, Rs0, Rs).\naction(stay, Ls, Ls, Rs, Rs).\naction(right, Ls0, [Sym|Ls0], [Sym|Rs], Rs).\nleft([], [], Rs0, [b|Rs0]).\nleft([L|Ls], Ls, Rs, [L|Rs]).\nA simple example Turing machine is specified by the facts:\nrule(q0, 1, q0, 1, right).\nrule(q0, b, qf, 1, stay).\nThis machine performs incrementation by one of a number in unary encoding: It loops over any number of \"1\" cells and appends an additional \"1\" at the end. Example query and result:\n?- turing([1,1,1], Ts).\nTs = [1, 1, 1, 1] ;\nThis illustrates how any computation can be expressed declaratively as a sequence of state transitions, implemented in Prolog as a relation between successive states of interest.\nImplementation.\nISO Prolog.\nThe International Organization for Standardization (ISO) Prolog technical standard consists of two parts. ISO/IEC 13211-1, published in 1995, aims to standardize the existing practices of the many implementations of the core elements of Prolog. It has clarified aspects of the language that were previously ambiguous and leads to portable programs. There are three corrigenda: Cor.1:2007, Cor.2:2012, and Cor.3:2017. ISO/IEC 13211-2, published in 2000, adds support for modules to the standard. The standard is maintained by the ISO/IEC JTC1/SC22/WG17 working group. ANSI X3J17 is the US Technical Advisory Group for the standard.\nCompilation.\nFor efficiency, Prolog code is typically compiled to abstract machine code, often influenced by the register-based Warren Abstract Machine (WAM) instruction set. Some implementations employ abstract interpretation to derive type and mode information of predicates at compile time, or compile to real machine code for high performance. Devising efficient implementation methods for Prolog code is a field of active research in the logic programming community, and various other execution methods are employed in some implementations. These include clause binarization and stack-based virtual machines.\nTail recursion.\nProlog systems typically implement a well-known optimization method called tail call optimization (TCO) for deterministic predicates exhibiting tail recursion or, more generally, tail calls: A clause's stack frame is discarded before performing a call in a tail position. Therefore, deterministic tail-recursive predicates are executed with constant stack space, like loops in other languages.\nTerm indexing.\nFinding clauses that are unifiable with a term in a query is linear in the number of clauses. Term indexing uses a data structure that enables sub-linear-time lookups. Indexing only affects program performance, it does not affect semantics. Most Prologs only use indexing on the first term, as indexing on all terms is expensive, but techniques based on \"field-encoded words\" or \"superimposed codewords\" provide fast indexing across the full query and head.\nHashing.\nSome Prolog systems, such as WIN-PROLOG and SWI-Prolog, now implement hashing to help handle large datasets more efficiently. This tends to yield very large performance gains when working with large corpora such as WordNet.\nTabling.\nSome Prolog systems, (B-Prolog, XSB, SWI-Prolog, YAP, and Ciao), implement a memoization method called \"tabling\", which frees the user from manually storing intermediate results. Tabling is a space\u2013time tradeoff; execution time can be reduced by using more memory to store intermediate results:\nSubgoals encountered in a query evaluation are maintained in a table, along with answers to these subgoals. If a subgoal is re-encountered, the evaluation reuses information from the table rather than re-performing resolution against program clauses.\nTabling can be extended in various directions. It can support recursive predicates through SLG resolution or linear tabling. In a multi-threaded Prolog system tabling results could be kept private to a thread or shared among all threads. And in incremental tabling, tabling might react to changes.\nImplementation in hardware.\nDuring the Fifth Generation Computer Systems project, there were attempts to implement Prolog in hardware with the aim of achieving faster execution with dedicated architectures. Furthermore, Prolog has a number of properties that may allow speed-up through parallel execution. A more recent approach has been to compile restricted Prolog programs to a field-programmable gate array (FPGA). However, rapid progress in general-purpose hardware has consistently overtaken more specialised architectures.\nIn 1982, computers operated at around 10,000 to 100,000 LIPS [logical inferences per second]. The FGCS planned to produce computers operating at 0.1 to 1 GLIPS. The Institute for New Generation Computer Technology documents estimated that 1 LIP took about 100 operations on a conventional computer. The plan was to produce at the end of the project (in 1992) a machine with 1000 processors achieving 1 GLIPS, implying at least 1 MLIPS per processor.\nSega implemented Prolog for use with the Sega AI Computer , released for the Japanese market in 1986. Prolog was used for reading natural language inputs, in the Japanese language, via a touch pad.\nExtensions.\nVarious implementations have been developed from Prolog to extend logic programming abilities in many directions. These include types, modes, constraint logic programming (CLP), object-oriented logic programming (OOLP), concurrency, linear logic (LLP), functional and higher-order logic programming abilities, plus interoperability with knowledge bases:\nTypes.\nProlog is an untyped language. Attempts to introduce and extend Prolog with types began in the 1980s, and continue as of 2008[ [update]]. Type information is useful not only for type safety but also for reasoning about Prolog programs.&lt;ref name=\"cite doi|10.1007/BF01213601\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;\nModes.\nThe syntax of Prolog does not specify which arguments of a predicate are inputs and which are outputs. However, this information is significant and it is recommended that it be included in the comments. Modes provide valuable information when reasoning about Prolog programs and can also be used to accelerate execution.\nConstraints.\nConstraint logic programming extends Prolog to include concepts from constraint satisfaction. A constraint logic program allows constraints in the body of clauses, such as: codice_77 It is suited to large-scale combinatorial optimisation problems and is thus useful for applications in industrial settings, such as automated time-tabling and production scheduling. Most Prolog systems ship with at least one constraint solver for finite domains, and often also with solvers for other domains like rational numbers.\nObject-orientation.\nFlora-2 is an object-oriented knowledge representation and reasoning system based on F-logic and incorporates HiLog, Transaction logic, and defeasible reasoning.\nLogtalk is an object-oriented logic programming language that can use most Prolog implementations as a back-end compiler. As a multi-paradigm language, it includes support for both prototypes and classes.\nOblog is a small, portable, object-oriented extension to Prolog by Margaret McDougall of EdCAAD, University of Edinburgh.\nObjlog was a frame-based language combining objects and Prolog II from CNRS, Marseille, France.\nProlog++ was developed by Logic Programming Associates and first released in 1989 for MS-DOS PCs. Support for other platforms was added, and a second version was released in 1995. A book about Prolog++ by Chris Moss was published by Addison-Wesley in 1994.\nVisual Prolog is a multi-paradigm language with interfaces, classes, implementations and object expressions.\nGraphics.\nProlog systems that provide a graphics library are SWI-Prolog, Visual Prolog, WIN-PROLOG, and B-Prolog.\nConcurrency.\nProlog-MPI is an open-source SWI-Prolog extension for distributed computing over the Message Passing Interface. Also there are various concurrent Prolog programming languages.\nWeb programming.\nSome Prolog implementations, notably Visual Prolog, SWI-Prolog and Ciao, support server-side web programming with support for web protocols, HTML and XML. There are also extensions to support semantic web formats such as Resource Description Framework (RDF) and Web Ontology Language (OWL). Prolog has also been suggested as a client-side language. In addition, Visual Prolog supports JSON-RPC and Websockets.\nInterfaces to other languages.\nFrameworks exist which can bridge between Prolog and other languages:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23486", "revid": "829949", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23486", "title": "Phil Zimmermann", "text": "Creator of Pretty Good Privacy (PGP)\nPhilip R. Zimmermann (born 1954) is an American computer scientist and cryptographer. He is the creator of Pretty Good Privacy (PGP), the most widely used email encryption software in the world. He is also known for his work in VoIP encryption protocols, notably ZRTP and Zfone. Zimmermann is co-founder and Chief Scientist of the global encrypted communications firm Silent Circle.\nBackground.\nZimmermann was born in Camden, New Jersey. He received a B.S. degree in computer science from Florida Atlantic University in Boca Raton, Florida, in 1978. In the 1980s, he worked in Boulder, Colorado, as a software engineer on the Nuclear Weapons Freeze Campaign as a military policy analyst. From 2016 to 2021, he worked at Delft University of Technology as an associate professor in the Cybersecurity section at the Faculty of Electrical Engineering, Mathematics, and Computer Science.\nPGP.\nIn 1991, he wrote the popular Pretty Good Privacy (PGP) program, and made it available (together with its source code) through public FTP for download, the first widely available program implementing public-key cryptography. Shortly thereafter, it became available overseas via the Internet, though Zimmermann has said he had no part in its distribution outside the United States.\nThe very first version of PGP included an encryption algorithm, BassOmatic, developed by Zimmermann.\nPGP was made to democratize software and digital privacy. But Zimmerman sold PGP to Network Associates (now McAfee) in 1997, for around 10 million dollars, and let them put the software behind a paywall.\nArms Export Control Act investigation.\nAfter a report from RSA Security, who were in a licensing dispute with regard to the use of the RSA algorithm in PGP, the United States Customs Service started a criminal investigation of Zimmermann, for allegedly violating the Arms Export Control Act. The United States Government had long regarded cryptographic software as a munition, and thus subject to arms trafficking export controls. At that time, PGP was considered to be impermissible (\"high-strength\") for export from the United States. The maximum strength allowed for legal export has since been raised and now allows PGP to be exported. The investigation lasted three years, but was finally dropped without filing charges after MIT Press published the source code of PGP.\nIn 1995, Zimmermann published the book \"PGP Source Code and Internals\" as a way to bypass limitations on exporting digital code. Zimmermann's introduction says the book contains \"all of the C source code to a software package called PGP\" and that the unusual publication in book form of the complete source code for a computer program was a direct response to the U.S. government's criminal investigation of Zimmermann for violations of U.S. export restrictions as a result of the international spread of PGP's use.\nAfter the government dropped its case without indictment in early 1996, Zimmermann founded PGP Inc. and released an updated version of PGP and some additional related products. That company was acquired by Network Associates (NAI) in December 1997, and Zimmermann stayed on for three years as a Senior Fellow. NAI decided to drop the product line and in 2002, PGP was acquired from NAI by a new company called PGP Corporation. Zimmermann served as a special advisor and consultant to that firm until Symantec acquired PGP Corporation in 2010. Zimmermann is also a fellow at the Stanford Law School's Center for Internet and Society. He was a principal designer of the cryptographic key agreement protocol (the \"association model\") for the Wireless USB standard.\nSilent Circle.\nAlong with Mike Janke and Jon Callas, in 2012 he co-founded Silent Circle, a secure hardware and subscription based software security company.\nDark Mail Alliance.\nIn October 2013, Zimmermann, along with other key employees from Silent Circle, teamed up with Lavabit founder Ladar Levison to create the Dark Mail Alliance. The goal of the organization is to work on a new protocol to replace PGP that will encrypt email metadata, among other things that PGP is not capable of.\nOkuna.\nZimmermann was also involved in the social network Okuna, formerly Openbook, which aimed to be an ethical and privacy-friendly alternative to existing social networks, especially Facebook. He sees today's established social media platforms as a threat to democracy and privacy, because of their profit-oriented revenue models that \"are all about exploiting our personal information\" and \"[deepen] the political divides in our culture\", and hoped Okuna would help solve these problems.\nZimmermann's Law.\nIn 2013, an article on \"Zimmermann's Law\" quoted Phil Zimmermann as saying \"The natural flow of technology tends to move in the direction of making surveillance easier\", and \"the ability of computers to track us doubles every eighteen months\", in reference to Moore's law.\nAwards and other recognition.\nZimmermann has received numerous technical and humanitarian awards for his pioneering work in cryptography:\nSimon Singh's \"The Code Book\" devotes an entire chapter to Zimmermann and PGP. In 2022 Steven Johnson covered his story and achievements in Zimmermann's profile for Hidden Heroes - The Crypto Wars: How Philip Zimmermann Fought for Our Right to Privacy.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23487", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23487", "title": "PSTN", "text": ""}
{"id": "23490", "revid": "1318166673", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23490", "title": "Political spectrum", "text": "Graphical system to visually classify political positions\nA political spectrum is a system to characterize and classify different political positions in relation to one another. These positions sit upon one or more geometric axes that represent independent political dimensions. The expressions political compass and political map are used to refer to the political spectrum as well, especially to popular two-dimensional models of it.\nMost long-standing spectra include the left\u2013right dimension as a measure of social, political and economic hierarchy which originally referred to seating arrangements in the French parliament after the Revolution (1789\u20131799), with radicals on the left and aristocrats on the right. While communism and socialism are usually regarded internationally as being on the left, conservatism and reactionism are generally regarded as being on the right. Liberalism can mean different things in different contexts, being sometimes on the left (social liberalism) and other times on the right (conservative liberalism or classical liberalism). Those with an intermediate outlook are sometimes classified as centrists. Politics that rejects the conventional left\u2013right spectrum is often known as syncretic politics. This form of politics has been criticized as tending to mischaracterize positions that have a logical location on a two-axis spectrum because they seem randomly brought together on a one-axis left\u2013right spectrum.\nSome political scientists have noted that a single left\u2013right axis is too simplistic and insufficient for describing the existing variation in political beliefs and include other axes to compensate for this problem. Although the descriptive words at polar opposites may vary, the axes of popular biaxial spectra are usually split between economic issues (on a left\u2013right dimension) and socio-cultural issues (on an authority\u2013liberty dimension).\nHistorical origin of the terms.\nThe terms \"right\" and \"left\" refer to political affiliations originating early in the French Revolutionary era of 1789\u20131799 and referred originally to the seating arrangements in the various legislative bodies of France. As seen from the Speaker's seat at the front of the Assembly, the aristocracy sat on the right (traditionally the seat of honor) and the commoners sat on the left, hence the terms right-wing politics and left-wing politics.\nOriginally, the defining point on the ideological spectrum was the \"Ancien R\u00e9gime\" (\"old order\"). \"The Right\" thus implied support for aristocratic or royal interests and the church, while \"The Left\" implied support for republicanism, secularism and civil liberties.\nAcademic investigation.\nFor almost a century, social scientists have considered the problem of how to best describe political variation.\nLeonard W. Ferguson.\nIn 1950, Leonard W. Ferguson analyzed political values using ten scales measuring attitudes toward: birth control, capital punishment, censorship, communism, evolution, law, patriotism, theism, treatment of criminals and war. Submitting the results to factor analysis, he was able to identify three factors, which he named religionism, humanitarianism and nationalism. He defined religionism as belief in God and negative attitudes toward evolution and birth control; humanitarianism as being related to attitudes opposing war, capital punishment and harsh treatment of criminals; and nationalism as describing variation in opinions on censorship, law, patriotism and communism.\nThis system was derived empirically, as rather than devising a political model on purely theoretical grounds and testing it, Ferguson's research was exploratory. As a result of this method, care must be taken in the interpretation of Ferguson's three factors, as factor analysis will output an abstract factor whether an objectively real factor exists or not. Although replication of the nationalism factor was inconsistent, the finding of religionism and humanitarianism had a number of replications by Ferguson and others.\nHans Eysenck.\nShortly afterward, Hans Eysenck began researching political attitudes in the United Kingdom. He believed that there was something essentially similar about the fascism of the National Socialists (Nazis) on the one hand and the communists on the other, despite their opposite positions on the left\u2013right axis. As Hans Eysenck described in his 1956 book \"Sense and Nonsense in Psychology\", Eysenck compiled a list of political statements found in newspapers and political tracts and asked subjects to rate their agreement or disagreement with each. Submitting this value questionnaire to the same process of factor analysis used by Ferguson, Eysenck drew out two factors, which he named \"Radicalism\" (R-factor) and \"Tender-Mindedness\" (T-factor).\nSuch analysis produces a factor whether or not it corresponds to a real-world phenomenon and so caution must be exercised in its interpretation. While Eysenck's R-factor is easily identified as the classical \"left\u2013right\" dimension, the T-factor (representing a factor drawn at right angles to the R-factor) is less intuitive, as high-scorers favored pacifism, racial equality, religious education and restrictions on abortion, while low-scorers had attitudes more friendly to militarism, harsh punishment, easier divorce laws and companionate marriage.\nAccording to social scientist Bojan Todosijevic, radicalism was defined as positively viewing evolution theory, strikes, welfare state, mixed marriages, student protests, law reform, women's liberation, United Nations, nudist camps, pop-music, modern art, immigration, abolishing private property, and rejection of patriotism. Conservatism was defined as positively viewing white superiority, birching, death penalty, antisemitism, opposition to nationalization of property, and birth control. Tender-mindedness was defined by moral training, inborn conscience, Bible truth, chastity, self-denial, pacifism, anti-discrimination, being against the death penalty and harsh treatment of criminals. Tough-mindedness was defined by compulsory sterilization, euthanasia, easier divorce laws, racism, antisemitism, compulsory military training, wife swapping, casual living, death penalty, and harsh treatment of criminals.\nDespite the difference in methodology, location and theory, the results attained by Eysenck and Ferguson matched. Simply rotating Eysenck's two factors 45 degrees renders the same factors of religionism and humanitarianism identified by Ferguson in America.\nEysenck's dimensions of R and T were found by factor analyses of values in Germany and Sweden, France and Japan.\nOne interesting result Eysenck noted in his 1956 work was that in the United States and the United Kingdom, most of the political variance was subsumed by the left/right axis, while in France the T-axis was larger and in the Middle East the only dimension to be found was the T-axis: \"Among mid-Eastern Arabs it has been found that while the tough-minded/tender-minded dimension is still clearly expressed in the relationships observed between different attitudes, there is nothing that corresponds to the radical-conservative continuum\".\nRelationship between Eysenck's political views and political research.\nEysenck's political views related to his research: Eysenck was an outspoken opponent of what he perceived as the authoritarian abuses of the left and right, and accordingly he believed that with this T axis he had found the link between Nazism and communism. According to Eysenck, members of both ideologies were tough-minded. Central to Eysenck's thesis was the claim that tender-minded ideologies were democratic and friendly to human freedoms, while tough-minded ideologies were aggressive and authoritarian, a claim that is open to political criticism. In this context, Eysenck carried out studies on Nazism and communist groups, claiming to find members of both groups to be more \"dominant\" and more \"aggressive\" than control groups.\nEysenck left Nazi Germany to live in Britain and was not shy in attacking Stalinism, citing the antisemitic prejudices of the Russian government, the luxurious lifestyles of the Soviet Union leadership and the Orwellian \"doublethink\" of East Germany's naming itself the German Democratic Republic despite being \"one of the most undemocratic regimes in the world today\". While Eysenck was an opponent of Nazism, his relationship with fascist organizations was more complex. Eysenck himself lent theoretical support to the English National Party, which also opposed Hitlerite Nazism, and was interviewed in the first issue of their journal \"The Beacon\" in relation to his controversial views on relative intelligence between different races. At one point during the interview, Eysenck was asked whether or not he was of Jewish origin before the interviewer proceeded. His political allegiances were called into question by other researchers, notably Steven Rose, who alleged that his scientific research was used for political purposes.\nSubsequent criticism of Eysenck's research.\nEysenck's conception of tough-mindedness has been criticized for a number of reasons.\nMilton Rokeach.\nDissatisfied with Hans J. Eysenck's work, Milton Rokeach developed his own two-axis model of political values in 1973, basing this on the ideas of freedom and equality, which he described in his book, \"The Nature of Human Values\".\nRokeach claimed that the defining difference between the left and right was that the left stressed the importance of equality more than the right. Despite his criticisms of Eysenck's tough\u2013tender axis, Rokeach also postulated a basic similarity between communism and Nazism, claiming that these groups would not value freedom as greatly as more conventional social democrats, democratic socialists and capitalists would and he wrote that \"the two value model presented here most resembles Eysenck's hypothesis\".\nTo test this model, Rokeach and his colleagues used content analysis on works exemplifying Nazism (written by Adolf Hitler), communism (written by Vladimir Lenin), capitalism (by Barry Goldwater) and socialism (written by various authors). This method has been criticized for its reliance on the experimenter's familiarity with the content under analysis and its dependence on the researcher's particular political outlooks.\nMultiple raters made frequency counts of sentences containing synonyms for a number of values identified by Rokeach\u2014including freedom and equality\u2014and Rokeach analyzed these results by comparing the relative frequency rankings of all the values for each of the four texts:\nLater studies using samples of American ideologues and American presidential inaugural addresses attempted to apply this model.\nLater research.\nIn further research, Eysenck refined his methodology to include more questions on economic issues. Doing this, he revealed a split in the left\u2013right axis between social policy and economic policy, with a previously undiscovered dimension of socialism-capitalism (S-factor).\nWhile factorially distinct from Eysenck's previous R factor, the S-factor did positively correlate with the R-factor, indicating that a basic left\u2013right or right\u2013left tendency underlies both social values and economic values, although S tapped more into items discussing economic inequality and big business, while R relates more to the treatment of criminals and to sexual issues and military issues.\nAnother replication came from Ronald Inglehart's research into national opinions based on the World Values Survey, although Inglehart's research described the values of countries rather than individuals or groups of individuals within nations. Inglehart's two-factor solution took the form of Ferguson's original religionism and humanitarianism dimensions; Inglehart labelled them \"secularism\u2013traditionalism\", which covered issues of tradition and religion, like patriotism, abortion, euthanasia and the importance of obeying the law and authority figures, and \"survivalism \u2013 self expression\", which measured issues like everyday conduct and dress, acceptance of diversity (including foreigners) and innovation and attitudes towards people with specific controversial lifestyles such as homosexuality and vegetarianism, as well as willingness to engage in political activism. See for Inglehart's national chart.\nThough not directly related to Eysenck's research, evidence suggests there may be as many as 6 dimensions of political opinions in the United States and 10 dimensions in the United Kingdom. This conclusion was based on two large datasets and uses a Bayesian approach rather than the traditional factor analysis method.\nOther double-axis models.\nGreenberg and Jonas: left\u2013right, ideological rigidity.\nIn a 2003 \"Psychological Bulletin\" paper, Jeff Greenberg and Eva Jonas posit a model comprising the standard left\u2013right axis and an axis representing ideological rigidity. For Greenberg and Jonas, ideological rigidity has \"much in common with the related concepts of dogmatism and authoritarianism\" and is characterized by \"believing in strong leaders and submission, preferring one's own in-group, ethnocentrism and nationalism, aggression against dissidents, and control with the help of police and military\". Greenberg and Jonas posit that high ideological rigidity can be motivated by \"particularly strong needs to reduce fear and uncertainty\" and is a primary shared characteristic of \"people who subscribe to any extreme government or ideology, whether it is right-wing or left-wing\".\nInglehart: traditionalist\u2013secular and self expressionist\u2013survivalist.\nIn its 4 January 2003 issue, \"The Economist\" discussed a chart, proposed by Ronald Inglehart and supported by the World Values Survey (associated with the University of Michigan), to plot cultural ideology onto two dimensions. On the y-axis it covered issues of tradition and religion, like patriotism, abortion, euthanasia and the importance of obeying the law and authority figures. At the bottom of the chart is the traditionalist position on issues like these (with loyalty to country and family and respect for life considered important), while at the top is the secular position. The x-axis deals with self-expression, issues like everyday conduct and dress, acceptance of diversity (including foreigners) and innovation, and attitudes towards people with specific controversial lifestyles such as vegetarianism, as well as willingness to engage in political activism. At the right of the chart is the open self-expressionist position, while at the left is its opposite position, which Inglehart calls survivalist. This chart not only has the power to map the values of individuals, but also to compare the values of people in different countries. Placed on this chart, European Union countries in continental Europe come out on the top right, Anglophone countries on the middle right, Latin American countries on the bottom right, African, Middle Eastern and South Asian countries on the bottom left and ex-Communist countries on the top left.\nPournelle: liberty\u2013control, irrationalism\u2013rationalism.\nThis very distinct two-axis model was created by Jerry Pournelle in 1963 for his doctoral dissertation in political science. The Pournelle chart has liberty on one axis, with those on the left seeking freedom from control or protections for social deviance and those on the right emphasizing state authority or protections for norm enforcement (farthest right being state worship, farthest left being the idea of a state as the \"ultimate evil\"). The other axis is rationalism, defined here as the belief in planned social progress, with those higher up believing that there are problems with society that can be rationally solved and those lower down skeptical of such approaches.\nMitchell: \"Eight Ways to Run the Country\".\nIn 2006, Brian Patrick Mitchell identified four main political traditions in Anglo-American history based on their regard for \"kratos\" (defined as the use of force) and \"arch\u0113\" or \"archy\" (defined as the recognition of rank). Mitchell grounded the distinction of archy and kratos in the West's historical experience of church and state, crediting the collapse of the Christian consensus on church and state with the appearance of four main divergent traditions in Western political thought:\nMitchell charts these traditions graphically using a vertical axis as a scale of kratos/akrateia and a horizontal axis as a scale of archy/anarchy. He places democratic progressivism in the lower left, plutocratic nationalism in the lower right, republican constitutionalism in the upper right, and libertarian individualism in the upper left. The political left is therefore distinguished by its rejection of archy, while the political right is distinguished by its acceptance of archy. For Mitchell, anarchy is not the absence of government but the rejection of rank. Thus there can be both anti-government anarchists (Mitchell's \"libertarian individualists\") and pro-government anarchists (Mitchell's \"democratic progressives\", who favor the use of government force against social hierarchies such as patriarchy). Mitchell also distinguishes between left-wing anarchists and right-wing anarchists, whom Mitchell renames \"akratists\" for their opposition to the government's use of force.\nFrom the four main political traditions, Mitchell identifies eight distinct political perspectives diverging from a populist center. Four of these perspectives (Progressive, Individualist, Paleoconservative, and Neoconservative) fit squarely within the four traditions; four others (Paleolibertarian, Theoconservative, Communitarian, and Radical) fit between the traditions, being defined by their singular focus on rank or force.\nNolan: economic freedom, personal freedom.\nThe Nolan Chart was created by libertarian David Nolan. This chart shows what he considers as \"economic freedom\" (issues like taxation, free trade and free enterprise) on the horizontal axis and what he considers as \"personal freedom\" (issues like drug legalization, abortion and the draft) on the vertical axis. This puts left-wingers in the left quadrant, libertarians in the top, centrists in the middle, right-wingers in the right and what Nolan originally named populists in the bottom. Several popular online tests, where individuals can self-identify their political values, utilize the same two axes as the Nolan Chart, including The Political Compass, iSideWith.com and MapMyPolitics.org.\nSpatial model.\nThe spatial model of voting plots voters and candidates in a multi-dimensional space where each dimension represents a single political issue sub-component of an issue, or candidate attribute. Voters are then modeled as having an \"ideal point\" in this space and voting for the nearest candidates to that point. The dimensions of this model can also be assigned to non-political properties of the candidates, such as perceived corruption, health, etc.\nMost of the other spectra in this article can then be considered projections of this multi-dimensional space onto a smaller number of dimensions. For example, a study of German voters found that at least four dimensions were required to adequately represent all political parties.\nOther proposed dimensions.\nIn 1998, political author Virginia Postrel, in her book \"The Future and Its Enemies\", offered another single-axis spectrum that measures views of the future, contrasting stasists, who allegedly fear the future and wish to control it, and dynamists, who want the future to unfold naturally and without attempts to plan and control. The distinction corresponds to the utopian versus dystopian spectrum used in some theoretical assessments of liberalism, and the book's title is borrowed from the work of the anti-utopian classic-liberal theorist Karl Popper.\nOther proposed axes include:\nPolitical spectrum\u2013based forecasts.\nAs shown by Russian political scientist Stepan S. Sulakshin, political spectra can be used as a forecasting tool. Sulakshin offered mathematical evidence that stable development (positive dynamics of the vast number of statistic indices) depends on the width of the political spectrum: if it is too narrow or too wide, stagnation or political disasters will result. Sulakshin also showed that in the short run the political spectrum determines the statistic indices dynamic and not vice versa.\nBiological variables.\nA number of studies have found that biology can be linked with political orientation. Many of the studies linking biology to politics remain controversial and unreplicated, although the overall body of evidence is growing.\nStudies have found that subjects with conservative political views have larger amygdalae and are more prone to feeling disgust. Liberals have larger volume of grey matter in the anterior cingulate cortex and are better at detecting errors in recurring patterns. The anterior cingulate cortex is used when dealing with conflicting information. A study conducted by researchers from the University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA) and New York University (NYU) had participants sort through a deck of cards. The letter M was four times more likely to be in the deck than the letter W. Participants had to press a button every time an M came up in the deck. Liberals were shown to make fewer errors in mistaking the W for the M. This behavioral study supported the notion that liberals are better with dealing with conflicting information. Conservatives have a stronger sympathetic nervous system response to threatening images and are more likely to interpret ambiguous facial expressions as threatening. In general, conservatives are more likely to report larger social networks, more happiness and better self-esteem than liberals. Liberals are more likely to report greater emotional distress, relationship dissatisfaction and experiential hardship and are more open to experience and tolerate uncertainty and disorder better.\nGenetic factors account for at least some of the variation of political views. From the perspective of evolutionary psychology, conflicts regarding redistribution of wealth may have been common in the ancestral environment and humans may have developed psychological mechanisms for judging their own chances of succeeding in such conflicts. These mechanisms affect political views.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23496", "revid": "7226930", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23496", "title": "Pregnancy (mammals)", "text": "Period of reproduction\nIn therian mammals, pregnancy is the period of reproduction during which a female carries one or more live offspring from implantation in the uterus through gestation. It begins when a fertilized zygote implants in the female's uterus, and ends once it leaves the uterus.\nFertilization and implantation.\nMale mammals introduce sperm through the penis into the vagina during copulation. The spermatozoon fertilizes an ovum or various ova in the uterus or oviducts, and this results in one or multiple zygotes. Sometimes, a zygote can be created by humans outside of the animal's body in the artificial process of in-vitro fertilization. After fertilization, the newly formed zygote then begins to divide through mitosis, forming an embryo, which implants in the female's endometrium. At this time, the embryo usually consists of 50 cells.\nDevelopment.\nAfter implantation.\nA blastocele is a small cavity on the center of the embryo, and the developing embryonary cells will grow around it. Then, a flat layer cell forms on the exterior of this cavity, and the zona pellucida, the blastocyst's barrier, remains the same size as before. Cells grow increasingly smaller to fit in. This new structure with a cavity in the center and the developing cells around it is known as a blastocyst.\nThe presence of the blastocyst means that two types of cells are forming, an inner-cell mass growing on the interior of the blastocele and cells growing on the exterior of it. In 24 to 48 hours, the zona pellucida breaches. The cells on the exterior of the blastocyst begin excreting an enzyme which erodes epithelial uterine lining and creates a site for implantation.\nPlacental circulation system.\nThe cells surrounding the blastocyst now destroy cells in the uterine lining, forming small pools of blood, which in turn stimulate the production of capillaries. This is the first stage in the growth of the placenta. The inner cell mass of the blastocyst divides rapidly, forming two layers. The top layer becomes the embryo, and cells from there occupy the amniotic cavity. At the same time, the bottom layer forms a small sac (if the cells begin developing in an abnormal position, an ectopic gestation may also occur at this point).\nSeveral days later, chorionic villi in the forming placenta anchor the implantation site to the uterus. A system of blood and blood vessels now develops at the point of the newly forming placenta, growing near the implantation site. The small sac inside the blastocyst begins producing red blood cells. For the next 24 hours, connective tissue develops between the developing placenta and the growing embryo. This later develops into the umbilical cord.\nCellular differentiation.\nFollowing this, a narrow line of cells appears on the surface on the embryo. Its growth makes the embryo undergo gastrulation, in which the three primary tissue layers of the fetus, the ectoderm, mesoderm, and endoderm, develop. The narrow line of cells begin to form the endoderm and mesoderm. The ectoderm begins to grow rapidly as a result of chemicals being produced by the mesoderm. These three layers give rise to all the various types of tissue in the body.\nThe endoderm later forms the lining of the tongue, digestive tract, lungs, bladder and several glands. The mesoderm forms muscle, bone, and lymph tissue, as well as the interior of the lungs, heart, and reproductive and excretory systems. It also gives rise to the spleen, and produces blood cells. The ectoderm forms the skin, nails, hair, cornea, lining of the internal and external ear, nose, sinuses, mouth, anus, teeth, pituitary gland, mammary glands, eyes, and all parts of the nervous system.\nApproximately 18 days after fertilization, the embryo has divided to form much of the tissue it will need. It is shaped like a pear, where the head region is larger than the tail. The embryo's nervous system is one of the first organic systems to grow. It begins growing in a concave area known as the neural groove.\nThe blood system continues to grow networks which allow the blood to flow around the embryo. Blood cells are already being produced and are flowing through these developing networks. Secondary blood vessels also begin to develop around the placenta, to supply it with more nutrients. Blood cells begin to form on the sac in the center of the embryo, as well as cells which begin to differentiate into blood vessels. Endocardial cells begin to form the myocardium.\nAt about 24 days past fertilization, there is a primitive S-shaped tubule heart which begins beating. The flow of fluids throughout the embryo begins at this stage.\nGestation periods.\nFor mammals, the gestation period is the time in which a fetus develops, beginning with fertilization and ending at birth. The duration of this period varies between species.\nFor most species, the amount a fetus grows before birth determines the length of the gestation period. Smaller species normally have a shorter gestation period than larger animals. For example, a cat's gestation normally takes 58\u201365 days while an elephant's takes nearly 2 years (21 months). However, growth does not necessarily determine the length of gestation for all species, especially for those with a breeding season. Species that use a breeding season usually give birth during a specific time of year when food is available.\nVarious other factors can come into play in determining the duration of gestation. For humans, male fetuses normally gestate several days longer than females and multiple pregnancies gestate for a shorter period. Ethnicity in humans is also a factor that may lengthen or shorten gestation. In dogs, there is a positive correlation between a longer gestation time and fewer members of the litter. The duration of gestation is usually longer in placental mammals than in marsupials.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23497", "revid": "46377218", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23497", "title": "Paroxysmal attack", "text": "Sudden intensification or recurrence of medical symptoms\nMedical condition&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Infobox/styles-images.css\" /&gt;\nParoxysmal attacks or paroxysms are a sudden recurrence or intensification of symptoms, such as a spasm or seizure. These short, frequent symptoms can be observed in various clinical conditions. They are usually associated with multiple sclerosis or pertussis, but they may also be observed in other disorders such as encephalitis, head trauma, stroke, autism, asthma, trigeminal neuralgia, breath-holding spells, epilepsy, malaria, tabes dorsalis, Beh\u00e7et's disease, and paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria (PNH). It has also been noted as a symptom of gratification disorder in children.\nThe word \"paroxysm\" means 'sudden attack, outburst' and comes from el \" \"\u03c0\u03b1\u03c1\u03bf\u03be\u03c5\u03c3\u03bc\u03cc\u03c2\" (paroxusm\u00f3s)\"\u00a0'irritation, exasperation'.\nParoxysmal attacks in various disorders have been reported extensively, and ephaptic coupling of demyelinated nerves has been presumed as one of the underlying mechanisms of this phenomenon. This is supported by the presence of these attacks in multiple sclerosis and tabes dorsalis, which both involve demyelination of spinal cord neurons. Exercise, tactile stimuli, hot water, anxiety, and neck flexion may provoke paroxysmal attacks. Most reported paroxysmal attacks are painful tonic spasms, dysarthria and ataxia, numbness, and hemiparesis. They are typically different from other transient symptoms by their brevity (lasting no more than 2 minutes), frequency (from 1\u20132 times/day up to a few hundred times/day), stereotyped fashion, and excellent response to drugs (usually carbamazepine). Withdrawal of symptoms without any residual neurological finding is another key feature in their recognition.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23499", "revid": "823269454", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23499", "title": "Political liberalism", "text": ""}
{"id": "23501", "revid": "2666701", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23501", "title": "Potato", "text": "Starchy tuber used as a staple food\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Taxobox/core/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe potato () is a starchy tuberous vegetable native to the Americas that is consumed as a staple food in many parts of the world. Potatoes are underground stem tubers of the plant Solanum tuberosum, a perennial in the nightshade family Solanaceae.\nWild potato species can be found from the southern United States to southern Chile. Genetic studies show that the cultivated potato has a single origin, in the area of present-day southern Peru and extreme northwestern Bolivia. Potatoes were domesticated there about 7,000\u201310,000 years ago from a species in the \"S. brevicaule\" complex. Many varieties of the potato are cultivated in the Andes region of South America, where the species is indigenous.\nThe Spanish introduced potatoes to Europe in the second half of the 16th century from the Americas. They are a staple food in many parts of the world and an integral part of much of the world's food supply. Following centuries of selective breeding, there are now over 5,000 different varieties of potatoes. The potato remains an essential crop in Europe, especially Northern and Eastern Europe, where per capita production is still the highest in the world, while the most rapid expansion in production during the 21st century was in southern and eastern Asia, with China and India leading the world production as of 2023.\nLike the tomato and the nightshades, the potato is in the genus \"Solanum\"; the aerial parts of the potato contain the toxin solanine. Normal potato tubers that have been grown and stored properly produce glycoalkaloids in negligible amounts, but if sprouts and potato skins are exposed to light, tubers can become toxic.\nEtymology.\nThe English word \"potato\" comes from Spanish , in turn from Ta\u00edno \"\", which means \"sweet potato\", not the plant now known as simply \"potato\".\nThe name \"spud\" for a potato is from the 15th century \"spudde\", a short and stout knife or dagger, probably related to Danish \"spyd\", \"spear\". Through semantic change, the general sense of \"short and thick\" was transferred to the tuber from around 1840.\nAt least seven languages: Afrikaans, Dutch, Low Saxon, French, (West) Frisian, Hebrew, Persian and some variants of German, use a term for \"potato\" that means \"earth apple\" or \"ground apple\", from an earlier sense of both pome and apple, referring in general to a (\"apple-shaped\") fruit or vegetable.\nDescription.\nPotato plants are herbaceous perennials that grow up to high. The stems are hairy. The leaves have roughly four pairs of leaflets. The flowers range from white or pink to blue or purple; they are yellow at the centre, and are insect-pollinated.\nThe plant develops tubers to store nutrients. These are not roots but stems that form from thickened rhizomes at the tips of long thin stolons. On the surface of the tubers there are \"eyes,\" which act as sinks to protect the vegetative buds from which the stems originate. The \"eyes\" are arranged in helical form. In addition, the tubers have small holes that allow breathing, called lenticels. The lenticels are circular and their number varies depending on the size of the tuber and environmental conditions. Tubers form in response to decreasing day length, although this tendency has been minimized in commercial varieties.\nAfter flowering, potato plants produce small green fruits that resemble green cherry tomatoes, each containing about 300 very small seeds.\nPhylogeny.\nLike the tomato, potatoes belong to the genus \"Solanum\", which is a member of the nightshade family, the Solanaceae. That is a diverse family of flowering plants, often poisonous, that includes the mandrake (\"Mandragora\"), deadly nightshade (\"Atropa\"), and tobacco (\"Nicotiana\"), as shown in the outline phylogenetic tree (many branches omitted). The most commonly cultivated potato is \"S. tuberosum\"; there are several other species.\nThe major species grown worldwide is \"S. tuberosum\" (a tetraploid with 48 chromosomes), and modern varieties of this species are the most widely cultivated. There are also four diploid species (with 24 chromosomes): \"S. stenotomum\", \"S. phureja\", \"S. goniocalyx\", and \"S. ajanhuiri\". There are two triploid species (with 36 chromosomes): \"S. chaucha\" and \"S. juzepczukii\". There is one pentaploid cultivated species (with 60 chromosomes): \"S. curtilobum\".\nThere are two major subspecies of tetraploid \"S. tuberosum\". The Andean potato, \"S. tuberosum andigena\", is adapted to the short-day conditions prevalent in the mountainous equatorial and tropical regions where it originated. The Chilean potato \"S. tuberosum tuberosum\", native to the Chilo\u00e9 Archipelago, is in contrast adapted to the long-day conditions prevalent in the higher latitude region of southern Chile.\nA 2025 study by Zhang et al. examining \"Solanum\" genomes groups all species of potato under \"S. tuberosum\". According to the study, the \"Petota\" (potato) lineage contains more than 55 diploid species, with only one being selected by humans for domestication; the study posits that all landraces branch out from a single point within \"Solanum candolleanum\".\nHistory.\nDomestication.\nWild potato species occur from the southern United States to southern Chile. The potato was first domesticated in southern Peru and northwestern Bolivia by pre-Columbian farmers, around Lake Titicaca. Potatoes were domesticated there about 7,000\u201310,000 years ago from a species in the \"S. brevicaule\" complex.\nThe earliest archaeologically verified potato tuber remains have been found at the coastal site of Ancon (central Peru), dating to 2500 BC. The most widely cultivated variety, \"Solanum tuberosum tuberosum\", is indigenous to the Chilo\u00e9 Archipelago, and has been cultivated by the local indigenous people since before the Spanish conquest.\nSpread.\nFollowing the Spanish conquest of the Inca Empire, the Spanish introduced the potato to Europe in the second half of the 16th century as part of the Columbian exchange. The staple was subsequently conveyed by European mariners (possibly including the Russian-American Company) to territories and ports throughout the world, especially their colonies. European and colonial farmers were slow to adopt farming potatoes. However, after 1750, they became an important food staple and field crop and played a major role in the European 19th century population boom. According to conservative estimates, the introduction of the potato was responsible for a quarter of the growth in Old World population and urbanization between 1700 and 1900. However, lack of genetic diversity, due to the very limited number of varieties initially introduced, left the crop vulnerable to disease. In 1845, a plant disease known as late blight, caused by the fungus-like oomycete \"Phytophthora infestans\", spread rapidly through the poorer communities of western Ireland as well as parts of the Scottish Highlands, resulting in the crop failures that led to the Great Irish Famine.\nThe International Potato Center, based in Lima, Peru, holds 4,870 types of potato germplasm, most of which are traditional landrace cultivars. In 2009, a draft sequence of the potato genome was made, containing 12 chromosomes and 860 million base pairs, making it a medium-sized plant genome.\nIt had been thought that most potato cultivars derived from a single origin in southern Peru and extreme Northwestern Bolivia, from a species in the \"S. brevicaule\" complex. DNA analysis however shows that more than 99% of all current varieties of potatoes are direct descendants of a subspecies that once grew in the lowlands of south-central Chile.\nMost modern potatoes grown in North America arrived through European settlement and not independently from the South American sources. At least one wild potato species, \"S. fendleri\", occurs in North America; it is used in breeding for resistance to a nematode species that attacks cultivated potatoes. A secondary center of genetic variability of the potato is Mexico, where important wild species that have been used extensively in modern breeding are found, such as the hexaploid \"S. demissum\", used as a source of resistance to the devastating late blight disease (\"Phytophthora infestans\"). Another relative native to this region, \"Solanum bulbocastanum\", has been used to genetically engineer the potato to resist potato blight. Many such wild relatives are useful for breeding resistance to \"P. infestans\".\nLittle of the diversity found in \"Solanum\" ancestral and wild relatives is found outside the original South American range. This makes these South American species highly valuable in breeding. The importance of the potato to humanity is recognised in the United Nations International Day of Potato, to be celebrated on 30 May each year, starting in 2024.\nBreeding.\nPotatoes, both \"S. tuberosum\" and most of its wild relatives, are self-incompatible: they bear no useful fruit when self-pollinated. This trait is problematic for crop breeding, as all sexually produced plants must be hybrids. The gene responsible for self-incompatibility, as well as mutations to disable it, are now known. Self-compatibility has successfully been introduced both to diploid potatoes (including a special line of \"S. tuberosum\") by CRISPR-Cas9. Plants having a 'Sli' gene produce pollen which is compatible to its own parent and plants with similar S genes. This gene was cloned by Wageningen University and Solynta in 2021, which would allow for faster and more focused breeding.\nDiploid hybrid potato breeding is a recent area of potato genetics supported by the finding that simultaneous homozygosity and fixation of donor alleles is possible. Wild potato species useful for breeding blight resistance include \"Solanum desmissum\" and \"S. stoloniferum\", among others.\nVarieties.\nThere are some 5,000 potato varieties worldwide, 3,000 of them in the Andes alone \u2014 mainly in Peru, Bolivia, Ecuador, Chile, and Colombia. Over 100 cultivars might be found in a single valley, and a dozen or more might be maintained by a single agricultural household.\nThe European Cultivated Potato Database is an online collaborative database of potato variety descriptions updated and maintained by the Scottish Agricultural Science Agency within the framework of the European Cooperative Programme for Crop Genetic Resources Networks\u2014which is run by the International Plant Genetic Resources Institute.\nAround 80 varieties are commercially available in the UK.\nFor culinary purposes, varieties are often differentiated by their waxiness: floury or mealy \"baking\" potatoes have more starch (20\u201322%) than waxy \"boiling\" potatoes (16\u201318%). The distinction may also arise from variation in the comparative ratio of two different potato starch compounds: amylose and amylopectin. Amylose, a long-chain molecule, diffuses from the starch granule when cooked in water, and lends itself to dishes where the potato is mashed. Varieties that contain a slightly higher amylopectin content, which is a highly branched molecule, help the potato retain its shape after being boiled in water. Potatoes that are good for making potato chips or potato crisps are sometimes called \"chipping potatoes\", which means they meet the basic requirements of similar varietal characteristics, being firm, fairly clean, and fairly well-shaped.\nImmature potatoes may be sold fresh from the field as \"&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Visible anchor/styles.css\" /&gt;creamer\" or \"&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Visible anchor/styles.css\" /&gt;new\" potatoes and are particularly valued for their taste. They are typically small in size and tender, with a loose skin, and flesh containing a lower level of starch than other potatoes. In the United States they are generally either a Yukon Gold potato or a red potato, called gold creamers or red creamers respectively. In the UK, the Jersey Royal is a famous type of new potato.\nDozens of potato cultivars have been selectively bred specifically for their skin or flesh color, including gold, red, and blue varieties. These contain varying amounts of phytochemicals, including carotenoids for gold/yellow or polyphenols for red or blue cultivars. Carotenoid compounds include provitamin A alpha-carotene and beta-carotene, which are converted to the essential nutrient, vitamin A, during digestion. Anthocyanins mainly responsible for red or blue pigmentation in potato cultivars do not have nutritional significance, but are used for visual variety and consumer appeal. In 2010, potatoes were bioengineered specifically for these pigmentation traits.\nGenetic engineering.\nGenetic research has produced several genetically modified varieties. 'New Leaf', owned by Monsanto Company, incorporates genes from \"Bacillus thuringiensis\" (source of most \"Bt\" toxins in transcrop use), which confers resistance to the Colorado potato beetle; 'New Leaf Plus' and 'New Leaf Y', approved by US regulatory agencies during the 1990s, also include resistance to viruses. McDonald's, Burger King, Frito-Lay, and Procter &amp; Gamble announced they would not use genetically modified potatoes, and Monsanto published its intent to discontinue the line in March 2001.\nPotato starch contains two types of glucan, amylose and amylopectin, the latter of which is most industrially useful. Waxy potato varieties produce waxy potato starch, which is almost entirely amylopectin, with little or no amylose. BASF developed the 'Amflora' potato, which was modified to express antisense RNA to inactivate the gene for granule bound starch synthase, an enzyme which catalyzes the formation of amylose. 'Amflora' potatoes therefore produce starch consisting almost entirely of amylopectin, and are thus more useful for the starch industry. In 2010, the European Commission cleared the way for 'Amflora' to be grown in the European Union for industrial purposes only\u2014not for food. Nevertheless, under EU rules, individual countries have the right to decide whether they will allow this potato to be grown on their territory. Commercial planting of 'Amflora' was expected in the Czech Republic and Germany in the spring of 2010, and Sweden and the Netherlands in subsequent years.\nThe 'Fortuna' GM potato variety developed by BASF was made resistant to late blight by introgressing two resistance genes, &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Visible anchor/styles.css\" /&gt;blb1 and &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Visible anchor/styles.css\" /&gt;blb2, from \"S. bulbocastanum\", a wild potato native to Mexico. &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Visible anchor/styles.css\" /&gt;Rpi-blb1 is a nucleotide-binding leucine-rich repeat (NB-LRR/NLR), an R-gene-produced immunoreceptor.\nIn October 2011, BASF requested cultivation and marketing approval as a feed and food from the EFSA. In 2012, GMO development in Europe was stopped by BASF. In November 2014, the United States Department of Agriculture (USDA) approved a genetically modified potato developed by Simplot, which contains genetic modifications that prevent bruising and produce less acrylamide when fried than conventional potatoes; the modifications do not cause new proteins to be made, but rather prevent proteins from being made via RNA interference.\nGenetically modified varieties have met public resistance in the U.S. and in the European Union.\nCultivation.\nSeed potatoes.\nPotatoes are generally grown from \"seed potatoes\", tubers specifically grown to be free from disease and to provide consistent and healthy plants. To be disease free, the areas where seed potatoes are grown are selected with care. In the US, this restricts production of seed potatoes to only 15 states out of all 50 states where potatoes are grown. These locations are selected for their cold, hard winters that kill pests and summers with long sunshine hours for optimum growth. In the UK, most seed potatoes originate in Scotland, in areas where westerly winds reduce aphid attacks and the spread of potato virus pathogens.\nPhases of growth.\nPotato growth can be divided into five phases. During the first phase, sprouts emerge from the seed potatoes and root growth begins. During the second, photosynthesis begins as the plant develops leaves and branches above-ground and stolons develop from lower leaf axils on the below-ground stem. In the third phase the tips of the stolons swell, forming new tubers, and the shoots continue to grow, with flowers typically developing soon after. Tuber bulking occurs during the fourth phase, when the plant begins investing the majority of its resources in its newly formed tubers. At this phase, several factors are critical to a good yield: optimal soil moisture and temperature, soil nutrient availability and balance, and resistance to pest attacks. The fifth phase is the maturation of the tubers: the leaves and stems senesce and the tuber skins harden.\nNew tubers may start growing at the surface of the soil. Since exposure to light leads to an undesirable greening of the skins and the development of solanine as a protection from the sun's rays, growers cover surface tubers. Commercial growers cover them by piling additional soil around the base of the plant as it grows (called \"hilling\" up, or in British English \"earthing up\"). An alternative method, used by home gardeners and smaller-scale growers, involves covering the growing area with mulches such as straw or plastic sheets.\nAt farm scale, potatoes require a well-drained neutral or mildly acidic soil (pH 6 or 7) such as a sandy loam. The soil is prepared using deep tillage, for example with a chisel plow or ripper. In areas where irrigation is needed, the field is leveled using a landplane so that water can be supplied evenly. Manure can be added after initial irrigation; the soil is then broken up with a disc harrow. The potatoes are planted using a potato planter machine in rows apart. At garden scale, potatoes are planted in trenches or individual holes some deep in soil, preferably with additional organic matter such as garden compost or manure. Alternatively, they can be planted in containers or bags filled with a free-draining compost.\nPotatoes are sensitive to heavy frosts, which damage them in the ground or when stored.\nPests and diseases.\nThe historically significant \"Phytophthora infestans\", the cause of late blight, remains an ongoing problem in Europe and the United States. Other potato diseases include \"Rhizoctonia\", \"Sclerotinia\", \"Pectobacterium carotovorum\" (black leg), powdery mildew, powdery scab and leafroll virus.\nInsects that commonly transmit potato diseases or damage the plants include the Colorado potato beetle, the potato tuber moth, the green peach aphid (\"Myzus persicae\"), the potato aphid, \"Tuta absoluta\", beet leafhoppers, thrips, and mites. The Colorado potato beetle is considered the most important insect defoliator of potatoes, devastating entire crops. The potato cyst nematode is a microscopic worm that feeds on the roots, thus causing the potato plants to wilt. Since its eggs can survive in the soil for several years, crop rotation is recommended.\nHarvest.\nOn a small scale, potatoes can be harvested using a hoe or spade, or simply by hand. Commercial harvesting is done with large potato harvesters, which scoop up the plant and surrounding earth. This is transported up an apron chain consisting of steel links several feet wide, which separates some of the earth. The chain deposits into an area where further separation occurs. The most complex designs use vine choppers and shakers, along with a blower system to separate the potatoes from the plant. The result is then usually run past workers who continue to sort out plant material, stones, and rotten potatoes before the potatoes are continuously delivered to a wagon or truck. Further inspection and separation occurs when the potatoes are unloaded from the field vehicles and put into storage.\nPotatoes are usually cured after harvest to improve skin-set. Skin-set is the process by which the skin of the potato becomes resistant to skinning damage. Potato tubers may be susceptible to skinning at harvest and suffer skinning damage during harvest and handling operations. Curing allows the skin to fully set and any wounds to heal. Wound-healing prevents infection and water-loss from the tubers during storage. Curing is normally done at relatively warm temperatures () with high humidity and good gas-exchange if at all possible.\nStorage.\nStorage facilities need to be carefully designed to keep the potatoes alive and slow the natural process of sprouting which involves the breakdown of starch. It is crucial that the storage area be dark, ventilated well, and, for long-term storage, maintained at temperatures near . For short-term storage, temperatures of about are preferred.\nTemperatures below convert the starch in potatoes into sugar, which alters their taste and cooking qualities and leads to higher acrylamide levels in the cooked product, especially in deep-fried dishes. The discovery of acrylamides in starchy foods in 2002 has caused concern, but it is not likely that the acrylamides in food, even if it is somewhat burnt, causes cancer in humans.\nChemicals are used to suppress sprouting of tubers during storage. Chlorpropham is the main chemical used, but it has been banned in the EU over toxicity concerns. Alternatives include ethylene, spearmint and orange oils, and 1,4-dimethylnaphthalene.\nUnder optimum conditions in commercial warehouses, potatoes can be stored for up to 10\u201312 months. The commercial storage and retrieval of potatoes involves several phases: first \"drying\" surface moisture; \"wound healing\" at 85% to 95% relative humidity and temperatures below ; a staged \"cooling phase\"; a \"holding\" phase; and a \"reconditioning\" phase, during which the tubers are slowly warmed. Mechanical ventilation is used at various points during the process to prevent condensation and the accumulation of carbon dioxide.\nProduction.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Table alignment/tables.css\" /&gt;\nIn 2023, world production of potatoes was 383 million tonnes, led by China with 25% of the total and India as a major secondary producer (table).\nThe world dedicated to potato cultivation in 2010; the world average yield was . The United States was the most productive country, with a nationwide average yield of .\nNew Zealand farmers have demonstrated some of the best commercial yields in the world, ranging between 60 and 80 tonnes per hectare, some reporting yields of 88 tonnes of potatoes per hectare.\nThere is a big gap among various countries between high and low yields, even with the same variety of potato. Average potato yields in developed economies ranges between . China and India accounted for over a third of world's production in 2010, and had yields of respectively. The yield gap between farms in developing economies and developed economies represents an opportunity loss of over of potato, or an amount greater than 2010 world potato production. Potato crop yields are determined by factors such as the crop breed, seed age and quality, crop management practices and the plant environment. Improvements in one or more of these yield determinants, and a closure of the yield gap, could be a major boost to food supply and farmer incomes in the developing world. The food energy yield of potatoes\u2014about \u2014is higher than that of maize (), rice (), wheat (), or soybeans ().\nEffects of climate change on production.\nClimate change is predicted to have significant effects on global potato production. Like many crops, potatoes are likely to be affected by changes in atmospheric carbon dioxide, temperature and precipitation, as well as interactions between these factors. As well as affecting potatoes directly, climate change will also affect the distributions and populations of many potato diseases and pests. While the potato is less important than maize, rice, wheat and soybeans, which are collectively responsible for around two-thirds of all calories consumed by humans (both directly and indirectly as animal feed), it still is one of the world's most important food crops. Altogether, one 2003 estimate suggests that future (2040\u20132069) worldwide potato yield would be 18\u201332% lower than it was at the time, driven by declines in hotter areas like Sub-Saharan Africa, unless farmers and potato cultivars can adapt to the new environment.\nPotato plants and crop yields are predicted to benefit from the CO2 fertilization effect, which would increase photosynthetic rates and therefore growth, reduce water consumption through lower transpiration from stomata and increase starch content in the edible tubers. However, potatoes are more sensitive to soil water deficits than some other staple crops like wheat. In the UK, the amount of arable land suitable for rainfed potato production is predicted to decrease by at least 75%. These changes are likely to lead to increased demand for irrigation water, particularly during the potato growing season.\nPotatoes grow best under temperate conditions. Temperatures above have negative effects on potato crops, from physiological damage such as brown spots on tubers, to slower growth, premature sprouting, and lower starch content. These effects reduce crop yield, affecting both the number and the weight of tubers. As a result, areas where current temperatures are near the limits of potatoes' temperature range (e.g. much of sub-Saharan Africa) will likely suffer large reductions in potato crop yields in the future. On the other hand, low temperatures reduce potato growth and present risk of frost damage.\nChanges in pests and diseases.\nClimate change is predicted to affect many potato pests and diseases. These include:\nAdaptation strategies.\nPotato production is expected to decline in many areas due to hotter temperatures and decreased water availability. Conversely, production is predicted to become possible in high altitude and latitude areas where it has been limited by frost damage, such as in Canada and Russia. This will shift potato production to cooler areas, mitigating much of the projected decline in yield. However, this may trigger competition for land between potato crops and other land uses, mostly due to changes in water and temperature regimes.\nThe other approach is through the development of varieties or cultivars which would be more adapted to altered conditions. This can be done through 'traditional' plant breeding techniques and genetic modification. These techniques allow for the selection of specific traits as a new cultivar is developed. Certain traits, such as heat stress tolerance, drought tolerance, fast growth/early maturation and disease resistance, may play an important role in creating new cultivars able to maintain yields under stressors induced by climate change.\nFor instance, developing cultivars with greater heat stress tolerance would be critical for maintaining yields in countries with potato production areas near current cultivars' maximum temperature limits (e.g. Sub-Saharan Africa, India). Superior drought resistance can be achieved through improved water use efficiency (amount of food produced per amount of water used) or the ability to recover from short drought periods and still produce acceptable yields. Further, selecting for deeper root systems may reduce the need for irrigation.\nNutrition.\nIn a reference amount of , a boiled potato with skin supplies 87 calories and is 77% water, 20% carbohydrates (including 2% dietary fiber in the skin and flesh), 2% protein, and contains negligible fat (table). The protein content is comparable to other starchy vegetable staples, as well as grains.\nBoiled potatoes are a moderate source (10\u201319% of the Daily Value, DV) of vitamin C (14% DV) and the B vitamins, vitamin B6 and pantothenic acid (table). Other than a moderate source of potassium (13% DV), boiled potatoes do not supply significant amounts of dietary minerals (table).\nThe potato is rarely eaten raw because raw potato starch is poorly digested by humans. Depending on the cultivar and preparation method, potatoes can have a high glycemic index (GI) and so are often excluded from the diets of individuals trying to follow a low-GI diet. There is a lack of evidence on the effect of potato consumption on obesity and diabetes.\nIn the UK, potatoes are not considered by the National Health Service as counting or contributing towards the recommended daily five portions of fruit and vegetables, the 5-A-Day program.\nToxicity.\nRaw potatoes contain toxic glycoalkaloids, of which the most prevalent are solanine and chaconine. Solanine is found in other plants in the same family, Solanaceae, which includes such plants as deadly nightshade (\"Atropa belladonna\"), henbane (\"Hyoscyamus niger\") and tobacco (\"Nicotiana\" spp.), as well as food plants like tomato. These compounds, which protect the potato plant from its predators, are especially concentrated in the aerial parts of the plant. The tubers are low in these toxins, unless they are exposed to light, which makes them go green.\nExposure to light, physical damage, and age increase glycoalkaloid content within the tuber. Different potato varieties contain different levels of glycoalkaloids. The 'Lenape' variety, released in 1967, was withdrawn in 1970 as it contained high levels of glycoalkaloids. Since then, breeders of new varieties test for this, sometimes discarding an otherwise promising cultivar. Breeders try to keep glycoalkaloid levels below . However, when these commercial varieties turn green, their solanine concentrations can go well above this limit, with higher levels in the potato's skin.\nUses.\nCulinary.\nPotato dishes vary around the world. Peruvian cuisine naturally contains the potato as a primary ingredient in many dishes, as around 3,000 varieties of the tuber are grown there. Chu\u00f1o is a freeze-dried potato product traditionally made by Quechua and Aymara communities of Peru and Bolivia. In the UK, potatoes form part of the traditional dish fish and chips. Roast potatoes are commonly served as part of a Sunday roast dinner and mashed potatoes form a major component of several other traditional dishes, such as shepherd's pie, bubble and squeak, and bangers and mash. New potatoes may be cooked with mint and are often served with butter. In Germany, Northern Europe (Finland, Latvia and especially Scandinavian countries), Eastern Europe (Russia, Belarus and Ukraine) and Poland, newly harvested, early ripening varieties are considered a special delicacy. Boiled whole and served un-peeled with dill, these \"new potatoes\" are traditionally consumed with Baltic herring. Puddings made from grated potatoes (kugel, kugelis, and potato babka) are popular items of Ashkenazi, Lithuanian, and Belarusian cuisine. Cepelinai, the national dish of Lithuania, are dumplings made from boiled grated potatoes, usually stuffed with minced meat. In Italy, in the Friuli region, potatoes serve to make a type of pasta called gnocchi. Potato is used in northern China where rice is not easily grown, a popular dish being (\"q\u012bng ji\u0101o t\u01d4 d\u00f2u s\u012b\"), made with green pepper, vinegar and thin slices of potato. In the winter, roadside sellers in northern China sell roasted potatoes.\nOther uses.\nPotatoes are sometimes used to brew alcoholic spirits such as vodka, poit\u00edn, akvavit, and br\u00e4nnvin.\nPotatoes are used as fodder for livestock. They may be made into silage which can be stored for some months before use.\nPotato starch is used in the food industry as a thickener and binder for soups and sauces, in the textile industry as an adhesive, and in the paper industry for the manufacturing of papers and boards.\nPotatoes are commonly used in plant research. The consistent parenchyma tissue, the clonal nature of the plant and the low metabolic activity make it an ideal model tissue for experiments on wound-response studies and electron transport.\nCultural significance.\nIn mythology.\nIn Inca mythology, a daughter of the earth mother Pachamama, Axomamma, is the goddess of potatoes. She ensured the fertility of the soil and the growth of the tubers. According to Iroquois mythology, the first potatoes grew out of Earth Woman's feet after she died giving birth to her twin sons, Sapling and Flint.\nIn art.\nThe potato has been an essential crop in the Andes since the pre-Columbian era. The Moche culture from Northern Peru made ceramics from the earth, water, and fire. This pottery was a sacred substance, formed in significant shapes and used to represent important themes. Potatoes are represented anthropomorphically as well as naturally.\nDuring the late 19th century, numerous images of potato harvesting appeared in European art, including the works of Willem Witsen and Anton Mauve.\nVan Gogh's 1885 painting \"The Potato Eaters\" portrays a family eating potatoes. Van Gogh said he wanted to depict peasants as they really were. He deliberately chose coarse and ugly models, thinking that they would be natural and unspoiled in his finished work.\nJean-Fran\u00e7ois Millet's \"The Potato Harvest\" depicts peasants working in the plains between Barbizon and Chailly. It presents a theme representative of the peasants' struggle for survival. Millet's technique for this work incorporated paste-like pigments thickly applied over a coarsely textured canvas.\nIn popular culture.\nInvented in 1949, and marketed and sold commercially by Hasbro in 1952, Mr. Potato Head is an American toy that consists of a plastic potato and attachable plastic parts, such as ears and eyes, to make a face. It was the first toy ever advertised on television.\nIn the 2015 science fiction film \"The Martian\", the protagonist, a stranded astronaut and botanist named Mark Watney, cultivates potatoes on Mars using Martian soil fertilized with frozen feces.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
