{"id": "29374", "revid": "1319086567", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29374", "title": "Steam turbine", "text": "Machine that uses steam to rotate a shaft\nA steam turbine or steam turbine engine is a machine or heat engine that extracts thermal energy from pressurized steam and uses it to do mechanical work utilising a rotating output shaft. Its modern manifestation was invented by Sir Charles Parsons in 1884. It revolutionized marine propulsion and navigation to a significant extent. Fabrication of a modern steam turbine involves advanced metalwork to form high-grade steel alloys into precision parts using technologies that first became available in the 20th century; continued advances in durability and efficiency of steam turbines remains central to the energy economics of the 21st century. The largest steam turbine ever built is the 1,770 MW Arabelle steam turbine built by Arabelle Solutions (previously GE Steam Power), two units of which will be installed at Hinkley Point C Nuclear Power Station, England.\nThe steam turbine is a form of heat engine that derives much of its improvement in thermodynamic efficiency from the use of multiple stages in the expansion of the steam, which results in a closer approach to the ideal reversible expansion process. Because the turbine generates rotary motion, it can be coupled to a generator to harness its motion into electricity. Such turbogenerators are the core of thermal power stations which can be fueled by fossil fuels, nuclear fuels, geothermal, or solar energy. About 42% of all electricity generation in the United States in 2022 was by the use of steam turbines. Technical challenges include rotor imbalance, vibration, bearing wear, and uneven expansion (various forms of thermal shock). \nHistory.\nThe first device that may be classified as a reaction steam turbine was little more than a toy, the classic Aeolipile, described in the 1st century by Hero of Alexandria in Roman Egypt. In 1551, Taqi al-Din in Ottoman Egypt described a steam turbine with the practical application of rotating a spit. Steam turbines were also described by the Italian Giovanni Branca (1629) and John Wilkins in England (1648). The devices described by Taqi al-Din and Wilkins are today known as steam jacks. In 1672, an impulse turbine-driven small toy car was designed by Ferdinand Verbiest. A more modern version of this car was produced some time in the late 18th century by an unknown German mechanic. In 1775, at Soho James Watt designed a reaction turbine that was put to work there. In 1807, Polikarp Zalesov designed and constructed an impulse turbine, using it for the fire pump operation. In 1827, the Frenchmen Real and Pichon patented and constructed a compound impulse turbine.\nThe modern steam turbine was invented in 1884 by Charles Parsons, whose first model was connected to a dynamo that generated of electricity. The invention of Parsons' steam turbine made cheap and plentiful electricity possible and revolutionized marine transport and naval warfare. Parsons' design was a reaction type. His patent was licensed and the turbine scaled up shortly after by an American, George Westinghouse. The Parsons turbine also turned out to be easy to scale up. Parsons had the satisfaction of seeing his invention adopted for all major world power stations, and the size of generators had increased from his first set up to units of capacity. Within Parsons' lifetime, the generating capacity of a unit was scaled up by about 10,000 times, and the total output from turbo-generators constructed by his firm C. A. Parsons and Company and by their licensees, for land purposes alone, had exceeded thirty million horse-power.\nOther variations of turbines have been developed that work effectively with steam. The \"de Laval turbine\" (invented by Gustaf de Laval) accelerated the steam to full speed before running it against a turbine blade. De Laval's impulse turbine is simpler and less expensive and does not need to be pressure-proof. It can operate with any pressure of steam, but is considerably less efficient. Auguste Rateau developed a pressure compounded impulse turbine using the de Laval principle as early as 1896, obtained a US patent in 1903, and applied the turbine to a French torpedo boat in 1904. He taught at the for a decade until 1897, and later founded a successful company that was incorporated into the Alstom firm after his death. One of the founders of the modern theory of steam and gas turbines was Aurel Stodola, a Slovak physicist and engineer and professor at the Swiss Polytechnical Institute (now ETH) in Zurich. His work (English: The Steam Turbine and its prospective use as a Heat Engine) was published in Berlin in 1903. A further book (English: Steam and Gas Turbines) was published in 1922.\nThe \"Brown-Curtis turbine\", an impulse type, which had been originally developed and patented by the U.S. company International Curtis Marine Turbine Company, was developed in the 1900s in conjunction with John Brown &amp; Company. It was used in John Brown-engined merchant ships and warships, including liners and Royal Navy warships.\nManufacturing.\nThe present-day manufacturing industry for steam turbines consists of the following companies: \nTypes.\nSteam turbines are made in a variety of sizes ranging from small &lt;0.75\u00a0kW (&lt;1\u00a0hp) units (rare) used as mechanical drives for pumps, compressors and other shaft driven equipment, to turbines used to generate electricity. There are several classifications for modern steam turbines.\nBlade and stage design.\nTurbine blades are of two basic types, blades and nozzles. Blades move entirely due to the impact of steam on them and their profiles do not converge. This results in a steam velocity drop and essentially no pressure drop as steam moves through the blades. A turbine composed of blades alternating with fixed nozzles is called an impulse turbine, &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Visible anchor/styles.css\" /&gt;Curtis turbine, Rateau turbine, or Brown-Curtis turbine. Nozzles appear similar to blades, but their profiles converge near the exit. This results in a steam pressure drop and velocity increase as steam moves through the nozzles. Nozzles move due to both the impact of steam on them and the reaction due to the high-velocity steam at the exit. A turbine composed of moving nozzles alternating with fixed nozzles is called a reaction turbine or Parsons turbine.\nExcept for low-power applications, turbine blades are arranged in multiple stages in series, called compounding, which greatly improves efficiency at low speeds. A reaction stage is a row of fixed nozzles followed by a row of moving nozzles. Multiple reaction stages divide the pressure drop between the steam inlet and exhaust into numerous small drops, resulting in a pressure-compounded turbine. Impulse stages may be either pressure-compounded, velocity-compounded, or pressure-velocity compounded. A pressure-compounded impulse stage is a row of fixed nozzles followed by a row of moving blades, with multiple stages for compounding. This is also known as a Rateau turbine, after its inventor. A velocity-compounded impulse stage (invented by Curtis and also called a \"Curtis wheel\") is a row of fixed nozzles followed by two or more rows of moving blades alternating with rows of fixed blades. This divides the velocity drop across the stage into several smaller drops. A series of velocity-compounded impulse stages is called a pressure-velocity compounded turbine.\nBy 1905, when steam turbines were coming into use on fast ships (such as ) and in land-based power applications, it had been determined that it was desirable to use one or more Curtis wheels at the beginning of a multi-stage turbine (where the steam pressure is highest), followed by reaction stages. This was more efficient with high-pressure steam due to reduced leakage between the turbine rotor and the casing. This is illustrated in the drawing of the German 1905 AEG marine steam turbine. The steam from the boilers enters from the right at high pressure through a throttle, controlled manually by an operator (in this case a sailor known as the throttleman). It passes through five Curtis wheels and numerous reaction stages (the small blades at the edges of the two large rotors in the middle) before exiting at low pressure, almost certainly to a condenser. The condenser provides a vacuum that maximizes the energy extracted from the steam, and condenses the steam into feedwater to be returned to the boilers. On the left are several additional reaction stages (on two large rotors) that rotate the turbine in reverse for astern operation, with steam admitted by a separate throttle. Since ships are rarely operated in reverse, efficiency is not a priority in astern turbines, so only a few stages are used to save cost.\nBlade design challenges.\nA major challenge facing turbine design was reducing the creep experienced by the blades. Because of the high temperatures and high stresses of operation, steam turbine materials become damaged through these mechanisms. As temperatures are increased in an effort to improve turbine efficiency, creep becomes significant. To limit creep, thermal coatings and superalloys with solid-solution strengthening and grain boundary strengthening are used in blade designs.\nProtective coatings are used to reduce the thermal damage and to limit oxidation. These coatings are often stabilized zirconium dioxide-based ceramics. Using a thermal protective coating limits the temperature exposure of the nickel superalloy. This reduces the creep mechanisms experienced in the blade. Oxidation coatings limit efficiency losses caused by a buildup on the outside of the blades, which is especially important in the high-temperature environment.\nThe nickel-based blades are alloyed with aluminum and titanium to improve strength and creep resistance. The microstructure of these alloys is composed of different regions of composition. A uniform dispersion of the gamma-prime phase \u2013 a combination of nickel, aluminum, and titanium \u2013 promotes the strength and creep resistance of the blade due to the microstructure.\nRefractory elements such as rhenium and ruthenium can be added to the alloy to improve creep strength. The addition of these elements reduces the diffusion of the gamma prime phase, thus preserving the fatigue resistance, strength, and creep resistance.\nSteam supply and exhaust conditions.\nTurbine types include condensing, non-condensing, reheat, extracting and induction.\nCondensing turbines.\nCondensing turbines are most commonly found in electrical power plants. These turbines receive steam from a boiler and exhaust it to a condenser. The exhausted steam is at a pressure well below atmospheric, and is in a partially condensed state, typically of a quality near 90%.\nNon-condensing turbines.\nNon-condensing turbines are most widely used for process steam applications, in which the steam will be used for additional purposes after being exhausted from the turbine. The exhaust pressure is controlled by a regulating valve to suit the needs of the process steam pressure. These are commonly found at refineries, district heating units, pulp and paper plants, and desalination facilities where large amounts of low pressure process steam are needed.\nReheat turbines.\nReheat turbines are also used almost exclusively in electrical power plants. In a reheat turbine, steam flow exits from a high-pressure section of the turbine and is returned to the boiler where additional superheat is added. The steam then goes back into an intermediate pressure section of the turbine and continues its expansion. Using reheat in a cycle increases the work output from the turbine and also the expansion reaches conclusion before the steam condenses, thereby minimizing the erosion of the blades in last rows. In most of the cases, maximum number of reheats employed in a cycle is 2 as the cost of super-heating the steam negates the increase in the work output from turbine.\nExtracting turbines.\nExtracting type turbines are common in all applications. In an extracting type turbine, steam is released from various stages of the turbine, and used for industrial process needs or sent to boiler feedwater heaters to improve overall cycle efficiency. Extraction flows may be controlled with a valve, or left uncontrolled. Extracted steam results in a loss of power in the downstream stages of the turbine.\nInduction turbines introduce low pressure steam at an intermediate stage to produce additional power.\nCasing or shaft arrangements.\nThese arrangements include single casing, tandem compound and cross compound turbines. Single casing units are the most basic style where a single casing and shaft are coupled to a generator. Tandem compound are used where two or more casings are directly coupled together to drive a single generator. A cross compound turbine arrangement features two or more shafts not in line driving two or more generators that often operate at different speeds. A cross compound turbine is typically used for many large applications. A typical 1930s-1960s naval installation is illustrated below; this shows high- and low-pressure turbines driving a common reduction gear, with a geared cruising turbine on one high-pressure turbine.\nTwo-flow rotors.\nThe moving steam imparts both a tangential and axial thrust on the turbine shaft, but the axial thrust in a simple turbine is unopposed. To maintain the correct rotor position and balancing, this force must be counteracted by an opposing force. Thrust bearings can be used for the shaft bearings, the rotor can use dummy pistons, it can be double flow- the steam enters in the middle of the shaft and exits at both ends, or a combination of any of these. In a double flow rotor, the blades in each half face opposite ways, so that the axial forces negate each other but the tangential forces act together. This design of rotor is also called two-flow, double-axial-flow, or double-exhaust. This arrangement is common in low-pressure casings of a compound turbine.\nPrinciple of operation and design.\nAn ideal steam turbine is considered to be an isentropic process, or constant entropy process, in which the entropy of the steam entering the turbine is equal to the entropy of the steam leaving the turbine. No steam turbine is truly isentropic, however, with typical isentropic efficiencies ranging from 20 to 90% based on the application of the turbine. The interior of a turbine comprises several sets of blades or \"buckets\". One set of stationary blades is connected to the casing and one set of rotating blades is connected to the shaft. The sets intermesh with certain minimum clearances, with the size and configuration of sets varying to efficiently exploit the expansion of steam at each stage.\nImpulse turbines.\nAn impulse turbine has fixed nozzles that orient the steam flow into high speed jets. These jets contain significant kinetic energy, which is converted into shaft rotation by the bucket-like shaped rotor blades, as the steam jet changes direction. A pressure drop occurs across only the stationary blades, with a net increase in steam velocity across the stage.\nAs the steam flows through the nozzle its pressure falls from inlet pressure to the exit pressure (atmospheric pressure or, more usually, the condenser vacuum). Due to this high ratio of expansion of steam, the steam leaves the nozzle with a very high velocity. The steam leaving the moving blades has a large portion of the maximum velocity of the steam when leaving the nozzle. The loss of energy due to this higher exit velocity is commonly called the carry over velocity or leaving loss.\nThe law of moment of momentum states that the sum of the moments of external forces acting on a fluid which is temporarily occupying the control volume is equal to the net time change of angular momentum flux through the control volume.\nThe swirling fluid enters the control volume at radius formula_1 with tangential velocity formula_2 and leaves at radius formula_3 with tangential velocity formula_4.\nA velocity triangle paves the way for a better understanding of the relationship between the various velocities. In the adjacent figure we have:\nformula_5 and formula_6 are the absolute velocities at the inlet and outlet respectively.\nformula_7 and formula_8 are the flow velocities at the inlet and outlet respectively.\nformula_9 and formula_4 are the swirl velocities at the inlet and outlet respectively, in the moving reference.\nformula_11 and formula_12 are the relative velocities at the inlet and outlet respectively.\nformula_13 is the velocity of the blade.\nformula_14 is the guide vane angle and formula_15 is the blade angle.\nThen by the law of moment of momentum, the torque on the fluid is given by:\n formula_16\nFor an impulse steam turbine: formula_17. Therefore, the tangential force on the blades is formula_18. The work done per unit time or power developed: formula_19.\nWhen \u03c9 is the angular velocity of the turbine, then the blade speed is formula_20. The power developed is then formula_21.\nBlade efficiency.\nBlade efficiency (formula_22) can be defined as the ratio of the work done on the blades to kinetic energy supplied to the fluid, and is given by\n formula_23\nWhere formula_24 is the specific enthalpy drop of steam in the nozzle.\nBy the first law of thermodynamics:\nformula_25\nAssuming that formula_5 is appreciably less than formula_6, we get formula_28. Furthermore, stage efficiency is the product of blade efficiency and nozzle efficiency, or formula_29.\nNozzle efficiency is given by formula_30.\nformula_31 and depicts the loss in the relative velocity due to friction as the steam flows around the blades (formula_32 for smooth blades).\nformula_33\nwhere\n formula_34 is the rate at which work is developed per unit time\n formula_35 is the rate of mass flow through the turbine\nIsentropic efficiency.\nTo measure how well a turbine is performing we can look at its isentropic efficiency. This compares the actual performance of the turbine with the performance that would be achieved by an ideal, isentropic, turbine. When calculating this efficiency, heat lost to the surroundings is assumed to be zero. Steam's starting pressure and temperature is the same for both the actual and the ideal turbines, but at turbine exit, steam's energy content ('specific enthalpy') for the actual turbine is greater than that for the ideal turbine because of irreversibility in the actual turbine. The specific enthalpy is evaluated at the same steam pressure for the actual and ideal turbines in order to give a good comparison between the two.\nThe isentropic efficiency is found by dividing the actual work by the ideal work.\nformula_36\nwhere\nDirect drive.\nElectrical power stations use large steam turbines driving electric generators to produce most (about 80%) of the world's electricity. The advent of large steam turbines made central-station electricity generation practical, since reciprocating steam engines of large rating became very bulky, and operated at slow speeds. Most central stations are fossil fuel power plants and nuclear power plants; some installations use geothermal steam, or use concentrated solar power (CSP) to create the steam. Steam turbines can also be used directly to drive large centrifugal pumps, such as feedwater pumps at a thermal power plant.\nThe turbines used for electric power generation are most often directly coupled to their generators. As the generators must rotate at constant synchronous speeds according to the frequency of the electric power system, the most common speeds are 3,000\u00a0RPM for 50\u00a0Hz systems, and 3,600\u00a0RPM for 60\u00a0Hz systems. Since nuclear reactors have lower temperature limits than fossil-fired plants, with lower steam quality, the turbine generator sets may be arranged to operate at half these speeds, but with four-pole generators, to reduce erosion of turbine blades.\nMarine propulsion.\nIn steamships, advantages of steam turbines over reciprocating engines are smaller size, lower maintenance, lighter weight, and lower vibration. A steam turbine is efficient only when operating in the thousands of RPM, while the most effective propeller designs are for speeds less than 300 RPM; consequently, precise (thus expensive) reduction gears are usually required, although numerous early ships through World War I, such as \"Turbinia\", had direct drive from the steam turbines to the propeller shafts. Another alternative is turbo-electric transmission, in which an electrical generator run by the high-speed turbine is used to run one or more slow-speed electric motors connected to the propeller shafts; precision gear cutting may be a production bottleneck during wartime. Turbo-electric drive was most used in large US warships designed during World War I and in some fast liners, and was used in some troop transports and mass-production destroyer escorts in World War II.\nThe higher cost of turbines and the associated gears or generator/motor sets is offset by lower maintenance requirements and the smaller size of a turbine in comparison with a reciprocating engine of equal power, although the fuel costs are higher than those of a diesel engine because steam turbines have lower thermal efficiency. To reduce fuel costs the thermal efficiency of both types of engine have been improved over the years.\nEarly development.\nThe development of steam turbine marine propulsion from 1894 to 1935 was dominated by the need to reconcile the high efficient speed of the turbine with the low efficient speed (less than 300 rpm) of the ship's propeller at an overall cost competitive with reciprocating engines. In 1894, efficient reduction gears were not available for the high powers required by ships, so direct drive was necessary. In \"Turbinia\", which has direct drive to each propeller shaft, the efficient speed of the turbine was reduced after initial trials by directing the steam flow through all three direct drive turbines (one on each shaft) in series, probably totaling around 200 turbine stages operating in series. Also, there were three propellers on each shaft for operation at high speeds. The high shaft speeds of the era are represented by one of the first US turbine-powered destroyers, , launched in 1909, which had direct drive turbines and whose three shafts turned at 724 rpm at .\nThe use of turbines in several casings exhausting steam to each other in series became standard in most subsequent marine propulsion applications, and is a form of cross-compounding. The first turbine was called the high pressure (HP) turbine, the last turbine was the low pressure (LP) turbine, and any turbine in between was an intermediate pressure (IP) turbine. A much later arrangement than \"Turbinia\" can be seen on in Long Beach, California, launched in 1934, in which each shaft is powered by four turbines in series connected to the ends of the two input shafts of a single-reduction gearbox. They are the HP, 1st IP, 2nd IP, and LP turbines.\nCruising machinery and gearing.\nThe quest for economy was even more important when cruising speeds were considered. Cruising speed is roughly 50% of a warship's maximum speed and 20-25% of its maximum power level. This would be a speed used on long voyages when fuel economy is desired. Although this brought the propeller speeds down to an efficient range, turbine efficiency was greatly reduced, and early turbine ships had poor cruising ranges. A solution that proved useful through most of the steam turbine propulsion era was the cruising turbine. This was an extra turbine to add even more stages, at first attached directly to one or more shafts, exhausting to a stage partway along the HP turbine, and not used at high speeds. As reduction gears became available around 1911, some ships, notably the battleship , had them on cruising turbines while retaining direct drive main turbines. Reduction gears allowed turbines to operate in their efficient range at a much higher speed than the shaft, but were expensive to manufacture.\nCruising turbines competed at first with reciprocating engines for fuel economy. An example of the retention of reciprocating engines on fast ships was the famous of 1911, which along with her sisters and had triple-expansion engines on the two outboard shafts, both exhausting to an LP turbine on the center shaft. After adopting turbines with the s launched in 1909, the United States Navy reverted to reciprocating machinery on the s of 1912, then went back to turbines on \"Nevada\" in 1914. The lingering fondness for reciprocating machinery was because the US Navy had no plans for capital ships exceeding until after World War I, so top speed was less important than economical cruising. The United States had acquired the Philippines and Hawaii as territories in 1898, and lacked the British Royal Navy's worldwide network of coaling stations. Thus, the US Navy in 1900\u20131940 had the greatest need of any nation for fuel economy, especially as the prospect of war with Japan arose following World War I. This need was compounded by the US not launching any cruisers 1908\u20131920, so destroyers were required to perform long-range missions usually assigned to cruisers. So, various cruising solutions were fitted on US destroyers launched 1908\u20131916. These included small reciprocating engines and geared or ungeared cruising turbines on one or two shafts. However, once fully geared turbines proved economical in initial cost and fuel they were rapidly adopted, with cruising turbines also included on most ships. Beginning in 1915 all new Royal Navy destroyers had fully geared turbines, and the United States followed in 1917.\nIn the Royal Navy, speed was a priority until the Battle of Jutland in mid-1916 showed that in the battlecruisers too much armour had been sacrificed in its pursuit. The British used exclusively turbine-powered warships from 1906. Because they recognized that a long cruising range would be desirable given their worldwide empire, some warships, notably the s, were fitted with cruising turbines from 1912 onwards following earlier experimental installations.\nIn the US Navy, the s, launched 1935\u201336, introduced double-reduction gearing. This further increased the turbine speed above the shaft speed, allowing smaller turbines than single-reduction gearing. Steam pressures and temperatures were also increasing progressively, from / [saturated steam] on the World War I-era to / [superheated steam] on some World War II s and later ships. A standard configuration emerged of an axial-flow high-pressure turbine (sometimes with a cruising turbine attached) and a double-axial-flow low-pressure turbine connected to a double-reduction gearbox. This arrangement continued throughout the steam era in the US Navy and was also used in some Royal Navy designs. Machinery of this configuration can be seen on many preserved World War II-era warships in several countries.\nWhen US Navy warship construction resumed in the early 1950s, most surface combatants and aircraft carriers used / steam. This continued until the end of the US Navy steam-powered warship era with the s of the early 1970s. Amphibious and auxiliary ships continued to use steam post-World War II, with , launched in 2001, possibly the last non-nuclear steam-powered ship built for the US Navy.\nTurbo-electric drive.\nTurbo-electric drive was introduced on the battleship , launched in 1917. Over the next eight years the US Navy launched five additional turbo-electric-powered battleships and two aircraft carriers (initially ordered as s). Ten more turbo-electric capital ships were planned, but cancelled due to the limits imposed by the Washington Naval Treaty.\nAlthough \"New Mexico\" was refitted with geared turbines in a 1931\u20131933 refit, the remaining turbo-electric ships retained the system throughout their careers. This system used two large steam turbine generators to drive an electric motor on each of four shafts. The system was less costly initially than reduction gears and made the ships more maneuverable in port, with the shafts able to reverse rapidly and deliver more reverse power than with most geared systems.\nSome ocean liners were also built with turbo-electric drive, as were some troop transports and mass-production destroyer escorts in World War II. However, when the US designed the \"treaty cruisers\", beginning with launched in 1927, geared turbines were used to conserve weight, and remained in use for all fast steam-powered ships thereafter.\nCurrent usage.\nSince the 1980s, steam turbines have been replaced by gas turbines on fast ships and by diesel engines on other ships; exceptions are nuclear-powered ships and submarines and LNG carriers. Some auxiliary ships continue to use steam propulsion.\nIn the U.S. Navy, the conventionally powered steam turbine is still in use on all but one of the Wasp-class amphibious assault ships. The Royal Navy decommissioned its last conventional steam-powered surface warship class, the , in 2002, with the Italian Navy following in 2006 by decommissioning its last conventional steam-powered surface warships, the s. In 2013, the French Navy ended its steam era with the decommissioning of its last . Amongst the other blue-water navies, the Russian Navy currently operates steam-powered s and s. The Indian Navy currently operates INS \"Vikramaditya\", a modified ; it also operates three s commissioned in the early 2000s. The Chinese Navy currently operates steam-powered s, s along with s and the lone Type 051B destroyer. Most other naval forces have either retired or re-engined their steam-powered warships. As of 2020, the Mexican Navy operates four steam-powered former U.S. s. The Egyptian Navy and the Republic of China Navy respectively operate two and six former U.S. s. The Ecuadorian Navy currently operates two steam-powered s (modified s).\nToday, propulsion steam turbine cycle efficiencies have yet to break 50%, yet diesel engines routinely exceed 50%, especially in marine applications. Diesel power plants also have lower operating costs since fewer operators are required. Thus, conventional steam power is used in very few new ships. An exception is LNG carriers which often find it more economical to use boil-off gas with a steam turbine than to re-liquify it.\nNuclear-powered ships and submarines use a nuclear reactor to create steam for turbines. Currently, the main propulsion steam turbines for United States Navy nuclear-powered Nimitz and Ford class aircraft carriers are manufactured by Curtiss-Wright, while the steam turbines for Virginia and Columbia class submarines are manufactured by Northrop Grumman. \nNuclear power is often chosen where diesel power would be impractical (as in submarine applications) or the logistics of refuelling pose significant problems (for example, icebreakers). It has been estimated that the reactor fuel for the Royal Navy's s is sufficient to last 40 circumnavigations of the globe \u2013 potentially sufficient for the vessel's entire service life. Nuclear propulsion has only been applied to a very few commercial vessels due to the expense of maintenance and the regulatory controls required on nuclear systems and fuel cycles.\nLocomotives.\nA steam turbine locomotive engine is a steam locomotive driven by a steam turbine. The first steam turbine rail locomotive was built in 1908 for the Officine Meccaniche Miani Silvestri Grodona Comi, Milan, Italy. In 1924 Krupp built the steam turbine locomotive T18 001, operational in 1929, for Deutsche Reichsbahn.\nThe main advantages of a steam turbine locomotive are better rotational balance and reduced hammer blow on the track. However, a disadvantage is less flexible output power so that turbine locomotives were best suited for long-haul operations at a constant output power.\nTesting.\nBritish, German, other national and international test codes are used to standardize the procedures and definitions used to test steam turbines. Selection of the test code to be used is an agreement between the purchaser and the manufacturer, and has some significance to the design of the turbine and associated systems.\nIn the United States, ASME has produced several performance test codes on steam turbines. These include ASME PTC 6\u20132004, Steam Turbines, ASME PTC 6.2-2011, Steam Turbines in Combined Cycles, PTC 6S-1988, Procedures for Routine Performance Test of Steam Turbines. These ASME performance test codes have gained international recognition and acceptance for testing steam turbines. The single most important and differentiating characteristic of ASME performance test codes, including PTC 6, is that the test uncertainty of the measurement indicates the quality of the test and is not to be used as a commercial tolerance.\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "29375", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29375", "title": "Shariah", "text": ""}
{"id": "29376", "revid": "1168483", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29376", "title": "Sardinia", "text": "Island in the Mediterranean and region of Italy\nSardinia ( ; ; ), officially the Autonomous Region of Sardinia, is the second largest island in the Mediterranean Sea after Sicily, and one of the twenty regions of Italy. It is located 200 km west of the Italian Peninsula, 200 km north of Tunisia, and 16.45 km south of the French island of Corsica. Sardinia is one five Italian regions with statutory domestic autonomy. It is divided into six provinces and two metropolitan cities. Cagliari is the capital and largest city, followed by Sassari. It has over 1.5 million inhabitants as of 2025.\nSardinia's indigenous language and the Algherese dialect of Catalan are recognized by both regional and national law as two of Italy's twelve official linguistic minorities, albeit gravely endangered; regional law provides some degree of protection and recognition of the island's other minority languages: the Corsican-influenced Sassarese and Gallurese, and Tabarchino Ligurian.\nOwing to its varied ecosystems, which include mountains, woods, plains, streams, rocky coasts, and long sandy beaches, Sardinia has been metaphorically described as a micro-continent. In the modern era, many travelers and writers have extolled the beauty of its long-untouched landscapes, which retain vestiges of the prehistoric Nuragic civilization.\nEtymology.\nThe name Sardinia has pre-Latin roots. It comes from the pre-Roman ethnonym *\"s(a)rd-\", later romanised as (feminine ). It makes its first appearance on the Nora Stone, where the word \"\u0160RDN\", or *\"\u0160ardana\", testifies to the name's existence when the Phoenician merchants first arrived.\nAccording to \"Timaeus\", one of Plato's dialogues, Sardinia (referred to by most ancient Greek authors as , ) and its people as well might have been named after a legendary woman called Sard\u1e53 (), born in Sardis (\u03a3\u03ac\u03c1\u03b4\u03b5\u03b9\u03c2), capital of the ancient Kingdom of Lydia. There has also been speculation that identifies the ancient Nuragic Sards with the Sherden, one of the Sea Peoples. It is suggested that the name had a religious connotation from its use also as the adjective for the ancient Sardinian mythological hero-god Sardus Pater (\"Sardinian Father\"; a common explanation that the term means \"Father of the Sardinians\" is incorrect, as that would be \"Sardorum Pater\"), as well as being the stem of the adjective \"sardonic\".\nIn classical antiquity, Sardinia was called a number of names besides \"Sard\u1e53\" () or \"Sardinia\", like (the Latinised form of the Greek ), () and ().\nGeography.\nSardinia is the second-largest island in the Mediterranean Sea (after Sicily and before Cyprus), with an area of . It is situated between 38\u00b0 51' and 41\u00b0 18' latitude north (respectively Isola del Toro and Isola La Presa) and 8\u00b0 8' and 9\u00b0 50' east longitude (respectively Capo dell'Argentiera and Capo Comino). To the west of Sardinia is the Sea of Sardinia, a unit of the Mediterranean Sea; to Sardinia's east is the Tyrrhenian Sea, which is also an element of the Mediterranean Sea.\nThe nearest land masses are (clockwise from north) the island of Corsica, the Italian Peninsula, Sicily, Tunisia, the Balearic Islands, and Provence. The Tyrrhenian Sea portion of the Mediterranean Sea is directly to the east of Sardinia between the Sardinian east coast and the west coast of the Italian mainland peninsula. The Strait of Bonifacio is directly north of Sardinia and separates Sardinia from the French island of Corsica.\nThe coast of Sardinia is long. It is generally high and rocky, with long, relatively straight stretches, outstanding headlands, wide, deep bays, rias, and inlets with various smaller islands.\nThe island has an ancient geoformation and, unlike Sicily and mainland Italy, is not earthquake-prone. Its rocks date in fact from the Palaeozoic Era. The Cambrian-Lower Ordovician succession of Sardinia reaches 1500\u20133000 m in thickness. Due to long erosion processes, the island's highlands, formed of granite, schist, trachyte, basalt (called \"jaras\" or \"gollei\"), sandstone and dolomite limestone (called \"tonneri\" or 'heels'), average at between . The highest peak is Punta La Marmora ( in Sardinian language) (), part of the Gennargentu Ranges in the centre of the island. Other mountain chains are Monte Limbara () in the northeast, the Chain of Marghine and Goceano () running crosswise for towards the north, the Monte Albo (), the Sette Fratelli Range in the southeast, and the Sulcis Mountains and the Monte Linas (). The island's ranges and plateaux are separated by wide alluvial valleys and flatlands, the main ones being the Campidano in the southwest between Oristano and Cagliari and the Nurra in the northwest.\nSardinia has few major rivers, the largest being the Tirso, long, which flows into the Sea of Sardinia, the Coghinas () and the Flumendosa (). There are 54 artificial lakes and dams that supply water and electricity. The main ones are Lake Omodeo and Lake Coghinas. The only natural freshwater lake is Lago di Baratz. A number of large, shallow, salt-water lagoons and pools are located along the coast.\nClimate.\nThe climate of the island is variable from area to area, due to several factors including the extension in latitude and the elevation. It can be classified in two different macrobioclimates (Mediterranean pluviseasonal oceanic and Temperate oceanic), one macrobioclimatic variant (Submediterranean), and four classes of continentality (from weak semihyperoceanic to weak semicontinental), eight thermotypic horizons (from lower thermomediterranean to upper supratemperate), and seven ombrotypic horizons (from lower dry to lower hyperhumid), resulting in a combination of 43 different isobioclimates.\nDuring the year there is a major concentration of rainfall in the winter and autumn, some heavy showers in the spring and snowfalls in the highlands. The average temperature is between , with mild winters and warm summers on the coasts ( in January, in July), and cold winters and cool summers on the mountains ( in January, in July).\nRainfall has a Mediterranean distribution all over the island, with almost totally rainless summers and wet autumns, winters and springs. However, in summer, the rare rainfalls can be characterized by short but severe thunderstorms, which can cause flash floods. The climate is also heavily influenced by the vicinity of the Gulf of Genoa (barometric low) and the relative proximity of the Atlantic Ocean. Low pressures in autumn can generate the formation of the so-called \"Medicanes\", extratropical cyclones which affect the Mediterranean basin. In 2013, the island was hit by several cyclones, included the Cyclone Cleopatra, which dumped of rainfall within an hour and a half.\nSardinia being relatively large and hilly, weather is not uniform; in particular the East is drier, but paradoxically it suffers the worst rainstorms: in autumn 2009, it rained more than in a single day in Siniscola, and 19 November 2013, locations in Sardinia were reported to have received more than within two hours. The western coast has a higher distribution of rainfalls even for modest elevations (for instance Iglesias, elevation , average annual precipitation ). The driest part of the island is the coast of Cagliari gulf, with less than per year, the minimum is at Capo Carbonara at the extreme south-east of the island , and the wettest is the top of the Gennargentu mountain with almost per year. The average for the entire island is about per year, which is more than enough for the needs of the population and vegetation. The Mistral from the northwest is the dominant wind on and off throughout the year, though it is most prevalent in winter and spring. It can blow quite strongly, but it is usually dry and cool.\nHistory.\nSardinia has been inhabited by humans since the end of the Paleolithic era, around 20\u201310,000 years ago. The island's most notable civilization is the indigenous Nuragic, which flourished from the 18th century BC to either 238 BC or the 2nd century AD in some parts of the island, and to the 6th century AD in that part of the island known as Barbagia.\nAfter a period in which the island was ruled by a political and economic alliance between the Nuragic Sardinians and the Phoenicians, parts of it were conquered by Carthage in the late 6th century BC, and by Rome in 238 BC. The Roman occupation lasted for 700 years.\nBeginning in the Early Middle Ages, the island was ruled by the Vandals and the Byzantines. In practice, the island was disconnected from Byzantium's territorial influence, which allowed the Sardinians to provide themselves with a self-ruling political organization, the four kingdoms known as Judicates. The Italian maritime republics of Pisa and Genoa struggled to impose political control over these indigenous kingdoms, but it was the Iberian Crown of Aragon which, in 1324, succeeded in bringing the island under its control, consolidating it into the Kingdom of Sardinia.\nThis Iberian kingdom endured until 1718, when it was ceded to the Alpine House of Savoy; the Savoyards would politically merge their insular possession with their domains on the Italian Mainland which, during the period of Italian unification, they would go on to expand to include the whole Italian peninsula; their territory was so renamed into the Kingdom of Italy in 1861, and it was reconstituted as the present-day Italian Republic in 1946.\nPrehistory.\nSardinia is one of the most geologically ancient bodies of land in Europe. The island was populated in various waves of immigration from prehistory until recent times.\nRemains from Corbeddu Cave in eastern Sardinia have been suggested by some authors to represent the earliest evidence of human presence on Sardinia, around 20,000 years ago, during the Last Glacial Maximum. However, other authors contend that there is no solid evidence for the occupation of the island until the early Mesolithic, around 10,000 years ago.\nThe Neolithic began on Sardinia during the 6th millennium BC resulting from the migration of Early European Farmers, replacing the Mesolithic hunter-gatherer populations, with a material culture including the widespread Cardium pottery style. In the mid-Neolithic period, the Ozieri culture, probably of Aegean origin, flourished on the island spreading the hypogeum tombs known as domus de Janas, while the Arzachena culture of Gallura built the first megaliths: circular tombs. In the early 3rd millennium BC, the metallurgy of copper and silver began to develop.\nDuring the late Chalcolithic the so-called Beaker culture, coming from various parts of Continental Europe, appeared in Sardinia. These new people predominantly settled on the west coast, where the majority of the sites attributed to them had been found. The Beaker culture was followed in the early Bronze Age by the Bonnanaro culture which showed both reminiscences of the Beaker and influences by the Polada culture.\nAs time passed the different Sardinian populations appear to have become united in customs, yet remained politically divided into various small, tribal groupings, at times banding together against invading forces from the sea, and at others waging war against each other. Habitations consisted of round thatched stone huts.\nNuragic civilization.\nFrom about 1500 BC onwards, villages were built around a kind of round tower-fortress called \"nuraghe\" (usually pluralized as \"nuraghes\" in English and as in Italian). These towers were often reinforced and enlarged with battlements. Tribal boundaries were guarded by smaller lookout Nuraghes erected on strategic hills commanding a view of other territories.\nToday, some 7,000 Nuraghes dot the Sardinian landscape. While initially these Nuraghes had a relatively simple structure, with time they became extremely complex and monumental (see for example the \"Nuraghe Santu Antine\", \"Su Nuraxi\", or \"Nuraghe Arrubiu\"). The scale, complexity and territorial spread of these buildings attest to the level of wealth accumulated by the Nuragic Sardinians, their advances in technology and the complexity of their society, which was able to coordinate large numbers of people with different roles for the purpose of building the monumental Nuraghes.\nThe Nuraghes are not the only Nuragic buildings that stand in place, as there are several sacred wells around Sardinia and other buildings with religious purposes such as the Giants' grave (monumental collective tombs) and collections of religious buildings that probably served as destinations for pilgrimage and mass religious rites (e.g. \"Su Romanzesu\" near Bitti).\nAt the time, Sardinia was at the centre of several commercial routes and it was an important provider of raw materials such as copper and lead, which were pivotal for the manufacture of the time. By controlling the extraction of these raw materials and by trading them with other countries, the ancient Sardinians were able to accumulate wealth and reach a level of sophistication that is not only reflected in the complexity of its surviving buildings, but also in its artworks (e.g. the votive bronze statuettes found across Sardinia or the statues of Mont'e Prama).\nAccording to some scholars, the Nuragic people(s) are identifiable with the Sherden, a tribe of the Sea Peoples.\nThe Nuragic civilization was linked with other contemporaneous megalithic civilization of the western Mediterranean, such as the Talaiotic culture of the Balearic Islands and the Torrean civilization of Southern Corsica. Evidence of trade with the other civilizations of the time is attested by several artefacts (e.g. pots), coming from as far as Cyprus, Crete, Mainland Greece, Spain and Italy, that have been found in Nuragic sites, bearing witness to the scope of commercial relations between the Nuragic people and other peoples in Europe and beyond.\nAncient history.\nAround the 9th century BC the Phoenicians began visiting Sardinia with increasing frequency, presumably initially needing safe overnight and all-weather anchorages along their trade routes from the coast of modern-day Lebanon as far afield as the African and European Atlantic coasts and beyond. The most common ports of call were Caralis, Nora, Bithia, Sulci, and Tharros. Claudian, a 4th-century Latin poet, in his poem \"De bello Gildonico\", stated that Caralis was founded by people from Tyre, probably in the same time of the foundation of Carthage, in the 9th or 8th century BC.\nIn the 6th century BC, after the conquest of western Sicily, the Carthaginians planned to annex Sardinia. A first invasion attempt led by Malchus was foiled by the victorious Nuraghic resistance. However, from 510 BC, the southern and west-central part of the island were invaded a second time and came under Carthaginian rule.\nIn 238 BC, taking advantage of Carthage having to face a rebellion of her mercenaries (the Mercenary War) after the First Punic War (264\u2013241 BC), the Romans annexed Corsica and Sardinia from the Carthaginians. The two islands became the province of Corsica and Sardinia. They were not given a provincial governor until 227 BC. The Romans faced many rebellions, and it took them many years to pacify both islands. The existing coastal cities were enlarged and embellished, and Roman colonies such as Turris Lybissonis and Feronia were founded. These were populated by Roman immigrants. The Roman military occupation brought the Nuragic civilization to an end, except for the mountainous interior of the island, which the Romans called \"Barbaria\", meaning 'Barbarian land'. Roman rule in Sardinia lasted 694 years, during which time the province was an important source of grain for the capital. Latin came to be the dominant spoken language during this period, though Roman culture was slower to take hold, and Roman rule was often contested by the Sardinian tribes from the mountainous regions.\nVandal conquest.\nThe East Germanic tribe of the Vandals conquered Sardinia in 456. Their rule lasted for 78 years until 534, when, in the Vandalic War 400 Eastern Roman troops led by Cyril, one of the officers of the \"foederati\", retook the island. It is known that the Vandal government continued the forms of the existing Roman Imperial structure. The governor of Sardinia continued to be called the \"praeses\" and apparently continued to manage military, judicial, and civil governmental functions via imperial procedures. The only Vandal governor of Sardinia about whom there is substantial record is the last, Godas, a Visigoth noble. In AD 530, a coup d'\u00e9tat in Carthage removed King Hilderic, a convert to Nicene Christianity, in favor of his cousin Gelimer, an Arian Christian like most of the elite in his kingdom. Godas was sent to take charge and ensure the loyalty of Sardinia. He did the exact opposite, declaring the island's independence from Carthage and opening negotiations with Emperor Justinian I, who had declared war on Hilderic's behalf. In AD 533, Gelimer sent the bulk of his army and navy (120 vessels and 5,000 men) to Sardinia to subdue Godas, with the catastrophic result that the Vandal Kingdom was overwhelmed when Justinian's own army under Belisarius arrived at Carthage in their absence. The Vandal Kingdom ended and Sardinia was returned to Roman rule.\nByzantine era and the rise of the Judicates.\nIn 533, Sardinia returned to the rule of the Byzantine Empire when the Vandals were defeated by the armies of Justinian I under the General Belisarius in the Battle of Tricamarum, in their African kingdom Belisarius sent his general Cyril to Sardinia to retake the island. Sardinia remained in Byzantine hands for the next 300 years aside from a short period in which it was invaded by the Ostrogoths in 551.\nUnder Byzantine rule, the island was divided into districts called \"mere\u00edai\" (\u03bc\u03b5\u03c1\u03b5\u03af\u03b1\u03b9) in Byzantine Greek, which were governed by a judge residing in Caralis and garrisoned by an army stationed in \"Forum Traiani\" (today Fordongianus) under the command of a \"dux\". During this time, Christianity took deeper root on the island, supplanting the Paganism which had survived into the early Middle Ages in the culturally conservative hinterlands. Along with lay Christianity, the followers of monastic figures such as Basil of Caesarea became established in Sardinia. While Christianity penetrated the majority of the population, the region of Barbagia remained largely pagan and, probably, partially non-Latin speaking. They re-established a short-lived independent domain with Sardinian-heathen lay and religious traditions, one of its kings being Hospito. Pope Gregory I wrote a letter to Hospito defining him \"Dux Barbaricinorum\" and, being Christian, the leader and best of his people. In this unique letter about Hospito, the Pope prompts him to convert his people who \"living all like irrational animals, ignore the true God and worship wood and stone\" ().\nThe dates and circumstances of the end of Byzantine rule in Sardinia are not known. Direct central control was maintained at least through c.\u2009650, after which local legates were empowered in the face of the rebellion of Gregory the Patrician, Exarch of Africa and the first invasion of the Muslim conquest of the Maghreb. There is some evidence that senior Byzantine administration in the Exarchate of Africa retreated to Caralis following the final fall of Carthage to the Arabs in 697. The loss of imperial control in Africa led to escalating raids by Arabs on the island, the first of which is documented in 703, forcing increased military self-reliance in the province.\nElsewhere in the central Mediterranean, the Aghlabids conquered the island of Malta in 870.208 They also attacked or raided Sardinia and Corsica.153, 244 Some modern references state that Sardinia came under Aghlabid control around 810 or after the beginning of the conquest of Sicily in 827. Historian Corrado Zedda argues that the island hosted a Muslim presence during the Aghlabid period, possibly a limited foothold along the coasts that forcibly coexisted with the local Byzantine government. Historian Alex Metcalfe argues that the available evidence for any Muslim occupation or colonisation of the island during this period is limited and inconclusive, and that Muslim attacks were limited to raids.\nCommunication with the central government became daunting if not impossible during and after the Muslim conquest of Sicily between 827 and 902. A letter by Pope Nicholas I as early as 864 mentions the \"Sardinian judges\", without reference to the empire and a letter by Pope John VIII (r.\u2009872\u00a0\u2013\u00a0882) refers to them as \"principes\" (\"princes\"). By the time of \"De Administrando Imperio\", completed in 952, the Byzantine authorities no longer listed Sardinia as an imperial province, suggesting they considered it lost.\nIn all likelihood a local noble family, the Lacon-Gunale, acceded to the power of Archon, still identifying themselves as vassals of the Byzantines, but \"de facto\" independent as communications with Constantinople were very difficult. Only two names of those rulers are known: Salousios () and the Tourkotourios () from two inscriptions), who probably reigned between the 10th and the 11th century. These rulers were still closely linked to the Byzantines, both for a pact of ancient vassalage, and from the ideological point of view, with the use of the Byzantine Greek language (in a Romance country), and the use of art of Byzantine inspiration.\nIn the early 11th century, an attempt to conquer the island was made by Mujahid al-Amiri al-\u1e62aqlab\u012b, the ruler of D\u00e9nia and the Balearic Islands based in the Iberian Peninsula. The only records of that war are from Pisan and Genoese chronicles. The Christians won but, after that, the previous Sardinian kingdom was undermined and subsequently divided into four smaller states: Cagliari (\"Calari\"), Arborea (\"Arbaree\"), Gallura, and Torres or Logudoro.\nWhether this final transformation from imperial civil servant to independent sovereign bodies resulted from imperial abandonment or local assertion, by the 10th century, the so-called \"Judges\" ( / , a Byzantine administrative title) had emerged as the autonomous rulers of Sardinia. The title of changed with the language and local understanding of the position, becoming the Sardinian , essentially a king or sovereign, while \"Judicate\" () came to mean 'state'.\nEarly medieval Sardinian political institutions evolved from the millennium-old Roman imperial structures with relatively little Germanic influence.\nAlthough the Judicates were hereditary lordships, the old Byzantine imperial notion that personal title or honor was separate from the state still remained, so the Judicate was not regarded as the personal property of the monarch as was common in later European feudalism. Like the imperial systems, the new order also preserved \"semi-democratic\" forms, with national assemblies called the Crown of the Realm. Each Judicate saw to its own defense, maintained its own laws and administration, and looked after its own foreign and trading affairs.\nThe history of the four Judicates would be defined by the contest for influence between the two Italian maritime powers of Genoa and Pisa, and later the ambitions of the Kingdom of Aragon.\nThe Judicate of Cagliari or \"Pluminos\", during the regency of Torchitorio V of Cagliari and his successor, William III, was allied with the Republic of Genoa. Because of this it was brought to an end in 1258, when its capital, Santa Igia, was stormed and destroyed by an alliance of Sardinian and Pisan forces. The territory then was divided between the Republic of Pisa, the Della Gherardesca family from Italy, and the Sardinian Judicates of Arborea and Gallura. Pisa maintained the control over the fortress of Castel di Cagliari founded by Pisan merchants in 1216\u20131217 east of Santa Igia; in the south-west the count Ugolino della Gherardesca promoted the birth of the town of \"Villa di Chiesa\" (today Iglesias) to exploit the nearby rich silver deposits.\nThe Judicate of Logudoro (also called \"Torres\") was also allied to the Republic of Genoa and came to an end in 1259 after the death of the (queen) Adelasia. The territory was divided up between the Doria and Malaspina families of Genoa and the Bas-Serra family of Arborea, while the city of Sassari became a small republic, along the lines of the Italian city-states (\"comuni\"), confederated firstly with Pisa and then with Genoa.\nThe Judicate of Gallura ended in the year 1288, when the last giudice, Nino Visconti (a friend of Dante Alighieri), was driven out by the Pisans, who occupied the territory.\nThe Judicate of Arborea, having Oristano as its capital, had the longest life compared to the other kingdoms. Its later history is entwined with the attempt to unify the island into a single Sardinian state ( 'Sardinian Republic' in Sardinian, or 'Sardinian Nation' in Catalan) against their relatives and former Aragonese allies.\nAragonese period.\nIn 1297, Pope Boniface VIII established on his own initiative (\"motu proprio\") a hypothetical \"regnum Sardiniae et Corsicae\" (\"Kingdom of Sardinia and Corsica\") in order to settle the War of the Sicilian Vespers diplomatically. This had broken out in 1282 between the Capetian House of Anjou and Aragon over the possession of Sicily. Despite the existence of the indigenous states, the Pope offered this newly created crown to James II of Aragon, promising him support should he wish to conquer Pisan Sardinia in exchange for Sicily.\nIn 1324, in alliance with the Kingdom of Arborea and following a military campaign that lasted a year or so, the Aragon Crown Prince Alfonso led an Aragonese army that occupied the Pisan territories of Cagliari and Gallura along with the allied city of Sassari, naming them \"The Kingdom of Sardinia and Corsica\". The kingdom was to remain a dominion of the Crown of Aragon (under the 16th-century kings of Spain) until the Peace of Utrecht.\nDuring this period, the Judicate of Arborea promulgated the legal code of the kingdom in the \"Carta de Logu\" ('Charter of the Land'). The Carta de Logu was originally compiled by Marianus IV of Arborea, and was amended and updated by Mariano's daughter, Female Judge ( or ) Eleanor of Arborea. The legal code was written in Sardinian and established a whole range of citizens' rights. Among the revolutionary concepts in this Carta de Logu was the right of women to refuse marriage and to own property. In terms of civil liberties, the code made provincial 14th century Sardinia one of the most developed societies in all of Europe.\nIn 1353, Peter IV of Aragon, following Aragonese customs, granted a parliament to the kingdom of Sardinia and Corsica, which was followed by some degree of self-government under a viceroy and judicial independence. This parliament, however, had limited powers. It consisted of high-ranking military commanders, the clergy and the nobility. The kingdom of Aragon also introduced the feudal system into the areas of Sardinia that it ruled.\nThe Sardinian Judicates never adopted feudalism, and Arborea maintained its parliament, called the \"Corona de Logu\" 'Crown of the Realm'. In this parliament, apart from the nobles and military commanders, also sat the representatives of each township and village. The Corona de Logu exercised some control over the king: under the rule of the \"bannus consensus\" the king could be deposed or even executed if he did not follow the rules of the kingdom.\nHaving broken the alliance with the Crown of Aragon, from 1353 to 1409, the Arborean giudici Marianus IV, Hugh III and Brancaleone Doria (husband of Eleanor of Arborea), succeeded in occupying all of Sardinia except the heavily fortified towns of the Castle of Cagliari and Alghero, which for years remained as the only Aragonese dominions in Sardinia (Sardinian\u2013Aragonese war).\nIn 1409, Martin I of Sicily, king of Sicily and heir to the crown of Aragon, defeated the Sardinians at the Battle of Sanluri. The battle was fought by about 20,000 Sardinian, Genoese and French knights, enrolled from their kingdom at a time when the population of Sardinia had been greatly depleted by the plague. Despite the Sardinian army outnumbering the Aragonese army, they were defeated.\nThe Judicate of Arborea disappeared in 1420, when its rights were sold by the last king for 100,000 gold florins, and after some of its most notable men switched sides in exchange for privileges. For example, Leonardo Cubello, with some claim to the crown being from a family related to the Kings of Arborea, was granted the title of Marquis of Oristano and feudal rights on a territory that partly overlapped with the original extension of the Kingdom of Arborea in exchange for his subjection to the Aragonese monarchs.\nThe conquest of Sardinia by the Kingdom of Aragon meant the introduction of the feudal system throughout Sardinia. Thus Sardinia is probably the only European country where feudalism was introduced in the transition period from the Middle Ages to the early modern period, at a time when feudalism had already been abandoned by many other European countries.\nSpanish period.\nIn 1469, the heir to Sardinia, Ferdinand II of Aragon, married Isabel of Castile, and the \"Kingdom of Sardinia\" (which was separated from Corsica) was to be inherited by their Habsburg grandson, Charles I of Spain, with the state symbol of the Four Moors. The successors of Charles I of Spain, in order to defend their Mediterranean territories from raids of the Barbary pirates, fortified the Sardinian shores with a system of coastal lookout towers, allowing the gradual resettlement of some coastal areas.\nThe Kingdom of Sardinia remained Aragonese-Spanish for about 400 years, from 1323 to 1708, assimilating a number of Spanish traditions, customs and linguistic expressions, nowadays vividly portrayed in the folklore parades of Saint Efisio in Cagliari (1 May), the Cavalcade on Sassari (last but one Sunday in May), and the Redeemer in Nuoro (28 August). To this day Catalan is still spoken in the north-western city of Alghero (l'Alguer).\nMany famines have been reported in Sardinia. According to Stephen L. Dyson and Robert J. Rowland, \"The Jesuits of Cagliari recorded years during the late 16th century \"of such hunger and so sterile that the majority of the people could sustain life only with wild ferns and other weeds\" ... During the terrible famine of 1680, some 80,000 people, out of a total population of 250,000, are said to have died, and entire villages were devastated ... \"\nSavoyard period.\nIn 1708, as a consequence of the Spanish War of Succession, the rule of the Kingdom of Sardinia passed from King Philip V of Spain into the hands of the Austrians, who occupied the island. The Treaty of Utrecht granted Sardinia to the Austrians, but in 1717, Cardinal Giulio Alberoni, minister of Philip V of Spain, reoccupied Sardinia.\nIn 1718, with the Treaty of London, Sardinia was eventually handed over to the House of Savoy; this Alpine dynasty would go on to introduce the Italian language on the island forty years later in 1760, thereby starting a process of Italianization amongst the islanders.\nIn 1793, Sardinians repelled the French \"Exp\u00e9dition de Sardaigne\" during the French Revolutionary Wars. On 23 February 1793, Domenico Millelire, commanding the Sardinian fleet, defeated the fleets of the French Republic near the Maddalena archipelago, of which then-lieutenant Napoleon Bonaparte was a leader. Millelire became the first recipient of the Gold Medal of Military Valor of the Italian Armed Forces. In the same month, Sardinians stopped the attempted French landing on the beach of Quartu Sant'Elena, near the Capital of Cagliari. Because of these successes, the representatives of the nobility and clergy (\"Stamenti\") formulated five requests addressed to the King Victor Amadeus III of Sardinia, but they were all met with rejection. Because of this discontent, on 28 April 1794, during an uprising in Cagliari, two Savoyard officials were killed; that was the spark that ignited a revolt (called the \"Sardinian Vespers\") throughout the island, which started on 28 April 1794 (commemorated today as \"sa die de sa Sardigna\") with the expulsion and execution of the Piedmontese officers for a few days from the Capital Cagliari. \nOn 28 December 1795 Sassari insurgents demonstrating against feudalism, mainly from the region of Logudoro, occupied the city. On 13 February 1796, in order to prevent the spread of the revolt, the viceroy Filippo Vivalda gave the Sardinian magistrate Giovanni Maria Angioy the role of Alternos, which meant a substitute of the viceroy himself. Angioy moved from Cagliari to Sassari, and during his journey almost all the villages joined the uprising, demanding an end to feudalism and aiming to declare the island to be an independent republic, but once he was outnumbered by loyalist forces he fled to Paris and sought support for a French annexation of the island.\nIn 1798, the islet near Sardinia was attacked by the Tunisians and over 900 inhabitants were taken away as slaves. The final Muslim attack on the island was on Sant'Antioco on 16 October 1815, over a millennium since the first.\nIn 1799, as a consequence of the Napoleonic Wars in Italy, the Savoy royal family left Turin and took refuge in Cagliari for some fifteen years. In 1847, the Sardinian parliaments (\"Stamenti\"), in order to get the Piedmontese liberal reforms they could not afford due to their separated legal system, renounced their state autonomy and agreed to form a union with the Italian Mainland States (\"Stati di Terraferma\"), ending up with a single parliament, a single magistracy and a single government in Turin; this move aggravated the island's peripheral condition and most of the pro-union supporters, including its leader Giovanni Siotto Pintor, would later regret it.\nIn 1820, the Savoyards imposed the Enclosures Act (\"Editto delle Chiudende\") on the island, aimed at turning the land's traditional collective ownership, a cultural and economic cornerstone of Sardinia since the Nuragic times, to private property. This gave rise to many abuses, as the reform ended up favouring the landholders while excluding the poor Sardinian farmers and shepherds, who witnessed the abolition of the communal rights and the sale of their lands. Many local rebellions like the Nuorese ('The Already Known' in Sardinian) riot in 1868, all repressed by the King's army, resulted in an attempt to return to the past and reaffirm the right to use the once common land. However the common lands (called \"ademprivios\") were never completely abolished, and they are still present in large number to this day (500,000 hectares of common lands were counted in 1956, of which 345,000 constituted by woods).\nKingdom of Italy.\nWith the Perfect Fusion in 1848, the confederation of states powered by the Savoyard kings of Sardinia became a unitary and constitutional state and moved to the Italian Wars of Independence for the Unification of Italy, that were led for thirteen years. In 1861, being Italy united by a debated war campaign, the parliament of the Kingdom of Sardinia decided by law to change its name and the title of its king to Kingdom of Italy and King of Italy. Most Sardinian forests were cut down at this time, in order to provide the Piedmontese with raw materials, like wood, used to make railway sleepers on the mainland. The primary natural forests, praised by every traveller visiting Sardinia, would in fact be reduced to one-fifth of their original number, being little more than 100,000 hectares at the end of the century. From 1850 onward, taxes more than doubled in Sardinia, which compounded the already severe financial hardships facing the islanders, due to the Italo-French tariff war: between 1885 and 1897, the Sardinians saw their land being confiscated more than the rest of Italy combined as a result of tax evasion.\nDuring the First World War, the Sardinian soldiers of the Brigata Sassari distinguished themselves. It was the first and only regional military unit in Italy, since the people enrolled were only Sardinians. The brigade suffered heavy losses and earned four Gold Medals of Military Valor. Sardinia lost more young people than any other Italian region on the front, with 138 casualties per 1000 soldiers compared to the Italian average of 100 casualties.\nDuring the Fascist period, with the implementation of the policy of autarky, several swamps around the island were reclaimed and agrarian communities founded. The main communities were the village of Mussolinia (now called Arborea), populated by farmers from Veneto and Friuli, in the area of Oristano and Fertilia, populated at first by settlers from the Ferrara area, followed, after World War II, by a notable number of Istrian Italians and Dalmatian Italians hailing from territories lost to Yugoslavia, in the area adjacent the city of Alghero, within the region of Nurra. Also established during that time (1938) was the city of Carbonia, which became the main centre of coal mining activity, that attracted thousand of workers from the rest of the Island and the Italian mainland. The Sardinian writer Grazia Deledda won the Nobel Prize for Literature in 1926.\nDuring the Second World War, Sardinia was an important air and naval base and was heavily bombed by the Allies, especially the city of Cagliari. German troops left the island on 8 September 1943, a few days after the Armistice of Cassibile, and retired to Corsica without fighting and bloodshed, after a bilateral agreement between the general Antonio Basso (Commander of the Armed Forces of Sardinia) and the German Karl Hans Lungerhausen, general of the 90th Panzergrenadier Division.\nPost-Second World War period.\nIn 1946, by popular referendum, Italy became a republic, with Sardinia being administered since 1948 by a special statute of autonomy. By 1951, malaria was successfully eliminated by the ERLAAS, Anti-malaric Regional Authority, and the support of the Rockefeller Foundation, which facilitated the commencement of the Sardinian tourist boom. With the increase in tourism, coal decreased in importance but Sardinia followed the Italian economic miracle.\nIn the early 1960s, an industrialisation effort was commenced, the so-called \"Piani di Rinascita\" (rebirth plans), with the initiation of major infrastructure projects on the island. These included the construction of new dams and roads, reforestation, agricultural zones on reclaimed marshland, and large industrial complexes (primarily oil refineries and related petrochemical operations). With the creation of petrochemical industries, thousands of ex-farmers became industrial workers. The 1973 oil crisis caused the termination of employment for thousands of workers employed in the petrochemical industries, which aggravated the emigration already present in the 1950s and 1960s.\nSardinia faced the creation of military bases on the island, like Decimomannu Air Base and Salto di Quirra (the biggest scientific military base in Europe) in the same decades. Even now, around 60% of all Italian and NATO military installations in Italy are on Sardinia, whose area is less than one-tenth of all the Italian territory and whose population is little more than the 2.5%; furthermore, they comprise over 35,000 hectares used for experimental weapons testing, where 80% of the military explosives in Italy are used.\nSardinian nationalism and local protest movements became stronger in the 1970s, and a number of bandits (\"anonima sarda\") started a long series of kidnappings, which ended only in the 1990s. This also gave rise to various militant groups that blended separatist and communist ideas, the most famous being \"Barbagia Rossa\" and the Sardinian Armed Movement, which perpetrated several bombings and terrorist actions between the 1970s and the 1980s. In the span of just two years (1987\u20131988), 224 bombing attacks were reported.\nIn 1983 a prominent activist of a separatist party, the Sardinian Action Party (\"Partidu Sardu \u2013 Partito Sardo d'Azione\"), was elected president of the regional parliament, and in the 1980s several other movements calling for independence from Italy were born; in the 1990s some of them became political parties, even if in a rather disjointed manner. It was not until 1999 that the island's languages (Sardinian, Sassarese, Gallurese, Algherese and Tabarchino) were recognised, even if just formally, together with Italian. The 35th G8 summit was planned by Prodi II Cabinet to be held in Sardinia, on the island of La Maddalena, in July 2009; however, in April 2009, the Italian Prime Minister, Silvio Berlusconi, decided, without convoking the Italian parliament or consulting the Sardinian governor of his own party, to move the summit, even though the works were almost completed, to L'Aquila, provoking heavy protests.\nToday Sardinia is phasing in as an EU region, with a diversified economy focused on tourism and the tertiary sector. The economic efforts of the last twenty years have reduced the handicap of insularity, especially in the fields of low-cost air travel and advanced information technology. For example, the CRS4 (Center for Advanced Studies, Research and Development in Sardinia) developed the second European website and 1st in Italy in 1991 and webmail in 1995. CRS4 allowed several telecommunication companies and internet service providers based on the island to flourish, such as Videonline in 1994, Tiscali in 1998 and Andala Umts in 1999.\nEnvironment.\nFollowing an enormous reforestation plan Sardinia has become the Italian region with the largest forest extension. 1,213,250 hectares (12,132\u00a0km2) or 50% of the island is covered by forested areas. The \"Corpo forestale e di vigilanza ambientale della Regione Sarda\" is the Sardinian Forestry Corps. Sardinia is one of the regions in Italy which are most affected by forest fires during the summer.\nThe Regional Landscape Plan prohibits new building activities on the coast (except in urban centers), next to forests, lakes or other environmental or cultural sites and the Coastal conservation agency ensures the protection of natural areas on the Sardinian coast.\nRenewable energies have increased noticeably in recent years, mainly wind power, favoured by the windy climate, but also solar power and biofuel, based on jatropha oil and colza oil. 586.8 megawatts of wind power capacity were installed on the island at the end of 2009.\nFlora and fauna.\nDue to Sardinia's continual isolation from mainland Europe even during glacial sea level lows (when it was connected to Corsica), Sardinia has a high level of endemism, with regards to both flora and fauna, including insects and arachnids, as well as terrestrial vertebrates, with endemic amphibians (including those also found on Corsica) including the Sardinian brook salamander, brown cave salamander, imperial cave salamander, Monte Albo cave salamander, Supramonte cave salamander, Sarrabus' cave salamander and the Sardinian tree frog (also found in Corsica), with lizards endemic to the archipelago including Bedriaga's rock lizard, the Tyrrhenian wall lizard and Fitzinger's algyroides.\nDuring the Late Pleistocene, Sardinia and Corsica had a highly endemic terrestrial mammal fauna, all of which is now extinct, which included a field mouse (\"Rhagamys orthodon\"), a vole (\"Microtus henseli\"), a shrew (\"Asoriculus similis\"), a mole (\"Talpa tyrrhenica\"), a dwarf mammoth (\"Mammuthus\" \"lamarmorai\"), the Sardinian pika (\"Prolagus sardus\"), a jackal-sized canine, the Sardinian dhole (\"Cynotherium sardus\"), a mustelid (\"Enhydrictis galictoides\"), three species of otter (\"Algarolutra majori, Sardolutra ichnusae,\" and the gigantic \"Megalenhydris barbaricina\") and a deer (\"Praemegaceros cazioti\"). Some of these animals were extinct by the beginning of the Holocene, with the deer species suggested to have persisted until around 7,600 years ago, and the shrew into the Neolithic, while the Sardinian pika, vole and field mouse are suggested to have persisted until around 3000\u20132000 years ago. The Sardinian pika in particular was historically abundant on the island, and was used by early inhabitants as a source of food. On the present-day island, its fauna includes a variety of introduced mammal species, such as the Corsican red deer.\nThe island is inhabited by terrestrial tortoises and sea turtles like Hermann's tortoise, the spur-thighed tortoise, marginated tortoise (\"Testudo marginata sarda\"), Nabeul tortoise, loggerhead sea turtle and green sea turtle.\nSome birds of prey found here are the griffon vulture, common buzzard, golden eagle, long-eared owl, western marsh harrier, peregrine falcon, European honey buzzard, Sardinian goshawk (\"Accipiter gentilis arrigonii\"), Bonelli's eagle and Eleonora's falcon, whose name comes from Eleonor of Arborea, national heroine of Sardinia, expert in falconry.\nThe hundreds of lagoons and coastal lakes that dot the island are home for many species of wading birds, such as the greater flamingo.\nConversely, Sardinia lacks many species common on the European continent, such as the viper, wolf, bear and marmot.\nThe island has also long been used for grazing flocks of indigenous Sardinian sheep. The Sardinian Anglo-Arab is a horse breed that was established in Sardinia, where it has been selectively bred for more than one hundred years.\nThree different breeds of dogs are peculiar to Sardinia: the Sardinian Shepherd Dog, the Dogo Sardesco and the Levriero Sardo.\nNatural parks and reserves.\nOver of Sardinian territory is environmentally preserved (about 25% of the island's territory).\nThe island has three national parks:\nTen regional parks:\nThere are 60 wildlife reserves, 5 W.W.F oases, 25 natural monuments and one Geomineral Park, preserved by UNESCO.\nNorthern Sardinian Coasts are included in the Pelagos Sanctuary for Mediterranean Marine Mammals, a Marine Protected Area, that covers a surface of about , aimed at the protection of marine mammals.\nEducation.\nAccording to the ISTAT census of 2001, the literacy rate in Sardinia among people below 65 years old is 99.5 percent. Total literacy rate (including people over 65) is 98.2 percent.\nThe illiteracy rate among males below 65 years old is 0.24 percent and among women 0.25 percent; the number of women that annually graduate at secondary high schools and universities is about 10\u201320 percent higher than men. Sardinia has the 2nd highest rate of school drop-out in Italy.\nSardinia has two public universities: the University of Sassari and the University of Cagliari, founded in the 16th and 17th century. 48,979 students were enrolled at universities in 2007\u20132008.\nEconomy.\nOf the Italian regions located south of Rome, Sardinia's economy is in the best state. The greatest amount of economic development took place inland, in the provinces of Cagliari and Sassari, characterized by a certain amount of enterprise. According to Eurostat, the 2014 nominal gross domestic product (GDP) was \u20ac33,356 million, \u20ac33,085 million in purchasing power parity, resulting in a GDP per capita of \u20ac19,900, which is 72% of the EU average. The per capita income in Sardinia is the highest of the southern half of Italy. The most populated provincial chief towns have higher incomes: in Cagliari the income per capita is \u20ac27,545, in Sassari \u20ac24,006, in Oristano \u20ac23,887, in Nuoro is \u20ac23,316 and in Olbia is \u20ac20,827. Sardinia is the 14th most productive region in the country and is the 16th for GRP per capita among Italian regions.\nThe Sardinian economy is, however, constrained due to the high costs of the transportation of goods and electricity, which is twice that of the continental Italian regions, and triple that of the EU average. Sardinia is the only Italian region that produces a surplus of electricity, and exports electricity to Corsica and the Italian mainland: in 2009, the new submarine power cable Sapei entered into operation. It links the Fiume Santo Power Station, in Sardinia, to the converter stations in Latina, in the Italian peninsula. The SACOI is another submarine power cable that links Sardinia to Italy, crossing Corsica, from 1965.\nSmall scale liquified natural gas terminals and a gas pipeline were under construction, and became operational in 2018. They will decrease the current high cost of the electric power in the island. As of 2021[ [update]], Sardinia has 2 GigaWatts (GW) of thermal power plants, 1 GW each of wind and solar power, and over 450 MW of hydropower.\nThree main banks are headquartered in Sardinia; however, Banco di Sardegna and Banca di Sassari, are both originally from Sassari.\nThere are chances for Sardinia to become a tax haven as the whole island territory is free of custom duties, value added tax (VAT) and excise taxes on fuel; since February 2013, the town of Portoscuso has become the first free trade zone. According to the article 12 of the Sardinian Statute modified by the regional parliament in October 2013: \"The Territory of the Autonomous Region of Sardinia is located off the customs line and constitutes a Free Trade Zone enclosed by the surrounding sea; the access points consist of the seaports and the airports. The Sardinian Free Trade Zone is regulated by the laws of the European Union and Italy that are in force also in Livigno, Campione D'Italia, Gorizia, Savogna d'Isonzo and the Region of Aosta Valley\".\nUnemployment.\nThe unemployment rate for the fourth quarter of 2008 was 8.6%; by 2012, the unemployment rate had increased to 14.6%. Its rise was due to the Great Recession that reduced Sardinian exports, mainly focused on refined oil, chemical products, and also mining and metallurgical products.\nThe unemployment rate dropped to 11.2% at the end of 2018, which is only 1.8 percentage points (pp) higher than the national average (9.4%) and 5.3pp lower than Southern Italian regions (16.5%), according to Italian National Institute of Statistics.\nEconomic sectors.\nThis table shows the sectors of the Sardinian economy in 2011:\nPrimary.\nSardinia is home to nearly four million sheep, almost half of the entire Italian assets and that makes the island one of the areas of the world with the highest density of sheep along with some parts of the United Kingdom and New Zealand (135 sheep every square kilometer versus 129 in UK and 116 in New Zealand). Sardinia has been for thousands of years specializing in sheep breeding, and, to a lesser extent, goats and cattle that is less productive of agriculture in relation to land use. It is probably in breeding and cattle ownership the economic base of the early proto-historic and monumental Sardinian civilization from Neolithic to the Iron Age.\nAgriculture has also played a very important role in the economic history of the island, especially in the great plain of Campidano, particularly suitable for wheat farming. Sardinian soil often has insufficient or brackish water aquifers, even on its more permeable plains. As such, water scarcity was the first problem that was faced for the modernization of the sector, with the construction of a great barrier system of dams, which today contains nearly 2 billion cubic meters of water. The Sardinian agriculture is now linked to specific products such as cheese, wine, olive oil, artichoke, tomato for a growing product export. The reclamations have helped to extend the crops and to introduce other ones such as vegetables and fruit, next to the historical ones, olive and grapes that are present in the hilly areas. The Campidano plain, the largest lowland Sardinian produces oats, barley and durum, of which is one of the most important Italian producers. Among the vegetables, as well as artichokes, has a certain weight the production of oranges, and, before the reform of the sugar sector from the European Union, the cultivation of sugar beet. \nIn the forests there is the cork oak, which grows naturally; Sardinia produces about 80% of Italian cork. The cork district, in the northern part of the Gallura region, around Calangianus and Tempio Pausania, is composed of 130 companies. Every year in Sardinia 200,000 quintals (20,000 tonnes) of cork are carved, and 40% of the end products are exported.\nIn fresh food, as well as artichokes, the production of tomatoes (including Camoni tomato) and citrus fruit are of a certain weight. Sardinia is the 5th Italian region for rice production, the main paddy fields are located in the Arborea Plain.\nIn addition to meat, Sardinia produces a wide variety of cheese, considering that half of the sheep milk produced in Italy is produced in Sardinia, and is largely worked by the cooperatives of the shepherds and small industries. Sardinia also produces most of the pecorino romano, a non-original product of the island, much of which is traditionally addressed to the Italian overseas communities. Sardinia boasts a centuries-old tradition of horse breeding since the Aragonese domination, whose cavalry drew from equine heritage of the island to strengthen their own army or to make a gift to the other sovereigns of Europe. Today the island boasts the highest number of horse herds in Italy.\nThere is little fishing (and no real maritime tradition), Portoscuso tunas are exported worldwide, but primarily to Japan.\nIndustry and handicraft.\nThe once prosperous mining industry is still active though restricted to coal (Nuraxi Figus, hamlet of Gonnesa), antimony (Villasalto), gold (Furtei), bauxite (Olmedo) and lead and zinc (Iglesiente, Nurra). The granite extraction represents one of the most flourishing industries in the northern part of the island. The Gallura granite district is composed of 260 companies that work in 60 quarries, where 75% of the Italian granite is extracted.\nThe principal industries are chemicals (Porto Torres, Cagliari, Villacidro, Ottana), petrochemicals (Porto Torres, Sarroch), metalworking (Portoscuso, Portovesme, Villacidro), cement (Cagliari), pharmaceutical (Sassari), shipbuilding (Arbatax, Olbia, Porto Torres), oil rig construction (Arbatax), rail industry (Villacidro), arms industries at Domusnovas and food (sugar refineries at Villasor and Oristano, dairy at Arborea, Macomer and Thiesi, fish factory at Olbia).\nIn Sardinia is located the DASS (\"Distretto Aerospaziale della Sardegna\"), a consortium of companies, research centers and universities focused on aerospace industry and research. The aerospace manufacturer Vitrociset, in Villaputzu, is involved in the production of the stealth multirole fighter Lockheed Martin F-35 Lightning II.\nPlans related to industrial conversion are in progress in the main industrial sites, like in Porto Torres, where seven research centres are developing the transformation from traditional fossil fuel related industry to an integrated production chain from vegetable oil using oleaginous seeds to bio-plastics.\nSardinia is involved in the industrial production of the AIRPod, an innovative car powered by compressed air, with the first factory being built in Bolotana.\nCraft industries include rugs, jewelry, textile, lacework, basket making and coral.\nTertiary.\nThe Sardinian economy is today focused on the overdeveloped tertiary sector (67.8% of employment), with commerce, services, information technology, public administration and especially on tourism (mainly seaside tourism), which represents the main industry of the island with 2,721 active companies and 189,239 rooms. In 2008 there were 2,363,496 arrivals (up 1.4% on 2007). In the same year, the airports of the island registered 11,896,674 passengers (up 1.24% on 2007).\nDue to its isolated and insular location, Sardinia focused part of its economy on the development of digital technologies since the dawn of internet era: the first Italian website, one of the first webmail system and one of the first and largest internet providers (Video On Line) were realised by the CRS4, the first European online newspaper was developed by L'Unione Sarda and also the first Italian UMTS company was founded on the island. Today Sardinia is the second Italian region, after Lombardy, for investments in startups (owning the 20% of the Italian venture capital).\nSardinia has many small and picturesque villages, nine of them have been selected by (), a non-profit private association of small Italian towns of strong historical and artistic interest, that was founded on the initiative of the Tourism Council of the National Association of Italian Municipalities.\nCommunications.\nOn the island are headquartered some telecommunication companies and internet service providers, such as Tiscali and the Mediterranean Skylogic Teleport, a ground station controlled by satellite provider Eutelsat. Sardinia is the Italian region with the highest e-intensity index after the Aosta Valley (index measuring the relative maturity of Internet economies on the basis of three factors: enablement, engagement, and expenditure) and the region with the highest internet performances, such as fastest broadband connection in Italy.\nSardinia is also the Italian region with the highest percentage (41%) of 4G LTE users.\nThe Chinese multinational telecommunications equipment and systems companies ZTE and Huawei have development centers and innovation labs in Sardinia.\nSardinia has become Europe's first region to fully adopt the new Digital Terrestrial Television broadcasting standard. From 1 November 2008 TV channels are broadcast only in digital.\nTransport.\nAirports.\nSardinia has three international airports (Alghero-Fertilia/Riviera del Corallo Airport, Olbia-Costa Smeralda Airport and Cagliari-Elmas Airport) connected with the principal Italian cities and many European destinations, mainly in the United Kingdom, France, Spain and Germany, and two regional airports (Oristano-Fenosu Airport and Tortol\u00ec-Arbatax Airport). Internal air connections between Sardinian airports are limited to a daily Cagliari-Olbia flight. Sardinian citizens benefit from special sales on plane tickets for Rome and Milan (\"continuit\u00e0 territoriale\"), and several low-cost air companies operate on the island.\n\"Airone - Compagnia Trasporti Aerei S.A.\" was an airline established in Cagliari in October 1944, its founders intended it to be the answer to the need for fast connections between Sardinia and mainland Italy. The name itself recalled one of the most typical animals of the island's wetlands. It is remembered as the first airline founded in Italy after the Second World War.\nAir Italy (formerly known as Meridiana) was an airline headquartered in the airport of Olbia; it was founded as Alisarda in 1963 by the Aga Khan IV. The development of Alisarda followed the development of Costa Smeralda in the northeast part of the island, a well known vacation spot among billionaires and film actors worldwide.\nSeaports.\nThe ferry companies operating on the island are Tirrenia di Navigazione, Moby Lines, Corsica Ferries - Sardinia Ferries, Grandi Navi Veloci, Grimaldi Lines, Corsica Linea; they link the Sardinian seaports of Porto Torres, Olbia, Golfo Aranci, Arbatax, Santa Teresa Gallura and Cagliari with Civitavecchia, Genoa, Livorno, Naples, Palermo, Trapani, Piombino in Italy, Marseille, Toulon, Bonifacio, Propriano and Ajaccio in France and Barcelona in Spain.\nPorto Torres is the largest port of Sardinia, while Olbia, Santa Teresa Gallura and Palau are the most popular arrival ports, based on passenger data between 2020\u20132024.\nCaronte &amp; Tourist and Delcomar links the main island to the islands of La Maddalena and San Pietro.\nAbout 40 tourist harbours are located along the Sardinian coasts.\nRoads.\nSardinia is the only Italian region without Autostrade (en:motorways), but the road network is well developed with a system of no-toll roads with dual carriageway, called \"superstrade\" ('super roads') that connect the principal towns and the main airports and seaports; the speed limit is /. The principal road is the SS131 \"Carlo Felice\", linking the south with the north of the island, crossing the most historic regions of Porto Torres and Cagliari; it is part of European route E25. The SS 131 d.c.n links Oristano with Olbia, crossing the hinterland Nuoro region. Other roads designed for high-capacity traffic link Sassari with Alghero, Sassari with Tempio Pausania, Sassari \u2013 Olbia, Cagliari \u2013 Tortol\u00ec, Cagliari \u2013 Iglesias, Nuoro \u2013 Lanusei. A work in progress is converting the main routes to highway standards, with the elimination of all intersections. The secondary inland and mountain roads are generally narrow with many hairpin turns, so the speed limits are very low.\nPublic transport buses reach every town and village at least once a day; however, due to the low density of population, the smallest territories are reachable only by car. The Azienda Regionale Sarda Trasporti (ARST) is the public regional bus transport agency. Networks of city buses serve the main towns (Cagliari, Iglesias, Oristano, Alghero, Sassari, Nuoro, Carbonia and Olbia).\nIn Sardinia 1,295,462 vehicles circulate, equal to 613 per 1,000 inhabitants.\nRailways.\nThe Sardinian railway system was developed starting from the 19th century by the Welsh engineer Benjamin Piercy.\nToday there are two different railway operators:\nThe \"Trenino Verde\" (\"Little Green Train\") is a railway tourism service operated by ARST. Vintage railcars and steam locomotives run through the wildest parts of the island. They allow the traveller to have scenic views impossible to see from the main roads.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nWith a population density of 65/km2, slightly less than a third of the national average, Sardinia is the fourth least-populated region in Italy. In the recent past the population distribution was similar to that of other Italian coastal regions. In fact, contrary to the general trend, most urban settlement, with the exception of the fortified cities of Cagliari, Alghero, Castelsardo and few others, has taken place not primarily along the coast but in the subcoastal areas and towards the centre of the island. Historical reasons for this include the repeated Saracen raids during the Middle Ages and then Barbary raids until the early 19th century which made the coast unsafe, widespread pastoral activities inland, and the swampy nature of the coastal plains, which were reclaimed definitively only in the 20th century. The situation has been reversed with the expansion of seaside tourism; all of Sardinia's major urban centres are now located near the coasts, and the island's interior is very sparsely populated.\nAt 1.087 births per woman, Sardinia has the lowest total fertility rate of any Italian region, and the second lowest birth rate in Italy, which is already one of the lowest in the world. Combined with the rapid aging of the population\u2014in 2009, 18.7% of the population were older than 65\u2014rural depopulation is a significant issue: between 1991 and 2001, 71.4% of Sardinian villages lost population (32 more than 20% and 115 between 10% and 20%), with over 30 at risk of becoming ghost towns. It is predicted that at that rate Sardinia will be the European island with the second-lowest population density, immediately after Iceland, by 2080.\nNonetheless, the overall population estimate has remained relatively stable because of a considerable immigration flow, mainly from the Italian mainland but also from Eastern Europe (especially Romania), Africa and Asia.\nLife expectancy.\nAverage life expectancy is slightly over 82 years (85 for women and 79.7 for men). Sardinia shares with the Japanese island of Okinawa the highest rate of centenarians in the world (22 centenarians per 100,000 inhabitants). Sardinia is the first discovered Blue Zone, a demographic or geographic area in the world with an oversize concentration of centenarians and supercentenarians.\nForeign immigration.\nIn 2023, there were 50,211 foreign national residents, forming 3,2% of the total Sardinian population. The most represented nationalities were:\nMain cities and Functional Urban Areas.\nSardinia's most populated cities are Cagliari and Sassari. The Metropolitan City of Cagliari has 431,302 inhabitants, or about a quarter of the population of the entire island. Eurostat has identified in Sardinia two Functional Urban Areas: Cagliari, with 477,000 inhabitants, and Sassari, with 222,000 inhabitants.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Static row numbers/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"template:sticky header/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Sort under/styles.css\" /&gt;\nGovernment and politics.\nSardinia is one of the five Italian autonomous regions, along with the Aosta Valley, Trentino-Alto Adige/S\u00fcdtirol, Friuli-Venezia Giulia and Sicily. Its particular statute, which in itself is a constitutional law, gives the region a limited degree of autonomy, entailing the right to carry out the administrative functions of the local body and to create its own laws in a strictly defined number of domains.\nThe regional administration is constituted by three authorities:\nAdministrative divisions.\nSince 2025, Sardinia is divided into two metropolitan cities and six provinces:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Static row numbers/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"template:sticky header/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Sort under/styles.css\" /&gt;\nIn April 2021, under Sardinian Regional Council's Regional Law Nr. 7, Sardinian administrative divisions were reorganized; the former provinces of Olbia-Tempio (now bearing the name Gallura-North East Sardinia), Ogliastra, Medio Campidano and Carbonia-Iglesias (now bearing the name Sulcis Iglesiente) were restored, the metropolitan city of Cagliari would be expanded with other municipalities from the to-be eliminated Province of South Sardinia, and the western part of the Province of Sassari would be reorganized into the new metropolitan city of Sassari. Whilst the Italian government challenged the law, thus stalling its implementation, on 12 March 2022, the Constitutional Court ruled in favor of the Autonomous Region of Sardinia. On 13 April 2023, the regional council, at the proposal of the regional government, approved an amendment to the 2021 reform, defining the timeframe and manner of its implementation, which would see its full implementation in 2025.\nMilitary installations.\nAround 60% of all the military installations in Italy are in Sardinia, whose area is less than one-tenth of all the Italian territory and whose population is little more than the 2,5%. The island hosts NATO joint forces and Israeli military forces, which use the island's territory to simulate war games; the Inter-service Test and Training Range of Salto di Quirra (PISQ) is one of the most important experimental\nmilitary training centres in Europe. The bases, used for manufacturing plants and military testing grounds, totally take up more than 350\u00a0km2 of the island's land, making Sardinia the most militarized region in Italy and the most militarized island in Europe.\nBesides the land-occupying installations, where 80% of the military explosives in Italy are used, there are also other military structures located on the sea and along the coastline, roughly equivalent to 20,000\u00a0km2 (little less than the island's surface), being made inaccessible to the civil population when military exercises are held.\nAmong the most notable military bases on the island are the Interagency Polygons in Quirra, Capo Teulada and Capo Frasca, used by Italian and NATO forces to test-fire ballistic missiles and weapons and by Italian and European Space Agency to test space vehicles and for orbital launches. Until 2008, the US navy also had a nuclear submarine base in the Maddalena Archipelago.\nDepleted uranium and thorium dust from missile tests has been linked to an increase in cancers according to activists and local politicians. In the late 1980s, a high level of birth defects occurred near the Salto di Quirra weapons testing site after old munitions were destroyed.\nCulture.\nSardinia is the only autonomous region in Italy where its special Statute uses the term \"popolo\" (distinct people) to refer to its inhabitants. While this formula is also used by Veneto, which unlike Sardinia is an ordinary region, the Sardinian Statute is adopted with a constitutional law. In both cases, such term is not meant to imply any legal difference between Sardinians and any other citizen of the country.\nArchitecture.\nOf the prehistoric architecture in Sardinia there are numerous testimonies such as the \"domus de janas\" (hypogeic tombs), the Giants' grave, the megalithic circles, the menhirs, the dolmens and the well temples; however, the element that more than any other characterizes the Sardinian prehistoric landscape are the nuraghe; the remains of thousands of these Bronze Age buildings of various types (simple and complex) are still visible today. There are also numerous traces left by the Phoenicians and Punics who introduced new urban forms on the coasts.\nThe Romans gave a new administrative structure to the whole island through the restructuring of several cities, the creation of new centers and the construction of many infrastructures of which the ruins remain, such as the palace of Re Barbaro in Porto Torres or the Roman Amphitheatre of Cagliari. Even from the early Christian and Byzantine epoch there are several testimonies throughout the territory both on the coasts and inside, especially linked to buildings of worship.\nA particular development had Romanesque architecture during the Judicates period. Starting from 1063 the Sardinian Judges (), through substantial donations, had favored the arrival to the island of monks of different orders from various regions of Italy and France. These circumstances favored in turn the arrival to the island of workers from Pisa, Lombardy, Provence and Muslim Spain, giving rise to unprecedented artistic manifestations, marked by the fusion of these experiences.\nThe cornerstone in the evolution of Romanesque architectural forms was the basilica of San Gavino in Porto Torres. Among the most relevant examples there are the cathedrals of Sant'Antioco di Bisarcio (Ozieri), San Pietro di Sorres in Borutta, San Nicola di Ottana, the palatine chapel of Santa Maria del Regno of Ardara, the Santa Giusta Cathedral, Nostra Signora di Tergu, the Basilica di Saccargia in Codrongianos and Santa Maria di Uta and, of the 13th century, the cathedrals of Santa Maria di Monserrato (Tratalias) and San Pantaleo (Dolianova). As for military architecture, numerous castles to defend the territory were built during this period. At the beginning of the 14th century date the fortifications and towers of Cagliari, designed by Giovanni Capula.\nAfter their arrival in 1324, the Aragonese concentrated the first realizations in Cagliari; the oldest Catalan Gothic church in Sardinia is the shrine of Our Lady of Bonaria. Also in Cagliari in the same years the Aragonese chapel was built inside the cathedral. In the first half of the fifteenth century a real Gothic jewel was built, the complex of San Domenico, which included the church and the convent, almost completely destroyed during the air raids of 1943, and of which only the cloister remains. Other works were the churches of San Francesco of Stampace (of which only a part of the cloister remains), Sant'Eulalia and San Giacomo. In Alghero in the second half of the fifteenth century the construction of the church of San Francesco and in the sixteenth century of the cathedral began.\nRenaissance architecture, although poorly represented, includes notable examples such as the installation of the cathedral of San Nicola di Sassari (late Gothic but with a strong Renaissance influence), the church of Sant'Agostino di Cagliari (designed by Palearo Fratino), the church of Santa Caterina in Sassari (designed by Bernardoni, a pupil of Vignola).\nOn the contrary, the Baroque architecture has found wide prominence, interesting examples are the Collegiata di Sant'Anna in Cagliari, the facade of the Cathedral of San Nicola in Sassari, the church of San Michele in Cagliari, as well as the cathedral of Cagliari, Ales and Oristano, rebuilt or modified between the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries.\nStarting from the nineteenth century, new architectural forms of neoclassical inspiration spread throughout the island. Among the most important figures of this architectural and urban phase is that of the architect from Cagliari Gaetano Cima, whose works are scattered throughout the Sardinian territory. Alongside the works of Cima, it is worth mentioning those of Giuseppe Cominotti (Palazzo and Civic Theater of Sassari) and Antonio Cano (dome of S. Maria di Betlem in Sassari and the cathedral of Santa Maria della Neve in Nuoro). In the second half of the nineteenth century in Sassari was built the neo Gothic palace Giordano (1878) which is one of the earliest examples of revivalism in the island.\nAn interesting realization of eclectic style, derived from the union between revivalist and Art Nouveau models, appears to be the City hall of Cagliari, completed in the early twentieth century. The advent of fascism has strongly influenced architecture in Sardinia in the twenties and thirties: interesting achievements of that period are the new centers of Fertilia, Arborea and the city of Carbonia, one of the greatest examples of rationalist architecture.\nArt.\nNumerous findings of the typical statues of the Mother Goddess and pottery engraved with geometric designs testify the artistic expressions of the Pre-Nuragic peoples. Subsequently, the Nuragic civilization produced hundreds of bronze statuettes and the enigmatic stone statuary of the Giants of Mont'e Prama.\nThe union between the nuragic populations and the merchants coming from every part of the Mediterranean led to a refined production of gold artifacts, rings, earrings and jewelry of all kinds, but also votive steles and wall decorations. In addition to architecture linked to public works, the Romans introduced the mosaics and decorated the rich villas of the patricians with sculptures and paintings.\nIn the Middle Ages, during the Judicates period, the architecture of the churches were enriched with capitals, sarcophagi, frescoes, marble altars and later embellished with retables, paintings by important artists such as the Master of Castelsardo, Pietro Cavaro, Andrea Lusso, and the school of the so-called Master of Ozieri who was headed by Giovanni del Giglio and Pietro Giovanni Calvano, of Senese origin.\nIn the nineteenth century and in early twentieth century originated the myths of an uncontaminated and timeless island. Recounted by the many travelers who visited Sardinia in that period, like D. H. Lawrence, such myths were celebrated mainly by Sardinian artists such as Giuseppe Biasi, Francesco Ciusa, Filippo Figari, Mario Delitala and Stanis Dessy. In their works they highlighted the autochthonous values of the agro-pastoral world, not yet homologated to the modernity that was pressing from the outside. Other important Sardinian artists of the second half of the twentieth century were Costantino Nivola, Maria Lai, Albino Manca and Pinuccio Sciola.\nWorld Heritage Sites.\nMegalithic building structures called nuraghes are scattered in great numbers throughout Sardinia. Su Nuraxi di Barumini is a UNESCO World Heritage Site since 1997.\nIn July 2025, the domus de janas were inscribed as UNESCO World Heritage Site under the listing \"Funerary Tradition in the Prehistory of Sardinia \u2013 \"The domus de janas\"\".\nLanguages.\nItalian, which is the official language throughout Italy, is the most widely spoken language today, followed by the island's indigenous language, Sardinian (\"sardu\").\nSardinian is a distinct branch of the Romance language family, going either by the same name or by Southern Romance: it is therefore a separate language rather than an Italian dialect, and it is by some measures more phonologically similar to its Vulgar Latin roots than Italian itself. Sardinian has been formally recognized as one of Italy's twelve historical ethnolinguistic minorities since 1997, by regional and Italian law. The language has been influenced by Catalan, Spanish and recently Italian, while the once spoken Paleo-Sardinian language contributes many features to it in many ancient remnants.\nIn 2006 the regional administration has approved the use of a single standardised writing system, the so-called \"Limba Sarda Comuna\", in official acts. As a literary language, Sardinian is gaining importance, despite heated debate about the lack of a commonly acknowledged standard orthography and controversial proposed solutions to this problem. The two main orthographies of the language are in fact Campidanese (\"sardu campidanesu\"), used in central southern Sardinia, and Logudorese (\"sardu logudoresu\"), extending northwards almost to the suburbs of Sassari. The Sardinian language is quite different from the other Romance languages and is homogeneous in terms of morphology, syntax and lexicon, but it also shows a spectrum of variation in terms of phonetics between the Northern and the Southern dialects.\nSassarese (\"sassaresu\") and Gallurese (\"gadduresu\") are classified as Corso-Sardinian languages, therefore belonging to the Italo-Dalmatian branch rather than to the Sardinian one, and are spoken in the north.\nIn Sardinia there are a few language islands: the Algherese dialect (\"alguer\u00e9s\") of Catalan is spoken in the city of Alghero; on the islands of San Pietro and Sant'Antioco, located in the extreme south west of Sardinia, the local population speaks a variant of Ligurian called Tabarchino (\"tabarchin\"); fewer and fewer people speak Venetian, Friulian and Istriot in Arborea and Fertilia, since these villages have been populated in the 1920s and 1930s by mainland colonists who came from northeast Italy, and families from Istria and Dalmatia immediately after World War II.\nDue to the Italian assimilation policies carried out since the late 18th century and the ongoing absorption into the Italian culture, over the course of time the once prevalent indigenous language has been increasingly losing ground to Italian and the process of ongoing language shift has led to its endangerment. In fact, according to the data published by ISTAT in 2006, 52.5% of the Sardinian population speaks only Italian in the family environment, while 29.3% alternates Italian and Sardinian and only 16.6% uses Sardinian or other non-Italian languages; outside the circle of family and friends, the last option drops to 5.2%. The resulting Italianization has led to a steep decline of the Sardinian language as well as produced a new non-standard variety of today's majority idiom, Italian: regional Italian of Sardinia (, \"IrS\").\nFollowing the recent growth of the foreign-born population, the presence of other languages, principally Romanian, Arabic, Wolof and Chinese, is also expanding in some urban areas.\nLiterature.\nThe first literary work in Sardinian language dates back to the second half of the 15th century: a poem inspired by the life of the holy Porto Torres martyrs by the archbishop of Sassari Antonio Cano. Literary production had a remarkable development in the 16th century, the protagonist was Antonio Lo Frasso, his \"Los diez libros de Fortuna de Amor\" is mentioned in the Don Quixote by Miguel de Cervantes. This work is written mainly in Spanish, but there are parts written in Catalan and in the Sardinian language. Multilingualism was a characteristic trait of the islanders of that time, among them Sigismondo Arquer, Giovanni Francesco Fara and Pietro Delitala stood out. Delitala wrote in Italian, then Tuscan, and Gerolamo Araolla in all the three languages (Sardinian, Spanish and Italian). But already in the 17th century there was a total integration in the Iberian world as demonstrated by the works in Spanish of the poets Jos\u00e9 Delitala y Castelv\u00ec, Joseph Zatrillas Vico and the writers Francesco Angelo de Vico and Salvatore Vidal.\nFrom 1720, with the passage of the Kingdom of Sardinia, to the House of Savoy, Italian became the official language. In the 19th century there is an interest of Sardinian authors for the history and culture of Sardinia: Giovanni Spano undertakes the first archaeological excavations, Giuseppe Manno writes the first great general history of the island, Pasquale Tola publishes important documents of the past and writes biographies of illustrious Sardinians. Alberto La Marmora travels the island far and wide, studying in detail and writing a four-part work entitled \"Voyage en Sardaigne\".\nThe Sardinian society of the Early 20th century is told by Grazia Deledda, the only italian woman to win a Nobel Prize in Literature to date, Enrico Costa, and the poet Sebastiano Satta. In this century, we must remember also the literary production of political characters of great value such as Antonio Gramsci and Emilio Lussu. After the Second World War, Giuseppe Dess\u00ec emerged, known mainly for his novel \"Paese d'ombre\". In more recent years, the autobiographical novels of Gavino Ledda \"Padre Padrone\" and Salvatore Satta \"Il Giorno del Giudici\" had a wide echo, in addition to the works of Sergio Atzeni and other writers active in the recent decades.\nTraditional clothes.\nColourful and of various and original forms, the Sardinian traditional clothes are a clear symbol of belonging to specific collective identities. Although the basic model is homogeneous and common throughout the island, each town or village has its own traditional clothing which differentiates it from the others.\nMusic.\nSardinia is home to one of the oldest forms of vocal polyphony, generally known as cantu a tenore. In 2005, Unesco classed the \"cantu a tenore\" among intangible world heritage. Several famous musicians have found it irresistible, including Frank Zappa, Ornette Coleman, and Peter Gabriel. The latter travelled to the town of Bitti in the central mountainous region and recorded the now world-famous Tenores di Bitti CD on his Real World label. The guttural sounds produced in this form make a remarkable sound, similar to Tuvan throat singing. Another polyphonic style of singing, more like the Corsican \"paghjella\" and liturgic in nature, is found in Sardinia and is known as \"cantu a cuncordu\".\nAnother unique instrument is the launeddas. Three reed-canes (two of them glued together with beeswax) produce distinctive harmonies, which have their roots many thousands of years ago, as demonstrated by the bronze statuettes from Ittiri, of a man playing the three reed canes, dated to 2000 BC.\nBeyond this, the tradition of \"cantu a chiterra\" (guitar songs) has its origins in town squares, when artists would compete against one another. The most famous singer of this genre are Maria Carta and Elena Ledda.\nSardinian culture is alive and well, and young people are actively involved in their own music and dancing. In 2004, BBC presenter Andy Kershaw travelled to the island with Sardinian music specialist Pablo Farba and interviewed many artists. His programme can be heard on BBC Radio 3. Sardinia has produced a number of notable jazz musicians such as Antonello Salis, Marcello Melis, and Paolo Fresu.\nThe main opera houses of the island are the Teatro Lirico in Cagliari and the Teatro Comunale in Sassari.\nCuisine.\nMeat, dairy products, grains and vegetables constitute the most basic elements of the traditional Sardinian diet, along with, to a lesser extent, seafoods such as rock lobster (\"aligusta\"), scampi, bottarga (\"but\u00e0riga\"), squid, and tuna.\nSuckling pig (\"porcheddu\") and wild boar (\"sirbone\") are roasted on the spit or boiled in stews of beans and vegetables, thickened with bread.\nHerbs such as mint and myrtle are used. Much Sardinian bread is made dry, which keeps longer than high-moisture breads.\nThose are baked as well, including \"civraxiu\", \"coccoi pintau\", a highly decorative bread and \"pistoccu\" made with flour and water only, originally meant for herders, but often served at home with tomatoes, basil, oregano, garlic and a strong cheese. Traditional cheeses include \"pecorino sardo\", \"pecorino romano\", \"casizolu\", \"ricotta\" and the \"casu martzu\" (notable for containing live insect larvae).\nOne of the most famous of foods is \"pane carasau\", the flat bread of Sardinia, famous for its thin crunchiness. Originally the making of this bread was a hard process which needed three women to do the job. This flat bread is always made by hand as it gives a different flavor the more the dough is worked. After working the dough it is rolled out in very thin circles and placed in an extremely hot stone oven where the dough will blow up into a ball shape. Once the dough achieves that state it is then removed from the oven where it is then cut into two thin sheets and stacked to go back into the oven.\nAlcoholic beverages include many indigenous wines such as Cannonau, Malvasia, Vernaccia, Vermentino, various liquors like Abbardente, Filu Ferru and Mirto. Beer is the most drunk alcoholic beverage; Sardinia boasts the highest consumption per capita of beer in Italy (twice higher than the national average). Birra Ichnusa is the most commercialized beer produced in Sardinia.\nSports.\nFootball.\nCagliari is home to Cagliari Calcio, which was founded in 1920 and play in Serie A, the Italian first division; it won the Italian Championship in the 1969\u201370 Serie A season, becoming the first club in Southern Italy to achieve such a result. Today, home matches are played at the Unipol Domus.\nThe island's other major teams are Olbia's Olbia Calcio and Sassari's Torres Calcio; they both usually play in the national lower leagues. However the latter's women's team counterparts Torres Femminile are 7 times national champions.\nThe Sardinian national football team has also joined CONIFA, a football federation for all associations outside FIFA.\nBasketball.\nSassari is home to Dinamo Basket Sassari, the only Sardinian professional basketball club playing in the Lega Basket Serie A, the highest level club competition in Italian professional basketball.\nIt was founded in 1960, and is also known as Dinamo Banco di Sardegna thanks to a long sponsorship deal with the Sardinian bank. Since its promotion in Lega A in 2010, it has been enjoying the support of fans from Sassari and all over Sardinia with full-house matches on every game played at home. Dinamo Sassari achieved the highest titles in the Italian basketball in 2015, winning the Coppa Italia, the Supercoppa and the Italian basketball championship.\nMotor racing.\nIn the Province of Sassari is the Mores motor racing circuit, the only FIA Circuit homologated by CSAI (Cars) and the IMF (Motorcycles), in Sardinia.\nCagliari hosted a Formula 3000 race in 2002 and 2003 on a 2.414-km street circuit around Sant'Elia stadium. In 2003, Renault F1's Jarno Trulli and former Ferrari driver Jean Alesi did a spectacular exhibition. At the Grand Prix BMW-F1 driver Robert Kubica took part in a F3 car, as did BMW WTCC Augusto Farfus, GP2's Fairuz Fauzy and Vitaly Petrov. Since 2004 Sardinia has hosted the Rally d'Italia Sardegna, a rally competition in the FIA World Rally Championship schedule. The rally is held on narrow, twisty, sandy and bumpy mountainous roads in the north of the island.\nWater sports.\nSardinia is well known for scuba diving and snorkeling activities also due to the many underwater caves and caverns located in Alghero and Cala Gonone, Capo Caccia and Punta Giglio limestone cliffs, and many sunken shipwrecks. Around the island there are many diving centers offering scuba diving services with equipment rental and guided tours.\nOn the island of Caprera is the \"Centro Velico Caprera\", considered one of the largest sailing schools in the Mediterranean Sea, founded in 1967.\nThe Yacht Club Costa Smeralda, located in Porto Cervo and founded in 1967, is the main yachting club on the island.\nAnnually the island hosts a Superyacht Regatta, previously sponsored by Loro Piana, but from 2021 onwards by Giorgio Armani, and the Maxi Yacht Rolex Cup.\nPart of the Louis Vuitton Trophy was held in the Maddalena archipelago in 2010.\n\"Vento di Sardegna\" ('Wind of Sardinia') was a sailboat sponsored by the Autonomous Region of Sardinia. Its skipper, Andrea Mura, won the Single-Handed Trans-Atlantic Race in 2013 and in 2017, the Two Handed Transatlantic Race (Twostar) regatta in 2012 and the Route du Rhum.\nPorto Pollo, north of Palau, is a bay well known by windsurfers and kitesurfers. The bay is divided by a thin tongue of land that separates it into areas for advanced and beginner/intermediate windsurfers. There is also a restricted area for kitesurfing. Many freestyle windsurfers went to Porto Pollo for training and 2007 saw the finale of the freestyle Pro Kids Europe 2007 contest. Because of the Venturi effect between Sardinia and Corsica, the western wind accelerates between the islands and creates the wind that makes Porto Pollo popular among windsurfing enthusiasts.\nCagliari hosts regularly international regattas, such as the RC44 championship, Farr 40 World championship, Audi MedCup and Kite Championships. In view of the 36th America's Cup, scheduled to take place in New Zealand in 2021, \"Luna Rossa Challenge\" has chosen Cagliari as place for its preparation.\nWinter sports.\nFour ski resorts are located on the Gennargentu Range at Separadorgiu, Monte Spada, S'Arena and Bruncu Spina; they are equipped with ski schools, chairlifts, skilifts and ski equipment hire.\nTraditional sports.\n\"S'Istrumpa\", also known as Sardinian Wrestling, is a traditional Sardinian sport, officially recognized by the Italian National Olympic Committee (C.O.N.I.) and the International Federation of Celtic Wrestling (I.F.C.W.). It shows similarities to Scottish Backhold and the gouren. Istrumpa's wrestlers participate annually at the championships for Celtic wrestling stiles.\nSardinia boasts ancient equestrian traditions and is the Italian region with the highest number of horse riders (29% of population) and boasts also fine darts tradition, which many believe originated in the Sassari region of the country towards the end of the 15th century. In those days, the darts were carved from beech (\"fagus\") wood and the flights were feathers drawn from the indigenous purple swamphen (named in Italian , 'sultana bird'), famed for its spectacular violet-blue plumage.\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "29377", "revid": "2214", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29377", "title": "Scale of notation", "text": ""}
{"id": "29378", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29378", "title": "Scrooge McDuck", "text": "Disney comics character\nScrooge McDuck (occasionally stylized as $crooge McDuck) is a cartoon character created in 1947 for The Walt Disney Company by Carl Barks. Appearing in Disney comics, Scrooge is a Scottish-born American anthropomorphic domestic duck. Like his nephew, Donald Duck, he has a yellow-orange bill, legs, and webbed feet. He typically wears a red or blue frock coat, a black top hat, pince-nez glasses, and spats varying in color. He is portrayed in animation as speaking with a Scottish accent. Originally intended to be used only once, Scrooge became one of the most popular characters in the Disney comics world, as well as Barks' signature work. Scrooge is an extremely rich duck who lives in the fictional city of Duckburg (which is also Donald Duck and Huey, Dewey, and Louie's home city) in the fictional U.S. state of Calisota (a blend of California and Minnesota), whose claimed location is in real-world California, United States.\nNamed after the character Ebenezer Scrooge from Charles Dickens' 1843 holiday novella \"A Christmas Carol\", Scrooge is an incredibly rich business magnate and self-proclaimed \"adventure-capitalist\", whose dominant character traits are his wealth, frugality, and tendency to seek more money through adventure and treasure hunting. Scrooge founded the company called McDuck Enterprises. He is the maternal uncle of Donald Duck and Della Duck, the maternal great uncle of Huey, Dewey, and Louie, a financial backer of inventor Gyro Gearloose, and the world's richest person \u2014 all within the context of the fictional Donald Duck universe. His business interests are comically diverse and all-inclusive. Both his \"Money Bin\" and Scrooge himself are often used as humorous metonyms for great wealth in popular culture around the world.\nMcDuck was initially characterized as a greedy miser and antihero (similar to Dickens' original Scrooge character). However, in later appearances, he has often been portrayed as a thrifty hero, adventurer, and explorer. He was originally created by Barks as an antagonist for Donald Duck, first appearing in the 1947 story \"Christmas on Bear Mountain\" (\"Four Color\" #178). However, McDuck's popularity grew so large that he became a major figure in the Donald Duck universe. In 1952, he received his own comic book series, called \"Uncle Scrooge\", originally published from 1952\u20131984, and has had various revivals over the years (as have other Disney comic lines). The most recent revival, by IDW Publishing, ran from 2015 to 2020.\nScrooge was most famously drawn by his creator Carl Barks, and then later by Don Rosa. Like other Disney franchise characters, Scrooge McDuck has gained international popularity, resulting in literature that's often translated into other languages. The comics have remained Scrooge's primary medium, although he has also appeared in animated feature films and television programs, most extensively in the TV series \"DuckTales\" (1987\u20131990), and its reboot (2017\u20132021), as the main protagonist of both series.\nComics history.\nFirst appearance.\nScrooge McDuck, maternal uncle of previously established character Donald Duck, made his first named appearance in the story \"Christmas on Bear Mountain;\" it was published in Dell's \"Four Color Comics\" #178 on October 22, 1947, and written and drawn by artist Carl Barks. His appearance may have been based on a similar-looking Scottish \"thrifty saver\" Donald Duck character from the 1943 propaganda short \"The Spirit of '43\".\nIn \"Christmas on Bear Mountain\", Scrooge was a bearded, bespectacled, reasonably wealthy old duck, visibly leaning on his cane and living in isolation in a \"huge mansion\". Scrooge's misanthropic thoughts in this first story are quite pronounced: \"Here I sit in this big lonely dump, waiting for Christmas to pass! Bah! That silly season when everybody loves everybody else! A curse on it! Me\u2014I'm different! Everybody hates me, and I hate everybody!\"\nBarks later reflected on the portrayal, saying \"Scrooge in 'Christmas on Bear Mountain' was only my first idea of a rich, old uncle. I had made him too old and too weak. I discovered later on that I had to make him more active. I could not make an old guy like that do the things I wanted him to do.\"\nRecurring character.\nBarks would later claim that he originally only intended to use Scrooge as a one-shot character, but then decided Scrooge (and his fortune) could prove useful for motivating further stories. Barks continued to experiment with Scrooge's appearance and personality over the next four years.\nScrooge's second appearance in \"The Old Castle's Secret\" (first published in June 1948) had him recruiting his nephews to search for a family treasure hidden in Dismal Downs, the McDuck's ancestral family castle built in the middle of Rannoch Moor in Scotland. \"Foxy Relations\" (first published in November 1948) was the first story where Scrooge is called by his title and catchphrase \"The Richest Duck in the World\".\nFirst hints of Scrooge's past.\nThe story \"Voodoo Hoodoo\", first published in Dell's \"Four Color Comics\" #238 in August 1949, was the first story to hint at Scrooge's past with the introduction of two figures. The first was Foola Zoola, an old African sorcerer and chief of the Voodoo tribe who cursed Scrooge, seeking revenge for the destruction of his village and the taking of his tribe's lands by Scrooge decades earlier.\nScrooge privately admitted to his nephews that he had used an army of \"cutthroats\" to get the tribe to abandon their lands, in order to establish a rubber plantation. The event was set in 1879 by Carl Barks, but it would later be retconned by Don Rosa to 1909 to better fit with Scrooge's later-established personal history in \"The Empire-Builder from Calisota\".\nThe second figure from Scrooge's past was Bombie the Zombie, the would-be assassin sent from Foola Zoola to enact the sorcerer's curse and revenge. He sought Scrooge for decades before reaching Duckburg, mistaking Donald for Scrooge.\nBarks, with a note of skepticism often found in his stories, explained the zombie was a living person who has never died but has somehow gotten under the influence of a sorcerer. Although some scenes of the story were intended as a parody of Bela Lugosi's \"White Zombie\", the story is the first to not only focus on Scrooge's past but also touch on the darkest aspects of his personality.\nLater stories.\n\"Trail of the Unicorn\", first published in February 1950, introduced Scrooge's private zoo. One of his pilots had managed to photograph the last living unicorn, which lived in the Indian part of the Himalayas. Scrooge offered a reward to competing cousins Donald Duck and Gladstone Gander for whoever captured the unicorn for Scrooge's collection.\nThis was also the story that introduced Scrooge's private airplane. Barks would later establish Scrooge as an experienced aviator; Donald had previously been shown as a skilled aviator, as was Flintheart Glomgold in later stories. In comparison, Huey, Dewey, and Louie were depicted as only having taken flying lessons in the story \"Frozen Gold\" (published in January 1945).\n\"The Pixilated Parrot\", first published in July 1950, introduced a precursor to Scrooge's money bin. In this story, Scrooge's central office building is said to contain \"three cubic acres of money\". Two burglars (one of which is referred to as Butch) who briefly appear during the story are considered to be the precursors of the Beagle Boys.\nScrooge as a major character.\n\"The Magic Hourglass\", first published in September 1950, was arguably the first story to change the focus of the Duck stories from Donald to Scrooge. During the story, several themes were introduced for Scrooge.\nDonald first mentions in this story that his uncle practically owns Duckburg, a statement that Scrooge's rival John D. Rockerduck would later dispute. Scrooge first hints that he was not born into wealth as he remembers buying the Hourglass in Morocco when he was a member of a ship's crew as a cabin boy. It's also the first story in which Scrooge mentions reading and speaking other languages besides his native English; during the story, he reads and speaks Arabic.\nScrooge's proficiency in languages would become apparent in future stories. Barks and Rosa depicted Scrooge as being fluent in Arabic, Dutch, German, Mongolian, Spanish, Mayan, Bengali, Finnish, and a number of Chinese dialects. Scrooge acquired this knowledge from years of living or traveling to the various regions of the world where those languages are spoken. Later writers would depict Scrooge having at least a working knowledge of several other languages. He also encountered several historical figures during his lifetime, such as U.S. President Roosevelt (\"The Buckaroo of the Badlands\", \"The Invader of Fort Duckburg\", and \"The Sharpie of the Culebra Cut\"), Apache leader Geronimo (\"The Vigilante of Pizen Bluff\"), Czar Nicholas II of Russia (\"The Empire-Builder from Calisota\"), and philologist Elias L\u00f6nnrot (\"The Quest for Kalevala\").\nIn \"The Magic Hourglass,\" Scrooge is shown in a more positive light than in previous stories, but his more villainous side is still evident. He is seen attempting to reacquire a magic hourglass that he gave to Donald, before finding out that it acted as a protective charm for him. Scrooge starts losing one billion dollars each minute and comments that he will go bankrupt within 600 years. This line is a parody of Orson Welles's line in \"Citizen Kane,\" \"You know, Mr. Thatcher, at the rate of a million dollars a year, I'll have to close this place in ... 60 years.\" To convince his nephews to return it, he pursues them throughout Morocco. Scrooge interrogates Donald by having him tied up and tickled with a feather in an attempt to get Donald to reveal the location of the hourglass. The former finally manages to retrieve it, exchanging the item for a flask of water, as he had found his nephews exhausted and left in the desert with no supplies. As Scrooge explains, he intended to give them a higher offer, but he just could not resist having somebody at his mercy without taking advantage of it.\nFinal developments.\n\"A Financial Fable\", first published in March 1951, had Scrooge teaching Donald some lessons in productivity as the source of wealth, along with the laws of supply and demand. Perhaps more importantly, it was also the first story where Scrooge observes how diligent and industrious Huey, Louie, and Dewey are, making them more similar to himself rather than to Donald. In Barks' stories, Donald is depicted as working hard on occasion, but given the choice often proves to be lazy. The three younger nephews first side with Scrooge rather than Donald in this story, with the bond between granduncle and grandnephews strengthening in later stories. However, there have been rare instances where Donald proved invaluable to Scrooge, such as when the group traveled back in time to Ancient Egypt to retrieve a pharaoh's papyrus. Donald cautions against taking it with him, as no one would believe the story unless it was unearthed. He then buries it and makes a marking point from the Nile River; Scrooge thinks to himself admiringly, \"Donald must have swallowed the Encyclop\u00e6dia Britannica!\"\n\"Terror of the Beagle Boys\", first published in November 1951, introduced the readers to the Beagle Boys. Although new to the series, Scrooge seems to be already familiar with them. \n\"The Big Bin on Killmotor Hill\" introduced Scrooge's money bin, built on Killmotor Hill in the center of Duckburg. In the Ducktales 2017 reboot, the Money Bin is built on an island on Audubon Bay. The island is connected to a small bridge that leads to downtown Duckburg.\nBy this point, Scrooge had become familiar to readers in the United States and Europe. Other Disney writers and artists, including Italian writer Romano Scarpa, began using Scrooge in their own stories. Western Publishing, then the publisher of North American Disney comics, began thinking about using Scrooge as a protagonist rather than a supporting character, and then decided to launch Scrooge in his own self-titled comic. \"Uncle Scrooge\" #1, featuring the story \"Only a Poor Old Man\", was published in March 1952. This story, along with \"Back to the Klondike\", first published a year later in March 1953, became the biggest influences in how Scrooge's character, past, and beliefs would become defined.\nAfter this point, Barks produced most of his longer stories in \"Uncle Scrooge\", with a focus mainly on adventure, while his ten-page stories for Walt Disney's Comics and Stories continued to feature Donald as the star and focused on comedy. In Scrooge's stories, Donald and his nephews were cast as Scrooge's assistants who accompanied the latter in his adventures around the world. This change of focus from Donald to Scrooge was also reflected in stories by other contemporary writers. Since then, Scrooge remains a central figure of the Duck comics' universe, thus the coining of the term \"Scrooge McDuck Universe\".\nModern era.\nAfter Barks's retirement, the character continued under other artists. However, in 1972, Barks was persuaded to write more stories for Disney. He wrote Junior Woodchuck stories where Scrooge often plays the part of the villain, closer to the role he had before acquiring his own series. Under Barks, Scrooge always was a malleable character who would take on whatever persona was convenient to the plot.\nThe Italian writer and artist Romano Scarpa made several additions to Scrooge McDuck's lore, including characters such as Brigitta MacBridge, Scrooge's self-styled fianc\u00e9e, and Gideon McDuck, a newspaper editor who is Scrooge's brother. Those characters have appeared mostly in European comics. This is also the case for Scrooge's rival John D. Rockerduck (created by Barks for just one story) and Donald's cousin Fethry Duck, who sometimes works as a reporter for Scrooge's newspaper.\nAnother major development was the arrival of writer and artist Don Rosa in 1986, with his story \"The Son of the Sun\"; it released by Gladstone Publishing and nominated for a Harvey Award, one of the comics industry's highest honors. Rosa has said in interviews that he considers Scrooge to be his favorite Disney character. Unlike most other Disney writers, Don Rosa considered Scrooge as a historical character whose Disney adventures had occurred in the fifties and sixties and ended (in his undepicted death) in 1967 when Barks retired. He considered only Barks's stories as canonical, and fleshed out a timeline and a family tree based on Barks's stories. Eventually he wrote and drew \"The Life and Times of Scrooge McDuck\", a full history in twelve chapters, which received an Eisner Award in 1995.\nLater editions included additional chapters. Under Rosa, Scrooge became more ethical; while he never cheats, he ruthlessly exploits any loopholes. He owes his fortune to his hard work and his money bin is \"full of souvenirs\" since every coin reminds him of a specific circumstance.\nDaan Jippes, who can mimic Barks's art to a close extent, repenciled all of Barks's 1970s Junior Woodchucks stories, as well as Barks's final Uncle Scrooge stories from the 1990s to the early 2000s. Other notable Disney artists who have worked with the Scrooge character include Michael Peraza, Marco Rota, William Van Horn, and Tony Strobl.\nIn an interview with the Norwegian \"Aftenposten\" from 1992, Don Rosa says that \"in the beginning Scrooge [owed] his existence to his nephew Donald, but that has changed and today it's Donald that [owes] his existence to Scrooge,\" and he also says that this is one of the reasons why he is so interested in Scrooge.\nCharacterization.\nOverview.\nThe character is almost exclusively portrayed as having worked his way up the financial ladder from humble immigrant roots. His characteristics are believed to be strongly influenced by the life of a real, incredibly wealthy Scottish-American business magnate Andrew Carnegie, as well as Ebenezer Scrooge, his namesake from \"A Christmas Carol\".\nThe comic book series \"The Life and Times of Scrooge McDuck\", written and drawn by Don Rosa, shows Scrooge's fictional life. As a young boy, he takes up a job polishing and shining boots in his native Glasgow. A pivotal moment comes in 1877 when a ditch-digger pays him with an 1875 US dime, which is useless as currency in 19th century Glasgow; he only notices what sort of coin he has been given after the man has left, as his boots were so caked with dirt, Scrooge fainted from exhaustion after finishing his work. Enraged, Scrooge vows to never be taken advantage of again, to be \"sharper than the sharpies, smarter than the smarties and tougher than the toughies\". He takes a position as cabin boy on a Clyde cattle ship to the United States to make his fortune at the age of 13. In 1898, after many adventures, he finally ends up in Klondike, where he finds a golden rock the size of a goose egg. By the following year, he made his first $1,000,000 and bought the deed for Killmule Hill from Casey Coot, the son of Clinton Coot and grandson of Cornelius Coot, the founder of Duckburg. He finally ends up in Duckburg in 1902. After some dramatic events, where he faces both the Beagle Boys and President Theodore Roosevelt and his Rough Riders at the same time, he tears down the rest of the old Fort Duckburg and builds his famous Money Bin at the site.\nIn the years to follow, Scrooge travels all around the world to increase his fortune, while his family remains behind to manage the Money Bin. When Scrooge finally returns to Duckburg, he is the richest duck in the world, rivaled only by Flintheart Glomgold, John D. Rockerduck, and less prominently, the maharaja of the fictional country Howdoyoustan (play on Hindustan). His experiences, however, have changed him into a hostile miser, and his family leaves him in disgust. About twelve years later, he closes down his empire; he eventually returns to a public life five years later and restarts his business in the comic's final chapter.\nHe keeps the majority of his wealth in his massive Money Bin, an enormous cubic building adorned with a dollar sign, overlooking the city of Duckburg. In the short \"Scrooge McDuck and Money\", he remarks to his nephews that this money is \"just petty cash\". In the Dutch and Italian version, he regularly forces Donald and his nephews to polish the coins one by one in order to pay off Donald's debts; Scrooge will not pay them much for this lengthy, tedious, hand-breaking work. As far as he is concerned, even 5 cents an hour is too much expenditure. He does not even keep any to his personal estate, stating \"Money goes to the bin, not next of kin\".\nA shrewd businessman and noted tightwad, he is fond of diving into and swimming in his money without injury. His most famous prized possession is his Number One Dime. He is also the richest member of The Billionaires Club of Duckburg, a society which includes the most successful businessmen of the world and allows them to keep connections with each other. Glomgold and Rockerduck are also influential members of the Club.\nWealth.\nThe sum of Scrooge's wealth is unclear. According to Barks' \"The Second Richest Duck\" as noted by a \"Time\" article, Scrooge is worth \"one multiplujillion, nine obsquatumatillion, six hundred twenty-three dollars and sixty-two cents\". The \"DuckTales\" episode \"Liquid Assets\", Fenton Crackshell (Scrooge's accountant) notes that McDuck's money bin contains \"607 tillion 386 zillion 947 trillion 522 billion dollars and 36 cents\". Don Rosa's \"Life and Times of Scrooge McDuck\" notes that Scrooge amounts to \"five multiplujillion, nine impossibidillion, seven fantastica trillion dollars and sixteen cents\". A thought bubble from Scrooge McDuck sitting in his car with his chauffeur in \"Walt Disney's Christmas Parade\" No. 1 (published in 1949) that takes place in the story \"Letter to Santa\" clearly states \"What's the use of having 'eleven octillion dollars' if I don't make a big noise about it?\". In the episode \"Duck in the Iron Mask\" of the animated series \"DuckTales\", Scrooge claims to have 72 quadrillion dollars. In \"\", he mentions \"We quadzillionaires have our own ideas of fun.\" In the first episode of the \"DuckTales\" reboot, Scrooge states that he runs \"a multi-trillion-dollar business\".\n\"Forbes\" magazine has occasionally tried to estimate Scrooge's wealth in real terms. In 2007, the magazine estimated his wealth at $28.8 billion. By 2011, it rose to $44.1 billion due to the rise in gold prices. In a 1970 comic, Scrooge says that he would be broke in 600 years if he lost 1 billion dollars a minute, putting his total estimated net worth at $315.36 quadrillion. A running gag is Scrooge always making profit on any business deal. Whatever the amount, Scrooge never considers it to be enough; he believes that he has to continue to earn money by any means possible. Additionally, \"Forbes\" does have him ranked at the number 1 spot on \"The Forbes Fictional 15\".\nEducation.\nScrooge never completed a formal education, as he left school at an early age. However, he has a sharp mind and is always ready to learn new skills. Because of his secondary occupation as a treasure hunter, Scrooge has become something of a scholar and an amateur archaeologist. Starting with Barks, several writers have explained how Scrooge becomes aware of the treasures he decides to pursue. This often involves periods of research consulting various written sources in search of passages that might lead him to treasure. Often Scrooge decides to search for the possible truth behind old legends, or discovers obscure references to the activities of ancient conquerors, explorers, and military leaders that he considers interesting enough to begin a new expedition.\nAs a result of his research, Scrooge has built up an extensive personal library, which includes many rare tomes. In the McDuck Archives, every work of McDuck's expeditions studied by scholars such as Ms. Quackfaster. In Barks's and Rosa's stories, among the prized pieces of this library is an almost complete collection of Spanish and Dutch naval logs of the 16th and 17th centuries. Their references to the fates of other ships have often allowed Scrooge to locate sunken vessels and recover their treasures from their watery graves. Mostly self-taught as he is, Scrooge is a firm believer in the saying \"knowledge is power\". Scrooge is also an accomplished linguist and entrepreneur, having learned to speak several different languages during his business trips around the world, selling refrigerators to Eskimos, wind to windmill manufacturers in the Netherlands, etc.\nMorality and beliefs.\nBoth as a businessman and as a treasure hunter, Scrooge is noted for his drive to set new goals and face new challenges. As Carl Barks described his character, for Scrooge there is \"always another rainbow\". The phrase later provided the title for one of Barks's better-known paintings depicting Scrooge. Periods of inactivity between adventures and lack of serious challenges tend to be depressing for Scrooge after a while; some stories see these phases take a toll on his health. Scrooge's other motto is \"Work smarter, not harder.\"\nAs a businessman, Scrooge often resorts to aggressive tactics and deception. He seems to have gained significant experience in manipulating people and events towards his own ends. As often seen in stories by writer Guido Martina and occasionally by others, Scrooge is noted for his cynicism, especially towards ideals of morality when it comes to business and the pursuit of set goals. This has been noted by some as not being part of Barks's original profile of the character, but has since come to be accepted as one valid interpretation of Scrooge's way of thinking.\nScrooge seems to have a personal code of honesty that offers him an amount of self-control. He can often be seen contemplating the next course of action, divided between adopting a ruthless pursuit of his current goal against those tactics he considers more honest. At times, he can sacrifice his goal in order to remain within the limits of this sense of honesty. Several fans of the character have come to consider these depictions as adding to the depth of his personality, because based on the decisions he takes Scrooge can be both the hero and the villain of his stories. This is one thing he has in common with his nephew Donald. Scrooge's sense of honesty also distinguishes him from his rival Flintheart Glomgold, who places no such self-limitations. During the cartoon series \"DuckTales\", at times he would be heard saying to Glomgold, \"You're a cheater, and cheaters \"never\" prosper!\"\nLike his nephew Donald, Scrooge has also a temper and rarely hesitates to use cartoon violence against those who provoke his ire (often his nephew Donald, but also bill and tax collectors as well as door-to-door salesmen). However, he seems to be against the use of lethal force. On occasion, he has even saved the lives of enemies who had threatened his own life but were in danger of losing their own. According to Scrooge's own explanation, this is to save himself from feelings of guilt over their deaths; he generally awaits no gratitude from them. Scrooge has also opined that only in fairy tales do bad people turn good, and that he is old enough to not believe in fairy tales. Scrooge believes in keeping his word\u2014never breaking a promise once given. In Italian-produced stories of the 1950s to 1970s, however, particularly those written by Guido Martina, Scrooge often acts differently from in American or Danish comics productions.\nCarl Barks gave Scrooge a definite set of ethics which were in tone with the time he was supposed to have made his fortune. The robber barons and industrialists of the 1890\u20131920s era were McDuck's competition as he earned his fortune. Scrooge proudly asserts \"I made it by being tougher than the toughies and smarter than the smarties! And I made it square!\". Barks's creation is averse to dishonesty in the pursuit of wealth. When Disney filmmakers first contemplated a Scrooge feature cartoon in the fifties, the animators had no understanding of the Scrooge McDuck character and merely envisioned Scrooge as a duck version of Ebenezer Scrooge\u2014a very unsympathetic character. In the end, they shelved the idea because a duck who gets all excited about money just was not funny enough.\nIn an interview, Barks summed up his beliefs about Scrooge and capitalism:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I've always looked at the ducks as caricatured human beings. In rereading the stories, I realized that I had gotten kind of deep in some of them: there was philosophy in there that I hadn't realized I was putting in. It was an added feature that went along with the stories. I think a lot of the philosophy in my stories is conservative\u2014conservative in the sense that I feel our civilization peaked around 1910. Since then we've been going downhill. Much of the older culture had basic qualities that the new stuff we keep hatching can never match.\nLook at the magnificent cathedrals and palaces that were built. Nobody can build that sort of thing nowadays. Also, I believe that we should preserve many old ideals and methods of working: honor, honesty, allowing other people to believe in their own ideas, not trying to force everyone into one form. The thing I have against the present political system is that it tries to make everybody exactly alike. We should have a million different patterns.\nThey say that wealthy people like the Vanderbilts and Rockefellers are sinful because they accumulated fortunes by exploiting the poor. I feel that everybody should be able to rise as high as they can or want to, provided they don't kill anybody or actually oppress other people on the way up. A little exploitation is something you come by in nature. We see it in the pecking order of animals\u2014everybody has to be exploited or to exploit someone else to a certain extent. I don't resent those things.\n\"DuckTales\".\nIn the \"DuckTales\" series, Scrooge has care of the nephews (as Donald has joined the US Navy and is away on his tour of duty), and, as a result, his darker personality traits are downplayed. While most of his persona remain from the comics, he is notably more optimistic and level-headed in the animated cartoon. In an early episode, Scrooge credits his improved temperament to the nephews and Webby (his housekeeper's granddaughter, who comes to live in Scrooge's mansion), saying that \"for the first time since I left Scotland, I have a family\". Though Scrooge is far from tyrannical in the comics, he is rarely so openly affectionate. While he still hunts for treasure in \"DuckTales\", many episodes focus on his attempts to thwart villains. However, he remains just as tightfisted with money as he has always been. But he's also affable and patient with his family and friends.\nScrooge displays a strict code of honor, insisting that the only valid way to acquire wealth is to \"earn it square,\" and he goes to great lengths to thwart those (sometimes even his own nephews) who gain money dishonestly. This code also prevents him from ever being dishonest himself, and he avows that \"Scrooge McDuck's word is as good as gold.\" He also expresses great disgust at being viewed by others as a greedy liar and cheater.\nThe series fleshes out Scrooge's upbringing by depicting his life as an individual who worked hard his entire life to earn his immense fortune and to fiercely defend it against those who were truly dishonest but also, he defends his family and friends from any dangers, including villains. His value teaches his nephews not to be dishonest with him or anybody else. It's shown that money is no longer the most important thing in his life. For one episode, he was under a love spell, which caused him to lavish his time on a goddess over everything else. The nephews find out that the only way to break the spell is to make the person realize that the object of their love will cost them something they truly love. The boys make it appear that Scrooge's love is allergic to money; however, he simply decides to give up his wealth so he can be with her. Later, when he realizes he will have to give up his nephews to be with her, the spell is immediately broken, showing that family is the most important thing to him.\nOn occasion, he demonstrates considerable physical strength by arm wrestling and beating bigger criminals on Aquatraz. He credits his strength to \"lifting money bags.\"\nVoice.\nAnother part of Scrooge's persona is his Scottish accent. Dallas McKennon was the first actor to provide Scrooge's voice for the 1960 Disneyland Records album, \"Donald Duck and His Friends\".\nWhen Scrooge later made his speaking animated debut in \"Scrooge McDuck and Money\" in 1967, he was voiced by Bill Thompson. Thompson had previously voiced Jock the Scottish Terrier in \"Lady and the Tramp\" and according to Alan Young, Thompson had some Scottish ancestry. Following \"Scrooge McDuck and Money\"'s release, Scrooge made no further animated appearances prior to Thompson's death in 1971.\nIn 1974, Disneyland Records produced the album, \"An Adaptation of Dickens' Christmas Carol, Performed by The Walt Disney Players\". Alan Young belonged to a Dickens Society and was asked to help adapt the story to fit in Disney characters. Young, whose parents were Scottish and who lived in Scotland for a few years when he was an infant, voiced Scrooge for this record in addition to voicing Mickey Mouse and Merlin from \"The Sword in the Stone\". When Disney decided to adapt the record into the 1983 theatrical short, \"Mickey's Christmas Carol\", Young returned to voice Scrooge. Young remained as Disney's official voice for Scrooge up until his death in 2016, although Will Ryan voiced Scrooge for the 1987 television special, \"Sport Goofy in Soccermania\" and Alan Reid voiced Scrooge for Tuomas Holopainen's 2014 album, \"Music Inspired by the Life and Times of Scrooge\". Young's last performance as Scrooge was in the 2016 \"Mickey Mouse\" short, \"No\".\nSince Young's death, several actors have provided Scrooge's voice. John Kassir took over for the \"Mickey Mouse\" shorts starting with \"Duck the Halls\" in 2016 and its follow-up series \"The Wonderful World of Mickey Mouse\". Eric Bauza voiced Scrooge for a cameo in the television series, \"Legend of the Three Caballeros\". Scottish actor Enn Reitel voiced Scrooge for the English dub of \"Kingdom Hearts III\", the 2022 life simulator game \"Disney Dreamlight Valley\", and for the Disney Parks.\nScottish actor David Tennant voices Scrooge in the 2017 reboot of \"DuckTales\", and reprised the role in \"\" and \"Chibiverse\". According to executive producer Matt Youngberg:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;David Tennant seemed to be the natural choice for this. We really wanted to find somebody who was legitimately Scottish. We thought that was really important in this iteration, someone who had the character to bring this icon alive. And David is an amazing actor. He's morphed into this role in an incredible way.\nEurope.\nMany of the European comics based on the Disney Universe have created their own version of Scrooge McDuck, usually involving him in slapstick adventures. This is particularly true of the Italian comics which were very popular in the 1960s\u20131990s in most parts of Western continental Europe. In these, Scrooge is mainly an anti-hero dragging his long-suffering nephews into treasure hunts and shady business deals. Donald is a reluctant participant in these travels, only agreeing to go along when his uncle reminds him of the debts and back-rent Donald owes him, threatens him with a sword or blunderbuss, or offers a share of the loot. When he promises Donald a share of the treasure, Scrooge will add a little loophole in the terms which may seem obscure at first but which he brings up at the end of the adventure to deny Donald his share, keeping the whole for himself. After Donald risks life and limb \u2013 something which Scrooge shows little concern for \u2013 he tends to end up with nothing.\nAnother running joke is Scrooge reminiscing about his adventures while gold prospecting in the Klondike much to Donald and the nephews' chagrin at hearing the never-ending and tiresome stories.\nAge.\nAccording to Carl Barks' 1955 one-pager \"Watt an Occasion\" (\"Uncle Scrooge\" #12), Scrooge is 75 years of age. According to Don Rosa, Scrooge was born in Scotland in 1867, and earned his Number One Dime (or First Coin) exactly ten years later. The \"DuckTales\" episodes (and many European comics) show a Scrooge who hailed from Scotland in the 19th century, yet was clearly familiar with all the technology and amenities of the 1980s. Despite this extremely advanced age, Scrooge does not appear to be on the verge of dotage, and is vigorous enough to keep up with his nephews in adventures. With rare exceptions, there appears to be no sign of him slowing down.\nBarks responded to some fan letters asking about Scrooge's Adamic age, that in the story \"That's No Fable!\", when Scrooge drank water from a Fountain of Youth for several days, rather than making him young again (bodily contact with the water was required for that), ingesting the water rejuvenated his body and cured him of his rheumatism, which arguably allowed Scrooge to live beyond his expected years with no sign of slowdown or senility. Don Rosa's solution to the issue of Scrooge's age is that he set all of his stories in the 1950s or earlier, which was when he himself discovered and reveled in Barks' stories as a kid, and in his unofficial timelines, he had Scrooge die in 1967, at the age of 100 years.\nIn \"DuckTales\" (2017), Scrooge was trapped in ice for five years and \"stuck in a timeless demon dimension\" called Demogorgana for an unknown amount of time, which is used to explain his longevity. In the episode \"The Other Bin of Scrooge McDuck!\", Webby Vanderquack's research on Scrooge reveals that he was born in 1867, as previously established by Rosa. This would make Scrooge 154 years old as of 2021, the year that series ended.\nIn popular culture.\nCultural impact.\n\"Forbes\" magazine routinely lists Scrooge McDuck on its annual \"Fictional 15\" list of the richest fictional characters by net worth:\nIn 1972, Grupo Ronda S.A acquired the license to use the character among other Disney characters for their board game \"T\u00edo Rico Mc. Pato\". As of today, it is one of the most popular board games in Colombia and the direct competitor of \"Monopoly\" in the region.\nIn tribute to its famous native, Glasgow City Council added Scrooge to its list of \"Famous Glaswegians\" in 2007, alongside the likes of Billy Connolly and Charles Rennie Mackintosh.\nIn 2008 \"The Weekly Standard\" parodied the bailout of the financial markets by publishing a memo where Scrooge applies to the TARP program.\nAn extortionist named Arno Funke targeted German department store chain Karstadt from 1992 until his capture in 1994, under the alias \"Dagobert\", the German (first) name for Scrooge McDuck.\nIn the \"Family Guy\" episode \"Lottery Fever\", Peter injures himself trying to dive into a pile of coins like Scrooge McDuck.\nIn the 2013 episode of \"Breaking Bad\", \"Buried\", Saul Goodman associate Patrick Kuby remarks to fellow associate Huell Babineaux \"we are here to do a job, not channel Scrooge McDuck\" when Huell lies down on Walter White's pile of cash stored in a storage facility locker.\nIn the \"Clarence\" episode \"Clarence's Millions\", Clarence dreams that he swims in money like Scrooge McDuck only on a pile of bills instead of coins until a money monster chases him.\n\"Dagobertducktaks\" (\"Dagobert Duck\" is the Dutch name for Scrooge McDuck), a tax for the wealthy, was elected Dutch word of the year 2014 in a poll by Van Dale.\nIn August 2017, the YouTube channel \"Film Theory\", hosted by Matthew \"MatPat\" Patrick, estimated the worth of the gold coins in the money bin of Scrooge McDuck based on four sources, with the lowest source equaling $52,348,493,767.50 and the highest source (\"three cubic acres\") equaling $333,927,633,863,527.10 of gold value.\nScrooge McDuck Universe.\nThe popularity of Scrooge McDuck comics spawned an entire mythology around the character, including new supporting characters, adventures, and life experiences as told by numerous authors. The popularity of the Duck universe \u2013 the fandom term for the associated intellectual properties that have developed from Scrooge's stories over the years, including the city of Duckburg \u2013 has led Don Rosa to claim that \"in the beginning Scrooge [owed] his existence to his nephew Donald, but that has changed and today it's Donald that [owes] his existence to Scrooge.\"\nIn addition to the many original and existing characters in stories about Scrooge McDuck, authors have frequently led historical figures to meet Scrooge over the course of his life. Most notably, Scrooge has met US president Theodore Roosevelt. Roosevelt and Scrooge would meet each other at least three times: in the Dakotas in 1883, in Duckburg in 1902, and in Panama in 1906. \"See Historical Figures in Scrooge McDuck stories\".\nBased on writer Don Rosa's \"The Life and Times of Scrooge McDuck\", a popular timeline chronicling Scrooge's adventures was created consisting of the most important \"facts\" about Scrooge's life. \"See Scrooge McDuck timeline according to Don Rosa\".\nIn 2014, composer Tuomas Holopainen of Nightwish released a conceptual album based on the book, \"The Life and Times of Scrooge McDuck\". The album is titled \"Music Inspired by the Life and Times of Scrooge\". Don Rosa illustrated the cover artwork for the album.\nIn other media.\nAlthough first established as a character in the comic books, Scrooge has also appeared in various other mediums. Carl Barks created an earlier film prototype of Scrooge while working as the lead story man (writer/designer) of the early \"Donald Duck\" cartoons. The prototype was featured in the animated short, \"The Spirit of '43\".\nScrooge's voice was first heard on the 1960 record album \"Donald Duck and His Friends;\" Dal McKennon voiced the character for this appearance. It took the form of a short dramatization called \"Uncle Scrooge's Rocket to the Moon\", a story of how Scrooge builds a rocket to send all his money to the moon to protect it from the Beagle Boys. In 1961 this story was reissued as a 45rpm single record entitled \"Donald Duck and Uncle Scrooge's Money Rocket.\"\nInitially, Scrooge was to make his animated debut in the Donald Duck theatrical cartoons. Late in 1954, Carl Barks was asked by the Disney Studios if he would be free to write a script for a Scrooge McDuck 7-minute animated cartoon. Scrooge was a huge success in the comic books at the time, and Disney now wanted to introduce the miserly duck to theater audiences as well. Barks supplied the studios with a detailed 9-page script, telling the story of the happy-go-lucky Donald Duck working for the troubled Scrooge who tries to save his money from a hungry rat. Barks also sent number of sketches of his ideas for the short, including a money-sorting machine, which Barks had already used on the cover of one of the Uncle Scrooge issues. The script was never used as Disney soon after decided to concentrate on TV shows instead.\nScrooge's first appearance in animated form (save for a brief \"Mickey Mouse Club\" television series cameo) was in Disney's 1967 theatrical short \"Scrooge McDuck and Money\" (voiced by Bill Thompson), in which he teaches his nephews basic financial tips.\nIn 1974, Disneyland Records released an adaptation of the Charles Dickens' \"A Christmas Carol\". Eight years later, Walt Disney Pictures produced a featurette of this same story, this time dubbed \"Mickey's Christmas Carol\" (1983). He also appeared as himself in the television special \"Sport Goofy in Soccermania\" (1987).\nScrooge's biggest role outside comics would come in the 1987 animated series \"DuckTales\", a series loosely based on Carl Barks's comics, and where Alan Young returned to voice him. In this series, premiered over two-hours on September 18, 1987, while the regular episodes began three days later, Scrooge becomes the legal guardian of Huey, Dewey and Louie when Donald joins the United States Navy. Scrooge's \"DuckTales\" persona is considerably mellow compared to most previous appearances; his aggression is played down and his often duplicitous personality is reduced in many episodes to that of a curmudgeonly but well-meaning old uncle. Still, there are flashes of Barks' Scrooge to be seen, particularly in early episodes of the first season. Scrooge also appeared in \"\", released during the series' run. He was mentioned in the \"Darkwing Duck\" episode \"Tiff of the Titans\", but never really seen, apart from on a billboard in Duckburg, in the aforementioned episode. A new version of \"DuckTales\" premiered in 2017, still focused on Scrooge, now voiced by David Tennant, and the triplets.\nHe has appeared in some episodes of \"Raw Toonage\", two shorts of \"Mickey Mouse Works\" and some episodes (especially \"House of Scrooge\") of \"House of Mouse\", as well as the direct-to-video films \"Mickey's Once Upon a Christmas\" and \"Mickey's Twice Upon a Christmas\". His video game appearances include the three \"DuckTales\" releases (\"DuckTales\", \"DuckTales 2\", and '), and in \"Toontown Online\" as the accidental creator of the Cogs. Additionally, he is a secret playable character in 2008 quiz game, \"Disney TH!NK Fast\". In the 2012 Nintendo 3DS game ', he is one of the first characters Mickey rescues, running a shop in the fortress selling upgrades and serving as a Sketch summon in which he uses his cane pogostick from the \"DuckTales\" NES games.\nScrooge also makes sporadic appearances in Disney's and Square Enix's \"Kingdom Hearts\" series, helping Mickey Mouse establish a world transit system to expand his business empire to other worlds. He first appears in \"Kingdom Hearts II\" as a minor non-playable character in Hollow Bastion, where he is trying to recreate his favorite ice cream flavor \u2013 sea-salt. Scrooge later appears in the prequel \"\", this time with a speaking role. He works on establishing an ice-cream business in Radiant Garden and gives Ventus three passes to the Dream Festival in Disney Town. Scrooge returns in \"Kingdom Hearts III\", now managing a bistro in Twilight Town with the help of Remy from \"Ratatouille\". Alan Young reprises the role in the English version of \"Birth by Sleep\", while Enn Reitel voices the character in \"III\".\nScrooge has appeared in the Boom! Studios \"Darkwing Duck\" comic, playing a key role at the end of its initial story, \"The Duck Knight Returns\". Later he would also play a key role on the final story arc \"Dangerous Currency\", where he teams up with Darkwing Duck in order to stop the Phantom Blot and Magica De Spell from taking over St. Canard and Duckburg.\nIn 2015, Scrooge was seen in the \"Mickey Mouse\" short \"Goofy's First Love\", where Mickey and Donald are trying to help Goofy find his love. Donald suggests money, and they head over to Scrooge's mansion where Donald tells his uncle that Goofy needs a million dollars. Scrooge then has his butler kick them out. When Goofy is inadvertently launched from a treadmill and catapulted off another building, he lands in Scrooge's mansion. The butler kicks Goofy out and the process repeats itself but this time Mickey and Donald are catapulted as well and kicked out by the butler. Scrooge is seen at the end attending Goofy's wedding with a sandwich. In the 2016 \"Mickey Mouse\" Christmas special, \"Duck the Halls\", after Young's death, John Kassir took over voicing Scrooge McDuck, however he later tweeted that he would not be reprising his role in the reboot. Kassir continues to voice the character in subsequent appearances in this series. Scrooge makes a cameo appearance in the \"Legend of the Three Caballeros\" episode \"Shangri-La-Di-Da\".\nScrooge also has a cameo appearance with his outfit from \"Mickey's Christmas Carol\" in the 2023 short film \"Once Upon a Studio\".\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "29379", "revid": "114797", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29379", "title": "Shiva (Judaism)", "text": "Week-long mourning period in Judaism for first-degree relatives\n () is the week-long mourning period in Judaism for first-degree relatives. The ritual is referred to as \"sitting \" in English. The period lasts for seven days following the burial. Following the initial period of despair and lamentation immediately after the death, embraces a time when individuals discuss their loss and accept the comfort of others.\nIts observance is a requirement for the parents, siblings, spouses, and children of the person who has died. At the funeral, mourners wear an outer garment that is torn before the procession in a ritual known as . In some traditions, mourners wear a black ribbon that is cut in place of an everyday garment. The torn article is worn throughout the entirety of . Typically, the seven days begin immediately after the deceased has been buried. Following burial, mourners assume the halakhic status of (Hebrew: \u05d0\u05d1\u05dc, 'mourner'). This state lasts for the entire duration of .\nIt is necessary for the burial spot to be entirely covered with earth in order for to commence. During the period of , mourners remain at home. Friends and family visit those in mourning in order to give their condolences and provide comfort. The process, dating back to biblical times, formalizes the natural way an individual confronts and overcomes grief. allows for the individual to express their sorrow, discuss the loss of a loved one, and slowly reenter society.\nEtymology.\nThe word comes from , referring to the seven-day length of this period.\nBiblical accounts similar to \"shiva\".\nA number of Biblical accounts describe mourning for fixed periods; in several cases, this period is seven days. For example, after the death of Jacob, his son Joseph and those accompanying Joseph observed a seven-day mourning period. The seven-day period of mourning that Joseph underwent was depicted by the sages before the revelation at Mount Sinai. In the Book of Job, it is stated that Job mourned his misfortune for seven days. During this time, he sat on the ground, with his friends surrounding him.\nBiblical mourning involved refraining from feasts, songs, and Temple rituals. Amos declared to the people that God would \"turn your feasts into mourning, and all your songs into lamentations\" as a punishment for sin, describing this mourning as similar to \"the mourning for an only son\". After two of the sons of Aaron, a High Priest, were killed, Aaron refused to eat the animal sacrifices, saying this would be inappropriate at a time when he was mourning the sons' death.\nStages of bereavement.\nThe process of mourning begins with the first stage, otherwise known as \"Aninut\". During this time, individuals experience the initial shock of their loss. Often emotions associated with the period of \"Aninut\" include anger, denial, and disbelief. During this period, which technically precedes the official mourning, the mourner is exempt from performing most positive commandments. The keriah (the rending of the garments) is performed during this period. Aninut begins the moment the individual dies and lasts until the end of the funeral service. Following \"Aninut\" is \"shiva\", in which the mourners dedicate seven days to remembrance of the deceased person. Throughout \"shiva\", individuals are instructed to take a break from their routines in order to focus on their loss. For these seven days the mourners' home is generally an open house for friends and family to come to offer comfort. The stage of mourning known as \"sheloshim\" (literally \"thirty\") lasts until thirty days after the burial. The first seven days of \"sheloshim\" is the period of \"shiva\"; \"sheloshim\" continues after \"shiva\" has ended. After the intense period of \"shiva\", which is mainly contained to the home, during the remainder of \"sheloshim\" the bereaved leave their residences and begin to interact with others again. \"Sheloshim\" encourages individuals to participate in social relations in order to slowly ease back into normal daily activities. The final stage, \"shenat aveilut\", is a twelve-month period of mourning, during which limitations are placed on mourners in the realms of wearing newly bought clothing, attending social gatherings and receiving gifts. During the first eleven months Kaddish is said. After the year's conclusion, yearly remembrance ceremonies, known as yahrzeit or hilula (on the date of passing) and yizkor (on major holidays) are held for the individual who died.\nComputing the timing of \"shiva\" and \"sheloshim\".\nThe \"shiva\" period commences immediately after the burial. The remainder of the day (until sundown) is considered to be the first day of shiva, even though it is only a partial day. On the seventh day (e.g., on Monday, if the first day was Tuesday), \"shiva\" ends in the morning after shacharit prayers (if no public services are held on the morning of the seventh day, a service is conducted in the home of the mourner); thus, the seventh day is again a partial day. The \"sheloshim\" (thirty-day period of mourning) continues until the end of morning services on the 30th day, 23 days after the end of \"shiva\"; as with \"shiva\", the two partial days at the beginning and end are counted as full days.\nHad the news of a close relative's death reached them 30 days after their deceased relative had expired, the 30th-day included, the mourner is only obligated to sit in mourning for one day. However, had the news of a close relative's death reached them within 30 days after expiration, the mourner is required to sit in mourning for seven days.\nReligious holidays during times of mourning.\nReligious holidays during \"shiva\" and \"sheloshim\" change the mourning period slightly. Because Judaism embraces the holidays with joy, the sadness and grief associated with mourning are meant to be set aside until the holiday concludes. Typically, if an individual dies before the beginning of a holiday, the holiday removes the observance of \"shiva\" or \"sheloshim\". The days of the holiday are counted towards the days of mourning, and the rules enforced during mourning are revoked in order to encourage the celebration of a holiday. If a death occurred during the holiday or unknowingly, mourning commences after the holiday ends. In other situations, if the entirety of \"shiva\" has been observed prior to the start of a holiday, the holiday will cancel the observance of \"sheloshim\", signifying the fulfillment of this period of mourning.\nThe occurrence of a major Jewish holiday terminates the \"shiva\". If the funeral occurs during a festival, the start of the mourning period is delayed to the end of the festival.\nSabbath.\nDuring Shabbat, private mourning continues, while public mourning is suspended. Individuals are permitted to wear shoes and leave their home to partake in public prayer services. In order to prepare for Shabbat, individuals are allowed to interrupt \"shiva\" for up to one hour and fifteen minutes in order to cook, dress, and perform other tasks. If this is not enough time to do so, in certain situations there may be two and a half hours allotted for such.\nPassover.\nDuring Passover, any days in observance of \"shiva\" before the start will equate to seven when the holiday begins. Since Passover is celebrated for eight days, any mourning prior will total to fifteen days when holiday ends, leaving only fifteen days of observance of \"sheloshim\".\nShavuot.\nDuring Shavuot, any days in observance of shiva before the start will equate to seven when the holiday begins. The first day of Shavuot equates to seven days. The second day of Shavuot is considered the fifteenth day, leaving only fifteen days left of observance of \"sheloshim\".\nSukkot.\nDuring Sukkot, any days in observance of \"shiva\" before the start will equate to seven when the holiday begins. Since Sukkot is observed for seven days, any mourning prior will total to fourteen days when the holiday ends. Shemini Atzeret is considered the eighth day of Sukkot, and equates to seven days of mourning. Simchat Torah is considered the twenty-second day of mourning, leaving only eight days of observance of \"sheloshim\".\nRosh Hashanah.\nDuring Rosh Hashanah, any days in observance of \"shiva\" before the start will equate to seven days when the holiday begins. Yom Kippur following Rosh Hashanah, will symbolize the end of mourning, and the end of both \"shiva\" and \"sheloshim\".\nYom Kippur.\nDuring Yom Kippur, any days in observance of \"shiva\" before the start will equate to seven days when the holiday begins. Sukkot, following Yom Kippur, will symbolize the end of mourning, and the end of both \"shiva\" and \"sheloshim\".\nYom Tov.\nIf the death occurs during Yom Tov, \"shiva\" does not begin until the burial is completed. Burial may not take place on Yom Tov, but can during the intermediate days of Sukkot or Passover, otherwise known as Chol HaMoed.\nChol HaMoed.\nIf a burial occurs on Chol HaMoed of Passover, \"shiva\" does not begin until after the Yom Tov is completed. In the Diaspora, where most Yamim Tovim are observed for two days, mourning does not take place on the second day, but the day is still counted as one of the days of \"shiva\".\nShiva customs.\nThere are many traditions that are upheld in order to observe \"shiva\". Throughout this time, mourners are required to stay at home and refrain from engaging with the social world.\nKeriah.\nAfter hearing of the death of a close relative, Jewish beliefs and traditions instruct individuals to tear their clothing as the primary expression of grief. The process of tearing the garment is known as \"keriah\". The tearing is done while standing and is required to extend in length to a \"tefach\" (handbreadth), or what is equivalent to about . Upon tearing the clothing, the mourner recites a blessing which describes God as \"the true Judge\". This blessing reminds mourners to acknowledge that God has taken the life of a close relative, and is seen as the first step in the acceptance of grief. The garment is torn over the heart if the individual who died was a parent, or over the chest on the right side if the individual who died was another relative. The torn article of clothing is worn throughout the period of \"shiva\", the only exception being on Shabbat.\nWashing hands.\nAfter being near or around the deceased, it is ancient custom to wash oneself, or at minimum wash one\u2019s hands, as a means of purification. After a funeral, or visitation to a cemetery, individuals are required to wash hands as a mark of spiritual transition through water. During shiva, it is especially mandatory to do so before entering the home. There are many different origins of this tradition, though the act is typically associated with symbolic cleansing, the idea being that death is impure in a spiritual sense. Within Judaism, the living is thought to emphasize value of life rather than focus on death. When washing hands after visiting the deceased, it is custom to not pass the cup of water used from person to person. The reason behind this stems from the beliefs and hopes of stopping the tragedy it began, rather than allowing it to continue from person to person as symbolized by the passing of the cup.\nMeal of condolences.\nThe first meal which should be eaten after the funeral is known as the \"seudat havra'ah\" (Hebrew: \u05e1\u05e2\u05d5\u05d3\u05ea \u05d4\u05d1\u05e8\u05d0\u05d4, \"meal of comforting\"). Traditionally, mourners should be served the meal of condolences by neighbors. The act of preparing such meal is considered to be a mitzvah. Though being the tradition, if the meal of condolences is unable to be prepared by a neighbor, extended family may do so, and in the last case the mourner themselves may prepare the meal. It was seen that many times following the death of a loved one, individuals who were in mourning possessed a death wish and often attempted to undergo starvation. The meal given to them upon returning home provided warmth in order to lessen such wishes. In order to be deemed the meal of condolences, the food selections must contain several specific dishes. An example of this is bread, which is symbolic for the staff of life. Aside from this, the meal must contain hard-boiled eggs, cooked vegetables, and coffee or tea. Often wine is allowed to be served as well. The only time the meal of condolences is not served is when there is no public observance of mourning. While some historical sources exclude this meal in cases of suicide, most contemporary Jewish communities, including Orthodox, Conservative, and Reform, recognize mental distress or mental illness as mitigating factors, and still provide the meal and other mourning rites in many cases.\nCandles.\nWithin Judaism, candles are symbolic of special events throughout life. They are lit during major holidays, during Shabbat, and during the process of mourning candles are required to burn for the entirety of shiva. Prior to the death of Rabbi Judah HaNasi in the third century, he instructed that a light should be kept burning. During shiva, the candle represents the deceased. The light is symbolic of the human being, the wick and flame are representative of the body and soul respectively, as well as their connection with one another. Traditionally, candles are required to be made of either oil or paraffin and are not allowed to be electric. The candle is ideally burned in the home of the deceased, but exceptions can be made. Regardless, candles should be in the presence of those observing shiva. During major holidays, the candle may be moved in order to lessen the feeling of mourning and focus on the joyous occasion at hand.\nMirrors.\nIndividuals who are in mourning, or in a shiva home, are required to cover mirrors from the time an individual dies until the end of shiva. There are several reasons Judaism requires this. The first reason may stem from the idea that man was created in the image of God. In doing so, man acquires the same dignity and value as God. When a creation of God dies, this lessens his image. The death of human beings disrupts the connection between the living man and living God. Since the purpose of mirrors is to reflect such image, they are covered during mourning. A second reason mirrors are covered in Judaism branches from contemplation of one's relationship with God during the death of a loved one. At this time, individuals are instructed to focus on grief and mourning rather than themselves. In order to prevent selfish thoughts, all mirrors are covered within the homes of mourners. A third reason which depicts why mirrors should be covered comes from the law which states that an individual may not stand directly in front of an image or worship one. Therefore, mirrors and pictures are hidden during mourning.\nPictures.\nSome have an additional custom to cover all pictures of people. One reason, which is linked to the covering of mirrors (and, by some, all pictures of people too) is that prayer services are held in the house of mourning, if a quorum can be gathered, and \"Jewish law clearly states that one may not worship an image or standing directly in front of one .. picture .. mirror.\"\nShoes.\nLeather shoes are not permitted to be worn during the observance of shiva. The reasoning behind this involves a lack of luxury. Without leather shoes, an individual is able to concentrate on mourning and the deeper meaning of life. However, exceptions to this rule include pregnant women and those with ailments of the feet. Aside from those observing shiva or sheloshim, guests and individuals who are not should refrain from wearing leather shoes in the home of mourners as well.\nPersonal grooming.\nSimilar to the idea of wearing leather shoes, hygiene and personal grooming fall under the idea of the task being done for pleasure. Such acts are prohibited during the observation of shiva or sheloshim as they are seen as actions done for physical comfort. However, there is a fine line which separates grooming for hygienic reasons and for comfort. Therefore, in order to prevent grooming for comfort individuals who are mourning are instructed to only bathe separate parts of the body, head, and face. On top of this, cold or cool water is recommended. The use of cosmetics is not allowed as this constitutes an act done for comfort and pleasure. However, the exception to this rule is a woman who is a bride, is engaged to be married, or is dating to be married.\n\"Sitting\" \"shiva\".\n\"Sitting\" \"shiva\" refers to the act of sitting on low stools during times of mourning. As mentioned in the Book of Job, upon mourning, Job's friends \"sat down with him upon the ground seven days and seven nights\". Therefore, originally, individuals who were observing a period of mourning were required to turn couches or beds over and sit on the ground. After time, modifications towards this rule were made. The \"Halakhah\" states that an individual is required to sit on low stools, or on the floor. The individual partakes in sitting on a low stool in order to signify their lack of concern for personal comfort during their time of mourning.\nMourning finds its expression in the sorrow and anguish of the soul and in symbolic, external actions. Different communities have practised different customs during the actual process of \"sitting\" \"shiva\". Sephardic Jews no longer sit whilst draped in their Tallit, but Yemenite Jews still follow the ancient Jewish custom of sitting seven days whilst draped in a Tallit. The practice is alluded to in the Talmud (\"Mo'ed Katan\"), and in the writings of the early rabbinic authorities.\nAmong Ashkenazi and Sephardic communities the practice is now obsolete, they adhering to the adjudicators of Jewish law that have come of late (\"Bayit Chadash\", the \"\u1e6curei Zahav\", and \"Siftei Cohen\") and who have canceled the custom, writing thus: \"And at this time, there is no custom of covering up one's head, so that it may not lead to frivolity. In any case, the hat should be pulled over one's eyes.\" The only ones who continue to observe the custom are the Jews of Yemen.\nPlace of observance.\nThe ideal place to observe shiva is in the home of the deceased individual. If this is not possible, the second best place is in the home of a relative close to the deceased. During the observance of shiva, individuals are generally not permitted to leave the premises. However, there are certain exceptions to this rule, including: not having enough room to house for every individual observing, the loss of another loved one, and the inability to conduct services in the home. If an individual mourning is allowed to leave the home, they must do so without disturbing others and never alone.\nPrayers in the \"shiva\" house.\nPraying in the home of a mourner is done in order to demonstrate respect for the grieving individual as well as the deceased. Even as early as 1790, the \"Hebra Maarib beZemanah Oheb Shalom\" (\u05d7\u05d1\u05e8\u05d4 \u05de\u05e2\u05e8\u05d9\u05d1 \u05d1\u05d6\u05de\u05e0\u05d4 \u05d0\u05d5\u05d4\u05d1 \u05e9\u05dc\u05d5\u05dd) organization was founded in order to provide mourners observing \"shiva\" with a \"minyan\". During 1853 in London, the \"Hebrath Menachem Abelim Hesed Ve Emeth\" organization was founded to accomplish a similar goal. Throughout history, prayers during mourning have been important. However, during \"shiva\", the prayers change slightly.\nKaddish.\nDuring the process of mourning, Kaddish is typically recited. Rather than losing faith in the religion, Jewish traditions require those who have experienced the loss of a loved one to publicly assert their faith in God. This is typically done in front of a minyan. The recitation of Kaddish is done in order to protect the dignity and merit of the individual who died within God's eyes. Judaism believes that prior to a soul's entry into heaven, a maximum of twelve months is required in order for even the worst soul to be purified. Though the entirety of mourning lasts for twelve months, Kaddish is only recited for eleven months so as to not imply the soul required an entire twelve months of purification.\nMourner's prayer.\nTraditionally the true mourner's prayer is known as \"El Malei Rachamim\" in Ashkenazi literature and \"Hashkavah\" in Sephardic literature. Often the mourner's prayer is mistaken for Kaddish. The recitation of the mourner's prayer is done for the soul of an individual who has died. The prayer itself is an appeal for the soul of the deceased to be given proper rest. Typically recitation of this prayer is done at the graveside during burial, during the unveiling of the tombstone, as in the Yizkor services on Jewish holidays. If the recitation is done as an individual commemoration, the prayer contains the name of the individual who died. However, if the recitation is done in the presence of a group, the prayer will contain a description of the individual who died.\nMinyan during shiva.\nA minyan is traditionally a quorum of ten or more adult men. Often in Conservative, Reconstructionist, or Reform communities, a minyan is composed of a mix of ten or more adult men and women. During shiva, a minyan will gather at the home of those in mourning for services. The services are similar to those held at a synagogue. During shiva, however, certain prayers or verses are either added or omitted. During the days that the Torah is read in a synagogue, it is likewise read at the shiva home. An effort is made by the community to lend a Torah scroll to the mourner for this purpose.\nChanges in service during mourning.\nThe following changes are made in the Shacharit (morning) prayer, listed by order in the prayer service:\nIn addition, the following changes are made in other prayers:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "29381", "revid": "15865", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29381", "title": "Semi-trailer truck", "text": "Combination of a tractor unit and one or more semi-trailers to carry freight\nA semi-trailer truck (also known by a wide variety of other terms \u2013 see below) is the combination of a tractor unit and one or more semi-trailers to carry freight. A semi-trailer attaches to the tractor with a type of hitch called a \"fifth wheel\".\nOther terms.\nThere are a wide variety of English-language terms for a semi-trailer truck, including:\nAmerican English:\nBritish English:\nCanadian English:\nRegional configurations.\nEurope.\nThe main difference between tractor units in Europe and North America is that European models are cab over engine (COE, called \"forward control\" in the United Kingdom), while the majority of North American trucks are \"conventional\" (called \"normal control\" or \"bonneted\" in the UK). European trucks, whether straight trucks or fully articulated, have a sheer face on the front. This allows shorter trucks with longer trailers (with larger freight capacity) within the legal maximum total length. Furthermore, it offers greater maneuverability in confined areas, a more balanced weight-distribution, and better overall view for the driver. The major disadvantage is that for repairs on COE trucks, the entire cab has to hinge forward to allow maintenance access.\nIn Europe, usually only the driven tractor axle has dual wheels, while single wheels are used for every other axle on the tractor and the trailer. The most common combination used in Europe is a semi tractor with two axles and a cargo trailer with three axles, one of which is sometimes a lift axle, giving 5 axles and 12 wheels in total. This format is now common across Europe as it is able to meet the EU maximum weight limit of without overloading any axle. Individual countries have raised their own weight limit. The U.K., for example, has a limit, an increase achieved by adding an extra axle to the tractor, usually in the form of a middle unpowered lifting axle (midlift) with a total of 14 wheels. The lift axles used on both tractors and trailers allow the trucks to remain legal when fully loaded (as weight per axle remains within the legal limits); on the other hand, these axle set(s) can be raised off the roadway for increased maneuverability or for reduced fuel consumption and tire wear when carrying lighter loads. Although lift axles usually operate automatically, they can be lowered manually even while carrying light loads, in order to remain within legal (safe) limits when, for example, navigating back-road bridges with severely restricted axle loads. \"For greater detail, see the United Kingdom section, below.\"\nWhen using a dolly, which generally has to be equipped with lights and a license plate, rigid trucks can be used to pull semi-trailers. The dolly is equipped with a fifth wheel to which the trailer is coupled. Because the dolly attaches to a pintle hitch on the truck, maneuvering a trailer hooked to a dolly is different from maneuvering a fifth wheel trailer. Backing the vehicle requires the same technique as backing an ordinary truck/full trailer combination, though the dolly/semi setup is probably longer, thus requiring more space for maneuvering. The tractor/semi-trailer configuration is rarely used on timber trucks since they use the two major advantages of having the weight of the load on the drive wheels, and the loader crane used to lift the logs from the ground can be mounted on the rear of the truck behind the load, allowing a short (lightweight) crane to reach both ends of the vehicle without uncoupling. Also, construction trucks are more often seen in a rigid + midaxle trailer configuration instead of the tractor/semi-trailer setup.\nContinental Europe.\nThe maximum overall length in the EU and EEA member states was with a maximum weight of if carrying an ISO container. However, rules limiting the semi-trailers to and 18.75\u00a0m are met with trucks carrying a standardized body with one additional 7.82\u00a0m body on tow as a trailer. truck combinations were developed under the branding of \"EcoCombi\" which influenced the name of \"EuroCombi\" for an ongoing standardization effort where such truck combinations shall be legal to operate in all jurisdictions of the European Economic Area. With the 50% increase in cargo weight, the fuel efficiency increases an average of 20% with a corresponding relative decrease in carbon emissions and with the added benefit of one third fewer trucks on the road. The 1996 EU regulation defines a Europe Module System (EMS) as it was implemented in Sweden. The wording of EMS combinations and EuroCombi are now used interchangeably to point to truck combinations as specified in the EU document; however, apart from Sweden and Finland, the EuroCombi is only allowed to operate on specific roads in other EU member states. Since 1996 Sweden and Finland formally won a final exemption from the European Economic Area rules with 60\u00a0tonne and combinations. From 2006, 25.25\u00a0m truck trailer combinations are to be allowed on restricted routes within Germany, following a similar (on-going) trial in The Netherlands. Similarly, Denmark has allowed 25.25\u00a0m combinations on select routes. These vehicles will run a weight limit. Two types are to be used: 1) a 26-tonne truck pulling a dolly and semi-trailer, or 2) an articulated tractor unit pulling a B-double, member states gained the ability to adopt the same rules. In Italy the maximum permitted weight (unless exceptional transport is authorized) is 44 tonnes for any kind of combination with five axles or more. Czech Republic has allowed 25.25\u00a0m combinations with a permission for a selected route.\nNordic countries.\nDenmark and Norway allow trucks (Denmark from 2008, and Norway from 2008 on selected routes). In Sweden, the allowed length has been since 1967. Before that, the maximum length was unlimited; the only limitations were on axle load. What stopped Sweden from adopting the same rules as the rest of Europe, when securing road safety, was the national importance of a competitive forestry industry. Finland, with the same road safety issues and equally important forestry industry, followed suit. The change made trucks able to carry three stacks of cut-to-length logs instead of two, as it would be in a short combination. They have one stack together with a crane on the 6\u00d74 truck, and two additional stacks on a four axle trailer. The allowed gross weight in both countries is up to depending on the distance between the first and last axle.\nIn the negotiations starting in the late 1980s preceding Sweden and Finland's entries to the European Economic Area and later the European Union, they insisted on exemptions from the EU rules citing environmental concerns and the transportation needs of the logging industry. In 1995, after their entry to the union, the rules changed again, this time to allow trucks carrying a standard CEN unit of to draw a standard semi-trailer on a dolly, a total overall length of 25.25\u00a0m. Later, B-double combinations came into use, often with one container on the B-link and a container (or two containers) on a semi-trailer bed. In allowing the longer truck combinations, what would take two semi-trailer trucks and one truck and trailer to haul on the continent now could be handled by just two 25.25\u00a0m trucks \u2013 greatly reducing overall costs and emissions. Prepared since late 2012 and effective in January 2013, Finland has changed its regulations to allow total maximum legal weight of a combination to be . At the same time the maximum allowed height would be increased by ; from current maximum of to . The effect this major maximum weight increase would cause to the roads and bridges in Finland over time is strongly debated.\nHowever, longer and heavier combinations are regularly seen on public roads; special permits are issued for special cargo. The mining company Boliden AB have a standing special permit for combinations on select routes between mines in the inland and the processing plant in Boliden, taking a load of ore. Volvo has a special permit for a , steering B-trailer-trailer combination carrying two containers to and from Gothenburg harbour and the Volvo Trucks factory, all on the island of Hisingen. Another example is the ongoing project \"En Trave Till\" (lit.\u2009'One more pile' or 'One more stack') started in December 2008. It will allow even longer vehicles to further rationalize the logging transports. As the name of the project points out, it will be able to carry four stacks of timber, instead of the usual three. The test is limited to Norrbotten county and the European route E4 between the timber terminal in \u00d6verkalix and the sawmill in Munksund (outside Pite\u00e5). The vehicle is a long truck trailer combination with a gross weight exceeding . It is estimated that this will give a 20% lower cost and 20\u201325% CO2 emissions reduction compared to the regular truck combinations. As the combination spreads its weight over more axles, braking distance, road wear and traffic safety is believed to be either the same or improved with the truck-trailer. In the same program two types of combinations will be tested in Dalsland and Bohusl\u00e4n counties in western Sweden: an enhanced truck and trailer combination for use in the forest and a b-double for plain highway transportation to the mill in Skoghall. In 2012, the Northland Mining company received permission for combinations with normal axle load (an extra dolly) for use on the Kaunisvaara-Svappavaara route, carrying iron ore.\nAs of 2015[ [update]], the longest and heaviest truck in everyday use in Finland is operated by transport company Ketosen Kuljetus as part of a pilot project studying transport efficiency in the timber industry. The combined vehicle is long, has 13 axles, and weighs a total of .\nStarting from 21 January 2019 the Government of Finland changed the maximum allowed length of truck from . New types of vehicle combinations that differ from the current standards may also be used on the road. The requirements for combinations also include camera systems for side visibility, an advanced emergency braking and lane detector system, electronic driving stability system and electronically controlled brakes. https:// https://\nUnited Kingdom.\nIn the United Kingdom, a semi-trailer truck is known as an 'articulated lorry' (or colloquially as an 'artic'). The maximum permitted gross weight of a semi-trailer truck without the use of a Special Type General Order (STGO) is . In order for a 44,000\u00a0kg semi-trailer truck to be permitted on UK roads the tractor and semi-trailer must have three or more axles each. Lower weight semi-trailer trucks can mean some tractors and trailer having fewer axles. In practice, as with double decker buses and coaches in the UK, there is no legal height limit for semi-trailer trucks; however, bridges over do not have the height marked on them. Semi-trailer trucks in continental Europe have a height limit of . Vehicles heavier than 44,000\u00a0kg are permitted on UK roads but are indivisible loads, which would be classed as abnormal (or oversize). Such vehicles are required to display an STGO (Special Types General Order) plate on the front of the tractor unit and, under certain circumstances, are required to travel by an authorized route and have an escort.\nMost UK trailers are long and, dependent on the position of the fifth wheel and kingpin, a coupled tractor unit and trailer will have a combined length of between . Although the Construction and Use Regulations allow a maximum rigid length of , this, combined with a shallow kingpin and fifth wheel set close to the rear of the tractor unit, can give an overall length of around .\nIn January 2012, the Department for Transport began conducting a trial of longer semi-trailers. The trial involves 900 semi-trailers of in length (i.e. longer than the current maximum), and a further 900 semi-trailers of in length (i.e. longer). This will result in the total maximum length of the semi-trailer truck being for trailers in length, and for trailers long. The increase in length will not result in the weight limit being exceeded and will allow some operators to approach the weight limit which may not have been previously possible due to the previous length of trailers. The trial will run for a maximum of 10 years. Providing certain requirements are fulfilled, a Special Types General Order (STGO) allows for vehicles of any size or weight to travel on UK roads. However, in practice, any such vehicle has to travel by a route authorized by the Department of Transport and move under escort. The escort of abnormal loads in the UK is now predominantly carried out by private companies, but extremely large or heavy loads that require road closures must still be escorted by the police.\nIn the UK, some semi-trailer trucks have eight tyres on three axles on the tractor; these are known as six-wheelers or \"six leggers,\" with either the centre or rear axle having single wheels which normally steer as well as the front axle and can be raised when not needed (i.e. when unloaded or only a light load is being carried; an arrangement known as a TAG axle when it is the rear axle, or mid-lift when it is the center axle). Some trailers have two axles which have twin tyres on each axle; other trailers have three axles, of which one axle can be a lift axle which has super-single wheels. In the UK, two wheels bolted to the same hub are classed as a single wheel, therefore a standard six-axle articulated truck is considered to have twelve wheels, even though it has twenty tyres. The UK also allows semi-trailer truck which have six tyres on two axles; these are known as four-wheelers.\nIn 2009, the operator Denby Transport designed and built a B-Train (or B-Double) semi-trailer truck called the Denby Eco-Link to show the benefits of such a vehicle, which were a reduction in road accidents and result in fewer road deaths, a reduction in emissions due to the one tractor unit still being used and no further highway investment being required. Furthermore, Denby Transport asserted that two Eco-Links would replace three standard semi-trailer trucks while, if limited to the current UK weight limit of , it was claimed the Eco-Link would reduce carbon emissions by 16% and could still halve the number of trips needed for the same amount of cargo carried in conventional semi-trailer trucks. This is based on the fact that for light but bulky goods such as toilet paper, plastic bottles, cereals and aluminum cans, conventional semi-trailer trucks run out of cargo space before they reach the weight limit. At , as opposed to usually associated with B-Trains, the Eco-Link also exerts less weight per axle on the road compared to the standard six-axle semi-trailer truck.\nThe vehicle was built after Denby Transport believed they had found a legal-loophole in the present UK law to allow the Eco-Link to be used on the public roads. The relevant legislation concerned the 1986 Road Vehicles Construction and Use Regulations. The 1986 regulations state that \"certain vehicles\" may be permitted to draw more than one trailer and can be up to . The point of law reportedly hinged on the definition of a \"towing implement\", with Denby prepared to argue that the second trailer on the Eco-Link was one. The Department for Transport were of the opinion that this refers to recovering a vehicle after an accident or breakdown, but the regulation does not explicitly state this.\nDuring BTAC performance testing the Eco-Link was given an \"excellent\" rating for its performance in maneuverability, productivity, safety and emissions tests, exceeding ordinary semi-trailer trucks in many respects. Reportedly, private trials had also shown the Denby vehicle had a 20% shorter stopping distance than conventional semi-trailer trucks of the same weight, due to having extra axles. The active steer system meant that the Eco-Link had a turning circle of , the same as a conventional semi-trailer truck.\nAlthough the Department for Transport advised that the Eco-Link was not permissible on public roads, Denby Transport gave the Police prior warning of the timing and route of the test drive on the public highway, as well as outlining their position in writing to the Eastern Traffic Area Office. On 1 December 2009 Denby Transport were preparing to drive the Eco-Link on public roads, but this was cut short because the Police pulled the semi-trailer truck over as it left the gates in order to test it for its legality \"to investigate any... offenses which may be found\". The Police said the vehicle was unlawful due to its length and Denby Transport was served with a notice by the Vehicle and Operator Services Agency (VOSA) inspector to remove the vehicle from the road for inspection. Having returned to the yard, Denby Transport was formally notified by Police and VOSA that the semi-trailer truck could not be used. Neither the Eco-Link, nor any other B-Train, have since been permitted on UK roads. However, this prompted the Department for Transport to undertake a desk study into semi-trailer trucks, which has resulted in the longer semi-trailer trial which commenced in 2012.\nNorth America.\nIn North America, the combination vehicles made up of a powered truck tractor and one or more semitrailers are known as \"semis\", \"semitrailers\", \"tractor-trailers\", \"big rigs\", \"semi-trucks\", \"eighteen-wheelers\", or \"semi-tractor-trailers\".\nThe tractor unit typically has two or three axles; those built for hauling heavy-duty commercial-construction machinery may have as many as five, some often being lift axles.\nThe most common tractor-cab layout has a forward engine, one steering axle, and two drive axles. The fifth-wheel trailer coupling on most tractor trucks is movable fore and aft, to allow adjustment in the weight distribution over its rear axle(s).\nUbiquitous in Europe but less common in North America since the 1990s, is the cabover engine configuration, where the driver sits next to or over the engine. With changes in the US to the maximum length of the combined vehicle, the cabover was largely phased out of North American over-the-road (long-haul) service by 2007. Cabovers were difficult to service; for a long time, the cab could not be lifted on its hinges to a full 90-degree forward tilt, severely limiting access to the front of the engine.\nAs of 2016[ [update]], a truck could cost US$, while the diesel fuel cost could be $70,000 per year. Trucks average from , with fuel economy standards requiring better than efficiency by 2014. Power requirements in standard conditions are at or at , and somewhat different power usage in other conditions.\nThe cargo trailer usually has tandem axles at the rear, each of which has dual wheels, or eight tires on the trailer, four per axle. In the US it is common to refer to the number of wheel hubs, rather than the number of tires; an axle can have either single or dual tires with no legal difference. The combination of eight tires on the trailer and ten tires on the tractor is what led to the moniker \"eighteen wheeler\", although this term is considered by some truckers to be a misnomer (the term \"eighteen-wheeler\" is a nickname for a five-axle over-the-road combination). Many trailers are equipped with movable tandem axles to allow adjusting the weight distribution.\nTo connect the second of a set of doubles to the first trailer, and to support the front half of the second trailer, a converter gear known as a \"dolly\" is used. This has one or two axles, a fifth-wheel coupling for the rear trailer, and a tongue with a ring-hitch coupling for the forward trailer. Individual states may further allow longer vehicles, known as \"longer combination vehicles\" (LCVs), and may allow them to operate on roads other than Interstates.\nLong combination vehicle types include:\nThe US federal government, which only regulates the Interstate Highway System, does not set maximum length requirements (except on auto and boat transporters), only minimums. Tractors can pull two or three trailers if the combination is legal in that state. Weight maximums are on a single axle, on a tandem, and total for any vehicle or combination. There is a maximum width of and no maximum height.\nRoads other than Interstates are regulated by individual states, and laws vary widely. Maximum weight varies between to , depending on the combination. Most states restrict operation of larger tandem trailer setups such as triple units, turnpike doubles, and Rocky Mountain doubles. Reasons for limiting the legal trailer configurations include safety concerns and the impracticality of designing and constructing roads that can accommodate the larger wheelbase of these vehicles and the larger minimum turning radii associated with them. In general, these configurations are restricted to the Interstates. Except for these units, double setups are not restricted to certain roads any more than a single setup. They are also not restricted by weather conditions or \"difficulty of operation\". The Canadian province of Ontario, however, does have weather-related operating restrictions for larger tandem trailer setups.\nOceania.\nAustralia.\nAustralian road transport has a reputation for using very large trucks and road trains. This is reflected in the most popular configurations of trucks generally having dual drive axles and three axles on the trailers, with four tyres on each axle. This means that Australian single semi-trailer trucks will usually have 22 tyres, which is generally more than their counterparts in other countries. Super single tyres are sometimes used on tri-axle trailers. The suspension is designed with travel limiting, which will hold the rim off the road for one blown or deflated tyre for each side of the trailer, so a trailer can be driven at reduced speed to a safe place for repair. Super singles are also often used on the steer axle in Australia to allow greater loading over the steer axle. The increase in loading of steer tyres requires a permit.\nLong haul transport usually operates as B-doubles with two trailers (each with three axles), for a total of nine axles (including steering). In some lighter duty applications, only one of the rear axles of the truck is driven, and the trailer may have only two axles. From July 2007, the Australian Federal and State Governments allowed the introduction of B-triple trucks on a specified network of roads. B-Triples are set up differently from conventional road trains. The front of their first trailer is supported by the turntable on the prime mover. The second and third trailers are supported by turntables on the trailers in front of them. As a result, B-Triples are much more stable than road trains and handle exceptionally well. True road trains only operate in remote areas, regulated by each state or territory government.\nIn total, the maximum length that any articulated vehicle may be (without a special permit and escort) is , its maximum load may be up to 164\u00a0tonnes gross, and may have up to four trailers. However, heavy restrictions apply to the areas where such a vehicle may travel in most states. In remote areas such as the Northern Territory great care must be taken when sharing the road with longer articulated vehicles that often travel during the daytime, especially four-trailer road trains.\nArticulated trucks towing a single trailer or two trailers (commonly known as \"short doubles\") with a maximum overall length of are referred to as \"General access heavy vehicles\" and are permitted in all areas, including metropolitan. B-doubles are limited to a maximum total weight of 62.5\u00a0tonnes and overall length of , or if they are fitted with approved FUPS (Front Underrun Protection System) devices. B-doubles may only operate on designated roads, which includes most highways and some major metropolitan roads. B-doubles are very common in all parts of Australia including state capitals and on major routes they outnumber single trailer configurations.\nMaximum width of any vehicle is and a height of . In the past few years, allowance has been made by several states to allow certain designs of heavy vehicles up to high but they are also restricted to designated routes. In effect, a 4.6\u00a0meter high B-double will have to follow two sets of rules: they may access only those roads that are permitted for B-doubles \"and\" for 4.6\u00a0meter high vehicles.\nIn Australia, both conventional prime movers and cabovers are common, however, cabovers are most often seen on B-doubles on the eastern seaboard where the reduction in total length allows the vehicle to pull longer trailers and thus more cargo than it would otherwise.\nNew Zealand.\nNew Zealand legislation governing truck dimensions falls under the Vehicle Dimensions and Mass Rules, published by NZ Transport Agency. New rules were introduced effective 1 February 2017, which increased the maximum height, width and weight of loads and vehicles, to simplify regulations, increase the amount of freight carried by road, and to improve the range of vehicles and trailers available to transport operators.\nCommon combinations in New Zealand are a standard semi-trailer, a B-train, or a rigid towing vehicle pulling a trailer with a drawbar, with a maximum of nine axles. Standard maximum vehicle lengths for trailers with one axle set are:\nTrailers with two axle sets can be long, including heavy rigid vehicles towing two trailers.\nOversized loads require, at minimum, a permit, and may require one or more pilot vehicles.\nHigh-productivity motor vehicle (HPMV) permits are issued for vehicles exceeding 44 tonnes, or the above dimensions. Trucks up to 62 tonnes were allowed, with an initial bridge strengthening program costing $12.5m.\nConstruction.\nTypes of trailers.\nThere are many types of semi-trailers in use, designed to haul a wide range of products.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nCoupling and uncoupling.\nThe cargo trailer is, by means of a king pin, hooked to a horseshoe-shaped quick-release coupling device called a fifth wheel or a turntable hitch at the rear of the towing engine that allows easy hook up and release. The truck trailer cannot move by itself because it only has wheels at the rear end: it requires a forward axle, provided by the towing engine, to carry half the load weight. When braking hard at high speeds, the vehicle has a tendency to fold at the pivot point between the towing vehicle and the trailer. Such a truck accident is called a \"trailer swing\", although it is also commonly described as a \"jackknife.\" Jackknifing is a condition where the tractive unit swings round against the trailer, and not vice versa.\nBraking.\nSemi trucks use air pressure, rather than hydraulic fluid, to actuate the brake. The use of air hoses allows for ease of coupling and uncoupling of trailers from the tractor unit. The most common failure is \"brake fade\", usually caused when the drums or discs and the linings of the brakes overheat from excessive use.\nThe parking brake of the tractor unit and the emergency brake of the trailer are spring brakes that require air pressure in order to be released. They are applied when air pressure is released from the system, and disengaged when air pressure is supplied. This is a fail-safe design feature which ensures that if air pressure to either unit is lost, the vehicle will stop to a grinding halt, instead of continuing without brakes and becoming uncontrollable. The trailer controls are coupled to the tractor through two \"gladhand connectors\", which provide air pressure, and an electrical cable, which provides power to the lights and any specialized features of the trailer.\n\"Glad-hand connectors\" (also known as \"palm couplings\") are air hose connectors, each of which has a flat engaging face and retaining tabs. The faces are placed together, and the units are rotated so that the tabs engage each other to hold the connectors together. This arrangement provides a secure connection but allows the couplers to break away without damaging the equipment if they are pulled, as may happen when the tractor and trailer are separated without first uncoupling the air lines. These connectors are similar in design to the ones used for a similar purpose between railroad cars. Two air lines typically connect to the trailer unit. An \"emergency\" or \"main\" air supply line pressurizes the trailer's air tank and disengages the emergency brake, and a second \"service\" line controls the brake application during normal operation.\nIn the UK, male/female quick release connectors (\"red line\" or emergency), have a female on the truck and male on the trailer, but a \"yellow line\" or service has a male on the truck and female on the trailer. This avoids coupling errors (causing no brakes) plus the connections will not come apart if pulled by accident. The three electrical lines will fit one way around a primary black, a secondary green, and an ABS lead, all of which are collectively known as \"suzies\" or \"suzie coils\".\nIn New Zealand all trucks and trailers use a DUOMATIC air coupler which has female receivers mounted on the truck/tractor and on the trailer, and male on both ends of the suzie lines (they can be completely removed and stored in the cab to prevent theft). Connecting the red and blue lines is one operation at each end. The red and blue lines are always on the same side of every fitting so they can never hook up in reverse or the wrong way around. The same system is used in Europe.\nAnother braking feature of semi-trucks is engine braking, which could be either a compression brake (usually shortened to \"Jake brake\") or exhaust brake or combination of both. However, the use of compression brake alone produces a loud and distinctive noise, and to control noise pollution, some local municipalities have prohibited or restricted the use of engine brake systems inside their jurisdictions, particularly in residential areas. The advantage to using engine braking instead of conventional brakes is that a truck can descend a long grade without overheating its wheel brakes. Some vehicles can also be equipped with hydraulic or electric retarders which have an advantage of near silent operation.\nTransmission.\nBecause of the wide variety of loads the semi may carry, they usually have a manual transmission to allow the driver to have as much control as possible. However, all truck manufacturers now offer automated manual transmissions (manual gearboxes with automated gear change), as well as conventional hydraulic automatic transmissions.\nSemi-truck transmissions can have as few as three forward speeds or as many as 18 forward speeds (plus 2 reverse speeds). A large number of transmission ratios means the driver can operate the engine more efficiently. Modern on-highway diesel engines are designed to provide maximum torque in a narrow RPM range (usually 1200\u20131500 RPM); having more gear ratios means the driver can hold the engine in its optimum range regardless of road speed (drive axle ratio must also be considered).\nA ten-speed manual transmission, for example, is controlled via a six-slot H-box pattern, similar to that in five-speed cars \u2014 five forward and one reverse gear. Gears six to ten (and high-speed reverse) are accessed by a Lo/High range splitter; gears one to five are Lo range; gears six to ten are High range using the same shift pattern. A Super-10 transmission, by contrast, has no range splitter; it uses alternating \"stick and button\" shifting (stick shifts 1-3-5-7-9, button shifts 2-4-6-8-10). The 13-, 15-, and 18-speed transmissions have the same basic shift pattern but include a splitter button to enable additional ratios found in each range. Some transmissions may have 12 speeds.\nAnother difference between semi-trucks and cars is the way the clutch is set up. On an automobile, the clutch pedal is depressed full stroke to the floor for every gear shift, to ensure the gearbox is disengaged from the engine. On a semi-truck with constant-mesh transmission (non-synchronized), such as by the Eaton Roadranger series, not only is double-clutching required, but a clutch brake is required as well. The clutch brake stops the rotation of the gears and allows the truck to be put into gear without grinding when stationary. The clutch is pressed to the floor only to allow a smooth engagement of low gears when starting from a full stop; when the truck is moving, the clutch pedal is pressed only far enough to break torque for gear changes.\nTheoretically, semi-trucks could have diesel-electric transmission, as electric motors have better torque at 0 RPM than diesel engines, but this would significantly increase the weight of the truck itself, above the maximum legal weight for road vehicles.\nLights.\nAn electrical connection is made between the tractor and the trailer through a cable often referred to as a \"pigtail\". This cable is a bundle of wires in a single casing. Each wire controls one of the electrical circuits on the trailer, such as running lights, brake lights, turn signals, etc. A coiled cable is used which retracts these coils when not under tension, such as when not cornering. It is these coils that cause the cable to look like a pigtail.\nIn most countries, a trailer or semi-trailer must have minimum\nWheels and tires.\nAlthough dual wheels are the most common, use of two single, wider tires, known as \"super singles\", on each axle is becoming popular among bulk cargo carriers and other weight-sensitive operators. With increased efforts to reduce greenhouse gas emissions, the use of the super-single tire is gaining popularity. There are several advantages to this configuration. The first of these is that super singles reduce fuel consumption. In 1999, tests on an oval track showed a 10% fuel savings when super singles were used. These savings are realized because less energy is wasted flexing fewer tire sidewalls. Second, the lighter overall tire weight allows a truck to be loaded with more freight. The third advantage is that the single wheel encloses less of the brake unit, which allows faster cooling and reduces brake fade.\nIn Europe, super singles became popular when the allowed weight of semitrailer rigs was increased from 38 to 40 tonnes. In this reform the trailer industry replaced two axles with dual wheels, with three axles on wide-base single wheels. The significantly lower axle weight on super singles must be considered when comparing road wear from single versus dual wheels. The majority of super singles sold in Europe have a width of . The standard 385 tires have a legal load limit of . (Note that expensive, specially reinforced 385 tires approved for do exist. Their market share is tiny, except for mounting on the steer axle.)\nSkirted trailers.\nAn innovation rapidly growing in popularity is the skirted trailer. The space between the road and the bottom of the trailer frame was traditionally left open until it was realized that the turbulent air swirling under the trailer is a major source of aerodynamic drag. Three split skirt concepts were verified by the United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) to provide fuel savings greater than 5%, and four split skirt concepts had EPA-verified fuel savings between 4% and 5%.\nSkirted trailers are often combined with Underrun Protection Systems (\"underride guards\"), greatly improving safety for passenger vehicles sharing the road.\nUnderride guard.\nUnderride protection systems can be installed at the rear, front and sides of a truck and the rear and sides of a trailer. A Rear Underrun Protection System (RUPS) is a rigid assembly hanging down from trailer's chassis, which is intended to provide some protection for passenger cars which collide with the rear of the trailer. Public awareness of this safeguard was increased in the aftermath of the accident that killed actress Jayne Mansfield on 29 June 1967, when the car she was in hit the rear of a tractor-trailer, causing fatal head trauma. After her death, the NHTSA proposed requiring a rear underride guard, also known as a \"Mansfield bar\", an \"ICC bar\", or a \"DOT bumper\". The proposal to mandate rear underride guards was withdrawn in 1971 after strong lobbying and opposition by the trucking industry, and so they were not federally mandated until 1996; that mandate did not go into effect until 1998.\nThe bottom rear of the trailer is near head level for an adult seated in a car, and without the underride guard, the only protection for such an adult's head in a rear-end collision would be the car's windshield and A pillars. The front of the car goes under the platform of the trailer rather than making contact via the passenger car bumper, so the car's protective crush zone becomes irrelevant and air bags are ineffective in protecting the passengers. If installed, the underride guard can provide a rigid area for the car to contact that is lower than the lip of the bonnet/hood, thus preventing the vehicle from squatting and running under the truck, instead ensuring that the vehicle's crush zones and engine block can absorb the force of the collision.\nIn addition to rear underride guards, truck tractor cabs may be equipped with a Front Underrun Protection System (FUPS) at the front bumper of the truck, if the front end is not low enough for the bumper to provide the adequate protection on its own. The safest tractor-trailers are also equipped with side underride guards, also called Side Underrun Protection System (SUPS). These additional barriers prevent passenger cars from skidding underneath the trailer from the side, such as in an oblique or side collision, or if the trailer jackknifes across the road, and this also helps protect cyclists, pedestrians, and other vulnerable road users. In the 1969 proposal for rear underride guards, the Federal Highway Administration indicated that, \"It is anticipated that the proposed [rear underride guard] standard will be amended, after technical studies have been completed, to extend the requirement for underride protection to the sides of large vehicles\". However, to date, a side underride guard mandate has yet to ever be proposed by the USDOT or NHTSA. In fact, for side underride guards, NHTSA has disregarded successful crash tests that stop a passenger vehicle from underriding a semitrailer, ignored recommendations, disregarded administrative petitions, and denied petitions. \u00a0In fact, for decades NHTSA has ignored credible scientific research on side underride guards and failed to take simple steps to stop these crashes.\nIn Europe, side and rear underrun protection are mandated on all lorries and trailers with a gross weight of or more. Several US states and cities have adopted or are in the process of adopting truck side guards, including New York City, Philadelphia, and Washington DC. The NTSB has recommended that the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA) develop standards for side underride protection systems for trucks, and for newly manufactured trucks to be equipped with technology meeting the standards.\nIn addition to safety benefits, these underride guards may improve fuel mileage by reducing air turbulence under the trailer at highway speeds. Another benefit of having a sturdy rear underride guard is that it may be secured to a loading dock with a hook to prevent \"trailer creep\", a movement of the trailer away from the dock, which opens up a dangerous gap during loading or unloading operations.\nSemi-truck manufacturers.\nCurrent semi-truck manufacturers include:\nAsia-Pacific.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nCanada and United States.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nEurope.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nOther locations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nFormer semi-truck manufacturers include:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nDriver's license.\nA special driver's license is required to operate various commercial vehicles.\nAustralia.\nTruck drivers in Australia require an endorsed license. These endorsements are gained through training and experience. The minimum age to hold an endorsed license is 18\u00a0years, and/or must have held open (full) driver's license for minimum 12\u00a0months.\nThe following are the heavy vehicle license classes in Australia:\nIn order to obtain an HC License the driver must have held an MR or HR license for at least 12 months. To upgrade to an MC License the driver must have held a HR or HC license for at least 12 months. From licenses MR and upward there is also a B Condition which may apply to the license if testing in a synchromesh or automatic transmission vehicle. The B Condition may be removed upon the driver proving the ability to drive a constant mesh transmission using the clutch. \"Constant mesh transmission refers to \"crash box\" transmissions, predominantly Road Ranger eighteen-speed transmissions in Australia.\"\nCanada.\nRegulations vary by province. A license to operate a vehicle with air brakes is required (i.e., normally a Class I, II, or III commercial license with an \"A\" or \"S\" endorsement in provinces other than Ontario). In Ontario, a \"Z\" endorsement is required to drive any vehicle using air brakes; in provinces other than Ontario, the \"A\" endorsement is for air brake operation only, and an \"S\" endorsement is for both operation and adjustment of air brakes. Anyone holding a valid Ontario driver's license (i.e., excluding a motorcycle license) with a \"Z\" endorsement can legally drive any air-brake-equipped truck-trailer combination with a registered- or actual-gross-vehicle-weight (i.e., including towing- and towed-vehicle) up to 11\u00a0tonnes, that includes one trailer weighing no more than 4.6\u00a0tonnes if the license falls under the following three classes: Class E (school bus\u2014maximum 24-passenger capacity or ambulance), F (regular bus\u2014maximum 24-passenger capacity or ambulance) or G (car, van, or small-truck).\nA Class B (any school bus), C (any urban-transit-vehicle or highway-coach), or D (heavy trucks other than tractor-trailers) license enables its holder to drive any truck-trailer combination with a registered- or actual-gross-vehicle-weight (i.e., including towing- and towed-vehicle) greater than 11\u00a0tonnes, that includes one trailer weighing no more than 4.6\u00a0tonnes. Anyone holding an Ontario Class A license (or its equivalent) can drive any truck-trailer combination with a registered- or actual-gross-vehicle-weight (i.e., including towing- and towed-vehicles) greater than 11 tonnes, that includes one or more trailers weighing more than 4.6 tonnes.\nEurope.\nA category CE driving licence is required to drive a tractor-trailer in Europe. Category C (\u0393 in Greece) is required for vehicles over , while category E is for heavy trailers, which in the case of trucks and buses means any trailer over . Vehicles over \u2014which is the maximum limit of B license\u2014but under 7,500 kg can be driven with a C1 license. Buses require a D (\u0394 in Greece) license. A bus that is registered for no more than 16 passengers, excluding the driver, can be driven with a D1 license.\nNew Zealand.\nIn New Zealand, drivers of heavy vehicles require specific licenses, termed as classes. A Class 1 license (\"car license\") will allow the driving of any vehicle with Gross Laden Weight (GLW) or Gross Combination Weight (GCW) of or less. For other types of vehicles the classes are separately licensed as follows:\nFurther information on the New Zealand licensing system for heavy vehicles can be found at the https://.\nTaiwan.\nThe Road Traffic Security Rules () require a combination vehicle driver license () to drive a combination vehicle (). These rules define a combination vehicle as a motor vehicle towing a heavy trailer, i.e., a trailer with a gross weight of more than .\nUnited States.\nDrivers of semi-trailer trucks generally require a Class A commercial driver's license (CDL) to operate any combination vehicles with a gross combination weight rating (or GCWR) in excess of if the gross vehicle weight rating (GVWR) of the towed vehicle(s) is in excess of . Some states (such as North Dakota) provide exemptions for farmers, allowing non-commercial license holders to operate semis within a certain air-mile radius of their reporting location. State exemptions, however, are only applicable in intrastate commerce; stipulations of the Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) may be applied in interstate commerce. Also a person under the age of 21 cannot operate a commercial vehicle outside the state where the commercial license was issued. This restriction may also be mirrored by certain states in their intrastate regulations. A person must be at least 18 in order to be issued a commercial license.\nIn addition, \"endorsements\" are necessary for certain cargo and vehicle arrangements and types;\nRole in trade.\nModern day semi-trailer trucks often operate as a part of a domestic or international transport infrastructure to support containerized cargo shipment.\nVarious types of rail flat bed train cars are modified to hold the cargo trailer or container with wheels or without. This is called \"Intermodal\" or \"piggyback\". The system allows the cargo to switch from highway to railway or vice versa with relative ease by using gantry cranes.\nThe large trailers pulled by a tractor unit come in many styles, lengths, and shapes. Some common types are: vans, reefers, flatbeds, sidelifts and tankers. These trailers may be refrigerated, heated, ventilated, or pressurized, depending on climate and cargo. Some trailers have movable wheel axles that can be adjusted by moving them on a track underneath the trailer body and securing them in place with large pins. The purpose of this is to help adjust weight distribution over the various axles, to comply with local laws.\nMedia.\nVideo games and truck simulators.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "29383", "revid": "50753085", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29383", "title": "Stonewall riots", "text": "1969 uprising for modern LGBTQ rights\nThe Stonewall riots (also known as the Stonewall uprising, Stonewall rebellion, Stonewall revolution, or simply Stonewall) were a series of spontaneous riots and demonstrations against a police raid that took place in the early morning of June 28, 1969, at the Stonewall Inn, in the Greenwich Village neighborhood of Lower Manhattan in New York City. Although the demonstrations were not the first time American LGBTQ people fought back against government-sponsored persecution of sexual minorities, the Stonewall riots marked a new beginning for the gay rights movement in the United States and around the world.\nAmerican gays and lesbians in the 1950s and 1960s faced a legal system more anti-homosexual than those of some other Western and Eastern Bloc countries. Early homophile groups in the U.S. sought to prove that gay people could be assimilated into society, and they favored non-confrontational education for homosexuals and heterosexuals alike. The last years of the 1960s, however, were very contentious, as many social movements were active, including the civil rights movement, the counterculture of the 1960s, and antiwar demonstrations. These influences, along with the liberal environment of Greenwich Village, served as catalysts for the Stonewall riots.\nVery few establishments welcomed openly gay people in the 1950s and 1960s. Those that did were often bars, although bar owners and managers were rarely gay. The Stonewall Inn was owned by the Mafia and catered to an assortment of patrons. It was popular among the poorest and most marginalized people in the gay community: drag queens, representatives of a newly self-aware transgender community, effeminate young men, hustlers, and homeless youth.\nPolice raids on gay bars were routine in the 1960s, but, in contrast to what was typical for raids at the time, the Mafia was not alerted by police prior to their arrival, nor was the NYPD's sixth precinct. Beyond this, raids typically occurred on weeknights in the early evening, when bar crowds were expected to be small. The Stonewall raid, in contrast, was to take place late on a Friday night, when crowd sizes were expected to be at their highest. Officers quickly lost control of the situation at the Stonewall Inn and attracted a crowd that was incited to riot. Tensions between New York City police and gay residents of Greenwich Village erupted into more protests the next evening and again several nights later. Within weeks, Village residents quickly organized into activist groups to concentrate efforts on establishing places for gays and lesbians to be open about their sexual orientation without fear of being arrested.\nFollowing the Stonewall riots, sexual minorities in New York City faced gender, class, and generational obstacles to becoming a cohesive community. Over the following weeks and months, they initiated politically active social organizations and launched publications that spoke openly about rights for gay and trans people. The first anniversary of the riots was marked by peaceful demonstrations in several American cities that have since grown to become pride parades. The Stonewall National Monument was established at the site in 2016. Today, pride events are held annually throughout the world toward the end of June to mark the Stonewall riots.\nBackground.\nHomosexuality in 20th-century United States.\nFollowing the social upheaval of World War\u00a0II, many people in the United States felt a fervent desire to \"restore the prewar social order and hold off the forces of change\", according to historian Barry Adam. Spurred by the national emphasis on anti-communism, Senator Joseph McCarthy conducted hearings searching for communists in the U.S. government, the U.S. Army, and other government-funded agencies and institutions, leading to a national paranoia. Anarchists, communists, and other people deemed un-American and subversive were considered security risks. Gay men and lesbians were included in this list by the U.S. State Department on the theory that they were susceptible to blackmail. In 1950, a Senate investigation chaired by Clyde R. Hoey noted in a report, \"It is generally believed that those who engage in overt acts of perversion lack the emotional stability of normal persons\", and said all of the government's intelligence agencies \"are in complete agreement that sex perverts in Government constitute security risks\". Between 1947 and 1950, 1,700 federal job applications were denied, 4,380 people were discharged from the military, and 420 were fired from their government jobs for being suspected homosexuals.\nThroughout the 1950s and 1960s, the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) and police departments kept lists of known homosexuals and their favored establishments and friends; the U.S. Post Office kept track of addresses where material pertaining to homosexuality was mailed. State and local governments followed suit: bars catering to gay men and lesbians were shut down and their customers were arrested and exposed in newspapers. Cities performed \"sweeps\" to rid neighborhoods, parks, bars, and beaches of gay people. They outlawed the wearing of opposite-gender clothes and universities expelled instructors suspected of being homosexual.\nIn 1952, the American Psychiatric Association listed homosexuality in the \"Diagnostic and Statistical Manual\" (\"DSM\") as a mental disorder. A large-scale study of homosexuality in 1962 was used to justify the inclusion of the \"disorder\" as a supposed pathological hidden fear of the opposite sex caused by traumatic parent\u2013child relationships. This view was widely influential in the medical profession. In 1956, the psychologist Evelyn Hooker performed a study that compared the happiness and well-adjusted nature of self-identified homosexual men with heterosexual men and found no difference. Her study stunned the medical community and made her a hero to many gay men and lesbians, but homosexuality remained in the \"DSM\" until 1974.\nHomophile activism.\nIn response to this trend, two organizations formed independently of each other to advance the cause of gay men and lesbians and provide opportunities where they could socialize without fear of being arrested. Los Angeles area homosexuals created the Mattachine Society in 1950, in the home of communist activist Harry Hay. Their objectives were to unify homosexuals, educate them, provide leadership, and assist \"sexual deviants\" with legal troubles. Facing enormous opposition to their radical approach, in 1953 the Mattachine shifted their focus to assimilation and respectability. They reasoned that they would change more minds about homosexuality by proving that gay men and lesbians were normal people, no different from heterosexuals. Soon after, several women in San Francisco met in their living rooms to form the Daughters of Bilitis (DOB) for lesbians. Although the eight women who created the DOB initially came together to be able to have a safe place to dance, as the DOB grew they developed similar goals to the Mattachine and urged their members to assimilate into general society.\nOne of the first challenges to government repression came in 1953. An organization named ONE, Inc. published a magazine called \"ONE\". The U.S. Postal Service refused to mail its August issue, which concerned homosexual people in heterosexual marriages, on the grounds that the material was obscene despite it being covered in brown paper wrapping. The case eventually went to the Supreme Court, which in 1958 ruled that ONE, Inc. could mail its materials through the Postal Service.\nHomophile organizations as homosexual groups self-identified in this era\u2014grew in number and spread to the East Coast. Gradually, members of these organizations grew bolder. Frank Kameny founded the Mattachine of Washington, D.C. He had been fired from the U.S. Army Map Service for being a homosexual and sued unsuccessfully to be reinstated. Kameny wrote that homosexuals were no different from heterosexuals, often aiming his efforts at mental health professionals, some of whom attended Mattachine and DOB meetings telling members they were abnormal.\nIn 1965, news on Cuban prison work camps for homosexuals inspired Mattachine New York and D.C. to organize protests at the United Nations and the White House. Similar demonstrations were then held also at other government buildings. The purpose was to protest the treatment of gay people in Cuba and U.S. employment discrimination. These pickets shocked many gay people and upset some of the leadership of Mattachine and the DOB. At the same time, demonstrations in the civil rights movement and opposition to the Vietnam War all grew in prominence, frequency, and severity throughout the 1960s, as did their confrontations with police forces.\nEarlier resistance and riots.\nOn the outer fringes of a few small gay communities were people who challenged traditional gender norms\u2014effeminate men, masculine women, or people who dressed and lived in ways that contrasted with their sex assigned at birth, either part-time or full-time. At the time, nomenclature classified them as transvestites. Thus, as the most visible representatives for sexual minorities, they belied the carefully crafted image promoted by the Mattachine Society and DOB, which sought to portray homosexuals capable of fitting within a normative society. The Mattachine and DOB believed that being arrested for wearing clothing normative of the opposite gender was akin to the struggles of homophile organizations\u2014similar but distinctly separate.\nGay, lesbian, bisexual, and transgender people rioted at the Cooper Do-nuts caf\u00e9 in Los Angeles in 1959 to counteract police harassment. In a larger 1966 event in San Francisco, drag queens, hustlers, and trans women were sitting in Compton's Cafeteria when the police arrived to arrest people appearing to be physically male but were presenting as women. A riot ensued: cafeteria patrons were slinging cups, plates, and saucers, breaking the plexiglass windows in the front of the restaurant. They returned several days later to break the windows again shortly after they were replaced. Professor Susan Stryker classifies the Compton's Cafeteria riot as an \"act of anti-transgender discrimination, rather than an act of discrimination against sexual orientation\" and connects the uprising to the intersectionality of gender, race, and class in relation to sexual orientation, which were being downplayed by contemporary homophile organizations. It marked the beginning of transgender activism in San Francisco.\nGreenwich Village.\nThe Manhattan neighborhoods of Greenwich Village and Harlem were home to sizable gay and lesbian populations after World War\u00a0I, when people who had served in the military took advantage of the opportunity to settle in larger cities. The enclaves of gay men and lesbians, described by a newspaper story as \"short-haired women and long-haired men\", developed a distinct subculture through the following two decades. Prohibition inadvertently benefited gay establishments, as drinking alcohol was pushed underground along with other behaviors considered immoral. New York City passed laws against homosexuality in public and private businesses, but because alcohol was in high demand, speakeasies and impromptu drinking establishments were so numerous and temporary that authorities were unable to police them all. However, police raids continued, resulting in the closure of iconic establishments such as Eve's Hangout in 1926.\nThe social repression of the 1950s resulted in a cultural revolution in Greenwich Village. A cohort of poets, later named the Beat poets, wrote about the evils of the social organization at the time, glorifying anarchy, drugs, and hedonistic pleasures over unquestioning social compliance, consumerism, and closed-mindedness. Of them, Allen Ginsberg and William S. Burroughs\u2014both Greenwich Village residents\u2014also wrote bluntly and honestly about homosexuality. Their writings attracted sympathetic liberal-minded people, as well as homosexuals looking for a community.\nBy the early 1960s, a campaign to rid New York City of gay bars was in full effect by order of Mayor Robert F. Wagner\u00a0Jr., who was concerned about the image of the city in preparation for the 1964 World's Fair. The city revoked the liquor licenses of the bars and undercover police officers worked to entrap as many homosexual men as possible. Entrapment usually consisted of an undercover officer who found a man in a bar or public park, engaged him in conversation; if the conversation headed toward the possibility that they might leave together\u2014or the officer bought the man a drink\u2014he was arrested for solicitation. One story in the \"New York Post\" described an arrest in a gym locker room, where the officer grabbed his crotch, moaning, and a man who asked him if he was all right was arrested. Few lawyers would defend cases as undesirable as these and some of those lawyers kicked back their fees to the arresting officer.\nThe Mattachine Society succeeded in getting newly elected mayor John Lindsay to end the campaign of police entrapment in New York City. They had a more difficult time with the New York State Liquor Authority (SLA). While no laws prohibited serving homosexuals, courts allowed the SLA discretion in approving and revoking liquor licenses for businesses that might become \"disorderly\". Despite the high population of gay men and lesbians who called Greenwich Village home, very few places existed, other than bars, where they were able to congregate openly without being harassed or arrested. In 1966 the New York Mattachine held a \"sip-in\" at a Greenwich Village bar named Julius, which was frequented by gay men, to illustrate the discrimination homosexuals faced.\nLindsay's re-election campaign for mayor in the summer of 1969 resulted in an acceleration of police enforcement action against gay bars/nightclubs and their patrons, stemming primarily from a belief that such enforcement would be praised by an increasingly anxious general public amidst the myriad social movements of the era. Gay and queer civilians were seen as an easy target for political scapegoating as a result of their marginalized position in American society, combined with the perceived unlikelihood that they or anyone else would actively resist police violence against them.\nA week prior to Stonewall, The Checkerboard, another popular gay bar in the area, was raided by police. Vigilante attacks against gay and queer civilians increased during the same period; walkie-talkies were used to coordinate shootings, blackmailing, strangulations, and killings of gay men in the area.\nNone of the bars frequented by gay men and lesbians were owned by gay people. Almost all of them were owned and controlled by organized crime, who treated the regulars poorly, watered down the liquor, and overcharged for drinks. However, they also paid off police to prevent frequent raids.\nStonewall Inn.\nThe Stonewall Inn, located at 51 and 53 Christopher Street, along with several other establishments in the city, was owned by the Genovese crime family. In 1966, three members of the Mafia invested $3,500 to turn the Stonewall Inn into a gay bar, after it had been a restaurant and a nightclub for heterosexuals. Once a week a police officer would collect envelopes of cash as a payoff known as a gayola, as the Stonewall Inn had no liquor license. It had no running water behind the bar\u2014dirty glasses were run through tubs of water and immediately reused. There were no fire exits, and the toilets overran consistently. Though the bar was not used for prostitution, drug sales and other black market activities took place. It was the only bar for gay men in New York City where dancing was allowed; dancing was its main draw since its re-opening as a gay club.\nVisitors to the Stonewall Inn in 1969 were greeted by a bouncer who inspected them through a peephole in the door. The legal drinking age was 18 and to avoid unwittingly letting in undercover police (who were called \"Lily Law\", \"Alice Blue Gown\", or \"Betty Badge\"), visitors would have to be known by the doorman or 'look gay'. Patrons were required to sign their names in a book to prove that the bar was a private \"bottle club\", but they rarely signed their real names. There were two dance floors in the Stonewall. The interior was painted black, making it very dark inside, with pulsing gel lights or black lights. If police were spotted, regular white lights were turned on, signaling that everyone should stop dancing or touching. In the rear of the bar was a smaller room frequented by \"queens\"; it was one of two bars where effeminate men who wore makeup and teased their hair (though dressed in men's clothing) could go. Only a few people in full drag were allowed in by the bouncers. The customers were \"98 percent male\" but a few lesbians sometimes came to the bar. Younger homeless adolescent males, who slept in nearby Christopher Park, would often try to get in so customers would buy them drinks. The age of the clientele ranged between the upper teens and early thirties and the racial mix was distributed among mainly white, with Black, and Hispanic patrons. Because of its mix of people, its location, and the attraction of dancing, the Stonewall Inn was known by many as \"\"the\" gay bar in the city\".\nPolice raids on gay bars were frequent, occurring on average once a month for each bar. Many bars kept extra liquor in a secret panel behind the bar, or in a car down the block, to facilitate resuming business as quickly as possible if alcohol was seized. Bar management usually knew about raids beforehand due to police tip-offs, and raids occurred early enough in the evening that business could commence after the police had finished. During a typical raid, the lights were turned on and customers were lined up and their identification cards checked. Those without identification or dressed in full drag were arrested; others were allowed to leave. Some of the men, including those in drag, used their draft cards as identification. Women were required to wear three pieces of feminine clothing and would be arrested if found not wearing them. Typically, employees and management of the bars were also arrested. The period immediately before June\u00a028, 1969, was marked by frequent raids of local bars\u2014including a raid at the Stonewall Inn on the Tuesday before the riots\u2014and the closing of the Checkerboard, the Tele-Star, and two other clubs in Greenwich Village.\nRiots.\nPolice raid.\nAt 1:20 a.m. on Saturday, June 28, 1969, four plainclothes policemen in dark suits, two patrol officers in uniform, Detective Charles Smythe, and Deputy Inspector Seymour Pine arrived at the Stonewall Inn's double doors and announced \"Police! We're taking the place!\" Two undercover policewomen and two undercover policemen entered the bar early that evening to gather visual evidence, as the Public Morals Squad waited outside for the signal. Once ready, the undercover officers called for backup from the Sixth Precinct using the bar's pay telephone. Stonewall employees do not recall being tipped off that a raid was to occur that night, as was the custom. The music was turned off and the main lights were turned on. Approximately 200 people were in the bar that night. Patrons who had never experienced a police raid were confused. A few who realized what was happening began to run for doors and windows in the bathrooms, but police barred the doors. Michael Fader remembered, \"Things happened so fast you kind of got caught not knowing. All of a sudden there were police there and we were told to all get in lines and to have our identification ready to be led out of the bar.\"\nThe raid did not go as planned. Standard procedure was to line up the patrons, check their identification and have female police officers take patrons they perceived to be women to the bathroom to verify their sex. The officers would then arrest any trans women or drag queens. The women refused to go with the officers and the men in line refused to produce their identification. The police decided to take everyone present to the police station, after separating those suspected of cross-dressing in a room in the back of the bar. All parties involved recall that a sense of discomfort spread very quickly, started by police who assaulted some of the lesbians by \"feeling some of them up inappropriately\" while frisking them.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWhen did you ever see a fag fight back?... Now, times were a-changin'. Tuesday night was the last night for bullshit... Predominantly, the theme [w]as, \"this shit has got to stop!\"\n\u2014Ronnie Di Brienza\nThe police were to transport the bar's alcohol in patrol wagons. Twenty-eight cases of beer and nineteen bottles of hard liquor were seized, but the patrol wagons had not yet arrived, so patrons were required to wait in line for about 15 minutes. Those who were not arrested were released from the front door, but they did not leave quickly as usual. Instead, they stopped outside and a crowd began to grow and watch. Within minutes, between 100 and 150 people had congregated outside, some after they were released from inside the Stonewall and some after noticing the police cars and the crowd. Although the police forcefully pushed or kicked some patrons out of the bar, some customers released by the police performed for the crowd by posing and saluting the police in an exaggerated fashion. The crowd's applause encouraged them further.\nWhen the first patrol wagon arrived, Inspector Pine recalled that the crowd\u2014most of whom were assumed to be homosexual\u2014had grown to at least ten times the number of people who were arrested and they all became very quiet. Confusion over radio communication delayed the arrival of a second wagon. The police began escorting Mafia members into the first wagon, to the cheers of the bystanders. Next, regular employees were loaded into the wagon. A bystander shouted, \"Gay power!\", someone began singing \"We Shall Overcome\" and the crowd reacted with amusement and general good humor mixed with \"growing and intensive hostility\". An officer shoved a person in drag, who responded by hitting him on the head with her purse. The cop clubbed her over the head, as the crowd began to boo. Author Edmund White, who had been passing by, recalled, \"Everyone's restless, angry, and high-spirited. No one has a slogan, no one even has an attitude, but something's brewing.\" Pennies, then beer bottles, were thrown at the wagon as a rumor spread through the crowd that patrons still inside the bar were being beaten.\nA scuffle broke out when a woman in handcuffs was escorted from the door of the bar to the waiting police wagon several times. She escaped repeatedly and fought with four of the police, swearing and shouting, for about ten minutes. Described as \"a typical New York butch\" and \"a dyke\u2013stone butch\", she had been hit on the head by an officer with a baton for, as one witness claimed, complaining that her handcuffs were too tight. Bystanders recalled that the woman, whose identity remains unknown (Storm\u00e9 DeLarverie has been identified by some, including herself, as the woman, but accounts vary), sparked the crowd to fight when she looked at bystanders and shouted, \"Why don't you guys do something?\" After an officer picked her up and heaved her into the back of the wagon, the crowd became a mob and became violent.\nViolence breaks out.\nThe police tried to restrain some of the crowd, knocking a few people down, which incited bystanders even more. Some of those handcuffed in the wagon escaped when police left them unattended (deliberately, according to some witnesses). As the crowd tried to overturn the police wagon, two police cars and the wagon\u2014with a few slashed tires\u2014left immediately, with Inspector Pine urging them to return as soon as possible. The commotion attracted more people who learned what was happening. Someone in the crowd declared that the bar had been raided because \"they didn't pay off the cops\", to which someone else yelled, \"Let's pay them off!\" Coins sailed through the air towards the police as the crowd shouted \"Pigs!\" and \"Faggot cops!\" Beer cans were thrown and the police lashed out, dispersing some of the crowd who found a construction site nearby with stacks of bricks. The police, outnumbered by between 500 and 600 people, grabbed several people, including activist folk singer Dave Van Ronk\u2014who had been attracted to the revolt from a bar two doors away from the Stonewall. Though Van Ronk was not gay, he had experienced police violence when he participated in antiwar demonstrations: \"As far as I was concerned, anybody who'd stand against the cops was all right with me and that's why I stayed in... Every time you turned around the cops were pulling some outrage or another.\" Van Ronk was the first of thirteen arrested that night. Ten police officers\u2014including two policewomen\u2014barricaded themselves, Van Ronk, Howard Smith (a column writer for \"The Village Voice\"), and several handcuffed detainees inside the Stonewall Inn for their own safety.\nMultiple accounts of the riot assert that there was no pre-existing organization or apparent cause for the demonstration; what ensued was spontaneous. Michael Fader explained:\nWe all had a collective feeling like we'd had enough of this kind of shit. It wasn't anything tangible anybody said to anyone else, it was just kind of like everything over the years had come to a head on that one particular night in the one particular place and it was not an organized demonstration...\nThe only known photograph from the first night of the riots, taken by freelance photographer Joseph Ambrosini, shows the homeless gay youth who slept in nearby Christopher Park, scuffling with police. Jackie Hormona and Tommy Lanigan-Schmidt are on the far left.\nThe Mattachine Society newsletter a month later offered its explanation of why the riots occurred: \"It catered largely to a group of people who are not welcome in, or cannot afford, other places of homosexual social gathering... The Stonewall became home to these kids. When it was raided, they fought for it. That and the fact that they had nothing to lose other than the most tolerant and broadminded gay place in town, explains why.\"\nGarbage cans, garbage, bottles, rocks, and bricks were hurled at the building, breaking the windows. Witnesses attest that \"flame queens\", hustlers, and gay \"street kids\"\u2014the most outcast people in the gay community\u2014were responsible for the first volley of projectiles, as well as the uprooting of a parking meter used as a battering ram on the doors of the Stonewall Inn.\nThe mob lit garbage on fire and stuffed it through the broken windows as the police grabbed a fire hose. Because it had no water pressure, the hose was ineffective in dispersing the crowd and seemed only to encourage them. Marsha P. Johnson later said that it was the police that had started the fire in the bar. When demonstrators broke through the windows\u2014which had been covered by plywood by the bar owners to deter the police from raiding the bar\u2014the police inside unholstered their pistols. The doors flew open and officers pointed their weapons at the angry crowd, threatening to shoot. Howard Smith, in the bar with the police, took a wrench from the bar and stuffed it in his pants, unsure if he might have to use it against the mob or the police. He watched someone squirt lighter fluid into the bar; as it was lit and the police took aim, sirens were heard and fire trucks arrived. The onslaught had lasted 45 minutes.\nWhen the violence broke out, the women and transmasculine people being held down the street at The Women's House of Detention joined in by chanting, setting fire to their belongings and tossing them into the street below. The historian Hugh Ryan says, \"When I would talk to people about Stonewall, they would tell me, that night on Stonewall, we looked to the prison because we saw the women rioting and chanting, 'Gay rights, gay rights, gay rights.'\"\nEscalation.\nThe Tactical Patrol Force (TPF) of the New York City Police Department arrived to free the police trapped inside the Stonewall. One officer's eye was cut and a few others were bruised from being struck by flying debris. Bob Kohler, who was walking his dog by the Stonewall that night, saw the TPF arrive:\nI had been in enough riots to know the fun was over... The cops were totally humiliated. This never, ever happened. They were angrier than I guess they had ever been because everybody else had rioted... but the fairies were not supposed to riot... no group had ever forced cops to retreat before, so the anger was just enormous. I mean, they wanted to kill.\nWith larger numbers, police detained anyone they could and put them in patrol wagons to go to jail, though Inspector Pine recalled, \"Fights erupted with the transvestites, who wouldn't go into the patrol wagon.\" His recollection was corroborated by another witness across the street who said, \"All I could see about who was fighting was that it was transvestites and they were fighting furiously.\"\nThe TPF formed a phalanx and attempted to clear the streets by marching slowly and pushing the crowd back. The mob openly mocked the police. The crowd cheered, started impromptu kick lines and sang to the tune of \"Ta-ra-ra Boom-de-ay\": \"We are the Stonewall girls/ We wear our hair in curls/ We don't wear underwear/ We show our pubic hair.\" Lucian Truscott reported in \"The Village Voice\": \"A stagnant situation there brought on some gay tomfoolery in the form of a chorus line facing the line of helmeted and club-carrying cops. Just as the line got into a full kick routine, the TPF advanced again and cleared the crowd of screaming gay power[-]ites down Christopher to Seventh Avenue.\" One participant who had been in the Stonewall during the raid recalled, \"The police rushed us and that's when I realized this is not a good thing to do, because they got me in the back with a nightstick.\" Another account stated, \"I just can't ever get that one sight out of my mind. The cops with the [nightsticks] and the kick line on the other side. It was the most amazing thing... And all the sudden that kick line, which I guess was a spoof on the machismo... I think that's when I felt rage. Because people were getting smashed with bats. And for what? A kick line.\"\nMarsha P. Johnson, an African-American street queen, recalled arriving at the bar around \"2:00 [am]\", and that at that point the riots were well underway, with the building in flames. As the riots continued into the early morning, Johnson, along with Zazu Nova and Jackie Hormona, were noted as \"three individuals known to have been in the vanguard\" of the pushback against the police.\nCraig Rodwell, owner of the Oscar Wilde Memorial Bookshop, reported watching police chase participants through the crooked streets, only to see them appear around the next corner behind the police. Members of the mob stopped cars, overturning one of them to block Christopher Street. Jack Nichols and Lige Clarke, in their column printed in \"Screw\", declared that \"massive crowds of angry protesters chased [the police] for blocks screaming, 'Catch them!'\"\nBy 4:00\u00a0am, the streets had nearly been cleared. Many people sat on stoops or gathered nearby in Christopher Park throughout the morning, dazed in disbelief at what had transpired. Many witnesses remembered the surreal and eerie quiet that descended upon Christopher Street, though there continued to be \"electricity in the air\". One commented: \"There was a certain beauty in the aftermath of the riot... It was obvious, at least to me, that a lot of people really were gay and, you know, this was our street.\" Thirteen people had been arrested. Some in the crowd were hospitalized, and four police officers were injured. Almost everything in the Stonewall Inn was broken. Inspector Pine had intended to close and dismantle the Stonewall Inn that night. Pay phones, toilets, mirrors, jukeboxes, and cigarette machines were all smashed, possibly in the riot and possibly by the police.\nSecond night of rioting.\nDuring the siege of the Stonewall, Craig Rodwell called \"The New York Times\", the \"New York Post\", and the \"Daily News\" to tell them what was happening. All three papers covered the riots; the \"Daily News\" placed coverage on the front page. News of the riot spread quickly throughout Greenwich Village, fueled by rumors that it had been organized by the Students for a Democratic Society, the Black Panthers, or triggered by \"a homosexual police officer whose roommate went dancing at the Stonewall against the officer's wishes\". All day Saturday, June 28, people came to stare at the burned and blackened Stonewall Inn. Graffiti appeared on the walls of the bar, declaring \"Drag power\", \"They invaded our rights\", \"Support gay power\" and \"Legalize gay bars\", along with accusations of police looting and\u2014regarding the status of the bar\u2014\"We are open.\"\nThe next night, rioting again surrounded Christopher Street; participants remember differently which night was more frantic or violent. Many of the same people returned from the previous evening\u2014hustlers, street youths, and \"queens\"\u2014but they were joined by \"police provocateurs\", curious bystanders, and even tourists. Remarkable to many was the sudden exhibition of homosexual affection in public, as described by one witness: \"From going to places where you had to knock on a door and speak to someone through a peephole in order to get in. We were just out. We were in the streets.\"\nThousands of people had gathered in front of the Stonewall, which had opened again, choking Christopher Street until the crowd spilled into adjoining blocks. The throng surrounded buses and cars, harassing the occupants unless they either admitted they were gay or indicated their support for the demonstrators. Marsha P. Johnson was seen climbing a lamppost and dropping a heavy bag onto the hood of a police car, shattering the windshield.\nAs on the previous evening, fires were started in garbage cans throughout the neighborhood. More than a hundred police were present from the Fourth, Fifth, Sixth and Ninth Precincts, but after 2:00\u00a0a.m. the TPF arrived again. Kick lines and police chases waxed and waned; when police captured demonstrators, whom the majority of witnesses described as \"sissies\" or \"swishes\", the crowd surged to recapture them. Again, street battling ensued until 4:00\u00a0am.\nBeat poet and longtime Greenwich Village resident Allen Ginsberg lived on Christopher Street and happened upon the jubilant chaos. After he learned of the riot that had occurred the previous evening, he stated, \"Gay power! Isn't that great!... It's about time we did something to assert ourselves\" and visited the open Stonewall Inn for the first time. While walking home, he declared to Lucian Truscott, \"You know, the guys there were so beautiful\u2014they've lost that wounded look that fags all had 10 years ago.\"\nActivist Mark Segal recounts that Martha Shelley and Marty Robinson stood and made speeches from the front door of the Stonewall on June 29, 1969, the second night of the riot.\nLeaflets, press coverage, and more violence.\nActivity in Greenwich Village was sporadic on Monday, June 30, and Tuesday, July 1, partly due to rain. Police and Village residents had a few altercations, as both groups antagonized each other. Craig Rodwell and his partner Fred Sargeant took the opportunity the morning after the first riot to print and distribute 5,000 leaflets, one of them reading: \"Get the Mafia and the Cops out of Gay Bars.\" The leaflets called for gay people to own their own establishments, for a boycott of the Stonewall and other Mafia-owned bars, and for public pressure on the mayor's office to investigate the \"intolerable situation\".\nNot everyone in the gay community considered the revolt a positive development. To many older homosexuals and many members of the Mattachine Society who had worked throughout the 1960s to promote homosexuals as no different from heterosexuals, the display of violence and effeminate behavior was embarrassing. Randy Wicker, who had marched in the first gay picket lines before the White House in 1965, said the \"screaming queens forming chorus lines and kicking went against everything that I wanted people to think about homosexuals... that we were a bunch of drag queens in the Village acting disorderly and tacky and cheap.\" Others found the closing of the Stonewall Inn, termed a \"sleaze joint\", as advantageous to the Village.\nOn Wednesday, however, \"The Village Voice\" ran reports of the riots, written by Howard Smith and Lucian Truscott, that included unflattering descriptions of the events and its participants: \"forces of faggotry\", \"limp wrists\" and \"Sunday fag follies\". A mob descended upon Christopher Street once again and threatened to burn down the offices of \"The Village Voice,\" which at the time was headquartered several buildings west of the Stonewall Inn on Christopher Street; that proximity gave Truscott and other writers for the newspaper first hand observations of the uprising. Also in the mob of between 500 and 1,000 were other groups that had had unsuccessful confrontations with the police and were curious how the police were defeated in this situation. Another explosive street battle took place, with injuries to demonstrators and police alike, local shops getting looted, and arrests of five people. The incidents on Wednesday night lasted about an hour and were summarized by one witness: \"The word is out. Christopher Street shall be liberated. The fags have had it with oppression.\"\nAftermath.\nThe feeling of urgency spread throughout Greenwich Village, even to people who had not witnessed the riots. Many who were moved by the rebellion attended organizational meetings, sensing an opportunity to take action. On July 4, 1969, the Mattachine Society performed its annual picket in front of Independence Hall in Philadelphia, called the Annual Reminder. Organizers Craig Rodwell, Frank Kameny, Randy Wicker, Barbara Gittings, and Kay Lahusen, who had all participated for several years, took a bus along with other picketers from New York City to Philadelphia. Since 1965, the pickets had been very controlled: women wore skirts and men wore suits and ties and all marched quietly in organized lines. This year Rodwell remembered feeling restricted by the rules Kameny had set. When two women spontaneously held hands, Kameny broke them apart, saying, \"None of that! None of that!\" Rodwell, however, convinced about ten couples to hold hands. The hand-holding couples made Kameny furious, but they earned more press attention than all of the previous marches. Participant Lilli Vincenz remembered, \"It was clear that things were changing. People who had felt oppressed now felt empowered.\" Rodwell returned to New York City determined to change the established quiet, meek ways of trying to get attention. One of his first priorities was planning Christopher Street Liberation Day.\nGay Liberation Front.\nAlthough the Mattachine Society had existed since the 1950s, many of their methods now seemed too mild for people who had witnessed or been inspired by the riots. Mattachine recognized the shift in attitudes in a story from their newsletter entitled, \"The Hairpin Drop Heard Around the World.\" When a Mattachine officer suggested an \"amicable and sweet\" candlelight vigil demonstration, a man in the audience fumed and shouted, \"Sweet! \"Bullshit!\" That's the role society has been forcing these queens to play.\" With a flyer announcing: \"Do You Think Homosexuals Are Revolting? You Bet Your Sweet Ass We Are!\", the Gay Liberation Front (GLF) was soon formed, the first gay organization to use \"gay\" in its name. Previous organizations such as the Mattachine Society, the Daughters of Bilitis (DOB), and various homophile groups had masked their purpose by deliberately choosing obscure names.\nThe rise of militancy became apparent to Frank Kameny and Barbara Gittings\u2014who had worked in homophile organizations for years and were both very public about their roles\u2014when they attended a GLF meeting to see the new group. A young GLF member demanded to know who they were and what their credentials were. Gittings, nonplussed, stammered, \"I'm gay. That's why I'm here.\" The GLF borrowed tactics from and aligned themselves with black and antiwar demonstrators with the ideal that they \"could work to restructure American society\". They took on causes of the Black Panthers, marching to the Women's House of Detention in support of Afeni Shakur and other radical New Left causes. Four months after the group formed, however, it disbanded when members were unable to agree on operating procedure.\nGay Activists Alliance.\nWithin six months of the Stonewall riots, activists started a citywide newspaper called \"Gay\"; they considered it necessary because the most liberal publication in the city\u2014\"The Village Voice\"\u2014refused to print the word \"gay\" in GLF advertisements seeking new members and volunteers. Two other newspapers were initiated within a six-week period: \"Come Out!\" and \"Gay Power\"; the readership of these three periodicals quickly climbed to between 20,000 and 25,000.\nGLF members organized several same-sex dances, but GLF meetings were chaotic. When Bob Kohler asked for clothes and money to help the homeless youth who had participated in the riots, many of whom slept in Christopher Park or Sheridan Square, the response was a discussion on the downfall of capitalism. In late December 1969, several people who had visited GLF meetings and left out of frustration formed the Gay Activists Alliance (GAA). The GAA was to be more orderly and entirely focused on gay issues. Their constitution began, \"We as liberated homosexual activists demand the freedom for expression of our dignity and value as human beings.\" The GAA developed and perfected a confrontational tactic called a zap: they would catch a politician off guard during a public relations opportunity and force him or her to acknowledge gay and lesbian rights. City councilmen were zapped and mayor John Lindsay was zapped several times\u2014once on television when GAA members made up the majority of the audience.\nPolice raids on gay bars did not stop after the Stonewall riots. In March 1970, deputy inspector Seymour Pine raided the Zodiac and 17 Barrow Street. An after-hours gay club with no liquor or occupancy licenses called The Snake Pit was soon raided and 167 people were arrested. One of them was Diego Vi\u00f1ales, an Argentinian national so frightened that he might be deported as a homosexual that he tried to escape the police precinct by jumping out of a two-story window, impaling himself on a spike fence. The \"New York Daily News\" printed a graphic photo of the young man's impalement on the front page. GAA members organized a march from Christopher Park to the Sixth Precinct in which hundreds of gay men, lesbians, and liberal sympathizers peacefully confronted the TPF. They also sponsored a letter-writing campaign to Mayor Lindsay in which the Greenwich Village Democratic Party and congressman Ed Koch sent pleas to end raids on gay bars in the city.\nThe Stonewall Inn lasted only a few weeks after the riot. By October 1969 it was up for rent. Village residents surmised it was too notorious a location and Rodwell's boycott discouraged business.\nGay Pride.\nChristopher Street Liberation Day, on June 28, 1970, marked the first anniversary of the Stonewall riots with an assembly on Christopher Street; with simultaneous Gay Pride marches in Los Angeles and Chicago, these were the first Gay Pride marches in US history. The next year, Gay Pride marches took place in Boston, Dallas, Milwaukee, London, Paris, West Berlin and Stockholm. The march in New York covered 51 blocks, from Christopher Street to Central Park. The march took less than half the scheduled time due to excitement, but also due to wariness about walking through the city with gay banners and signs. Although the parade permit was delivered only two hours before the start of the march, the marchers encountered little resistance from onlookers. \"The New York Times\" reported (on the front page) that the marchers took up the entire street for about 15 city blocks. Reporting by \"The Village Voice\" was positive, describing \"the out-front resistance that grew out of the police raid on the Stonewall Inn one year ago\".\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThere was little open animosity and some bystanders applauded when a tall, pretty girl carrying a sign \"I am a Lesbian\" walked by.\n\u2014\"The New York Times\" coverage of Gay Liberation Day, 1970\nBy 1972, the participating cities included Atlanta, Buffalo, Detroit, Washington, D.C., Miami, Minneapolis, and Philadelphia, as well as San Francisco.\nFrank Kameny soon realized the pivotal change brought by the Stonewall riots. An organizer of gay activism in the 1950s, he was used to persuasion, trying to convince heterosexuals that gay people were no different from them. When he and other people marched in front of the White House, the State Department, and Independence Hall only five years earlier, their objective was to look as if they could work for the US government. Ten people marched with Kameny then and they alerted no press to their intentions. Although he was stunned by the upheaval by participants in the Annual Reminder in 1969, he later observed, \"By the time of Stonewall, we had fifty to sixty gay groups in the country. A year later there were at least fifteen hundred. By two years later, to the extent that a count could be made, it was twenty-five hundred.\"\nSimilar to Kameny's regret at his own reaction to the shift in attitudes after the riots, Randy Wicker came to describe his embarrassment as \"one of the greatest mistakes of his life\". The image of gay people retaliating against police, after so many years of allowing such treatment to go unchallenged, \"stirred an unexpected spirit among many homosexuals\". Kay Lahusen, who photographed the marches in 1965, stated, \"Up to 1969, this movement was generally called the homosexual or homophile movement... Many new activists consider the Stonewall uprising the birth of the gay liberation movement. Certainly, it was the birth of gay pride on a massive scale.\" David Carter explained that even though there were several uprisings before Stonewall, the reason Stonewall was so significant was that thousands of people were involved, the riot lasted a long time (six days), it was the first to get major media coverage, and it sparked the formation of many gay rights groups.\nTrans organizations.\nAccording to Susan Stryker's book, \"Transgender History\", the Stonewall riots had significant effects on trans rights activism. Sylvia Rivera and Marsha P. Johnson established the Street Transvestite Action Revolutionaries (STAR) organization, as they believed that trans people weren't being adequately represented in the Gay Activists Alliance and Gay Liberation Front. They established politicized versions of \"houses\", which came from Black and Latino queer communities, and were places that marginalized trans youth could seek shelter.\nBesides STAR, organizations such as Transvestites and Transsexuals (TAT) and Queens' Liberation Front (QLF) were also established. QLF, which was established by drag queen Lee Brewster and heterosexual transvestite Bunny Eisenhower, marched on Christopher Street Liberation Day and fought against drag erasure and for trans visibility.\nLegacy.\nThe Stonewall riots are often considered to be the origin or impetus of the gay liberation movement, and many studies of LGBTQ history in the U.S. are divided into pre- and post-Stonewall analyses. This has been criticized by historians of sexuality. Calls for the rights of gender and sexual minorities predate the Stonewall riots. The first homosexual movement began one hundred years earlier, in Germany. West Germany had abolished criminal liability for homosexual acts among adults over 21 years of age through a change of Section 175 of the German Criminal Code on June 25, 1969 \u2212 just three days before the Stonewall riots began. There was already the emergence of a gay liberation movement in New York at the time of the riots. The Stonewall riots were not the only time LGBTQ people organized politically amid attacks on LGBTQ establishments. The event has been said to occupy a unique place in the collective memory of many LGBTQ people, including those outside of the United States, as it \"is marked by an international commemorative ritual \u2013 an annual gay pride parade\", according to sociologist Elizabeth A. Armstrong.\nCommunity.\nWithin two years of the Stonewall riots, there were gay rights groups in every major American city, as well as in Canada, Australia, and Western Europe. People who joined activist organizations after the riots had very little in common other than their same-sex attraction. Many who arrived at GLF or GAA meetings were taken aback by the number of gay people in one place. Race, class, ideology, and gender became frequent obstacles in the years after the riots. This was illustrated during the 1973 Stonewall rally when, moments after Barbara Gittings exuberantly praised the diversity of the crowd, feminist activist Jean O'Leary protested what she perceived as the mocking of women by cross-dressers and drag queens in attendance. During a speech by O'Leary, in which she claimed that drag queens made fun of women for entertainment value and profit, Sylvia Rivera and Lee Brewster jumped on the stage and shouted \"You go to bars because of what drag queens did for you and \"these bitches\" tell us to quit being ourselves!\" Both the drag queens and lesbian feminists in attendance left in disgust.\nO'Leary also worked in the early 1970s to exclude transgender people from gay rights issues because she felt that rights for transgender people would be too difficult to attain. Sylvia Rivera left New York City in the mid-1970s, relocating to upstate New York. She later returned to the city in the mid-1990s, after the 1992 death of friend Marsha P. Johnson. Rivera lived on the \"gay pier\" at the end of Christopher street and advocated for homeless members of the gay community. The initial disagreements among participants in the movements often evolved after further reflection. O'Leary later regretted her stance against the drag queens attending in 1973: \"Looking back, I find this so embarrassing because my views have changed so much since then. I would never pick on a transvestite now.\" \"It was horrible. How could I work to exclude transvestites and at the same time criticize the feminists who were doing their best back in those days to exclude lesbians?\"\nO'Leary was referring to the Lavender Menace, an appellation by second-wave feminist Betty Friedan based on attempts by members of the National Organization for Women (NOW) to distance themselves from the perception of NOW as a haven for lesbians. As part of this process, Rita Mae Brown and other lesbians who had been active in NOW were forced out. They staged a protest in 1970 at the Second Congress to Unite Women and earned the support of many NOW members, finally gaining full acceptance in 1971.\nThe growth of lesbian feminism in the 1970s at times so conflicted with the gay liberation movement that some lesbians refused to work with gay men. Many lesbians found men's attitudes patriarchal and chauvinistic and saw in gay men the same misguided notions about women that they saw in heterosexual men. The issues most important to gay men\u2014entrapment and public solicitation\u2014were not shared by lesbians. In 1977, a Lesbian Pride Rally was organized as an alternative to sharing gay men's issues, especially what Adrienne Rich termed \"the violent, self-destructive world of the gay bars\". Veteran gay activist Barbara Gittings chose to work in the gay rights movement, explaining, \"It's a matter of where does it hurt the most? For me it hurts the most not in the female arena, but the gay arena.\"\nThroughout the 1970s, gay activism had significant successes. One of the first and most important was the \"zap\" in May 1970 by the Los Angeles GLF at a convention of the American Psychiatric Association (APA). At a conference on behavior modification, during a film demonstrating the use of electroshock therapy to decrease same-sex attraction, Morris Kight and GLF members in the audience interrupted the film with shouts of \"Torture!\" and \"Barbarism!\" They took over the microphone to announce that medical professionals who prescribed such therapy for their homosexual patients were complicit in torturing them. Although 20 psychiatrists in attendance left, the GLF spent the hour following the zap with those remaining, trying to convince them that homosexual people were not mentally ill. When the APA invited gay activists to speak to the group in 1972, activists brought John E. Fryer, a gay psychiatrist who wore a mask, because he felt his practice was in danger. In December 1973\u2014in large part due to the efforts of gay activists\u2014the APA voted unanimously to remove homosexuality from the \"Diagnostic and Statistical Manual\".\nGay men and lesbians came together to work in grassroots political organizations responding to organized resistance in 1977. A coalition of conservatives named Save Our Children staged a campaign to repeal a civil rights ordinance in Miami-Dade County. Save Our Children was successful enough to influence similar repeals in several American cities in 1978. However, that same year, a campaign in California called the Briggs Initiative, designed to force the dismissal of homosexual public school employees, was defeated. Reaction to the influence of Save Our Children and the Briggs Initiative in the gay community was so significant that it has been called the second Stonewall for many activists, marking their initiation into political participation. The subsequent 1979 National March on Washington for Lesbian and Gay Rights was timed to coincide with the tenth anniversary of the Stonewall riots.\nRejection of prior gay subculture.\nThe Stonewall riots marked such a significant turning point that many aspects of prior gay and lesbian culture, such as bar culture formed from decades of shame and secrecy, were forcefully ignored and denied. Historian Martin Duberman writes, \"The decades preceding Stonewall... continue to be regarded by most gay men and lesbians as some vast neolithic wasteland.\" Sociologist Barry Adam notes, \"Every social movement must choose at some point what to retain and what to reject out of its past. What traits are the results of oppression and what are healthy and authentic?\" In conjunction with the growing feminist movement of the early 1970s, roles of butch and femme that developed in lesbian bars in the 1950s and 1960s were rejected, because as one writer put it: \"all role playing is sick.\" Lesbian feminists considered the butch roles as archaic imitations of masculine behavior. Some women, according to Lillian Faderman, were eager to shed the roles they felt forced into playing. The roles returned for some women in the 1980s, although they allowed for more flexibility than before Stonewall.\nAuthor Michael Bronski highlights the \"attack on pre-Stonewall culture\", particularly gay pulp fiction for men, where the themes often reflected self-hatred or ambivalence about being gay. Many books ended unsatisfactorily and drastically, often with suicide, and writers portrayed their gay characters as alcoholics or deeply unhappy. These books, which he describes as \"an enormous and cohesive literature by and for gay men\", have not been reissued and are lost to later generations. Dismissing the notion that the rejection was motivated by political correctness, Bronski writes, \"gay liberation was a youth movement whose sense of history was defined to a large degree by rejection of the past.\"\nImpact and recognition.\nThe riots spawned from a bar raid became a literal example of gay men and lesbians fighting back and a symbolic call to arms for many people. Historian David Carter remarks in his book about the Stonewall riots that the bar itself was a complex business that represented a community center, an opportunity for the Mafia to blackmail its own customers, a home, and a place of \"exploitation and degradation\". The true legacy of the Stonewall riots, Carter insists, is the \"ongoing struggle for lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender equality\". Historian Nicholas Edsall writes:\nStonewall has been compared to any number of acts of radical protest and defiance in American history from the Boston Tea Party on. But the best and certainly a more nearly contemporary analogy is Rosa Parks' refusal to move to the back of the bus in Montgomery, Alabama, in December 1955, which sparked the modern civil rights movement. Within months after Stonewall, radical gay liberation groups and newsletters sprang up in cities and on college campuses across America and then across all of northern Europe as well.\nBefore the rebellion at the Stonewall Inn, homosexuals were, as historians Dudley Clendinen and Adam Nagourney write:\na secret legion of people, known of but discounted, ignored, laughed at or despised. And like the holders of a secret, they had an advantage which was a disadvantage too, and which was true of no other minority group in the United States. They were invisible. Unlike African Americans, women, Native Americans, Jews, the Irish, Italians, Asians, Hispanics, or any other cultural group which struggled for respect and equal rights, homosexuals had no physical or cultural markings, no language or dialect which could identify them to each other, or to anyone else... But that night, for the first time, the usual acquiescence turned into violent resistance... From that night the lives of millions of gay men and lesbians and the attitude toward them of the larger culture in which they lived, began to change rapidly. People began to appear in public as homosexuals, demanding respect.\nHistorian Lillian Faderman calls the riots the \"shot heard round the world\", explaining, \"The Stonewall Rebellion was crucial because it sounded the rally for that movement. It became an emblem of gay and lesbian power. By calling on the dramatic tactic of violent protest that was being used by other oppressed groups, the events at the Stonewall implied that homosexuals had as much reason to be disaffected as they.\"\nJoan Nestle co-founded the Lesbian Herstory Archives in 1974 and credits \"its creation to that night and the courage that found its voice in the streets.\" Cautious, however, not to attribute the start of gay activism to the Stonewall riots, Nestle writes:\nI certainly don't see gay and lesbian history starting with Stonewall... and I don't see resistance starting with Stonewall. What I do see is a historical coming together of forces, and the sixties changed how human beings endured things in this society and what they refused to endure... Certainly, something special happened on that night in 1969 and we've made it more special in our need to have what I call a point of origin... it's more complex than saying that it all started with Stonewall.\nThe events of the early morning of June 28, 1969, were not the first instances of gay men and lesbians fighting back against police in New York City and elsewhere. Not only had the Mattachine Society been active in major cities such as Los Angeles and Chicago, but similarly marginalized people started the riot at Compton's Cafeteria in 1966 and another riot responded to a raid on Los Angeles' Black Cat Tavern in 1967. However, several circumstances were in play that made the Stonewall riots memorable. The location of the Lower Manhattan raid was a factor: it was across the street from \"The Village Voice\" offices, and the narrow crooked streets gave the rioters an advantage over the police. Many of the participants and residents of Greenwich Village were involved in political organizations that were effectively able to mobilize a large and cohesive gay community in the weeks and months after the rebellion. The most significant facet of the Stonewall riots, however, was the commemoration of them in Christopher Street Liberation Day, which grew into the annual Gay Pride events around the world.\nStonewall (officially Stonewall Equality Limited) is an LGBTQ rights charity in the United Kingdom, founded in 1989 and named after the Stonewall Inn because of the Stonewall riots. The Stonewall Awards is an annual event the charity has held since 2006 to recognize people who have affected the lives of British lesbian, gay, and bisexual people.\nThe middle of the 1990s was marked by the inclusion of bisexuals as a represented group within the gay community, when they successfully sought to be included on the platform of the 1993 March on Washington for Lesbian, Gay and Bi Equal Rights and Liberation. Transgender people also asked to be included but were not, though trans-inclusive language was added to the march's list of demands. The transgender community continued to find itself simultaneously welcome and at odds with the gay community as attitudes about non-binary gender discrimination and pansexual orientation developed and came increasingly into conflict. In 1994, New York City celebrated \"Stonewall 25\" with a march that went past the United Nations Headquarters and into Central Park. Estimates put the attendance at 1.1\u00a0million people. Sylvia Rivera led an alternate march in New York City in 1994 to protest the exclusion of transgender people from the events.\nAttendance at LGBTQ Pride events has grown substantially over the decades. Most large cities around the world now have some kind of Pride demonstration; Pride events in some cities mark the largest annual celebration of any kind. The growing trend towards commercializing marches into parades\u2014with events receiving corporate sponsorship\u2014has caused concern about taking away the autonomy of the original grassroots demonstrations.\nPresident Barack Obama declared June 2009 Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, and Transgender Pride Month, citing the riots as a reason to \"commit to achieving equal justice under law for LGBT Americans\". The year marked the 40th anniversary of the riots. Prompted by the Obama administration's continued legal defense of the Defense of Marriage Act\u00a0\u2013 following longstanding practice by the Department of Justice to defend all federal laws in court\u00a0\u2013 an editorial in the \"Washington Blade\" compared the scruffy, violent activism during and following the Stonewall riots to the lackluster response to failed promises given by President Obama; for being ignored, wealthy LGBTQ activists reacted by promising to give less money to Democratic causes. Two years later, the Stonewall Inn served as a rallying point for celebrations after the New York State Senate voted to pass same-sex marriage. The act was signed into law by Governor Andrew Cuomo on June\u00a024, 2011.\nObama also referenced the Stonewall riots in a call for full equality during his second inaugural address on January 21, 2013:\nWe, the people, declare today that the most evident of truths\u2014that all of us are created equal\u2014is the star that guides us still; just as it guided our forebears through Seneca Falls and Selma and Stonewall... Our journey is not complete until our gay brothers and sisters are treated like anyone else under the law\u2014for if we are truly created equal, then surely the love we commit to one another must be equal as well.\nThis was a historic moment: the first time that a president mentioned gay rights or the word \"gay\" in an inaugural address.\nThroughout June 2019, Stonewall 50 \u2013 WorldPride NYC 2019, produced by Heritage of Pride in partnership with the I Love New York program's LGBTQ division, took place in New York to commemorate the 50th anniversary of the Stonewall uprising. The final official estimate included 5\u00a0million visitors attending in Manhattan alone, making it the largest LGBTQ celebration in history. June is traditionally Pride month in New York City and worldwide, and the events were held under the auspices of the annual NYC Pride March. On June\u00a06, 2019, coinciding with WorldPride being celebrated in New York City, Police Commissioner James P. O'Neill apologized on behalf of the NYPD for the actions of its officers at the Stonewall uprising.\nThe official 50th-anniversary commemoration of the Stonewall Uprising occurred on June 28, 2019, on Christopher Street in front of Stonewall Inn. The official commemoration was themed as a rally, in reference to the original rallies in front of Stonewall Inn in 1969. Speakers at this event included mayor Bill De Blasio, senator Kirsten Gillibrand, congressman Jerry Nadler, American activist X Gonz\u00e1lez, and global activist R\u00e9my Bonny.\nAlso in June 2019, to coincide with the fifty-year anniversary of the Stonewall riots, steps at the Franklin D. Roosevelt Four Freedoms Park were turned into the largest LGBTQ pride flag. The rainbow-decorated staircase \"Ascend With Pride\" was installed June 14\u201330.\nAlso in 2019, Paris, France, officially named a square in the Marais district as Place des \u00c9meutes-de-Stonewall (Stonewall Riots Place).\nStonewall Day.\nIn 2018, 49 years after the uprising, Stonewall Day was announced as a commemoration day by Pride Live, a social advocacy and community engagement organization. The second Stonewall Day was held on Friday, June\u00a028, 2019, outside the Stonewall Inn. During this event, Pride Live introduced their Stonewall Ambassadors program, to raise awareness for the 50th anniversary of the Stonewall Riots.\nHistoric landmark and monument.\nIn June 1999, the US Department of the Interior included 51 and 53 Christopher Street and the surrounding area in Greenwich Village into the National Register of Historic Places, the first of significance to the LGBTQ community. In a dedication ceremony, Assistant Secretary of the Department of the Interior John Berry stated, \"Let it forever be remembered that here\u2014on this spot\u2014men and women stood proud, they stood fast, so that we may be who we are, we may work where we will, live where we choose, and love whom our hearts desire.\" The Stonewall Inn was also named a National Historic Landmark in February 2000. On June 23, 2015, the New York City Landmarks Preservation Commission designated Stonewall as a city landmark, the first to be designated based on its LGBTQ cultural significance alone.\nOn June 24, 2016, President Barack Obama announced the establishment of the Stonewall National Monument, administered by the National Park Service. The designation protects Christopher Park and adjacent areas totaling more than seven acres; the Stonewall Inn is within the boundaries of the monument but remains privately owned. The National Park Foundation formed a new nonprofit organization to raise funds for a ranger station and interpretive exhibits for the monument, including the first official national visitor center dedicated to the LGBTQ+ experience, which was inaugurated on June 28, 2024. The New York City Subway's Christopher Street\u2013Sheridan Square station was renamed the Christopher Street\u2013Stonewall station on the same day.\nRemoval of references to transgender and bisexual people.\nOn Feb 13, 2025, references to transgender and queer people were removed from the monument's official website, prompting protests. On July 10, 2025, references to bisexual people were removed as well.\nMedia representations.\nNo newsreel or TV footage was taken of the riots and few home movies and photographs exist, but those that do have been used in documentaries.\nSee also.\nAnalogous events\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "29384", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29384", "title": "Subjective probability", "text": ""}
{"id": "29385", "revid": "1532071", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29385", "title": "Spear of Destiny", "text": ""}
{"id": "29388", "revid": "41877120", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29388", "title": "Sheffer stroke", "text": "Logical operation\n B, A \\downarrow B, \\overline{A+B}&lt;/math&gt;\n | XNOR | formula_1\n | \u2514 equivalent | formula_2\n | XOR | formula_3\n | \u2514 nonequivalent | formula_4\n | implies | formula_5\n | nonimplication\u00a0(NIMPLY) | formula_6\n | converse | formula_7\n | converse nonimplication | formula_8\nIn Boolean functions and propositional calculus, the Sheffer stroke denotes a logical operation that is equivalent to the negation of the conjunction operation, expressed in ordinary language as \"not both\". It is also called non-conjunction, alternative denial (since it says in effect that at least one of its operands is false), or NAND (\"not and\"). In digital electronics, it corresponds to the NAND gate. It is named after Henry Maurice Sheffer and written as formula_9 or as formula_10 or as formula_11 or as formula_12 in Polish notation by \u0141ukasiewicz (but not as ||, often used to represent disjunction).\nIts dual is the NOR operator (also known as the Peirce arrow, Quine dagger or Webb operator). Like its dual, NAND can be used by itself, without any other logical operator, to constitute a logical formal system (making NAND functionally complete). This property makes the NAND gate crucial to modern digital electronics, including its use in computer processor design.\nDefinition.\nThe non-conjunction is a logical operation on two logical values. It produces a value of true, if \u2014 and only if \u2014 at least one of the propositions is false.\nTruth table.\nThe truth table of formula_13 is as follows.\nLogical equivalences.\nThe Sheffer stroke of formula_14 and formula_15 is the negation of their conjunction\nBy De Morgan's laws, this is also equivalent to the disjunction of the negations of formula_14 and formula_15\nAlternative notations and names.\nPeirce was the first to show the functional completeness of non-conjunction (representing this as formula_18) but didn't publish his result. Peirce's editor added formula_18) for non-disjunction.\nIn 1911, Stamm was the first to publish a proof of the completeness of non-conjunction, representing this with formula_20 (the Stamm hook) and non-disjunction in print at the first time and showed their functional completeness.\nIn 1913, Sheffer described non-disjunction using formula_9 and showed its functional completeness. Sheffer also used formula_22 for non-disjunction. Many people, beginning with Nicod in 1917, and followed by Whitehead, Russell and many others, mistakenly thought Sheffer had described non-conjunction using formula_9, naming this symbol the Sheffer stroke.\nIn 1928, Hilbert and Ackermann described non-conjunction with the operator formula_24.\nIn 1929, \u0141ukasiewicz used formula_25 in formula_12 for non-conjunction in his Polish notation.\nAn alternative notation for non-conjunction is formula_10. It is not clear who first introduced this notation, although the corresponding formula_28 for non-disjunction was used by Quine in 1940.\nHistory.\nThe stroke is named after Henry Maurice Sheffer, who in 1913 published a paper in the \"Transactions of the American Mathematical Society\" providing an axiomatization of Boolean algebras using the stroke, and proved its equivalence to a standard formulation thereof by Huntington employing the familiar operators of propositional logic (AND, OR, NOT). Because of self-duality of Boolean algebras, Sheffer's axioms are equally valid for either of the NAND or NOR operations in place of the stroke. Sheffer interpreted the stroke as a sign for nondisjunction (NOR) in his paper, mentioning non-conjunction only in a footnote and without a special sign for it. It was Jean Nicod who first used the stroke as a sign for non-conjunction (NAND) in a paper of 1917 and which has since become current practice. Russell and Whitehead used the Sheffer stroke in the 1927 second edition of \"Principia Mathematica\" and suggested it as a replacement for the \"OR\" and \"NOT\" operations of the first edition.\nCharles Sanders Peirce (1880) had discovered the functional completeness of NAND or NOR more than 30 years earlier, using the term \"ampheck\" (for 'cutting both ways'), but he never published his finding. Two years before Sheffer, Edward Stamm also described the NAND and NOR operators and showed that the other Boolean operations could be expressed by it.\nProperties.\nNAND is commutative but not associative, which means that formula_29 but formula_30.\nFunctional completeness.\nThe Sheffer stroke, taken by itself, is a functionally complete set of connectives. This can be seen from the fact that NAND does not possess any of the following five properties, each of which is required to be absent from, and the absence of all of which is sufficient for, at least one member of a set of functionally complete operators: truth-preservation, falsity-preservation, linearity, monotonicity, self-duality. (An operator is truth-preserving if its value is truth whenever all of its arguments are truth-, or falsity-preserving if its value is falsity whenever all of its arguments are falsity.)\nIt can also be proved by first showing, with a truth table, that formula_31 is truth-functionally equivalent to formula_32. Then, since formula_13 is truth-functionally equivalent to formula_34, and formula_35 is equivalent to formula_36, the Sheffer stroke suffices to define the set of connectives formula_37, which is shown to be truth-functionally complete by the Disjunctive Normal Form Theorem.\nOther Boolean operations in terms of the Sheffer stroke.\nExpressed in terms of NAND formula_10, the usual operators of propositional logic are:\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "29389", "revid": "44656", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29389", "title": "Straw package", "text": ""}
{"id": "29390", "revid": "30292728", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29390", "title": "Stalactite", "text": "Elongated mineral formation hanging down from a cave ceiling\nA stalactite (, ; from grc \" \"\" ()\"\u00a0'dripping', from \" \"\u03c3\u03c4\u03b1\u03bb\u03ac\u03c3\u03c3\u03b5\u03b9\u03bd\" ()\"\u00a0'to drip') is a mineral formation that hangs from the ceiling of caves, hot springs, or man-made structures such as bridges and mines. Any material that is soluble and that can be deposited as a colloid, or is in suspension, or is capable of being melted, may form a stalactite. Stalactites may be composed of lava, minerals, mud, peat, pitch, sand, sinter, and amberat (crystallized urine of pack rats). A stalactite is not necessarily a speleothem, though speleothems are the most common form of stalactite because of the abundance of limestone caves.\nThe corresponding formation on the floor of the cave is known as a stalagmite.\nFormation and type.\nLimestone stalactites.\nThe most common stalactites are speleothems, which occur in limestone caves. They form through deposition of calcium carbonate and other minerals, which is precipitated from mineralized water solutions. Limestone is the chief form of calcium carbonate rock which is dissolved by water that contains carbon dioxide, forming a calcium bicarbonate solution in caverns. The chemical formula for this reaction is:\n(s) + (l) + (aq) \u2192 \nThis solution travels through the rock until it reaches an edge and if this is on the roof of a cave it will drip down. When the solution comes into contact with air the chemical reaction that created it is reversed and particles of calcium carbonate are deposited. The reversed reaction is:\nAn average growth rate is a year. The quickest growing stalactites are those formed by a constant supply of slow dripping water rich in calcium carbonate (CaCO3) and carbon dioxide (CO2), which can grow at per year. The drip rate must be slow enough to allow the CO2 to degas from the solution into the cave atmosphere, resulting in deposition of CaCO3 on the stalactite. Too fast a drip rate and the solution, still carrying most of the CaCO3, falls to the cave floor where degassing occurs and CaCO3 is deposited as a stalagmite.\nAll limestone stalactites begin with a single mineral-laden drop of water. When the drop falls, it deposits the thinnest ring of calcite. Each subsequent drop that forms and falls deposits another calcite ring. Eventually, these rings form a very narrow (\u22484 to 5\u00a0mm diameter), hollow tube commonly known as a \"soda straw\" stalactite. Soda straws can grow quite long, but are very fragile. If they become plugged by debris, water begins flowing over the outside, depositing more calcite and creating the more familiar cone-shaped stalactite.\nStalactite formation generally begins over a large area, with multiple paths for the mineral rich water to flow. As minerals are dissolved in one channel slightly more than other competing channels, the dominant channel begins to draw more and more of the available water, which speeds its growth, ultimately resulting in all other channels being choked off. This is one reason why formations tend to have minimum distances from one another. The larger the formation, the greater the interformation distance.\nPillars.\nThe same water drops that fall from the tip of a stalactite deposit more calcite on the floor below, eventually resulting in a rounded or cone-shaped stalagmite. Unlike stalactites, stalagmites never start out as hollow \"soda straws\". Given enough time, these formations can meet and fuse to create a speleothem of calcium carbonate known as a pillar, column, or stalagnate.\nLava stalactites.\nAnother type of stalactite is formed in lava tubes while molten and fluid lava is still active inside. The mechanism of formation is the deposition of molten dripping material on the ceilings of caves, however with lava stalactites formation happens very quickly in only a matter of hours, days, or weeks, whereas limestone stalactites may take up to thousands of years. A key difference with lava stalactites is that once the lava has ceased flowing, so too will the stalactites cease to grow. This means that if the stalactite were to be broken it would never grow back.\nThe generic term \"lavacicle\" has been applied to lava stalactites and stalagmites indiscriminately and evolved from the word icicle.\nLike limestone stalactites, they can leave lava drips onto the floor that turn into lava stalagmites and may eventually fuse with the corresponding stalactite to form a column.\nShark tooth stalactites.\nThe shark tooth stalactite is broad and tapering in appearance. It may begin as a small driblet of lava from a semi-solid ceiling, but then grows by accreting layers as successive flows of lava rise and fall in the lava tube, coating and recoating the stalactite with more material. They can vary from a few millimeters to over a meter in length.\nSplash stalactites.\nAs lava flows through a tube, material will be splashed up on the ceiling and ooze back down, hardening into a stalactite. This type of formation results in an irregularly-shaped stalactite, looking somewhat like stretched taffy. Often they may be of a different color than the original lava that formed the cave.\nTubular lava stalactites.\nWhen the roof of a lava tube is cooling, a skin forms that traps semi-molten material inside. Trapped gases expansion forces lava to extrude out through small openings that result in hollow, tubular stalactites analogous to the soda straws formed as depositional speleothems in solution caves. The longest known is almost 2 meters in length. These are common in Hawaiian lava tubes and are often associated with a drip stalagmite that forms below as material is carried through the tubular stalactite and piles up on the floor beneath. Sometimes the tubular form collapses near the distal end, most likely when the pressure of escaping gases decreased and still-molten portions of the stalactites deflated and cooled.\nOften these tubular stalactites acquire a twisted, vermiform appearance as bits of lava crystallize and force the flow in different directions. These tubular lava helictites may also be influenced by air currents through a tube and point downwind.\nIce stalactites.\nA common stalactite found seasonally or year round in many caves is the ice stalactite, commonly referred to as icicles, especially on the surface. Water seepage from the surface will penetrate into a cave and if temperatures are below freezing, the water will form stalactites. They can also be formed by the freezing of water vapor. Similar to lava stalactites, ice stalactites form very quickly within hours or days. Unlike lava stalactites however, they may grow back as long as water and temperatures are suitable.\nIce stalactites can also form under sea ice when saline water is introduced to ocean water. These specific stalactites are referred to as brinicles.\nIce stalactites may also form corresponding stalagmites below them and given time may grow together to form an ice column.\nConcrete stalactites.\nStalactites can also form on concrete, and on plumbing where there is a slow leak and where there are calcium, magnesium or other ions in the water supply, although they form much more rapidly there than in the natural cave environment. These secondary deposits, such as stalactites, stalagmites, flowstone and others, which are derived from the lime, mortar or other calcareous material in concrete, outside of the \"cave\" environment, can not be classified as \"speleothems\" due to the definition of the term. The term \"calthemite\" is used to encompass these secondary deposits which mimic the shapes and forms of speleothems outside the cave environment.\nThe way stalactites form on concrete is due to different chemistry than those that form naturally in limestone caves and is due to the presence of calcium oxide in cement. Concrete is made from aggregate, sand and cement. When water is added to the mix, the calcium oxide in the cement reacts with water to form calcium hydroxide (Ca(OH)2). The chemical formula for this is:\nCaO(s) + H2O(l) \u2192 Ca(OH)2(aq)\nOver time, any rainwater that penetrates cracks in set (hard) concrete will carry any free calcium hydroxide in solution to the edge of the concrete. Stalactites can form when the solution emerges on the underside of the concrete structure where it is suspended in the air, for example, on a ceiling or a beam. When the solution comes into contact with air on the underside of the concrete structure, another chemical reaction takes place. The solution reacts with carbon dioxide in the air and precipitates calcium carbonate.\nCa(OH)2(aq) + CO2(g) \u2192 CaCO3(s) + H2O(l)\nWhen this solution drops down it leaves behind particles of calcium carbonate and over time these form into a stalactite. They are normally a few centimeters long and with a diameter of approximately . The growth rate of stalactites is significantly influenced by supply continuity of Ca2+ saturated solution and the drip rate. A straw shaped stalactite which has formed under a concrete structure can grow as much as 2\u00a0mm per day in length, when the drip rate is approximately 11 minutes between drops. Changes in leachate solution pH can facilitate additional chemical reactions, which may also influence calthemite stalactite growth rates.\nRecords.\nThe White Chamber in the Jeita Grotto's upper cavern in Lebanon contains an limestone stalactite which is accessible to visitors and is claimed to be the longest stalactite in the world. Another such claim is made for a limestone stalactite that hangs in the Chamber of Rarities in the Gruta Rei do Mato (Sete Lagoas, Minas Gerais, Brazil). However, cavers have often encountered longer stalactites during their explorations. One of the longest stalactites viewable by the general public is in Pol an Ionain (Doolin Cave), County Clare, Ireland, in a karst region known as The Burren; what makes it more impressive is the fact that the stalactite is held on by a section of calcite less than .\nEtymology.\nStalactites are first mentioned (though not by name) by the Roman natural historian Pliny in a text which also mentions stalagmites and columns and refers to their formation by the dripping of water. The term \"stalactite\" was coined in the 17th century by the Danish Physician Ole Worm, who coined the word from the Greek word \u03c3\u03c4\u03b1\u03bb\u03b1\u03ba\u03c4\u03cc\u03c2 (stalaktos, \"dripping\") and the Greek suffix -\u03af\u03c4\u03b7\u03c2 (-ites, connected with or belonging to).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "29391", "revid": "1295777532", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29391", "title": "Strangers in Paradise", "text": "American comic book series by Terry Moore\nStrangers in Paradise is a creator-owned comic book series, written and drawn by Terry Moore, which debuted in 1993. Principally the story of a love triangle between two women and one man, \"Strangers in Paradise\" began as a slice-of-life dramedy that later expanded to incorporate aspects of the crime and thriller genres. Moore has remained the sole creator throughout the run, with the exception of a superhero dream sequence drawn by Jim Lee that opens Volume 3, issue #1. The artwork was originally presented in Moore's distinctive black-and-white style, aside from two full colour dream sequences, which included the aforementioned superhero panels.\nThe majority of the run has been published under Moore's creator-owned imprint, Abstract Studio. The first issue was published in November 1993, and the original series reached its planned conclusion in 2007 with issue #90 of Volume 3.\nIn 2012, Moore announced a \"Strangers in Paradise\" novel at San Diego Comic-Con.\nIn 2018, Moore officially revived the series as \"Strangers in Paradise XXV\" for the 25th anniversary.\nOrigins and publication history.\nTerry Moore stated that \"I started out wanting to do a newspaper strip, and tried one idea after another before I realised I hated the gag-a-day life and really wanted to try a story instead\". The story he chose to tell turned out to be \"Strangers in Paradise\", or \"this story about 2 girls and a guy who gets to know them\" (from Moore's introduction to \"The Collected Strangers in Paradise, Volume One\"), which used characters he had developed during his time on the gag-a-day circuit. For example, Katchoo appears as a \"happy-go-lucky wood nymph\" in an early strip by Moore about an enchanted forest. These strips were collected into two trade paperbacks, but they did not include three issues. Because of this, the entire run was later published in one large paperback edition entitled \"The Complete Paradise Too\". This volume can be considered the true origin of Katchoo, Francine and the \"Strangers in Paradise\" universe.\n\"SiP\", as it is commonly known, began as a three-issue miniseries published by Antarctic Press in 1993, which focused entirely on the relationship between the three main characters and Francine's unfaithful boyfriend. This is now known as \"Volume 1\". Thirteen issues were published under Moore's own \"Abstract Studio\" imprint, and these make up \"Volume 2\". This is where the \"thriller\" plot was introduced. The series moved to Image Comics' Homage imprint for the start of \"Volume 3\", but after eight issues moved back to Abstract Studio, where it continued with the same numbering. Volume 3 concluded at issue #90, released on June 6, 2007.\nMoore revived the series as \"Strangers in Paradise XXV\" in 2018 for the 25th anniversary. The new miniseries included characters and elements from Moore's other works, \"Echo\", \"Rachel Rising\", and \"Motor Girl\".\nPlot.\nThe story is centered on the stormy, lifelong relationship between two women, Francine Helena Peters and Katina Marie (\"Katchoo\") Choovanski, and their friend David Qin. Francine considers Katchoo her best, oldest friend. Katchoo makes no secret of her romantic attraction to Francine, creating tension each time Francine remains wary of fully committing to her. Meanwhile, Katchoo herself is deeply conflicted when David professes his love for her, as adamantly as she has declared her own love for Francine.\nThe love triangle later expands to a love rectangle with the introduction of Casey Bullock, who marries Francine's ex-boyfriend Freddie Femur (on the rebound from Francine) early in the series and later divorces him, then goes on to pursue both David and Katchoo.\nFlashbacks and flash-forwards reveal more about the characters as the love story alternates with mystery, danger and intrigue, most of it stemming from Katchoo's past as an underage call girl who was taken in by David's lesbian sister, Darcy Parker (David's connection to Darcy only comes to light after he enters Katchoo's life). Darcy puts her \"Parker Girls\" to work for the shadowy Big Six organization, an international crime syndicate with influence over the world of politics. The Parker Girls are highly trained women, weaponized on targeted assignments by Darcy and the Big Six to control, manipulate, spy upon, and ultimately kill men and women in positions of power and authority.\nAwards.\nThe series received the Eisner Award for Best Serialized Story in 1996 for \"I Dream of You\" as well as the National Cartoonists Society Reuben Award for Best Comic Book in 2003. It also won the GLAAD Award for Best Comic Book in 2001.\nCollected editions.\n\"Strangers in Paradise\" has been collected into a series of full-size trade paperbacks, hardback collections, and smaller format paperback collections. These reprints collect the issues into different sets.\nThe full-size paperback collections to date are:\nThe hardback collections to date are:\nThe \"pocket book\" collections to date are:\nOther books to date are:\nMerchandise.\nTwo limited edition statuettes of Katchoo were produced by Clayburn Moore as the first in a planned series of three statues based around the series. In the first, she is standing in a skimpy black dress, and in the second she is reclining in a bath wearing her leather jacket and holding a drink and a gun.\nIn 2009, Shocker Toys released a Katchoo figure as part of the first series of its \"Indie Spotlight\" line.\nIn 1996, a series of trading cards was released by Comic Images, consisting of a 90-card base set plus extra collector's cards, such as the 500 'autograph cards' that featured Terry Moore's signature and information on the creation of \"SiP\". These extra cards were inserted randomly into packs. Also produced was a matching \"SiP\" binder, which came with 12 9-pocket sleeves to hold the cards.\nAdvertised on the official \"SiP\" website are character pin badges representing Francine, Katchoo and David. There is also a black tote bag featuring the \"Strangers in Paradise\" logo and a tumbler decorated with colour panels from the series, in addition to a postcard set and two T-shirts, although several of these items are listed as 'sold out', and are hard to come by elsewhere.\nFilm adaptation.\nIn Autumn of 2017, Angela Robinson and Moore announced a film adaptation of the comic. Moore was working on a script for it. IMG Global Media was attached to finance the project and Robinson was attached to direct.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "29392", "revid": "7611264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29392", "title": "Summer", "text": "Hottest of the four temperate seasons\nSummer or summertime is the hottest and brightest of the four temperate seasons, occurring after spring and before autumn. At or centred on the summer solstice, daylight hours are the longest and darkness hours are the shortest, with day length decreasing as the season progresses after the solstice. The earliest sunrises and latest sunsets also occur near the date of the solstice. The date of the beginning of summer varies according to definition, climate, tradition, and culture. When it is summer in the Northern Hemisphere, it is winter in the Southern Hemisphere, and vice versa.\nEtymology.\nThe modern English \"summer\" derives from the Middle English \"somer\", via the Old English \"sumor\".\nTiming.\nMeteorological reckoning.\nThe meteorological convention defines summer as comprising the months of June, July, and August in the northern hemisphere and the months of December, January, and February in the southern hemisphere. Under meteorological definitions, all seasons are arbitrarily set to start at the beginning of a calendar month and end at the end of a month. This meteorological definition of summer also aligns with the commonly viewed notion of summer as the season with the longest (and warmest) days of the year, in which daylight predominates. \nThe meteorological reckoning of seasons is used in countries including Australia, New Zealand, Austria, Denmark, Russia and Japan. It is also used by many people in the United Kingdom and Canada. In Ireland, the summer months according to the national meteorological service, Met \u00c9ireann, are June, July and August.\nDays continue to lengthen from equinox to solstice and summer days progressively shorten after the solstice, so meteorological summer encompasses the build-up to the longest day and a diminishing thereafter, with summer having many more hours of daylight than spring. Reckoning by hours of daylight alone, summer solstice marks the midpoint, not the beginning, of the seasons. Midsummer takes place over the shortest night of the year, which is the summer solstice, or on a nearby date that varies with tradition.\nA variable seasonal lag means that the meteorological midpoint of the season, which is based on average temperature patterns, occurs several weeks after the time of maximal insolation.\nCultural reckoning.\nIn the Julian calendar used in the ancient Roman world, summer began on 9 May, its midpoint was the summer solstice on 24 June, and summer ended on 10 August.\nLikewise, in Anglo-Saxon England, summer began on 9 May and its midpoint was the summer solstice or Midsummer, on 24 June. In England, 24 June continued to be called Midsummer Day and was one of the quarter days of the English calendar. Elsewhere in northern Europe, midsummer and the solstice were traditionally reckoned as the night of 23\u201324 June.\nTraditionally, in much of Europe, summer began with May Day, and the time around the summer solstice was seen as the middle of summer.\nIn Gaelic Ireland and Scotland, summer began with the festival of \"Bealtaine\" on 1 May and ended with \"Lughnasa\" on 1 August. Likewise, in Wales, summer began with the festival of \"Cyntefin\" or \"Calan Haf\" (meaning \"first of Summer\") on 1 May. \nReckoning by cultural festivals, the summer season in the United States is traditionally regarded as beginning on Memorial Day weekend (the last weekend in May) and ending on Labor Day (the first Monday in September), more closely in line with the meteorological definition for the parts of the country that have four-season weather. The similar Canadian tradition starts summer on Victoria Day one week prior (although summer conditions vary widely across Canada's expansive territory) and ends, as in the United States, on Labour Day.\nIn some Southern Hemisphere countries such as Brazil, Argentina, South Africa, Australia and New Zealand, summer is associated with the Christmas and New Year holidays. Many families take extended holidays for two or three weeks or longer during summer.\nIn Australia and New Zealand, summer begins on 1 December and ends on 28 February (29 February in leap years).\nIn Chinese astronomy, summer starts on or around 5 May, with the \"ji\u00e9q\u00ec\" (solar term) known as \"l\u00ecxi\u00e0\" (\u7acb\u590f), i.e. \"establishment of summer\". Summer ends around 7 August, with the solar term of \"l\u00ecqi\u016b\" (\u7acb\u79cb, \"establishment of autumn\").\nIn southern and southeast Asia, where the monsoon occurs, summer is more generally defined as lasting from March, April, May and June, the warmest time of the year, ending with the onset of the monsoon rains.\nBecause the temperature lag is shorter in the oceanic temperate southern hemisphere, most countries in this region use the meteorological definition with summer starting on 1 December and ending on the last day of February.\nAstronomical reckoning.\nFrom an astronomical view, the equinoxes and solstices would be the middle of the respective seasons, but sometimes astronomical summer is defined as starting at the solstice, often identified with 21 June or 21 December. By solar reckoning, summer instead starts on around 5 May, ends around 7 August and the summer solstice is Midsummer. Where a seasonal lag of half a season or more is common, reckoning based on astronomical markers is shifted half a season. By this method, in North America, summer is the period from the summer solstice (usually 20 or 21 June in the Northern Hemisphere) to the autumn equinox.\nWeather.\nSummer is traditionally associated with hot or warm weather. In Mediterranean climates, it is also associated with dry weather, while in other places (particularly in Eastern Asia because of the monsoon) it is associated with rainy weather. The wet season is the main period of vegetation growth within the savanna climate regime. Where the wet season is associated with a seasonal shift in the prevailing winds, it is known as a monsoon.\nIn the northern Atlantic Ocean, a distinct tropical cyclone season occurs from 1 June to 30 November. The statistical peak of the Atlantic hurricane season is 10 September. The Northeast Pacific Ocean has a broader period of activity, but in a similar timeframe to the Atlantic. The Northwest Pacific sees tropical cyclones year-round, with a minimum in February and March and a peak in early September. In the North Indian basin, storms are most common from April to December, with peaks in May and November. In the Southern Hemisphere, the tropical cyclone season runs from the start of November until the end of April with peaks in mid-February to early March.\nThunderstorm season in the United States and Canada runs in the spring through summer but sometimes can run as late as October or even November in the fall. These storms can produce hail, strong winds and tornadoes, usually during the afternoon and evening.\nHolidays.\nSchool breaks.\nSchools and universities typically have a summer break to take advantage of the warmer weather and longer days. In almost all countries, children are out of school during this time of year for summer break, although dates vary. Many families will take holidays for a week or two over the summer, particularly in Southern Hemisphere Western countries with statutory Christmas and New Year holidays.\nIn the United States, public schools usually end in late May in Memorial Day weekend, while colleges finish in early May. Schools often resume in mid-August. Note that school start and end dates vary significantly across the US.\nIn England and Wales, school ends in mid-July and resumes again in early September. In Scotland, the summer holiday begins in late June and ends in mid-to-late August. Similarly, in Canada the summer holiday starts on the last or second-last Friday in June and ends in late August or on the first Tuesday of September, with the exception of when that date falls before Labour Day, in which case, ends on the second Tuesday of the month. In Russia, the summer holiday begins at the end of May and ends on 31 August.\nIn the Southern Hemisphere, school summer holiday dates include the major holidays of Christmas and New Year's Day. School summer holidays in Australia, New Zealand and South Africa begin in early December and end in early February, with dates varying between states. In South Africa, the new school year usually starts during the second week of January, thus aligning the academic year with the Calendar year. In India, school ends in late April and resumes in early or mid-June. In Cameroon and Nigeria, schools usually start a summer vacation in mid-July and resume in the later weeks of September or the first week of October.\nPublic holidays.\nA wide range of public holidays fall during summer, including:\nActivities.\nPeople generally take advantage of the high temperatures by spending more time outdoors during summer. Activities such as travelling to the beach and picnics occur during the summer months. Sports including cricket, association football (soccer), horse racing, basketball, American football, volleyball, skateboarding, baseball, softball, tennis and golf are played. \nWater sports also occur. These include water skiing, wakeboarding, swimming, surfing, tubing and water polo. The modern Olympics have been held during the summer months every four years since 1896. The 2000 Summer Olympics, in Sydney, were held in spring and the 2016 Summer Olympics, in Rio de Janeiro, were held in winter.\nIn the United States, many television shows made for children are released during the summer, as children are off school.\nConversely, the music and film industries generally experience higher returns during the summer than other times of the year and market their summer hits accordingly. Summer is popular for animated movies to be released theatrically in movie theaters.\nWith many schools closed, especially in Western countries, travel and vacationing tend to peak during the summer. Teenagers and university students often take summer jobs, and business activity for the recreation, tourism, restaurant, and retail industries reach their peak.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "29393", "revid": "2807487", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29393", "title": "Spring", "text": "Spring(s) may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "29394", "revid": "35410073", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29394", "title": "Shrike", "text": "Family of birds\nShrikes () are passerine birds of the family Laniidae. The family is composed of 34 species in two genera.\nThe family name, and that of the larger genus, \"Lanius\", is derived from the Latin word for \"butcher\", and some shrikes are also known as butcherbirds because of the habit, particularly of males, of impaling prey onto plant spines within their territories. These larders have multiple functions, attracting females and serving as food stores. \nThe common English name shrike is from Old English , alluding to the shrike's shriek-like call.\nTaxonomy.\nThe family Laniidae was introduced (as the subfamily Lanidia) in 1815 by the French polymath Constantine Samuel Rafinesque. The type genus \"Lanius\" had been introduced by Carl Linnaeus in 1758.\nAs currently constituted, the family contains 34 species in four genera. It includes the genus \"Eurocephalus\" with the two white-crowned shrikes. A molecular phylogenetic study published in 2023 found that the white-crowned shrikes were more closely related to the crows in the family Corvidae than they are to the Laniidae and authors proposed that the genus \"Eurocephalus\" should be moved to its own family Eurocephalidae. The cladogram below is based on these results:\nDistribution, migration, and habitat.\nMost shrike species have a Eurasian and African distribution, with just two breeding in North America (the loggerhead and northern shrikes). No members of this family occur in South America or Australia, although one species reaches New Guinea. The shrikes vary in the extent of their ranges: some species, such as the great grey shrike, ranging across the Northern Hemisphere, while the S\u00e3o Tom\u00e9 fiscal (or Newton's fiscal) is restricted to the island of S\u00e3o Tom\u00e9.\nThey inhabit open habitats, especially steppe and savannah. A few species of shrikes are forest dwellers, seldom occurring in open habitats. Some species breed in northern latitudes during the summer, then migrate to warmer climes for the winter.\nDescription.\nShrikes are medium-sized birds with grey, brown, or black-and-white plumage. Most species are between and in size; however, the genus \"Corvinella\", with its extremely elongated tail-feathers, may reach up to in length. Their beaks are hooked, like those of a bird of prey, reflecting their carnivorous nature; their calls are strident.\nBehaviour.\nMale shrikes are known for their habit of catching insects and small vertebrates and impaling them on thorns, branches, the spikes on barbed-wire fences, or any available sharp point. These stores serve as a cache so that the shrike can return to the uneaten portions at a later time. The primary function of conspicuously impaling prey on thorny vegetation is however thought to be for males to display their fitness and the quality of the territory held to prospective mates. The impaling behaviour increases during the onset of the breeding season. Female shrikes have been known to impale prey, but primarily to assist in dismembering prey. This behaviour may also serve secondarily as an adaptation to eating the toxic lubber grasshopper, \"Romalea microptera\". The bird waits 1\u20132 days for the toxins within the grasshopper to degrade before eating it.\nLoggerhead shrikes kill vertebrates by using their beaks to grab or pierce the neck and violently shake their prey.\nShrikes are territorial, and these territories are defended from other pairs. In migratory species, a breeding territory is defended in the breeding grounds and a smaller feeding territory is established during migration and in the wintering grounds. Where several species of shrikes exist together, competition for territories can be intense.\nShrikes make regular use of exposed perch sites, where they adopt a conspicuous upright stance. These sites are used to watch for prey and to advertise their presence to rivals.\nShrikes vocally imitate their prey to lure them for capture. In 1575, this was noted by the English poet George Turberville.She will stand at perch upon some tree or poste, and there make an exceedingly lamentable crye\u00a0... All to make other fowles to thinke that she is very much distressed\u00a0... whereupon the credulous sellie birds do flocke together at her call. If any happen to approach near her, she\u00a0... ceazeth on them, and devoureth them (ungrateful subtill fowle).\nBreeding.\nShrikes are generally monogamous breeders, although polygyny has been recorded in some species. Co-operative breeding, where younger birds help their parents raise the next generation of young, has been recorded in both species in the genera \"Eurocephalus\" and \"Corvinella\", as well as one species of \"Lanius\". Males attract females to their territory with well-stocked caches, which may include inedible but brightly coloured items. During courtship, the male performs a ritualised dance which includes actions that mimic the skewering of prey on thorns, and feeds the female. Shrikes make simple, cup-shaped nests from twigs and grasses, in bushes and the lower branches of trees.\nSpecies in taxonomic order.\nFAMILY: LANIIDAE \nIn popular culture.\nThe science-fiction novel series \"Hyperion Cantos\" by Dan Simmons features a creature called the Shrike, which impales its human victims on the thorns protruding from its body, as well as on a large metal tree where it displays its prey.\nA serial killer who snaps the necks of his victims is known as The Shrike in Michael Connelly's \"Fair Warning\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "29396", "revid": "1318792068", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29396", "title": "Screwdriver (cocktail)", "text": "Highball drink made with fresh orange juice and vodka\nA screwdriver (in North American English) is an alcoholic highball drink made with orange juice and vodka. In the UK, it is referred to as a \"vodka and orange\". While the basic drink is simply the two ingredients, there are many variations. Many of the variations have different names in different parts of the world.\nHistory.\nThe drink originated during World War II, when Americans in China and Turkey mixed neutral spirits with orange juice.\nThe origin of the name \"screwdriver\" is less clear, but the name appeared in Ankara, Turkey, in 1943 and 1944 and later in Istanbul. Variations on the recipe were present in 1948 in Turkey and also called screwdrivers, such as a mixture of one-third vodka and two-thirds gin, and another recipe adding gin, cognac, bitters, and other ingredients to orange juice and vodka. An unattributed but popular story for the name is that the Americans lacked a spoon and instead used a screwdriver as a stirring stick. Another unattributed story is that auto workers in the US used to pour vodka in their breakfast orange juice before starting the shift and used screwdrivers to stir the glass.\nStarting mid-1950s, vodka rose rapidly in popularity in America, and mixed drinks such as the screwdriver rose with it.\nAdvertising campaigns in the 1950s and 1960s by vodka brands such as Smirnoff cemented the screwdriver as a vodka favorite.\nVariations.\nThe screwdriver served as the foundation of the Harvey Wallbanger.\nA screwdriver with two parts of sloe gin, one part of Southern Comfort, and filled with orange juice is a \"sloe comfortable screw\" or \"slow comfortable screw\".\nA screwdriver with one part of sloe gin, one part of Southern Comfort, one part Galliano, and filled with orange juice is a \"sloe comfortable screw up against the wall\".\nA screwdriver with one part of sloe gin, one part of Southern Comfort, one part Galliano, one part tequila, and filled with orange juice is a \"sloe comfortable screw up against the wall Mexican style\".\nA \"virgin screwdriver\" is a mocktail (non-alcoholic variation), usually made with orange juice and tonic water.\nA screwdriver with apple juice instead of orange juice is an \"Anita Bryant cocktail\". Bryant was an American singer and spokeswoman for the Florida Citrus Commission during the 1960s and 1970s. Starting in 1977, she became an anti-gay-rights activist.\nBecause Bryant promoted orange juice, the gay community retaliated by boycotting it in the 1977\u20131980 Florida orange juice boycott. Gay bars across North America stopped serving screwdrivers and invented this cocktail to replace it. The sales and proceeds of the cocktail went to gay rights activists and helped fund their work against Bryant. The campaign was ultimately successful, as Bryant's activism damaged her musical and business career. Her contract with the Florida Citrus Commission was left to expire in 1980 after they stated she was \"worn out\" as a spokesperson.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "29397", "revid": "11091232", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29397", "title": "Sub-molecular engineering", "text": ""}
{"id": "29398", "revid": "28481209", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29398", "title": "Single-stage-to-orbit", "text": "Launch system that only uses one rocket stage\nA single-stage-to-orbit (SSTO) vehicle reaches orbit from the surface of a body using only propellants and fluids and without expending tanks, engines, or other major hardware. The term usually, but not exclusively refers to reusable vehicles. To date, no Earth-launched SSTO launch vehicles have ever been flown; orbital launches from Earth have been performed by multi-stage rockets, either fully or partially expendable.\nThe main projected advantage of the SSTO concept is elimination of the hardware replacement inherent in expendable launch systems. However, the non-recurring costs associated with design, development, research and engineering (DDR&amp;E) of reusable SSTO systems are much higher than expendable systems due to the substantial technical challenges of SSTO, assuming that those technical issues can in fact be solved. SSTO vehicles may also require a significantly higher degree of regular maintenance.\nIt is considered to be marginally possible to launch a single-stage-to-orbit chemically fueled spacecraft from Earth. The principal complicating factors for SSTO from Earth are: high orbital velocity of over ; the need to overcome Earth's gravity, especially in the early stages of flight; and flight within Earth's atmosphere, which limits speed in the early stages of flight due to drag, and influences engine performance.\nAdvances in rocketry in the 21st century have resulted in a substantial fall in the cost to launch a kilogram of payload to either low Earth orbit or the International Space Station, reducing the main projected advantage of the SSTO concept.\nNotable single stage to orbit concepts include Skylon, which used the hybrid-cycle SABRE engine that can use oxygen from the atmosphere when it is at low altitude, and then use onboard liquid oxygen after switching to the closed cycle rocket engine at high altitude, the McDonnell Douglas DC-X, the Lockheed Martin X-33 and VentureStar which was intended to replace the Space Shuttle, and the Roton SSTO, which is a helicopter that can get to orbit. However, despite showing some promise, none of them have come close to achieving orbit yet due to problems with finding a sufficiently efficient propulsion system and discontinued development.\nSingle-stage-to-orbit is much easier to achieve on extraterrestrial bodies that have weaker gravitational fields and lower atmospheric pressure than Earth, such as the Moon and Mars, and has been achieved from the Moon by the Apollo program's Lunar Module, by several robotic spacecraft of the Soviet Luna program, and by China's Chang'e 5 and Chang'e 6 lunar sample return missions.\nHistory.\nEarly concepts.\nBefore the second half of the twentieth century, very little research was conducted into space travel. During the 1960s, some of the first concept designs for this kind of craft began to emerge.\nOne of the earliest SSTO concepts was the expendable One stage Orbital Space Truck (OOST) proposed by Philip Bono, an engineer for Douglas Aircraft Company. A reusable version named ROOST was also proposed.\nAnother early SSTO concept was a reusable launch vehicle named NEXUS which was proposed by Krafft Arnold Ehricke in the early 1960s. It was one of the largest spacecraft ever conceptualized with a diameter of over 50 metres and the capability to lift up to 2000 short tons into Earth orbit, intended for missions to further out locations in the Solar System such as Mars.\nThe North American Air Augmented VTOVL from 1963 was a similarly large craft which would have used ramjets to decrease the liftoff mass of the vehicle by removing the need for large amounts of liquid oxygen while traveling through the atmosphere.\nFrom 1965, Robert Salkeld investigated various single stage to orbit winged spaceplane concepts. He proposed a vehicle which would burn hydrocarbon fuel while in the atmosphere and then switch to hydrogen fuel for increasing efficiency once in space.\nFurther examples of Bono's early concepts (prior to the 1990s) which were never constructed include:\nStar-raker: In 1979, Rockwell International unveiled a concept for a 100-ton payload heavy-lift multicycle airbreather ramjet/cryogenic rocket engine, horizontal takeoff/horizontal landing single-stage-to-orbit spaceplane named \"Star-Raker\", designed to launch heavy Space-based solar power satellites into a 300 nautical mile Earth orbit. Star-raker would have had 3 x LOX/LH2 rocket engines (based on the SSME) + 10 x turboramjets.\nAround 1985 the NASP project was intended to launch a scramjet vehicle into orbit, but funding was stopped and the project cancelled. At around the same time, the HOTOL tried to use precooled jet engine technology, but failed to show significant advantages over rocket technology.\nDC-X technology.\nThe DC-X, short for Delta Clipper Experimental, was an uncrewed one-third scale vertical takeoff and landing demonstrator for a proposed SSTO. It is one of only a few prototype SSTO vehicles ever built. Several other prototypes were intended, including the DC-X2 (a half-scale prototype) and the DC-Y, a full-scale vehicle which would be capable of single stage insertion into orbit. Neither of these were built, but the project was taken over by NASA in 1995, and they built the DC-XA, an upgraded one-third scale prototype. This vehicle was lost when it landed with only three of its four landing pads deployed, which caused it to tip over on its side and explode. The project has not been continued since.\nRoton.\nFrom 1999 to 2001 Rotary Rocket attempted to build a SSTO vehicle called the Roton. It received a large amount of media attention and a working sub-scale prototype was completed, but the design was largely impractical.\nApproaches.\nThere have been various approaches to SSTO vehicles including: pure rockets that are launched and land vertically, air-breathing scramjet-powered vehicles that are launched and land horizontally, nuclear-powered vehicles, and even jet-engine-powered vehicles that can fly into orbit and return landing like an airliner, completely intact.\nFor rocket-powered SSTO, the main challenge is achieving a high enough mass-ratio to carry sufficient propellant to achieve orbit, plus a meaningful payload weight. One possibility is to give the rocket an initial speed with a space gun, as planned in the Quicklaunch project.\nFor air-breathing SSTO, the main challenges are system complexity and associated research and development costs, material science, construction techniques necessary for surviving sustained high-speed flight within the atmosphere, \"and\" achieving a high enough mass-ratio to carry sufficient propellant to achieve orbit, plus a meaningful payload weight. Air-breathing designs typically fly at supersonic or hypersonic speeds and usually include a rocket engine for the final burn for orbit.\nWhether rocket-powered or air-breathing, a reusable vehicle must be rugged enough to survive multiple round trips into space without adding excessive weight or maintenance. In addition, a reusable vehicle must be able to reenter without damage and land safely.\nWhile single-stage rockets were once thought to be beyond reach, advances in materials technology and construction techniques have shown them to be possible. For example, calculations show that the Titan II first stage, launched on its own, would have a 25-to-1 ratio of fuel to vehicle hardware.\nIt has a sufficiently efficient engine to achieve orbit, but without carrying much payload.\nDense versus hydrogen fuels.\nHydrogen fuel might seem the obvious fuel for SSTO vehicles. When burned with oxygen, hydrogen gives the highest specific impulse of any commonly used fuel: around 450 seconds, compared with up to 350 seconds for kerosene.\nHydrogen has the following advantages:\nHowever, hydrogen also has these disadvantages:\nThese issues can be dealt with, but at extra cost.\nWhile kerosene tanks can be 1% of the weight of their contents, hydrogen tanks often must weigh 10% of their contents. This is because of both the low density and the additional insulation required to minimize boiloff (a problem which does not occur with kerosene and many other fuels). The low density of hydrogen further affects the design of the rest of the vehicle: pumps and pipework need to be much larger in order to pump the fuel to the engine. The result is the thrust/weight ratio of hydrogen-fueled engines is 30\u201350% lower than comparable engines using denser fuels.\nThis inefficiency indirectly affects gravity losses as well; the vehicle has to hold itself up on rocket power until it reaches orbit. The lower excess thrust of the hydrogen engines due to the lower thrust/weight ratio means that the vehicle must ascend more steeply, and so less thrust acts horizontally. Less horizontal thrust results in taking longer to reach orbit, and gravity losses are increased by at least . While not appearing large, the mass ratio to delta-v curve is very steep to reach orbit in a single stage, and this makes a 10% difference to the mass ratio on top of the tankage and pump savings.\nThe overall effect is that there is surprisingly little difference in overall performance between SSTOs that use hydrogen and those that use denser fuels, except that hydrogen vehicles may be rather more expensive to develop and buy. Careful studies have shown that some dense fuels (for example liquid propane) exceed the performance of hydrogen fuel when used in an SSTO launch vehicle by 10% for the same dry weight.\nIn the 1960s Philip Bono investigated single-stage, VTVL tripropellant rockets, and showed that it could improve payload size by around 30%.\nOperational experience with the DC-X experimental rocket has caused a number of SSTO advocates to reconsider hydrogen as a satisfactory fuel. The late Max Hunter, while employing hydrogen fuel in the DC-X, often said that he thought the first successful orbital SSTO would more likely be fueled by propane.\nOne engine for all altitudes.\nSome SSTO concepts use the same engine for all altitudes, which is a problem for traditional engines with a bell-shaped nozzle. Depending on the atmospheric pressure, different bell shapes are required. Engines designed to operate in a vacuum have large bells, allowing the exhaust gasses to expand to near vacuum pressures, thereby raising efficiency. Due to an effect known as Flow separation, using a vacuum bell in atmosphere would have disastrous consequences for the engine. Engines designed to fire in atmosphere therefore have to shorten the nozzle, only expanding the gasses to atmospheric pressure. The efficiency losses due to the smaller bell are usually mitigated via staging, as upper stage engines such as the Rocketdyne J-2 do not have to fire until atmospheric pressure is negligible, and can therefore use the larger bell.\nOne possible solution would be to use an aerospike engine, which can be effective in a wide range of ambient pressures. In fact, a linear aerospike engine was to be used in the X-33 design.\nOther solutions involve using multiple engines and other altitude adapting designs such as double-mu bells or extensible bell sections.\nStill, at very high altitudes, the extremely large engine bells tend to expand the exhaust gases down to near vacuum pressures. As a result, these engine bells are counterproductive due to their excess weight. Some SSTO concepts use very high pressure engines which permit high ratios to be used from ground level. This gives good performance, negating the need for more complex solutions.\nAirbreathing SSTO.\nSome designs for SSTO attempt to use airbreathing jet engines that collect oxidizer and reaction mass from the atmosphere to reduce the take-off weight of the vehicle.\nSome of the issues with this approach are:\nThus with for example scramjet designs (e.g. X-43) the mass budgets do not seem to close for orbital launch.\nSimilar issues occur with single-stage vehicles attempting to carry conventional jet engines to orbit\u2014the weight of the jet engines is not compensated sufficiently by the reduction in propellant.\nOn the other hand, LACE-like precooled airbreathing designs such as the Skylon spaceplane (and ATREX) which transition to rocket thrust at rather lower speeds (Mach\u00a05.5) do seem to give, on paper at least, an improved orbital mass fraction over pure rockets (even multistage rockets) sufficiently to hold out the possibility of full reusability with better payload fraction.\nIt is important to note that mass fraction is an important concept in the engineering of a rocket. However, mass fraction may have little to do with the costs of a rocket, as the costs of fuel are very small when compared to the costs of the engineering program as a whole. As a result, a cheap rocket with a poor mass fraction may be able to deliver more payload to orbit with a given amount of money than a more complicated, more efficient rocket.\nLaunch assists.\nMany vehicles are only narrowly suborbital, so practically anything that gives a relatively small delta-v increase can be helpful, and outside assistance for a vehicle is therefore desirable.\nProposed launch assists include:\nAnd on-orbit resources such as:\nNuclear propulsion.\nDue to weight issues such as shielding, many nuclear propulsion systems are unable to lift their own weight, and hence are unsuitable for launching to orbit. However, some designs such as the Orion project and some nuclear thermal designs do have a thrust to weight ratio in excess of\u00a01, enabling them to lift off. Clearly, one of the main issues with nuclear propulsion would be safety, both during a launch for the passengers, but also in case of a failure during launch. As of February 2024, no current program is attempting nuclear propulsion from Earth's surface.\nBeam-powered propulsion.\nBecause they can be more energetic than the potential energy that chemical fuel allows for, some laser or microwave powered rocket concepts have the potential to launch vehicles into orbit, single stage. In practice, this area is not possible with current technology.\nDesign challenges inherent in SSTO.\nThe design space constraints of SSTO vehicles were described by rocket design engineer Robert Truax:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Using similar technologies (i.e., the same propellants and structural fraction), a two-stage-to-orbit vehicle will always have a better payload-to-weight ratio than a single stage designed for the same mission, in most cases, a very much better [payload-to-weight ratio]. Only when the structural factor approaches zero [very little vehicle structure weight] does the payload/weight ratio of a single-stage rocket approach that of a two-stage. A slight miscalculation and the single-stage rocket winds up with no payload. To get any at all, technology needs to be stretched to the limit. Squeezing out the last drop of specific impulse, and shaving off the last pound, costs money and/or reduces reliability.\nThe Tsiolkovsky rocket equation expresses the maximum change in velocity any single rocket stage can achieve:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;\nwhere:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;formula_1 (delta-v) is the maximum change of velocity of the vehicle,\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;formula_2 is the propellant specific impulse,\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;formula_3 is the standard gravity,\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;formula_4 is the vehicle mass ratio,\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;formula_5 refers to the natural logarithm function.\nThe mass ratio of a vehicle is defined as a ratio the initial vehicle mass when fully loaded with propellants formula_6 to the final vehicle mass formula_7 after the burn:\nwhere:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;formula_8 is the initial vehicle mass or the gross liftoff weight formula_9,\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;formula_10 is the final vehicle mass after the burn,\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;formula_11 is the structural mass of vehicle,\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;formula_12 is the propellant mass,\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;formula_13 is the payload mass.\nThe propellant mass fraction (formula_14) of a vehicle can be expressed solely as a function of the mass ratio:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe structural coefficient (formula_15) is a critical parameter in SSTO vehicle design. Structural efficiency of a vehicle is maximized as the structural coefficient approaches zero. The structural coefficient is defined as:\nThe overall structural mass fraction formula_16 can be expressed in terms of the structural coefficient:\nAn additional expression for the overall structural mass fraction can be found by noting that the payload mass fraction formula_17, propellant mass fraction and structural mass fraction sum to one:\nEquating the expressions for structural mass fraction and solving for the initial vehicle mass yields:\nThis expression shows how the size of a SSTO vehicle is dependent on its structural efficiency. Given a mission profile formula_18 and propellant type formula_19, the size of a vehicle increases with an increasing structural coefficient. This growth factor sensitivity is shown parametrically for both SSTO and two-stage-to-orbit (TSTO) vehicles for a standard LEO mission. The curves vertically asymptote at the maximum structural coefficient limit where mission criteria can no longer be met:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;\nIn comparison to a non-optimized TSTO vehicle using restricted staging, a SSTO rocket launching an identical payload mass and using the same propellants will always require a substantially smaller structural coefficient to achieve the same delta-v. Given that current materials technology places a lower limit of approximately 0.1 on the smallest structural coefficients attainable, reusable SSTO vehicles are typically an impractical choice even when using the highest performance propellants available.\nExamples.\nIt is easier to achieve SSTO from a body with lower gravitational pull than Earth, such as the Moon or Mars. The Apollo Lunar Module ascended from the lunar surface to lunar orbit in a single stage.\nA detailed study into SSTO vehicles was prepared by Chrysler Corporation's Space Division in 1970\u20131971 under NASA contract NAS8-26341. Their proposal (Shuttle SERV) was an enormous vehicle with more than of payload, utilizing jet engines for (vertical) landing. While the technical problems seemed to be solvable, the USAF required a winged design that led to the Shuttle as we know it today.\nThe uncrewed DC-X technology demonstrator, originally developed by McDonnell Douglas for the Strategic Defense Initiative (SDI) program office, was an attempt to build a vehicle that could lead to an SSTO vehicle. The one-third-size test craft was operated and maintained by a small team of three people based out of a trailer, and the craft was once relaunched less than 24\u00a0hours after landing. Although the test program was not without mishap (including a minor explosion), the DC-X demonstrated that the maintenance aspects of the concept were sound. That project was cancelled when it landed with three of four legs deployed, tipped over, and exploded on the fourth flight after transferring management from the Strategic Defense Initiative Organization to NASA.\nThe Aquarius Launch Vehicle was designed to bring bulk materials to orbit as cheaply as possible.\nCurrent development.\nCurrent and previous SSTO projects include the Japanese Kankoh-maru project, ARCA Haas 2C, Radian One and the Indian Avatar spaceplane.\nSkylon.\nThe British Government partnered with the ESA in 2010 to promote a single-stage to orbit spaceplane concept called Skylon. This design was pioneered by Reaction Engines Limited (REL), a company founded by Alan Bond after HOTOL was canceled. The Skylon spaceplane has been positively received by the British government, and the British Interplanetary Society. Following a successful propulsion system test that was audited by ESA's propulsion division in mid-2012, REL announced that it would begin a three-and-a-half-year project to develop and build a test jig of the Sabre engine to prove the engines performance across its air-breathing and rocket modes. In November 2012, it was announced that a key test of the engine precooler had been successfully completed, and that ESA had verified the precooler's design. The project's development is now allowed to advance to its next phase, which involves the construction and testing of a full-scale prototype engine.\nAlternative approaches to inexpensive spaceflight.\nMany studies have shown that regardless of selected technology, the most effective cost reduction technique is economies of scale. Merely launching a large total number reduces the manufacturing costs per vehicle, similar to how the mass production of automobiles brought about great increases in affordability.\nUsing this concept, some aerospace analysts believe the way to lower launch costs is the exact opposite of SSTO. Whereas reusable SSTOs would reduce per launch costs by making a reusable high-tech vehicle that launches frequently with low maintenance, the \"mass production\" approach views the technical advances as a source of the cost problem in the first place. By simply building and launching large quantities of rockets, and hence launching a large volume of payload, costs can be brought down. This approach was attempted in the late 1970s, early 1980s in West Germany with the Democratic Republic of the Congo-based OTRAG rocket.\nThis is somewhat similar to the approach some previous systems have taken, using simple engine systems with \"low-tech\" fuels, as the Russian and Chinese space programs still do.\nAn alternative to scale is to make the discarded stages practically reusable: this was the original design goal of the Space Shuttle phase B studies, and is currently pursued by the SpaceX reusable launch system development program with their Falcon 9, Falcon Heavy, and Starship, and Blue Origin using New Glenn.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "29400", "revid": "20483999", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29400", "title": "Structural biology", "text": "Study of molecular structures in biology\nStructural biology deals with structural analysis of living material (formed, composed of, and/or maintained and refined by living cells) at every level of organization. \nEarly structural biologists throughout the 19th and early 20th centuries were primarily only able to study structures to the limit of the naked eye's visual acuity and through magnifying glasses and light microscopes. In the 20th century, a variety of experimental techniques were developed to examine the 3D structures of biological molecules. The most prominent techniques are X-ray crystallography, nuclear magnetic resonance, and electron microscopy. Through the discovery of X-rays and its applications to protein crystals, structural biology was revolutionized, as now scientists could obtain the three-dimensional structures of biological molecules in atomic detail. Likewise, NMR spectroscopy allowed information about protein structure and dynamics to be obtained. Finally, in the 21st century, electron microscopy also saw a drastic revolution with the development of more coherent electron sources, aberration correction for electron microscopes, and reconstruction software that enabled the successful implementation of high resolution cryo-electron microscopy, thereby permitting the study of individual proteins and molecular complexes in three-dimensions at angstrom resolution.\nWith the development of these three techniques, the field of structural biology expanded and also became a branch of molecular biology, biochemistry, and biophysics concerned with the molecular structure of biological macromolecules (especially proteins, made up of amino acids, RNA or DNA, made up of nucleotides, and membranes, made up of lipids), how they acquire the structures they have, and how alterations in their structures affect their function. This subject is of great interest to biologists because macromolecules carry out most of the functions of cells, and it is only by coiling into specific three-dimensional shapes that they are able to perform these functions. This architecture, the \"tertiary structure\" of molecules, depends in a complicated way on each molecule's basic composition, or \"primary structure.\" At lower resolutions, tools such as FIB-SEM tomography have allowed for greater understanding of cells and their organelles in 3-dimensions, and how each hierarchical level of various extracellular matrices contributes to function (for example in bone). In the past few years it has also become possible to predict highly accurate physical molecular models to complement the experimental study of biological structures. Computational techniques such as molecular dynamics simulations can be used in conjunction with empirical structure determination strategies to extend and study protein structure, conformation and function.\nHistory.\nIn 1912 Max Von Laue directed X-rays at crystallized copper sulfate generating a diffraction pattern. These experiments led to the development of X-ray crystallography, and its usage in exploring biological structures. In 1951, Rosalind Franklin and Maurice Wilkins used X-ray diffraction patterns to capture the first image of deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA). Francis Crick and James Watson modeled the double helical structure of DNA using this same technique in 1953 and received the Nobel Prize in Medicine along with Wilkins in 1962.\nPepsin crystals were the first proteins to be crystallized for use in X-ray diffraction, by Theodore Svedberg who received the 1962 Nobel Prize in Chemistry. The first tertiary protein structure, that of myoglobin, was published in 1958 by John Kendrew. During this time, modeling of protein structures was done using balsa wood or wire models. With the invention of modeling software such as CCP4 in the late 1970s, modeling is now done with computer assistance. Recent developments in the field have included the generation of X-ray free electron lasers, allowing analysis of the dynamics and motion of biological molecules, and the use of structural biology in assisting synthetic biology.\nIn the late 1930s and early 1940s, the combination of work done by Isidor Rabi, Felix Bloch, and Edward Mills Purcell led to the development of nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR). Currently, is widely used in the field of structural biology to determine the structure and dynamic nature of proteins (protein NMR).\nIn 1990, Richard Henderson produced the first three-dimensional, high resolution image of bacteriorhodopsin using cryogenic electron microscopy (cryo-EM). Since then, cryo-EM has emerged as an increasingly popular technique to determine three-dimensional, high resolution structures of biological images.\nMore recently, computational methods have been developed to model and study biological structures. For example, molecular dynamics (MD) is commonly used to analyze the dynamic movements of biological molecules. In 1975, the first simulation of a biological folding process using MD was published in Nature. Recently, was significantly improved by a new machine learning method called AlphaFold. Some claim that computational approaches are starting to lead the field of structural biology research.\nTechniques.\nBiomolecules are too small to see in detail even with the most advanced light microscopes. The methods that structural biologists use to determine their structures generally involve measurements on vast numbers of identical molecules at the same time. These methods include:\nMost often researchers use them to study the \"native states\" of macromolecules. But variations on these methods are also used to watch nascent or denatured molecules assume or reassume their native states. See protein folding.\nA third approach that structural biologists take to understanding structure is bioinformatics to look for patterns among the diverse sequences that give rise to particular shapes. Researchers often can deduce aspects of the structure of integral membrane proteins based on the membrane topology predicted by hydrophobicity analysis. See protein structure prediction.\nApplications.\nStructural biologists have made significant contributions towards understanding the molecular components and mechanisms underlying human diseases. For example, cryo-EM and ssNMR have been used to study the aggregation of amyloid fibrils, which are associated with Alzheimer's disease, Parkinson's disease, and type II diabetes. In addition to amyloid proteins, scientists have used cryo-EM to produce high resolution models of tau filaments in the brain of Alzheimer's patients which may help develop better treatments in the future. Structural biology tools can also be used to explain interactions between pathogens and hosts. For example, structural biology tools have enabled virologists to understand how the HIV envelope allows the virus to evade human immune responses.\nStructural biology is also an important component of drug discovery. Scientists can identify targets using genomics, study those targets using structural biology, and develop drugs that are suited for those targets. Specifically, ligand-NMR, mass spectrometry, and X-ray crystallography are commonly used techniques in the drug discovery process. For example, researchers have used structural biology to better understand Met, a protein encoded by a protooncogene that is an important drug target in cancer. Similar research has been conducted for HIV targets to treat people with AIDS. Researchers are also developing new antimicrobials for mycobacterial infections using structure-driven drug discovery.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "29402", "revid": "50837519", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29402", "title": "Sunni Islam", "text": "Largest main branch of Islam\nSunni Islam is the largest branch of Islam and the largest religious denomination in the world. It holds that Muhammad did not appoint any successor and that his closest companion Abu Bakr (r.\u2009632\u00a0\u2013\u00a0634) rightfully succeeded him as the caliph of the Muslim community, being appointed at the meeting of Saqifa. This contrasts with the Shia view, which holds that Muhammad appointed Ali ibn Abi Talib (r.\u2009656\u00a0\u2013\u00a0661) as his successor. Nevertheless, Sunnis revere Ali, along with Abu Bakr, Umar (r.\u2009634\u00a0\u2013\u00a0644) and Uthman (r.\u2009644\u00a0\u2013\u00a0656) as 'rightly-guided caliphs'.\nThe term means those who observe the , the practices of Muhammad. The Quran, together with hadith (especially the Six Books) and (scholarly consensus), form the basis of all traditional jurisprudence within Sunni Islam. Sharia legal rulings are derived from these basic sources, in conjunction with consideration of public welfare and juristic discretion, using the principles of jurisprudence developed by the four predominant legal schools: Hanafi, Maliki, Shafi'i and Hanbali.\nIn matters of creed, the Sunni tradition upholds the six pillars of (faith) and comprises the Ash'ari and Maturidi schools of (theology) as well as the textualist Athari school. Sunnis regard the first four caliphs Abu Bakr (r.\u2009632\u00a0\u2013\u00a0634), Umar (r.\u2009634\u00a0\u2013\u00a0644), Uthman (r.\u2009644\u00a0\u2013\u00a0656) and Ali (r.\u2009656\u00a0\u2013\u00a0661) as (rightly-guided) and revere the , , and as the (predecessors).\nTerminology.\nSunna.\nThe Arabic term , which Sunnis are named after, dates back to pre-Islamic language. It was used for \"the right path that has always been followed\". The term gained greater political significance after the murder of the third caliph, Uthman (r.\u2009644\u00a0\u2013\u00a0656). It is said Malik al-Ashtar, a famous follower of Ali, provided encouragement during the Battle of Siffin with the expression \"Ali's political rival Mu'awiya kills the '\". After the battle, it was agreed that \"the righteous ', the unifying, not the divisive\" (\"\") should be consulted to resolve the conflict. The time when the term \"sunna\" became the short form for \"Sunnah of the Prophet\" () is still unknown. During the Umayyad Caliphate, several political movements, including the Shia and the Kharijites rebelled against the formation of the state. They led their battles in the name of \"the book of God (\"Qur'an\") and the \"Sunnah\" of his Prophet\". During the second Civil War (680\u201392) the Sunna term received connotations critical of Shi'i doctrines (). It is recorded by Masr\u016bq ibn al-Adschda\u02bf (died 683), who was a \"Mufti\" in Kufa, a need to love the first two caliphs Ab\u016b Bakr and \u02bfUmar ibn al-Kha\u1e6d\u1e6d\u0101b and acknowledge their priority (). A disciple of Masr\u016bq, the scholar ash-Sha\u02bfb\u012b (died between 721 and 729), who first sided with the Shia in Kufa during Civil War, but turned away in disgust by their fanaticism and finally decided to join the Umayyad Caliph \u02bfAbd al-Malik, popularized the concept of \"Sunnah\". It is also passed down by ash-Sha\u02bfb\u012b that he took offense at the hatred on \u02bf\u0100\u02bei\u0161a bint Ab\u012b Bakr and considered it a violation of the \"Sunnah\".\nThe term \"Sunna\" instead of the longer expression or as a group-name for Sunnis is a relatively young phenomenon. It was probably Ibn Taymiyyah, who used the short-term for the first time. It was later popularized by pan-Islamic scholars such as Muhammad Rashid Rida in his treatise (\"The Sunna and the Shia, Or Wahhabism and R\u0101fidism: Religious history, sociological and reform-oriented facts\") published in 1928\u201329. The term \"Sunnah\" is usually used in Arabic discourse as designation for Sunni Muslims, when they are intended to be contrasted with Shias. The word pair \"Sunnah\u2013Shia\" is also used on Western research literature to denote the \"Sunni\u2013Shia\" contrast.\nAhl as-Sunna.\nOne of the earliest supporting documents for derives from the Basric scholar Muhammad Ibn Siri (died 728). His is mentioned in the \"Sahih\" of Muslim ibn al-Hajjaj, and quoted having said: \"Formerly one did not ask about the Isnad. But when the \"fitna\" started, one said: 'Name us your informants'. One would then respond to them: If they were Sunnah people, you accept their hadith. But if they are people of the Innovations, the hadith was rejected.\" G.H.A. Juynboll assumed, the term \"fitna\" in this statement is not related to the first Civil War (665\u2013661) after murder of \u02bfUthm\u0101n ibn \u02bfAff\u0101n, but the second Civil War (680\u2013692) in which the Islamic community was split into four parties (Abd Allah ibn al-Zubayr, the Umayyads, the Shia under al-Mukht\u0101r ibn Ab\u012b \u02bfUbaid and the Kharijites). The term \"\" designated in this situation whose, who stayed away from heretic teachings of the different warring parties.\nThe term ' was always a laudatory designation. Abu Hanifa (died 769), who sympathized with Murdshia, insisted that this were \"righteous people and people of the Sunnah\" (\"ahl al-\u02bfadl wa-ahl as-sunna\"). According to Josef van Ess this term did not mean more than \"honorable and righteous believing people\". Among Hanafits the designation ' and \"ahl al-\u02bfadl\" (people of the righteous) remained interchangeable for a long time. Thus the Hanafite Ab\u016b l-Q\u0101sim as-Samarqand\u012b (died 953), who composed a catechism for the Samanides, used sometimes one expression and sometimes another for his own group.\nSingular to ' was \"\u1e63\u0101\u1e25ib sunna\" (adherent to the sunnah). This expression was used for example by \u02bfAbd All\u0101h ibn al-Mub\u0101rak (died 797) for a person, who distances himself from the teachings of Shia, Kharijites, Qadarites and Murjites. In addition, the Nisba adjective \"sunn\u012b\" was also used for the individual person. Thus it has been recorded, the Kufic scholar of the Quran Ab\u016b Bakr ibn \u02bfAyy\u0101sh (died 809) was asked, how he was a \"sunni\". He responded the following: \"The one who, when the heresies are mentioned, doesn't get excited about any of them.\" The Andalusiaian scholar Ibn Hazm (died 1064) taught later that those who confess Islam can be divided into four groups: ', Mutazilites, Murjites, Shites, Kharijites. The Mu\u02bftazilites replaced the Qadarites here.\nIn the 9th century, one started to extent the term \"\" with further positive additions. Abu al-Hasan al-Ashari used for his own group expressions like \"ahl as-sunna wa-l-istiq\u0101ma\" (\"people of Sunna and Straightness\"), \"ahl as-sunna wa-l-\u1e25ad\u012b\u1e6f\" (\"people of Sunnah and of the Hadith\") or \"ahl al-\u1e25aqq wa-s-sunna\" (\"people of Truth and of the Sunnah\").\nAhl as-Sunna wa l-Jam\u0101\u02bbah.\nThe first appearances of the expression are entirely clear. In his Mihna edict, the Abbasite Caliph Al-Ma'm\u016bn (reigned 813\u201333) criticized a group of people who related themselves to the sunnah () and claimed they are the \"people of truth, religion and community\" (). \"Sunna\" and \"jam\u0101\u02bfah\" are already connected here. As a pair, these terms already appear in the 9th century. It is recorded that the disciple of Ahmad ibn Hanbal Harb ibn Ismail as-Sirjdshani (died 893) created a writing with the title \"as-Sunna wa l-Jam\u0101\u02bfah\", to which the Mutazilite Abu al-Qasim al-Balchi wrote a refutation later. Al-Jubba'i (died 916) tells in his \"Kit\u0101b al-Maq\u0101l\u0101t\", that Ahmad ibn Hanbal attributed to his students the predicate \"sunn\u012b jam\u0101\u02bfah\" (\"Sunni Community\"). This indicates that the Hanbalis were the first to use the phrase \"ahl as-sunna wa l-jam\u0101\u02bfah\" as a self-designation.\nKarramiyya theology, founded by Muhammad ibn Karram (died 859) referred to the sunnah and community. In praise of their school founder, they passed down a hadith, according to which Muhammad predicted that at the end of times a man named Muhammad ibn Karram will appear, who will restore the sunna and the community (\"as-sunna wa l-jam\u0101\u02bfah\") and take Hidraj from Chorasan to Jerusalem, just how Muhammad himself took a Hidraj from Mecca to Medina. According to the testimony of the Transoxianian scholar Abu al-Yusr al-Bazdawi (died 1099), the Kullabites (followers of the Basrian scholar Ibn Kullab [died 855]) referred to themselves as also being among the \"ahl as-sunna wa l-jama\".\nAbu al-Hasan al-Ashari used the expression \"ahl as-sunna wa l-jam\u0101\u02bfah\" rarely, and preferred another combination. Later Asharites like al-Isfaranini (died 1027) and Abd al-Qahir al-Baghdadi (died 1078) also used the expression \"ahl as-sunna wa l-jam\u0101\u02bfah\" and used them in their works to designate the teachings of their own school. According to al-Bazdawi, all Asharites in his time said they belong to the \"ahl as-sunna wa l-jam\u0101\u02bfah\". During this time, the term was used as a self-designation by the Hanafite Maturidites in Transoxiania, used frequently by Abu al-Layth al-Samarqandi (died 983), Abu Schakur as-Salimi (died 1086) and al-Bazdawi himself. They used the term as a contrast to their enemies, among them Hanafites in the West, who have been followers of the Mutazilites. Al-Bazdaw\u012b also contrasted the \"Ahl as-Sunnah wa l-Jam\u0101\u02bbah\" with \"Ahl al-\u1e24ad\u012bth\", \"because they would adhere to teachings contrary to the Quran\".\nAccording to Schams ad-D\u012bn al-Maqdis\u012b (late 10th century) was the expression \"ahl as-sunna wa l-jam\u0101\u02bfah\" a laudatory term during his time, similar to \"ahl al-\u02bfadl wa-t-taw\u1e25\u012bd\" (\"people of Righteousness and Divine Unity\"), which was used for Mutazilites or generally designations like Mu'min\u016bn ('believer') or \"a\u1e63\u1e25\u0101b al-hud\u0101\" ('people of guidance') for Muslims, who have been seen as righteous believers. Since the expression \"ahl as-sunna wa l-jam\u0101\u02bfah\" was used with a demand for righteous belief, it has been translated as 'orthodox' in academic research.\nThere are different opinions regarding what the term \"jama\" in the phrase \"ahl as-sunna wa l-jama\" actually means, among Muslim scholars. In the Sunni Creed by at-Tahawi (died 933), the term \"jama\" contrasts several times with the Arabic term \"furqa\" (\"division, sectarianism\"). Thus at-Tah\u0101w\u012b explains that \"jama\" is considered true or right (\"\u1e25aqq wa-\u1e63aw\u0101b\") and \"furqa\" as aberration and punishment (\"zai\u0121 wa-\u02bfa\u1e0f\u0101b\"). Ibn Taymiyyah argues that \"jama\", as opposed to \"furqa\", has the inherent meaning of \"i\u01e7tim\u0101\u02bf\" (\"Coming together, being together, agreement\"). Furthermore, he connects it with the principle of Ijma, a third juridical source after the Book (Quran), and the Sunnah. The Ottoman scholar Muslih ad-Din al-Qastallani (died 1495) held the opinion that \"jama\" means 'path of the Sahaba' (\"\u1e6dar\u012bqat a\u1e63-\u1e63a\u1e25\u0101ba\"). The modern Indonesian theologian Nurcholish Madjid (died 2005) interpreted \"jama\" as an inclusive concept: it means a society open for pluralism and dialogue, though it does not particularly emphasize it.\nIn the Meeting of the Aqidah Expert Panel of the Department of Islamic Development Malaysia (JAKIM) held on 28 December 2010 at the Malaysian Islamic Training Institute (ILIM), Bangi, Selangor, the panel decided that the definition of \"Ahl al-Sunnah wa\u2019l-Jama\u2018ah\" is:\n\u201cA group who understands and adheres to the Qur\u2019an and the Sunnah of the Prophet SAW through the Companions, the Tabi\u2018in, and the Tabi\u2018 al-Tabi\u2018in, who remained steadfast with them in the principles of creed (\"aqidah\"), law (\"shari\u2018ah\"), and ethics (\"akhlaq\").\u201d\nExplanation of the definition:\nHistory.\nOne common mistake is to assume that Sunni Islam represents a normative Islam that emerged during the period after Muhammad's death, and that Sufism and Shi'ism developed out of Sunni Islam. This perception is partly due to the reliance on highly ideological sources that have been accepted as reliable historical works, and also because the vast majority of the population is Sunni. Both Sunnism and Shiism are the end products of several centuries of competition between ideologies. Both sects used each other to further cement their own identities and doctrines.\nThe first four caliphs are known among Sunnis as the R\u0101shidun or \"Rightly-Guided Ones\". Sunni recognition includes the aforementioned Abu Bakr as the first, Umar as the second, Uthman as the third, and Ali as the fourth. Sunnis recognised different rulers as the caliph, though they barely ever included anyone in the list of the rightly guided ones or \"R\u0101shidun\" after the murder of Ali, until the caliphate was constitutionally abolished in Turkey on 3 March 1924.\nTransition of caliphate into dynastic monarchy of Banu Umayya.\nThe seeds of metamorphosis of caliphate into kingship were sown, as the second caliph Umar had feared, as early as the regime of the third caliph Uthman, who appointed many of his kinsmen from his clan Banu Umayya, including Marw\u0101n and Walid bin Uqba on important government positions, becoming the main cause of turmoil resulting in his murder and the ensuing infighting during Ali's time and rebellion by Mu\u0101wiya, another of Uthman's kinsman. This ultimately resulted in the establishment of firm dynastic rule of Banu Umayya after Husain, the younger son of Ali from F\u0101tima, was killed at the Battle of Karbal\u0101. The rise to power of Banu Umayya, the Meccan tribe of elites who had vehemently opposed Muhammad under the leadership of Abu Sufy\u0101n, Mu\u0101wiya's father, right up to the conquest of Mecca by Muhammad, as his successors with the accession of Uthman to caliphate, replaced the egalitarian society formed as a result of Muhammad's revolution to a society stratified between haves and have-nots as a result of nepotism, and in the words of El-Hibri through \"the use of religious charity revenues (\"zak\u0101t\") to subsidise family interests, which Uthman justified as \"'al-sila\"' (pious filial support)\". Ali, during his rather brief regime after Uthman maintained austere life style and tried hard to bring back the egalitarian system and supremacy of law over the ruler idealised in Muhammad's message, but faced continued opposition, and wars one after another by Aisha-Talhah-Zubair, by Mu\u0101wiya and finally by the Kh\u0101rjites. After he was murdered, his followers immediately elected Hasan ibn Ali his elder son from F\u0101tima to succeed him. Hasan shortly afterward signed a treaty with Mu\u0101wiya relinquishing power in favour of the latter, with a condition inter alia, that one of the two who will outlive the other will be the caliph, and that this caliph will not appoint a successor but will leave the matter of selection of the caliph to the public. Subsequently, Hasan was poisoned to death and Muawiya enjoyed unchallenged power. Dishonouring his treaty with Hasan, he nominated his son Yazid to succeed him. Upon Mu\u0101wiya's death, Yazid asked Husain, the younger brother of Hasan, Ali's son and Muhammad's grandson, to give his allegiance to Yazid, which he plainly refused. His caravan was cordoned by Yazid's army at Karbal\u0101 and he was killed with all his male companions \u2013 total 72 people, in a day long battle after which Yazid established himself as a sovereign, though strong public uprising erupted after his death against his dynasty to avenge the massacre of Karbal\u0101, but Banu Umayya were able to quickly suppress them all and ruled the Muslim world, till they were finally overthrown by Banu Abb\u0101s.\nCaliphate and the dynastic monarchy of Banu Abb\u0101s.\nThe rule of and \"caliphate\" of Banu Umayya came to an end at the hands of Banu Abb\u0101s a branch of Banu H\u0101shim, the tribe of Muhammad, only to usher another dynastic monarchy styled as caliphate from 750 CE. This period is seen formative in Sunni Islam as the founders of the four schools viz, Abu Hanifa, Malik ibn Anas, Sh\u0101fi'i and Ahmad bin Hanbal all practised during this time, so also did Jafar al S\u0101diq who elaborated the doctrine of im\u0101mate, the basis for the Shi'a religious thought. There was no clearly accepted formula for determining succession in the Abbasid caliphate. Two or three sons or other relatives of the dying caliph emerged as candidates to the throne, each supported by his own party of supporters. A trial of strength ensued and the most powerful party won and expected favours of the caliph they supported once he ascended the throne. The caliphate of this dynasty ended with the death of the Caliph al-Ma'mun in 833 CE, when the period of Turkish domination began.\nSunni Islam in the contemporary era.\nThe fall, at the end of World War I of the Ottoman Empire, the biggest Sunni empire for six centuries, brought the caliphate to an end. This resulted in Sunni protests in far off places including the Khilafat Movement in India, which was later on upon gaining independence from Britain divided into Sunni-dominated Pakistan and secular India. Pakistan, the most populous Sunni state at its dawn, was later partitioned into Pakistan and Bangladesh. The demise of Ottoman caliphate also resulted in the emergence of Saudi Arabia, a dynastic absolute monarchy that championed the reformist doctrines of Muhammad ibn Abd al-Wahhab; the eponym of the Wahhabi movement. This was followed by a considerable rise in the influence of the Wahhabi, \"Salafiyya\", Islamist and Jihadist movements that revived the doctrines of the Hanbali theologian Taqi Al-Din Ibn Taymiyyah (1263\u20131328 C.E/ 661\u2013728 A.H), a fervent advocate of the traditions of the Sunni Imam Ahmad ibn Hanbal. The expediencies of Cold War resulted in the radicalisation of Afghan refugees in Pakistan who fought the communist regime backed by USSR forces in Afghanistan giving birth to the Taliban movement. After the fall of communist regime in Afghanistan and the ensuing civil war, Taliban wrestled power from the various Mujahidin factions in Afghanistan and formed a government under the leadership of Mohammed Omar, who was addressed as the Emir of the faithful, an honorific way of addressing the caliph. The Taliban regime was recognised by Pakistan and Saudi Arabia till after 9/11, perpetrated by Osama bin Laden \u2013 a Saudi national by birth and harboured by the Taliban \u2013 took place, resulting in a war on terror launched against the Taliban.\nThe sequence of events of the 20th century has led to resentment in some quarters of the Sunni community due to the loss of pre-eminence in several previously Sunni-dominated regions such as the Levant, Mesopotamia, the Balkans, the North Caucasus and the Indian sub continent. The latest attempt by a radical wing of Salafi-Jihadists to re-establish a Sunni caliphate was seen in the emergence of the militant group ISIL, whose leader Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi is known among his followers as caliph and \"Amir-al-mu'mineen\", \"The Commander of the Faithful\". Jihadism is opposed from within the Muslim community (known as the \"ummah\" in Arabic) in all quarters of the world as evidenced by turnout of almost 2% of the Muslim population in London protesting against ISIL.\nFollowing the puritan approach of Ibn Kathir, Muhammad Rashid Rida, etc. many contemporary \"Tafsir\" (exegetic treatises) downplay the earlier significance of Biblical material (\"Isr\u0101'iliyy\u0101t\"). Half of the Arab commentaries reject \"Isr\u0101'iliyy\u0101t\" in general, while Turkish tafsir usually partly allow referring to Biblical material. Nevertheless, most non-Arabic commentators regard them as useless or not applicable. A direct reference to the Israeli\u2013Palestinian conflict could not be found. It remains unclear whether the refusal of \"Isr\u0101'iliyy\u0101t\" is motivated by political discourse or by traditionalist thought alone. The usage of \"tafsir'ilmi\" is another notable characteristic of modern Sunni tafsir. \"Tafsir'ilmi\" stands for alleged scientific miracles found in the Qur'an. In short, the idea is that the Qur'an contains knowledge about subjects an author of the 7th century could not possibly have. Such interpretations are popular among many commentators. Some scholars, such as the Commentators of Al-Azhar University, reject this approach, arguing the Qur'an is a text for religious guidance, not for science and scientific theories that may be disproved later; thus \"tafsir'ilmi\" might lead to interpreting Qur'anic passages as falsehoods. Modern trends of Islamic interpretation are usually seen as adjusting to a modern audience and purifying Islam from alleged alterings, some of which are believed to be intentional corruptions brought into Islam to undermine and corrupt its message.\nAdherents.\nSunnis believe the companions of Muhammad to be reliable transmitters of Islam, since God and Muhammad accepted their integrity. Medieval sources even prohibit cursing or vilifying them. This belief is based upon prophetic traditions such as one narrated by Abdullah, son of Masud, in which Muhammad said: \"The best of the people are my generation, then those who come after them, then those who come after them.\" Support for this view is also found in the Qur'an, according to Sunnis. Therefore, narratives of companions are also reliably taken into account for knowledge of the Islamic faith. Sunnis also believe that the companions were true believers since it was the companions who were given the task of compiling the Qur'an.\nSunni Islam does not have a formal hierarchy. Leaders are informal, and gain influence through study to become a scholar of Islamic law (\"sharia\") or Islamic theology (\"Kal\u0101m\"). Both religious and political leadership are in principle open to all Muslims. According to the Islamic Center of Columbia, South Carolina, anyone with the intelligence and the will can become an Islamic scholar. During Midday Mosque services on Fridays, the congregation will choose a well-educated person to lead the service, known as a Khateeb (one who speaks).\nA study conducted by the \"Pew Research Center\" in 2010 and released January 2011 found that there are 1.62\u00a0billion Muslims around the world, and it is estimated over 85\u201390% are Sunni.\nThree group doctrines.\nThere is no agreement among Muslim scholars as to which dogmatic tendencies are to be assigned to Sunni tradition. Since the early modern period, is the idea that a total of three groups belong to the Sunnis: 1. those named after Abu l-Hasan al-Asch\u02bfari (died 935) Ash\u02bfarites, 2. those named after Abu Mansur al-Maturidi (died 941) named Maturidites and 3. a differently named third group, which is traditionalistic-oriented and rejects the rational discourse of Kal\u0101m advocated by the Maturidites and Ash\u02bfarites. The Syrian scholar \u02bfAbd al-Baqi Ibn Faqih Fussa (died 1661) calls this third traditionalist group the Hanbalites. The late Ottoman thinker \u0130smail Hakk\u0131 \u0130zmirli (died 1946), who agreed to dividing Sunnis into these three groups, called the traditionalist group Salafiyya, but also used \"Athariyya\" as an alternative term. For the Maturidiyya he gives \"Nasaf\u012byya\" as a possible alternative name. Another used for the traditionalist-oriented group is \"people of Hadith\" (\"ahl al-\u1e25ad\u012b\u1e6f\"). It is used, for example, in the final document of the Grozny Conference. Only those \"people of the Hadith\" are assigned to Sunnism who practice \"tafw\u012b\u1e0d\", i.e. who refrain from interpreting the ambiguous statements of the Quran.\nAsh'ari.\nFounded by Abu al-Hasan al-Ash'ari (873\u2013935). This theological school of Aqeedah was embraced by many Muslim scholars and developed in parts of the Islamic world throughout history; al-Ghazali wrote on the creed discussing it and agreeing upon some of its principles.\nAsh'ari theology stresses divine revelation over human reason. Contrary to the Mu'tazilites, they say that ethics cannot be derived from human reason, but that God's commands, as revealed in the \"Quran\" and the \"Sunnah\" (the practices of Muhammad and his companions as recorded in the traditions, or hadith), are the sole source of all morality and ethics.\nRegarding the nature of God and the divine attributes, the Ash'ari rejected the Mu'tazili position that all Quranic references to God as having real attributes were metaphorical. The Ash'aris insisted that these attributes were as they \"best befit His Majesty\". The Arabic language is a wide language in which one word can have 15 different meanings, so the Ash'aris endeavor to find the meaning that best befits God and is not contradicted by the Quran. Therefore, when God states in the Quran, \"He who does not resemble any of His creation\", this clearly means that God cannot be attributed with body parts because He created body parts. Ash'aris tend to stress divine omnipotence over human free will and they believe that the Quran is eternal and uncreated.\nMaturidi.\nFounded by Abu Mansur al-Maturidi (died 944), Maturidiyyah was the major tradition in Central Asia based on Hanafi-law. It is more influenced by Persian interpretations of Islam and less on the traditions established within Arabian culture. In contrast to the traditionalistic approach, Maturidism allows to reject hadiths based on reason alone. Nevertheless, revelation remains important to inform humans about that is beyond their intellectual limits, such as the concept of an afterlife. Ethics on the other hand, do not need prophecy or revelation, but can be understood by reason alone. One of the tribes, the Seljuk Turks, migrated to Turkey, where later the Ottoman Empire was established. Their preferred school of law achieved a new prominence throughout their whole empire although it continued to be followed almost exclusively by followers of the Hanafi school while followers of the Shafi and Maliki schools within the empire followed the Ash'ari and Athari schools of thought. Thus, wherever can be found Hanafi followers, there can be found the Maturidi creed.\nAthari.\nTraditionalist or Athari theology is a movement of Islamic scholars who reject rationalistic Islamic theology (\"kalam\") in favor of strict textualism in interpreting the \"Qur'an\" and \"sunnah\". The name derives from \"tradition\" in its technical sense as translation of the Arabic word \"hadith\". It is also sometimes referred to as \"athari\" as by several other names.\nAdherents of traditionalist theology believe that the \"zahir\" (literal, apparent) meaning of the \"Qur'an\" and the hadith have sole authority in matters of belief and law; and that the use of rational disputation is forbidden even if it verifies the truth.36 They engage in a literal reading of the \"Qur'an\", as opposed to one engaged in \"ta'wil\" (metaphorical interpretation). They do not attempt to conceptualize the meanings of the \"Qur'an\" rationally, and believe that their realities should be consigned to God alone (\"tafwid\").36\u201337 In essence, the text of the Qur'an and Hadith is accepted without asking \"how\" or \"Bi-la kaifa\".\nTraditionalist theology emerged among scholars of hadith who eventually coalesced into a movement called \"ahl al-hadith\" under the leadership of Ibn Hanbal. In matters of faith, they were pitted against Mu'tazilites and other theological currents, condemning many points of their doctrine as well as the rationalistic methods they used in defending them. In the 10th century AD al-Ash'ari and al-Maturidi found a middle ground between Mu'tazilite rationalism and Athari literalism, using the rationalistic methods championed by Mu'tazilites to defend most tenets of the traditionalist doctrine. Although the mainly Athari scholars who rejected this synthesis were in the minority, their emotive, narrative-based approach to faith remained influential among the urban masses in some areas, particularly in Abbasid Baghdad.35\nWhile Ash'arism and Maturidism are often called the Sunni \"orthodoxy\", traditionalist theology has thrived alongside it, laying rival claims to be the orthodox Sunni faith. In the modern era, Salafism represents a continuation and revival of the Athari school in Islamic theology, maintaining its commitment to the textualist interpretation of revelation and the rejection of speculative kal\u0101m, while adapting its discourse to contemporary religious and social contexts.\nNarrow definition.\nThere were also Muslim scholars who wanted to limit the Sunni term to the \"Ash'arites\" and \"M\u0101tur\u012bdites\" alone. For example, Murtad\u0101 az-Zab\u012bd\u012b (died 1790) wrote in his commentary on al-Ghazalis \"I\u1e25y\u0101\u02be \u02bful\u016bm ad-d\u012bn\": \"When (sc. The term) \"ahl as-sunna wal jama\u02bfa\" is used, the Ash\u02bfarites and M\u0101tur\u012bdites are meant.\" This position was also taken over by the Egyptian Fatwa Office in July 2013. In Ottoman times, many efforts were made to establish a good harmony between the teachings of the Ash\u02bfar\u012bya and the M\u0101tur\u012bd\u012bya. Finally, there were also scholars who regarded the Ash\u02bfarites alone as Sunnis. For example, the Moroccan Sufi Ahmad ibn \u02bfAdschiba (died 1809) stated in his commentary on Fatiha: \"As far as the Sunnis are concerned, it is the Ash\u02bfarites and those who follow in their correct belief.\"\nConversely, there were also scholars who excluded the Ash\u02bfarites from Sunnism. The Andalusian scholar Ibn Hazm (died 1064) said that Abu l-Hasan al-Ash\u02bfar\u012b belonged to the Murji'a, namely those who were particularly far removed from the Sunnis in terms of faith. Twentieth-century Syrian-Albanian Athari Salafi theologian Muhammad Nasir al-Din al-Albani rejected extremism in excluding Ash'aris from Sunni Islam. He believed that despite that their fundamental differences from Atharis, not every Ash'ari is to be excluded from \"Ahl al-Sunna wal Jama'ah\", unless they openly disapprove of the doctrines of the \"Salaf\" (\"mad'hab as-Salaf\"). According to Albani:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I do not share [the view of] some of the noble scholars of the past and present that we say about a group from the [many] Islamic groups that it is not from \"Ahlus-Sunnah\" due to its deviation in one issue or another\u00a0... as for whether the Ash\u2019aris or the Maaturidis are from \"Ahlus-Sunnah wal-Jamaa\u2019ah\", I say that they are from \"Ahlus-Sunnah wal-Jamaa\u2019ah\" in many things related to \"aqidah\" but in other \"aqidah\" issues they have deviated away from \"Ahlus-Sunnah wal-Jamaa\u2019ah\u00a0...\" I don't hold that we should say that they are not from \"Ahlus-Sunnah wal-Jamaa\u2019ah\" whatsoever\nSunnism in general and in a specific sense.\nThe Hanbali scholar Ibn Taymiyyah (died 1328) distinguished in his work \"Minh\u0101j as-sunna\" between Sunnis in the general sense (\"ahl as-unna al-\u02bf\u0101mma\") and Sunnis in the special sense (\"ahl as-sunna al-\u1e2b\u0101\u1e63\u1e63a\"). Sunnis in the general sense are all Muslims who recognize the caliphate of the three caliphs (Ab\u016b Bakr, \u02bfUmar ibn al-Kha\u1e6d\u1e6d\u0101b and \u02bfUthm\u0101n ibn \u02bfAff\u0101n). In his opinion, this includes all Islamic groups except the Shiite Rafidites. Sunnis in the special sense are only the \"people of the hadith\" (\"ahl al-\u1e25ad\u012b\u1e6f\").\n\u0130smail Hakk\u0131 \u0130zmirli, who took over the distinction between a broader and narrower circle of Sunnis from Ibn Taimiya, said that Kullabiyya and the Ash\u02bfar\u012byya are Sunnis in the general sense, while the Salafiyya represent Sunnis in the specific sense. About the Maturidiyya he only says that they are closer to the Salafiyya than the Ash\u02bfariyya because they excel more in Fiqh than in Kal\u0101m. The Saudi scholar Muhammad Ibn al-\u02bfUthaimin (died 2001), who like Ibn Taimiya differentiated between Sunnis in general and special senses, also excluded the Asharites from the circle of Sunnis in the special sense and took the view that only the pious ancestors (\"as-salaf a\u1e63-\u1e63\u0101li\u1e25\") who have agreed on the Sunnah belonged to this circle.\nClassification of the Mu\u02bftazila.\nThe Mu\u02bftazilites are usually not regarded as Sunnis. Ibn Hazm, for example, contrasted them with the Sunnis as a separate group in his heresiographic work \"al-Fa\u1e63l fi-l-milal wa-l-ahw\u0101\u02be wa-n-ni\u1e25al\". In many medieval texts from the Islamic East, the \"\" are also differentiated to the Mu\u02bftazilites. In 2010 the Jordanian \"fatwa\" office ruled out in a fatwa that the Mu\u02bftazilites, like the Kharijites, represent a doctrine that is contrary to Sunnism. Ibn Taymiyya argued that the Mu\u02bftazilites belong to the Sunnis in the general sense because they recognize the caliphate of the first three caliphs.\nMysticism.\nThere is broad agreement that the Sufis are also part of Sunnism. This view can already be found in the Shafi'ite scholar Abu Mansur al-Baghdadi (died 1037). In his heresiographical work \" al-Farq baina l-firaq \" he divided the Sunnis into eight different categories (\"a\u1e63n\u0101f\") of people: 1. the theologians and Kalam Scholars, 2. the Fiqh scholars, 3. the traditional and Hadith scholars, 4. the Adab and language scholars, 5. the Koran \u2013 Scholars, 6. the Sufi ascetics (\"az-zuhh\u0101d a\u1e63-\u1e63\u016bf\u012bya\"), 7. those who perform the \"ribat\" and \"jihad\" against the enemies of Islam, 8. the general crowd. According to this classification, the Sufis are one of a total of eight groups within Sunnism, defined according to their religious specialization.\nThe Tunisian scholar Muhammad ibn al-Q\u0101sim al-Bakk\u012b (died 1510) also included the Sufis in Sunnism. He divided the Sunnis into the following three groups according to their knowledge (\"istiqr\u0101\u02be\"):\nSimilarly, Murtad\u0101 az-Zab\u012bd\u012b stated elsewhere in his commentary on Ghazzali's \"I\u1e25y\u0101\u02be \u02bful\u016bm ad-d\u012bn\" \" that the Sunnis consisted of four groups (firaq\"), namely the hadith scholars (\"mu\u1e25addi\u1e6fh\u016bn), the Sufis, the Ash\u02bfarites and the M\u0101tur\u012bdites.\"\nSome \"ulema\" wanted to exclude the Sufis from Sunnism. The Yemeni scholar \u02bfAbb\u0101s ibn Mans\u016br as-Saksak\u012b (died 1284) explained in his doxographic work \" al-Burh\u0101n f\u012b ma\u02bfrifat \u02bfaq\u0101\u02beid ahl al-ady\u0101n \" (\"The evidence of knowledge of the beliefs of followers of different religions\") about the Sufis: \"They associate themselves with the Sunnis, but they do not belong to them, because they contradict them in their beliefs, actions and teachings.\" That is what distinguishes the Sufis from Sunnis according to as-Saksak\u012b their orientation to the hidden inner meaning of the \"Qur'an\" and the \"Sunnah\". In this, he said, they resemble the B\u0101tinites. According to the final document of the Grozny Conference, only those Sufis are to be regarded as Sunnis who are \"people of pure Sufism\" (\"ahl at-ta\u1e63auwuf a\u1e63-\u1e63\u0101f\u012b\") in the knowledge, ethics and purification of the interior, according to Method as practiced by al-Junaid Al- Baghdadi and the \"Imams of Guidance\" (\"a\u02beimma al-hud\u0101\") who followed his path.\nIn the 11th century, Sufism, which had previously been a less \"codified\" trend in Islamic piety, began to be \"ordered and crystallized\" into \"Tariqahs\" (orders) which have continued until the present day. All these orders were founded by a major Sunni Islamic saint, and some of the largest and most widespread included the Qadiriyya (after Abdul-Qadir Gilani [died 1166]), the Rifa'iyya (after Ahmed al-Rifa'i [died 1182]), the Chishtiyya (after Moinuddin Chishti [died 1236]), the Shadiliyya (after Abul Hasan ash-Shadhili [died 1258]), and the Naqshbandiyya (after Baha-ud-Din Naqshband Bukhari [died 1389]). Contrary to popular Orientalist depictions, neither the founders of these orders nor their followers considered themselves to be anything other than orthodox Sunni Muslims, Many of the most eminent defenders of Islamic orthodoxy, such as 'Abd al-Qadir Jilani, Al-Ghazali, Sultan \u1e62al\u0101\u1e25 ad-D\u012bn Al-Ayyubi (Saladin) were connected with Sufism.\" The Salafi and Wahhabi strands of Sunnism do not accept many mystical practices associated with the contemporary Sufi orders.\nJurisprudence.\nInterpreting Islamic law by deriving specific rulings \u2013 such as how to pray \u2013 is commonly known as Islamic jurisprudence. The schools of law all have their own particular tradition of interpreting this jurisprudence. As these schools represent clearly spelled out methodologies for interpreting Islamic law, there has been little change in the methodology with regard to each school. While conflict between the schools was often violent in the past, the four Sunni schools recognize each other's validity and they have interacted in legal debate over the centuries.\nSchools.\nThere are many intellectual traditions within the field of \"Shari'ah\" (Islamic law), often referred to as \"Madh'habs\" (legal schools). These varied traditions reflect differing viewpoints on some laws and obligations within Islamic law. While one school may see a certain act as a religious obligation, another may see the same act as optional. These schools are not regarded as sects; rather, they represent differing viewpoints on issues that are not considered the core of Islamic belief. Historians have differed regarding the exact delineation of the schools based on the underlying principles they follow.\nMany traditional scholars saw Sunni Islam in two groups: \"Ahl al-Ra'y\", or \"people of reason\", due to their emphasis on scholarly judgment and discourse; and \"Ahl al-Hadith\", or \"people of traditions\", due to their emphasis on restricting juristic thought to only what is found in scripture. Ibn Khaldun defined the Sunni schools as three: the Hanafi school representing reason, the \u1e92\u0101hir\u012bte school representing tradition, and a broader, middle school encompassing the Shafi'ite, Malikite and Hanbalite schools.\nDuring the Middle Ages, the Mamluk Sultanate in Egypt delineated the acceptable Sunni schools as only Hanafi, Maliki, Shafi'i and Hanbali, excluding the \u1e92\u0101hir\u012b school. The Ottoman Empire later reaffirmed the official status of four schools as a reaction to the Shiite character of their ideological and political archrival, the Persian Safavids. In the contemporary era, former Prime Minister of Sudan Al-Sadiq al-Mahdi, as well as the Amman Message issued by King Abdullah II of Jordan, recognize the \u1e92\u0101hir\u012bs and keep the number of Sunni schools at five.\nBarelvism and Deobandism.\nBarelvism is a Sunni revivalist movement following the Hanafi school of jurisprudence, and Maturidi school of theology with hundreds of millions of followers. \nThe movement is moderate form of Islam that Muslims in South Asia have followed for centuries and it encompasses a variety of Sufi orders, including the Chistis, Qadiris, Suhrawardis and Naqshbandis as well as many other orders and sub-orders of Sufism. They consider themselves to be the continuation of Sunni Islamic orthodoxy before the rise of Salafism and Deobandi Movement. Barelvi movement is spread across the globe with millions of followers, thousands of mosques, institutions and organizations in India, Pakistan, Bangladesh, Afghanistan, Sri Lanka, United Kingdom, South Africa and other parts of Africa, Europe, the Caribbean, and the United States The movement claim to revive the Sunnah as embodied in the Qur\u2019an and literature of traditions (Hadith), as the people had lapsed from the Prophetic traditions. Consequently, scholars took the duty of reminding Muslims go back to the 'ideal' way of Islam. The movement drew inspiration from the Sunni doctrines of Shah Abdur Rahim (1644\u20131719) founder of Madrasah-i Rahimiyah and one of the compiler of Fatawa-e-Alamgiri. Shah Abdur Rahim is father of Shah Waliullah Dehlawi. The movement also drew inspiration from Shah Abdul Aziz Muhaddith Dehlavi (1746 \u20131824) and Fazl-e-Haq Khairabadi (1796\u20131861) founder of the Khairabad School. \nFazle Haq Khairabadi Islamic scholar and leader of 1857 rebellion issued \"fatwas\" against Wahabi Ismail Dehlvi for his doctrine of God's alleged ability to lie (Imkan-e-Kizb) from Delhi in 1825. Ismail is considered as an intellectual ancestor of Deobandis. The movement emphasizes personal devotion to and oneness of God i.e. Tawheed and the finality of prophethood, adherence to Sharia and in Fiqh following the four schools, following the Ilm al-Kalam and Sufi practices such as veneration of saints among other things associated with Sufism. They are also called Sunni Sufis. The movement defines itself as the most authentic representative of what is known as Sunn\u012b Islam and thus adopts the generic moniker, Ahl-i-Sunnat wa-al-Jam\u0101\u02bfat (The people who adhere to the Prophetic Tradition and preserve the unity of the community).\nPillars of \"iman\".\nThe doctrines of the Sunnis are recorded in various creeds, which summarize the most important points in the form of a list in the manner of a catechism. The individual teaching points differ depending on the author's affiliation to a certain teaching tradition. The most important creeds that explicitly claim to represent the teachings of the Sunnis (\"ahl as-sunna wal-jama\" or similar) include:\nMost of the mentioned branches testify to six principal articles of faith known as the six pillars of \"im\u0101n\" (Arabic for \"faith\"), which are believed to be essential. These six articles are common that present-day Sunnis agree on, from those who adhere to traditional Sunnism to those who adhere to latter-day movements. Additionally, classical Sunni Islam also outlined numerous other cardinal doctrines since the 8th century, such as the Creed of Tah\u0101wi. Traditionally, these Sunni articles of faith have included the following:\nGod.\nUnity.\nAt the center of the Sunni creed is Tawhid, the belief in the oneness of God. God is a single (\"fard\") God, besides whom there is no other deity. He is single (\"munfarid\"), has no partner (\"\u0161ar\u012bk\"), no opposite (\"nidd\"), no counterpart (\"ma\u1e6f\u012bl\") and no adversary (\"\u1e0didd\"). He has neither taken a companion nor children, neither conceived nor is he conceived.\nGod created everything, the years and times, day and night, light and darkness, the heavens and the earth, all kinds of creatures that are on it, the land and the sea, and everything living, dead and solid. Before he created all of this, he was completely alone, with nothing with him. In contrast to his creation, God has a timeless nature. He is beginningless (\"azal\u012b\") because he has existed for all eternity and nothing precedes him, and he is endless (\"abad\u012b\") because he continues to exist without interruption for all eternity. He is the first and the last, as it says in the Quran (Sura 57: 3). God brought forth creation not because he needed it, but to demonstrate his power and as the implement his previous will and his primordial speech. God is creator, but has no needs. He does not need food, does not feel lonely and does not keep company with anyone.\nTranscendence.\nTo absolve God of all anthropomorphism, the Qur'anic statements that \"God sat on the throne\" (istaw\u0101 \u02bfal\u0101 l-\u02bfar\u0161; Surah 7:54; 20: 5) receive a lot of the Sunni creeds attention. The creed of al-Q\u0101dir emphasizes that God did not set himself up on the throne (\u02bfar\u0161) \"in the manner of the rest of the creatures\" and that he created this throne, although he did not need it. Al-Ghazali's knowledge of the faith states that the \"sitting down\" is free from contact (\"mum\u0101ssa\") with the throne. It is not the throne that carries God, but the throne and its bearers are carried through the grace of his power. According to al-Ash\u02bfari, the Sunnis confess that God is on his throne, but without asking how. Even if God does not need the throne and what is below, because he spatially occupies everything, including what is above him, the throne and stool (\"kurs\u012b\") are a reality.\nNames and attributes.\nThe Sunnis confess that the names of God cannot be said to be anything other than God, as Mu\u02bftazilites and Kharijites claim. Rather, they teach that there are correlating attributes (\"\u1e63if\u0101t\") which exist in each of the names of God mentioned in the Quran: God is alive through life (\"\u1e25ay\u0101h\"), knowing through knowledge (\"\u02bfilm\"), mighty through power (\"\u02bfqudra\"), wanting through will (\"ir\u0101da\"), hearing through hearing (\"sam\u02bf\"), seeing through sight (\"ba\u1e63ar\") and speaking through Speech (\"kal\u0101m\"). The attributes are not identical to God, nor are they anything different from him. Only those attributes are ascribed to God which he ascribed to himself (in the Quran) or which his prophet ascribed to him. And every attribute that he or his prophet has ascribed to him is a real attribute, not an attribute figuratively.\nAngels and other spirits.\nSunnis believe in angels. God hid the angels from the vision of humans, thus they can usually not see them. Just in some special occusations God unveils them for individual humans. Like when the archangel Gabriel appeared to Muhammad one time in his true form with 600 wings, filling the entire horizon and another time when he was among the circles of the Sahaba, in the form of a white clothed traveller.\nAngels fulfil duties assigned by God. The angel Gabriel has the mission to transmit God's revelations to chosen Prophets. The angel Michael is assigned over rain and plants. The angel Israfil must blow into the trumpet during thunder and the day of resurrection. Furthermore, to the angels belong the recording angels, who supervise humans and the angel of death, who takes the souls (lit. spirits) of the inhabitants of the world.\nUnlike the Mutazilites and the Jahmites, the Sunnis believe that Satan whispers doubts to humans and hits them, as the Quran states. But humans, jinn, angels and devils are all created by the power of God and bound to his will. Even if humans, jinn, angels and devils aligned to move or stop one atom, they could not succeed without God's will.\nBooks of God.\nThe Sunnis further believe in the books of God, sent to the envoys of God. To them belong the Quran, the Torah, the Gospel and the Psalms.\nThe Quran is according to Sunni views the speech of God. Who listens to it and regards it as human speech is according to Sunni Creed by at-Tah\u0101w\u012b an infidel. The Quran as the speech of God is sent down by the \"trustworthy Spirit\" (\"ar-r\u016b\u1e25 al-am\u012bn\"; surah 26:193) and taught by Muhammad. God sent him down as inspiration (\"wahy\") on his Messenger. The path of God's speech to the community of Muslims is a multi-stage process: God pronounced it, the angel Gabriel heard it and Mohammed repeated it, Mohammed repeated it to his companions, and the Ummah repeated them.\nAs the speech of God, the Quran is according to Sunnism uncreated. The teachings of the creation of the Quran is rejected by Sunnis. Anyone who takes this teaching is regarded as an unbeliever. The Quran is recited with the tongue, written into books and memorized by the heart, but remains the uncreated speech of God, because it is individable and can not be split by the transmition from heart to paper. At-Tah\u0101w\u012b specifies that the Quran is not created like human speech. Rather, it came from God in an unexplained way as a word (\"qaul\"). Ibn Taym\u012bya explains that the Quran originated from God and will return (sc. At the end of times) too.\nProphets.\nMessages.\nConfessing to the Prophets of God is also part of the Sunni faith. The first of the prophets is Adam. The original contract (\"m\u012b\u1e6f\u0101q\") that God concluded with him and his descendants according to sura 7:172\u2013173 is a reality according to Sunni belief. God has taken Abraham as a friend (\"\u1e2bal\u012bl\") and talked to Moses directly. The last of the prophets is Mohammed from the tribe of the Quraish. The Sunnis do not differentiate between the messengers of God, (By rejecting some of them), but consider everything they have brought to be true.\nGod called the prophets and presented their truthfulness through obvious miracles. The prophets conveyed God's command and prohibition, his promise and threat, and it is incumbent on people to believe what they have brought to be true. God has given people the act of obedience (\"\u1e6d\u0101\u02bfa\") and opposition (\"ma\u02bf\u1e63iya\") forbidden. God's right to the acts of obedience is not only an obligation for people through the intellect (\"bi-mu\u01e7arrad al-\u02bfaql\"), but also through it for making it a duty through the oral transmission of his prophets.\nMuhammad.\nMuhammad from the tribe of the Quraish is not only the seal of the prophets (\"\u1e2b\u0101tam al-anbiy\u0101\u02be\"), rather, God placed him above all other prophets and made him Lord of men (\"saiyid al-ba\u0161ar\"). He is God's chosen servant (\"\u02bfabd\"), Messenger, the Imam of the godly (\"im\u0101m al-atqiy\u0101\u02be\") and the beloved of the Lord of the Worlds (\"\u1e25ab\u012bb rabb al-\u02bf\u0101lam\u012bn\"). He is sent with truth (\"\u1e25aqq\"), guidance (\"hud\u0101\") and light (\"n\u016br\"). God has him with his message to Arabs and Non-Arabs as well as sent to the general public of the jinn and humans and with his Sharia, the earlier religious laws abrogated, except that which he has confirmed. Part of the Sunnis path is to follow the traditions (\"\u0101\u1e6f\u0101r\") of Muhammad internally and externally. They prefer his guidance to the guidance of anyone else.\nMuhammad's prophethood is proven by miracles (\"mu\u02bf\u01e7iz\u0101t\") such as the splitting of the moon. The most obvious miracle is the Quran's inimitability. Every claim to prophethood after him is an error or imagination, since Muhammad is the last prophet. Another important point of teaching is the belief in Muhammad's Ascension (\"mi\u02bfr\u0101\u01e7\").\nAccordingly, Muhammad went on a nocturnal journey during which his person was transported to heaven while awake and from there to heights, \"which God has chosen\". God gave him what he had chosen for him and gave him his revelation. God has also blessed him in his life beyond and in this world.\nEschatology.\nIn the grave.\nAccording to Sunni doctrine, people are questioned in their graves by Munkar and Nakir after death. Munkar and Nak\u012br are two terrifying, huge figures who let the person sit upright in his grave with mind and body and then tell him about the oneness of God and the prophethood of Muhammad. They ask him: \"Who is your master? What is your religion? Who is your prophet?\". They are the two inspectors of the grave and their questioning is the first test (\"fitna\") of humans after death. The believer will answer to this test: \"God is my Lord, Islam is my religion and Mohammed is my prophet.\" The doubter, on the other hand, will answer: \"Oh dear, I don't know. I heard people say something, and that's how I said it.\" He is then hit with an iron club so that he utters a loud scream that can be heard by everyone except people and jinn. If people heard him, they would lose consciousness. Children are also interviewed by Munkar and Nak\u012br as well as people who have disappeared, drowned or were eaten by predatory animals. Deceased Muslims receive the supplication said for them, and the Sadaqa spoken in their name are a favor for them.\nSign of the hour.\nAnother point of belief are the \"signs of the hour\" (\"a\u0161r\u0101\u1e6d as-s\u0101\u02bfa\") that precede the day of resurrection. This includes the emergence of the Dajjal, the rising of the sun in the west, the emergence of the Dabba from the earth and the excerpt from Gog and Magog. Jesus, the son of Mary, will descend from heaven and kill the Dajjal.\nDay of resurrection.\nOn the Day of the Resurrection the resurrection (\"ba\u02bf\u1e6f\") and the retribution of the deeds take place. First the bodies of all people, animals and jinn are put back together and revived. The souls are brought back into the body, the people rise from their graves, barefoot, naked and uncircumcised. The sun is approaching them and they are sweating.\nA scales are set up to weigh people's deeds. The scales have two scales and one tongue and are as big as several layers of heaven and earth. The weights will have the weight of atoms and mustard seeds in order to realize the accuracy of God's righteousness. The leaves with good deeds (\"\u1e25asan\u0101t\") are thrown in a beautiful shape into the scales of light and weigh down the scales by the grace (\"fa\u1e0dl\") of God, the leaves with bad deeds (\"saiyi\u02be\u0101t\") are thrown into the scales of darkness in an ugly form and reduce the weight of the scales through the justice (\"\u02bfadl\") of God.\nThe vision of God in the hereafter.\nThe teachings of the Sunnis also include the vision of God (\"ru\u02beyat All\u0101h\") in the hereafter, which has similarities with the \"visio beatifica\" in the Christian tradition. With this teaching the Sunnis set themselves apart from the Mu\u02bftazilites, the Zaidiyyah and the philosophers who consider the vision of God intellectually impossible.\nThere are differing views among Sunni scholars about the timing and type of the divine vision. Al-Ashari states that God is seen on the day of resurrection, whereby only the believers see him, the unbelievers not because they are kept away from God. At-Tah\u0101w\u012b, on the other hand, was of the opinion that the vision of God was a reality for the inmates of Paradise. Ibn Taim\u012bya doubles the vision of God: people see God while they are still in the places of the resurrection, and then after entering paradise.\nAs for the way of seeing God, al-Ash Aari and Ibn Taimiyah emphasized its visual characteristics. Al-Ashari meant that God can be seen with the eyes, just as one sees the moon on the night of the full moon. Ibn Taim\u012bya adds that the vision of God is as one sees the sun on a cloudless day. In the \u02bfAq\u012bda at-Tah\u0101w\u012bs, the transcendence of God is emphasized: the vision can neither be understood nor described, because none of the creatures are like God. According to al-Ghaz\u0101l\u012b's creed the pious in the hereafter see the essence of God without substance and accidents. According to the creed of an-Nasaf\u012b, God is seen neither in one place nor in any direction or distance. There is also no connection to rays.\nRelease of the monotheists from hell and intercession.\nAccording to the Ibn Taim\u012bya's creed, the Umma of Muhammad is the first religious community to enter Paradise, Other religious communities also have the opportunity to get to paradise, because God leads whole peoples through the grace of his mercy (\"aqw\u0101m\") out of hellfire. Ahmad ibn Hanbal and al-Ghaz\u0101l\u012b declare in their creeds that the monotheist en (\"al-muwa\u1e25\u1e25id\u016bn\") after being punished. Al-Ghaz\u0101l\u012b adds that through the grace (\"fa\u1e0dl\") of God no monotheist remains in hell for all eternity.\nAccording to at-Tah\u0101w\u012b's creed, this only applies to the serious sinners from Muhammad's ummah: They are in hell, but not forever if they were monotheists at the time of death. What happens to them lies within God: if he wants, he forgives them through his grace (\"fa\u1e0dl\"), and if he wants, he punishes them in his justice (\"\u02bfadl\") and then brings them through His mercy (\"ra\u1e25ma\") and through the intercession of those who obey him out of hell and make them enter the Paradise Garden.\nThe intercession (\"\u0161af\u0101\u02bfa\") of the Messenger of God and its effect on those of his ummah who have committed serious sins is a fixed teaching point of the Sunni faith. Muhammad reserved the intercession especially for them. According to al-Ghaz\u0101l\u012b, the Sunni believer has a total of the intercession of the prophets, then the scholars, then the martyrs, then to believe the other believers in accordance with their dignity and their rank in God. Those of the believers who have no advocate will be brought out of hell by the grace of God.\nThe predestination.\nExtent of the predestination.\nAccording to Sunni doctrine, everything that happens happens through God's decision (\"qad\u0101\u02be\") and predestination (Qadar) or his determination (\"taqd\u012br\"). Predestination includes the predestination of good and bad, sweet and bitter. God has that The measured (\"qadar\") of creatures and determined their time of time. He makes his creatures sick and heals them, lets them die and makes them alive, while the creatures themselves have no power over it. God lets them die without fear and brings them to life without exertion. The one who dies dies on the appointed date, even if he is killed.\nGod has written the things predestined for the creatures on the well-kept tablet (\"al-lau\u1e25 al-ma\u1e25f\u016b\u1e93\"). The pen she wrote with is the first thing God created. God commanded him to write down what will be until the day of resurrection. The pen has already dried out and the scrolls are rolled up. Everything that was written on it in ancient times is immutable.\nGod is righteous in his judgments (\"aq\u1e0diya\"), but his righteousness cannot be decided by analogy with the righteousness of people, because unjust actions for people are only conceivable with regard to someone else's property, but God does not encounter someone else's property anywhere so that he could behave unfairly to him. The principle of predestination is God's mystery with regard to his creatures. No archangel and no prophet is informed of this. Reflecting on predestination leads to destruction and is a step toward rebellion against God because He has hidden the knowledge about it from people.\nThe Blessed and the Damned.\nIt is made easy for everyone for what they were created for. Blessed are whose who are saved by God's judgment (\"qa\u1e0d\u0101\u02be All\u0101h\"), condemned are those who are condemned by the judgment of God. God created paradise and hell above all else; then he created the people who are worthy of them. He has designated some out of generosity (\"fa\u1e0dlan\") for paradise, the others out of justice (\"\u02bfadlan\") for hell. God has always known the number of those who go to paradise and the number of those who go to hell. This number is neither increased nor decreased. When God creates the body of the embryo, he sends an angel to him who writes down his livelihood (\"rizq\"), the hour he dies, his deeds and whether he is a damned (\"\u0161aq\u012b\") or a blessed (\"sa\u02bf\u012bd\").\nThe Sunni does not doubt his belief. Humans neither know how they are registered by God (whether as believers or unbelievers), nor how it ends with them. God is also the converter of hearts (\"muqallib al-qul\u016bb\"). Therefore, it is recommended to say the \"Istit\u0332h\u0332n\u0101\": \"A believer, if God is willing\" or \"I hope that I am a Believer\". Such a way of expression does not make people into doubters, because by that, they only mean that their otherworldly fate and their end are hidden from them. Sunnis do make claims about anyone's destiny in either paradise or hell, who prays to the direction of the Kaaba, no matter of their good deed or sins they committed.\nSunni view of \"hadith\".\nThe Quran as it exists today in book form was compiled by Muhammad's companions (\"Sahabah\") within a handful of months of his death, and is accepted by all sects of Islam. Many matters of belief and daily life were not directly prescribed in the Quran, but were actions observed by Muhammad and the early Muslim community. Later generations sought out oral traditions regarding the early history of Islam, and the practices of Muhammad and his first followers, and wrote them down so that they might be preserved. These recorded oral traditions are called hadith. Muslim scholars have through the ages sifted through the hadith and evaluated the chain of narrations of each tradition, scrutinizing the trustworthiness of the narrators and judging the strength of each hadith accordingly.\n\"Kutub al-Sittah\".\n\"Kutub al-Sittah\" are six books containing collections of hadiths. Sunni Muslims accept the hadith collections of Bukhari and Muslim as the most authentic (\"sahih\"), and while accepting all hadiths verified as authentic, grant a slightly lesser status to the collections of other recorders. Four other hadith collections are also held in particular reverence by Sunni Muslims, making a total of six:\nThere are also other collections of hadith which also contain many authentic hadith and are frequently used by scholars and specialists. Examples of these collections include:\nSunni State institutions.\nOne of the most important teaching institutions of Sunni Islam worldwide is the Azhar in Egypt. Article 32b, paragraph 7 of the Egyptian Azhar Law of 1961 stipulates that the Azhar \"follows the path of the Sunnis\" (\"manha\u01e7 ahl as-sunna wa-l-jam\u0101\u02bfa\"), Umma has agreed to the foundations of the religion and applications of fiqh, with its four disciplines. Only those who stick to the paths of their science and behavior can become a \"Member of the Council of Great Scholars\" (\"hai\u02beat kib\u0101r al-\u02bfulam\u0101\u02be\"), among whom the Grand Imam of al-Azhar is elected. Zitouna University in Tunisia and University of al-Qarawiyyin in Morocco are recognized. They are also mentioned, along with the Azhar, in the final document of the Sunni Conference in Grozny.\nAnother body that claims to speak on behalf of Sunnism is the Council of Senior Religious Scholars founded in Saudi Arabia in 1971. In the past, the committee has expressed several times on fatwas about the Sunni-membership of certain Islamic groups within. In 1986 it published a fatwa excluding the Ahb\u0101sh community from Sunnism. The Islamic World League in Mecca, also funded by Saudi Arabia, made a resolution from 1987 that it regards Sunnism as the pure teachings at the time of the Messenger and the rightful existence of the Caliphate. However, the Council of Senior Religious Scholars is largely under control of Wahhabi scholars.\nThe Turkish Directorate of Religious Affairs (\"Diyanet \u0130\u015fleri Ba\u015fkanl\u0131\u011f\u0131\"), follows the religious policy of the Ottoman Empire, providing a Sunni interpretation of Islam. Plans by the National Unity Committee in the 1960s to convert the Diyanet authority into a non-denominational institution that also integrated the Alevis, failed because of resistance from conservative Sunni clergy inside and outside the Diyanet authority. Since the 1990s, the Diyanet authority has presented itself as an institution that stands above the denominations (\"mezhepler \u00fcst\u00fc\") The religious education organized by the authority at the Turkish schools is based exclusively on the Sunni understanding of Islam.\nDemographics.\nAs the largest branch of Islam and the largest religious denomination worldwide, Sunnis number more than 1.7\u20131.8 billion people worldwide, accounting for 85\u201390% of the world's total Muslim population. In terms of jurisprudence, the Hanafi school is the most followed school within Sunnism, followed by more than 650 million adherents.\nSelf-image of the Sunnis.\nAs the \"saved sect\".\nA well-known hadith, which is to be interpreted as , says that the Muslim Umma will split into 73 sects, only one of which will be saved. The Sunnis have the idea that they are this \"saved sect\" (). For example, Abu Mansur al-Baghdadi (died 1037) explains at the beginning of his heresiographical work \"al-Farq baina l-firaq\" (\"The difference between the sects\") that there are 20 Rafiditic, 20 Kharijite, 20 Qadaritic, 3 Murjiite, 3 Nadj\u0101ritic, 3 karramitic and furthermore Bakriyya, Dirariyyya and Jahm\u012bya. These are the 72 erring sects. The 73rd sect that is the \"saved sect\" are the Sunnis (\"ahl as-sunna wa-l-jama\u02bfa\"). According to al-Baghdadi, they are composed of two groups, namely the followers of the Ra'y and the followers of the hadith. They agreed on the fundamentals of religion (\"u\u1e63\u016bl ad-d\u012bn\"). There were only differences in the derivations (\"fur\u016b\u02bf\") from the norms regarding the question of what permitted and what forbidden is. These differences are not so great that they considered each other to have strayed from the right path.\nAs center of Muslims.\nLater Sunni scholars also present the Sunnis as the center of Muslim community. The idea already appears to some extent in the Ash\u02bfarite \u02bfAbd al-Q\u0101hir al-Baghd\u0101d\u012b, who emphasizes on several dogmatic questions that the Sunnis hold a position that lies in the middle between the positions of the other Islamic groups. An example is the question of predestination (Qadar), in which, according to the Kasb theory, you hold exactly the middle between the two extreme positions of the Jabriyya and the Qadariyya.\nThe Hanbali scholar Ibn Taymiyya (died 1328), who was otherwise known for his uncompromising attitude, also adhered to this view. He said that the Sunnis represented \"the middle among the sects of the Umma\" (\"al-wasa\u1e6d f\u012b firaq al-umma\"), just as the Islamic Umma is the middle between the other religious communities. He illustrates this with the following examples:\nThe Hanafi scholar \u02bfAl\u012b al-Q\u0101r\u012b (died 1606) continued this idea later. In his anti-Shiite pamphlet \"\u0160amm al-alaw\u0101ri\u1e0d f\u012b \u1e0famm ar-raw\u0101fi\u1e0d\" he quotes a tradition according to which \u02bfAl\u012b ibn Ab\u012b T\u0101lib said: \"Two kinds of people perish on me: the exaggerated lover and the exaggerated hater.\" He notes that the exaggerated lover is the Rafidites and the exaggerated hater is the Kharijit. The Sunni, on the other hand, loves \u02bfAl\u012b in high esteem and is thus in the balanced middle (\"al-wasa\u1e6d alla\u1e0f\u012b huwa al-qis\u1e6d\"). This relates al-Qari to the Qur'anic sura 2: 143, in which it is said that God made the Muslims a community standing in the middle (\"umma wasa\u1e6d\"). Since the Sunnis stay away from the exaggeration described in the traditional \u02bfAl\u012b saying, al-Q\u0101r\u012b believes that they are also the actual \"Party of \u02bfAl\u012bs\" (\"\u0161\u012b\u02bfat \u02bfAl\u012b\").\nAs the essential bearers of Islamic science and culture.\n\u02bfAbd al-Q\u0101hir al-Baghd\u0101d\u012b portrays the Sunnis in his work \"al-Farq baina l-firaq\" as the actual bearers of Islamic science and culture. Of all the sciences, knowledge and efforts of which Muslims are proud, al-Baghd\u0101d\u012b explains that the Sunnis have a major share. In the last chapter of his book, al-Baghdadi also relates this to building activity in Islamic countries. He believes that the Sunnis with their mosques, madrasas, palaces, factories and hospitals have achieved an unattainable position because none of the non-Sunnis have performed such services.\nContemporary Ash\u02bfar\u012b \u2013 Salaf\u012b relations.\nSince the second half of the 20th century, there have been fierce clashes within the Sunni camps between \"Ash\u02bfarites\" on the one hand and \"Salafiyya\" on the other, who exclude each other from Sunnism. In Indonesia, the Ash\u02bfarite scholar Sirajuddin Abbas (died 1980) wrote several books in the 1960s in which he explicitly excluded the \"Ahl as-salaf\" from Sunnism. Among other things, he argued that there was no Salafi madhhab in the first 300 years of Islam. From this he deduced that those who called other Muslims to obey the Salafi \"madhhab\", were promoting a \"madhhab\" which did not even exist. In his view, only the Ash\u02bfarites were real Sunnis. Abbas' books served as the theological basis for anti-Salafist campaigns in Aceh in 2014. During these campaigns, various Salafist schools in Aceh were closed by the provincial government.\nThe Permanent Committee for Scholarly Research and Ifta in Saudi Arabia issued a fatwa in 1996 stating that Salafis are Sunnis. Like many Ash\u02bfarites, the Salafis believe their teachings are the only true form of Sunnism, and hence reject the Asharites and Maturidites as part of Sunnism. An example is the Saudi scholar al-\u02bfUthaym\u012bn, who in his 2001 published commentary on \"Aq\u012bda W\u0101si\u1e6d\u012bya\" by Ibn Taimiyya expressed the opinion that Ash'arites and M\u0101tur\u012bdites would not count among the Sunnis, because their doctrine of attributes would be in contrast to the doctrine of Muhammad and his companions. For this reason, the view that three groups belong to Sunnism should also be rejected. Sunnis are only those who are \"salaf\" in terms of belief.\nThe accusation by some Wahhabis that the Ash\u02bfarites were not Sunnis was subject of a fatwa by the \"Egyptian Fatwa Office\" in July 2013. In its fatwa, the office rejected this accusation, affirming that the Ash\u02bfarites still represented the \"multitude of scholars\" (\"jumh\u016br al-\u02bfulam\u0101\u02be\"), and stressed out that they were the ones who in the past rejected the arguments of the atheists (\"\u0161ubuh\u0101t al-mal\u0101\u1e25ida\"). Anyone who declares them to be unbelieving or who doubts their orthodoxy should fear for their religion. On the same day, the fatwa office made clear in a fatwa that, according to their understanding, the \"Ahl as-Sunna wa-l-jama\" only refer to those Muslims who are Ash\u02bfarites or Maturidites.\nThe rivalry between \"Ash\u02bfar\u012byya\" and \"Salafiyya\" became visible again at the two Sunni conferences in 2016, which were directed against the terror of the IS organization. The first conference with the title \"Who are the Ahl al-Sunna wa al-jama?\" took place in the Chechen capital Grozny in August 2016 under the patronage of Ramzan Kadyrov. Numerous religious figures from Egypt, India, Syria, Yemen and the Russian Federation took part, including Ahmed el-Tayeb, the Grand Imam of the Azhar, and Sheikh Aboobacker Ahmed, the Grand Mufti of India. According to its organizers, the conference should \"mark a blessed turning point in efforts to correct the serious and dangerous distortion of religion by those extremists trying to usurp the venerable name of \"Ahl al-Sunna wa-al-Jama'a\", him to coin exclusively on itself and to exclude its true representatives from it.\" In the final declaration the Salafis and Islamist groups like Muslim Brotherhood, Hizb ut-Tahrir, etc. and the \"Takfiri\" organisations like ISIL were excluded from Sunni Islam.\nIn response to this, various prominent \"Salafiyya\" figures held a counter-conference in Kuwait in November 2016 under the title \"The Correct Meaning of Sunnism\" (\"al-Mafh\u016bm a\u1e63-\u1e63a\u1e25\u012b\u1e25 li-ahl as-sunna wa-l-jama\"), in which they also distanced themselves from extremist groups, but at the same time insisted that \"Salafiyya\" was not only part of Sunnism, but represented Sunnism itself. The conference was chaired by Ahmad ibn Murabit, Grand Mufti of Mauritania. A few days later, Grand Imam of Al-Azhar Ahmed el-Tayeb publicly distanced himself from the final declaration of the Grozny conference, reiterating that he had not participated in it and stressed that he naturally viewed the Salafists as Sunnis.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "29403", "revid": "43682752", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29403", "title": "Sour mix", "text": "Yellow-green mixer used in cocktails\nSour mix (also known as sweet and sour mix) is a mixer that is usually yellow-green in color, and is used in many cocktails. It is made from approximately equal parts lemon and/or lime juice and simple syrup and shaken vigorously with ice. This produces a pearly-white liquid with a pronounced flavor. \nOptionally, egg whites may be added to make the liquid slightly foamy.\nSour mix can be mixed with liquor(s) to make a sour drink; most common are vodka sour (vodka) and whiskey sour (whiskey). It may also be served neat or with juice, club soda, etc., as a soft drink.\nPre-mixed versions are available and are used in many bars. These typically consist of a powder which must be rehydrated by adding water prior to use.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "29404", "revid": "11292982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29404", "title": "Sikh people", "text": ""}
{"id": "29405", "revid": "82432", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29405", "title": "Sikhs", "text": "Religious group who adhere to Sikhism\nSikhs (Gurmukhi: \u0a38\u0a3f\u0a71\u0a16, romanized: \"Sikkh\", ) are followers of Sikhism, a religion that originated in the late 15th century in the Punjab region of the Indian subcontinent, based on the teachings of Guru Nanak. The term \"Sikh\" has its origin in the Sanskrit word \"\", meaning 'seeker', 'disciple' or 'student'.\nAccording to Article I of Chapter 1 of the Sikh \"Rehat Maryada\" ('code of conduct'), the definition of Sikh is: Any human being who faithfully believes in\nMale Sikhs generally have \"Singh\" ('lion') as their last name, though not all Singhs are necessarily Sikhs; likewise, female Sikhs have \"Kaur\" ('princess') as their last name. These unique last names were given by the Gurus to allow Sikhs to stand out and also as an act of defiance to India's caste system, which the Gurus were always against. Sikhs strongly believe in the idea of \"sarbat da bhala\" ('welfare of all') and are often seen on the frontline to provide humanitarian aid across the world.\nSikhs who have undergone the \"Amrit Sanchar\" ('baptism by Khanda'), an initiation ceremony, are known as Khalsa from the day of their initiation and they must at all times have on their bodies the five Ks:\nThe Punjab region of the Indian subcontinent has been the historic homeland of the Sikhs, having even been ruled by the Sikhs for significant parts of the 18th and 19th centuries. Today, Canada has the largest national Sikh proportion (2.1%) in the world, while the Punjab state in India has the largest Sikh proportion (60%) amongst all administrative divisions in the world. With a population of approximately 25 to 30 million, Sikhs represent about 0.3% to 0.4% of the total world population in 2024. Many countries, such as Canada and the United Kingdom, recognise Sikhs as a designated religion on their censuses and, as of 2020, Sikhs are considered as a separate ethnic group in the United States. The UK also considers Sikhs to be an ethno-religious people, as a direct result of the \"Mandla v Dowell-Lee\" case in 1982.\nHistory.\nGuru Nanak (1469\u20131539), the founder of Sikhism, was born in a Hindu Khatri family to Mehta Kalu and Mata Tripta in the village of Talwandi, present-day Nankana Sahib, near Lahore. Throughout his life, Guru Nanak was a religious leader and social reformer. However, Sikh political history may be said to begin in 1606, with the death of the fifth Sikh guru, Guru Arjan Dev. Religious practices were formalised by Guru Gobind Singh on March 30, 1699, when the Guru initiated five people from a variety of social backgrounds known as the \"Panj Piare\" ('beloved five'), to form a collective body of initiated Sikhs known as the \"Khalsa\" ('pure').\nThe early followers of Guru Nanak were Khatris, but later a large number of Jats joined the Sikh faith. Khatris and Brahmins opposed \"the demand that the Sikhs set aside the distinctive customs of their castes and families, including the older rituals.\"\nPashaura Singh analysed references made within the 11th ballad of the \"Varan\" of Bhai Gurdas to form a picture of the caste-makeup of the early Sikh community. At the time of the writing the Vaar, the early Sikh community was composed of various castes and backgrounds, such as:\nThe early Sikhs varied widely in their occupations and position in society's hierarchy: some were rich merchants (Seths and Sarrafs), others were heads of villages (Chowdhury), some were labourers, others were enslaved, whilst others still were artisans, craftsmen, shopkeepers or simple peasants.\nDuring the rule of the Mughal Empire in India, two Sikh gurus were martyred. (Guru Arjan was martyred on suspicion of helping in betrayal of Mughal Emperor Jahangir and Guru Tegh Bahadur was martyred by the Mughal Emperor Aurangzeb) As the Sikh faith grew, the Sikhs subsequently militarised to oppose Mughal rule.\nAfter defeating the Afghans and Mughals, sovereign states called Misls were formed under Jassa Singh Ahluwalia. The Confederacy of these states was unified and transformed into the Sikh Empire under Maharaja Ranjit Singh. This era was characterised by religious tolerance and pluralism, including Christians, Muslims and Hindus in positions of power. Its secular administration implemented military, economic and governmental reforms. The empire is considered the zenith of political Sikhism, encompassing Kashmir, Ladakh and Peshawar. Hari Singh Nalwa, the commander-in-chief of the Sikh Khalsa Army in the North-West Frontier, expanded the confederacy to the Khyber Pass.\nBritish rule in India.\nAfter the annexation of the Sikh kingdom by the British, the British Army began recruiting significant numbers of Sikhs and Punjabis. During the 1857 Indian mutiny, the Sikhs stayed loyal to the British, resulting in heavy recruitment from Punjab to the British Indian Army for the next 90 years of the British Raj in colonial India. The distinct turban that differentiates a Sikh from other turban wearers is a relic of the rules of the British Indian Army. The British colonial rule saw the emergence of many reform movements in India, including Punjab, such as the formation of the First and Second Singh Sabha in 1873 and 1879 respectively. The Sikh leaders of the Singh Sabha worked to offer a clear definition of Sikh identity and tried to purify Sikh belief and practice.\nThe later years of British colonial rule saw the emergence of the Akali movement to bring reform in the gurdwaras during the early 1920s. The movement led to the introduction of \"Sikh Gurdwara Bill\" in 1925, which placed all the historical Sikh shrines in India under the control of the Shiromani Gurdwara Parbandhak Committee.\nPartition and post-Partition.\nAt the time of the Indian independence movement, the Sikh ruler of the Kapurthala State fought to oppose the partition of India and advocated for a united, secular country. Sikh organisations, including the Chief Khalsa Dewan and Shiromani Akali Dal led by Master Tara Singh, condemned the Lahore Resolution and the movement to create Pakistan, viewing it as inviting possible persecution, with Akali Dal instead favouring an undivided Azad Punjab as an independent Sikh State or Khalistan, having passed the Sikh State Resolution in 1946. The Sikhs therefore strongly fought against the partition of Punjab. The months leading up to the 1947 partition of Punjab were marked by conflict in the Punjab between Sikhs and Muslims. This caused the religious migration of Punjabi Sikhs and Hindus from West Punjab to the east (modern India), mirroring a simultaneous religious migration of Punjabi Muslims from East Punjab to the west (modern Pakistan).\nFollowing partition, the Government of India had begun to redraw states corresponding to demographic and linguistic boundaries. However, this was not effective in the northern part of the country, as the government reconsidered redrawing states in the north. While states across the country were extensively redrawn on linguistic lines at the behest of linguistic groups, the only languages not considered for statehood were Punjabi, Sindhi and Urdu. Leading to the launch of the Punjabi Suba movement and the presentation for a Punjabi Suba as a policy in April 1948 by Master Tara Singh. Also, on January 26, 1950, Sikh representatives refused to sign the Indian constitution. As Sikhs were recognised as Hindus and Sikhs were not provided with scheduled castes concessions given to Hindu scheduled castes.\nThe Punjab Suba experienced heavy government crackdown with the Congress Government arresting as many as 21,000 people. Attempted negotiations with Congress-led the agitation to be adjourned twice, though Jawaharlal Nehru continued to reject the demand. On July 4, 1955, government police forces, led by DIG Ashwini Kumar, forced entry into the Golden Temple premises and heavy-handedly arrested protestors and took them into custody, along with the head granthis of the Akal Takht and Golden Temple, volunteer protestors and even cooks of the temple's langar. The Guru Ram Das Serai and Shiromani Akali Dal offices were also raided and batons used and tear gas and shells were fired to disperse the protestors gathered on the periphery of the temple, damaging the periphery and Sarovar, or pool, of the temple. The government stopped volunteers on the way to the Golden Temple and troops were ordered to flag-march through the bazaars and streets surrounding the site. Over 200 protestors were killed, thousands arrested, and thousands, including women and children, were injured.\nThe Congress government agreed to the Punjab Suba in 1966 after protests and recommendation of the States Reorganisation Commission. The state of East Punjab was later split into the states of Himachal Pradesh, the new state Haryana and current day Punjab. However, there was a growing alienation between Punjabi Sikh and Hindu populations. The latter of which reported Hindi rather than Punjabi as their primary language. The result was that Punjabi-speaking areas were left out of the new state and given to Haryana and Himachal Pradesh resulting in the state of Punjab to be roughly 35,000 square miles smaller than the Punjabi-speaking areas based on pre-1947 census figures. Moreover, the 1966 reorganisation left Sikhs highly dissatisfied, with the capital Chandigarh being made into a shared union territory and the capital of Punjab and Haryana.\nIn the late 1960s, the Green Revolution in India was first introduced in Punjab as part of a development program issued by international donor agencies and the Government of India. While, Green Revolution in Punjab had several positive impacts, the introduction of the mechanised agricultural techniques led to uneven distribution of wealth. The industrial development was not done at the same pace as agricultural development, the Indian government had been reluctant to set up heavy industries in Punjab due to its status as a high-risk border state with Pakistan. The rapid increase in the higher education opportunities without an adequate rise in the jobs resulted in the increase in the unemployment of educated youth.\nIn 1973 as a result, of unaddressed grievances and increasing inequality the Akali Dal put forward the Anandpur Sahib Resolution. The resolution included both religious and political issues. It asked for recognising Sikhism as a religion, it also demanded the devolution of power from the Central to state governments. The Anandpur Resolution was rejected by the government as a secessionist document. Thousands of people joined the movement, feeling that it represented a real solution to demands such as a larger share of water for irrigation and the return of Chandigarh to Punjab.\nAfter unsuccessful negotiations the Dharam Yuddh Morcha ('righteous campaign') was launched on August 4, 1982, by the Akali Dal in partnership with Jarnail Singh Bhindranwale, with its stated aim being the fulfillment of a set of devolutionary objectives based on the Anandpur Sahib Resolution. Indian police responded to protestors with high-handed police methods creating state repression affecting a very large segment of Punjab's population. Police brutality resulted in retaliatory violence from a section of the Sikh population, widening the scope of the conflict by the use of violence of the state on its own people. A \"state of chaos and repressive police methods\" combined to create \"a mood of overwhelming anger and resentment in the Sikh masses against the authorities.\" Leading to Sikh leader Jarnail Singh Bhindranwale gaining prominence and demands of independence gain currency, even amongst moderates and Sikh intellectuals. In 1982 and early 1983, extrajudicial killings by the police of orthodox Sikh youth in rural areas in Punjab provoked reprisals. Over 190 Sikhs had been killed in the first 19 months of the protest movement.\nIn May 1984, a \"Grain Roko morcha\" was planned and to be initiated on June3 with protestors practising civil disobedience by refusing to pay land revenue, water or electricity bills and blocking the flow of grain out of Punjab. Indian Prime minister Indira Gandhi launched Operation Blue Star on June1 prior to the Grain Roko morcha in order to remove Bhindranwale from the Golden Temple. This subsequently led to Gandhi's assassination by her Sikh bodyguards. Her assassination was followed by government-sponsored pogroms against Sikh communities across India and the killing of thousands of Sikhs throughout India. These events triggered an Insurgency in Punjab which would consume Punjab until the early 1990s.\nDuring the day of Vaisakhi in 1999, Sikhs worldwide celebrated the 300th anniversary of the creation of the Khalsa. Canada Post honoured Sikh Canadians with a commemorative stamp in conjunction with the anniversary. Likewise, on April 9, 1999, Indian president K. R. Narayanan issued a stamp commemorating the 300th anniversary of the Khalsa as well.\nArt and culture.\nSikh art and culture are nearly synonymous with that of Punjab and Sikhs are easily recognised by their distinctive turban (Dastar). Punjab has been called India's melting pot, due to the confluence of invading cultures from the rivers from which the region gets its name. Sikh culture is therefore a synthesis of cultures. Sikhism has forged a unique architecture, which S.\u00a0S. Bhatti described as \"inspired by Guru Nanak's creative mysticism\" and \"is a mute harbinger of holistic humanism based on pragmatic spirituality.\" The American non-profit organisation United Sikhs has fought to have Sikh included on the U.S. census as well, arguing that Sikhs \"self-identify as an ethnic minority\" and believe \"that they are more than just a religion.\"\nDuring the Mughal and Afghan persecution of the Sikhs during the 17th and 18th centuries, the latter were concerned with preserving their religion and gave little thought to art and culture. With the rise of Ranjit Singh and the Sikh Raj in Lahore and Delhi, there was a change in the landscape of art and culture in Punjab; Hindus and Sikhs could build decorated shrines without the fear of destruction or looting.\nThe Sikh Confederacy was the catalyst for a uniquely Sikh form of expression, with Ranjit Singh commissioning forts, palaces, bungas (residential places) and colleges in a Sikh style. Sikh architecture is characterised by gilded fluted domes, cupolas, kiosks, stone lanterns, ornate balusters and square roofs. A pinnacle of Sikh style is Harmandir Sahib (also known as the Golden Temple) in Amritsar.\nSikh culture is influenced by militaristic motifs (with the Khanda the most obvious) and most Sikh artifacts\u2014except for the relics of the Gurus\u2014have a military theme. This theme is evident in the Sikh festivals of Hola Mohalla and Vaisakhi, which feature marching and displays of valor.\nAlthough the art and culture of the Sikh diaspora have merged with that of other Indo-immigrant groups into categories like \"British Asian,\" \"Indo-Canadian\" and \"Desi-Culture,\" a minor cultural phenomenon that can be described as \"political Sikh\" has arisen. The art of diaspora Sikhs like Amarjeet Kaur Nandhra and Amrit and Rabindra Kaur Singh (The Singh Twins) is influenced by their Sikhism and current affairs in Punjab.\nBhangra and Giddha are two forms of Punjabi folk dancing which have been adapted and pioneered by Sikhs. Punjabi Sikhs have championed these forms of expression worldwide, resulting in Sikh culture becoming linked to Bhangra (although \"Bhangra is not a Sikh institution but a Punjabi one\").\nPainting.\nSikh painting is a direct offshoot of the Kangra school of painting. In 1810, Ranjeet Singh (1780\u20131839) occupied Kangra Fort and appointed Sardar Desa Singh Majithia his governor of the Punjab hills. In 1813, the Sikh army occupied Guler State and Raja Bhup Singh became a vassal of the Sikhs. With the Sikh kingdom of Lahore becoming the paramount power, some of the Pahari painters from Guler migrated to Lahore for the patronage of Maharaja Ranjeet Singh and his Sardars.\nThe Sikh school adapted Kangra painting to Sikh needs and ideals. Its main subjects are the ten Sikh gurus and stories from Guru Nanak's Janamsakhis. The tenth Guru, Gobind Singh, left a deep impression on the followers of the new faith because of his courage and sacrifices. Hunting scenes and portraits are also common in Sikh painting.\nShrines.\nThere is an old Sikh shrine called 'Prachin Guru Nanak Math', which lies at a small hill, just next to Bishnumati bridge at Balaju. Guru Nanak is said to have visited Nepal during his third Udasi while returning from Mount Kailash in Tibet. Nanak is said to have stayed at Balaju and Thapathali in Kathmandu. The Nanak Math shrine at Balaju is managed by the Guru-Ji and the Udasin Akardha, a sect developed by Guru Nanak's son, Sri Chandra.\nDaily routine.\nFrom the Guru Granth Sahib:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;One who calls themself a Sikh of the Guru, the True Guru, shall rise in the early morning hours and meditate on the Lord's Name. Upon arising early in the morning, he is to bathe and cleanse himself in the pool of nectar. Following the Instructions of the Guru, he is to chant the Name of the Lord, \"Har, Har.\" All sins, misdeeds, and negativity shall be then erased. Then, at the rising of the sun, he is to sing Gurbani; whether sitting down or standing up, he is to meditate on the Lord's Name. One who meditates on my Lord, Har, Har, with every breath and every morsel of food and \u2013 that GurSikh becomes pleasing to the Guru's Mind. That person, unto whom my Lord and Master is kind and compassionate \u2013 upon that GurSikh, the Guru's Teachings are bestowed. Servant Nanak begs for the dust of the feet of that GurSikh, who himself chants the Naam, and inspires others to chant it.\u2014\u200a\nThe Sikh Rahit Maryada (Code of Conduct) clearly states that initiated Amritdhari Khalsa Sikhs must recite or listen to the recitation of Japji Sahib, Jaap Sahib, the 10 Sawayyas, Sodar Rehraas and Sohila. Every Sikh is also supposed take the Hukam (divine order) from the Guru Granth Sahib after awakening in the ambrosial hours of the morning (three hours before the dawn) before eating.\nIn his 52 Hukams, Guru Gobind Singh orders his followers to arise during Amritvela (early morning) and to recite the late evening prayer \"Sohila\" and the verse \"Pavan guru pani pita...\" before sleeping.\nFive Ks.\nThe five Ks (\"panj kakaar\") are five articles of faith which all initiated (\"Amritdhari\") Sikhs are obliged to wear. The symbols represent the ideals of Sikhism: honesty, equality, fidelity, meditating on Waheguru and never bowing to tyranny.\nThe five symbols are:\nMusic and instruments.\nThe Sikhs have a number of musical instruments, including the rebab, dilruba, taus, jori and sarinda. Playing the sarangi was encouraged by Guru Hargobind. The rebab was played by Bhai Mardana as he accompanied Guru Nanak on his journeys. The jori and sarinda were introduced to Sikh devotional music by Guru Arjan. The \"taus\" (Persian for \"peacock\") was designed by Guru Hargobind, who supposedly heard a peacock singing and wanted to create an instrument mimicking its sounds. The dilruba was designed by Guru Gobind Singh at the request of his followers, who wanted a smaller instrument than the taus. After Japji Sahib, all of the shabad in the Guru Granth Sahib were composed as raags. This type of singing is known as Gurmat Sangeet.\nWhen they marched into battle, the Sikhs would play a \"Ranjit nagara\" ('victory drum') to boost morale. Nagaras (usually two to three feet in diameter, although some were up to five feet in diameter) are played with two sticks. The beat of the large drums and the raising of the Nishan Sahib, meant that the Singhs were on their way.\nKhalistan movement.\nThe Khalistan movement is a Sikh separatist movement, which seeks to create a separate country called Khalist\u0101n ('The Land of the Khalsa') in the Punjab state of India to serve as a homeland for Sikhs. The territorial definition of the proposed country Khalistan consists of the Punjab, India and includes Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu and Kashmir and Rajasthan.\nKhalistan movement began as an expatriate venture. In 1971, the first explicit call for Khalistan was made in an advertisement published in the \"New York Times\" by an expat (Jagjit Singh Chohan). By proclaiming the formation of Khalistan, he was able to collect millions of dollars from the Sikh diaspora. On April 12, 1980, he declared the formation of the \"National Council of Khalistan,\" at Anandpur Sahib. He declared himself as the President of the council and named Balbir Singh Sandhu as its Secretary General. In May 1980, Chohan traveled to London and announced the formation of Khalistan. A similar announcement was made by Balbir Singh Sandhu in Amritsar, where he began releasing stamps and currency of Khalistan. The inaction of the authorities in Amritsar and elsewhere was decried as a political stunt by the Congress(I) party of Indira Gandhi by the Akali Dal, headed by the Sikh leader Harchand Singh Longowal.\nThe movement flourished in the Indian state of Punjab following Operation Blue Star and the Anti-Sikh Pogroms. As proponents were able to generate funding from a grieving diaspora. In June 1985, Air India Flight 182 was bombed by Babbar Khalsa, a pro-Khalistani terrorist organisation. In January 1986, the Golden Temple was occupied by militants belonging to All India Sikh Students Federation and Damdami Taksal. On January 26, 1986, a gathering known as the Sarbat Khalsa (a de facto parliament) passed a resolution (\"gurmatt\u0101\") favouring the creation of Khalistan. Subsequently, a number of rebel militant groups in favour of Khalistan waged a major insurgency against the government of India. Indian security forces suppressed the insurgency in the early 1990s, but Sikh political groups such as the Khalsa Raj Party and SAD (A) continued to pursue an independent Khalistan through non-violent means. Pro-Khalistan organisations such as Dal Khalsa (International) are also active outside India, supported by a section of the Sikh diaspora.\nIn the 1990s, the insurgency abated, and the movement failed to reach its objective due to multiple reasons including a heavy police crackdown on separatists, divisions among the Sikhs and loss of support from the Sikh population. However, various pro-Khalistan groups, both political and militant, remain committed to the separatist movement. There are claims of funding from Sikhs outside India to attract young people into militant groups. There have also been multiple claims that the movement is motivated and supported by the Pakistan's external intelligence agency, the ISI.\nDemographics.\n \nSikhs number about 26\u201330\u00a0million worldwide, of whom 24\u201328 million live in India, which thus represents around 90 percent of the total Sikh population. A 2020 estimate by Charles Preston gives a figure of 29,254,000 of Sikhs worldwide. About 76 percent of all Indian Sikhs live in the northern Indian state of Punjab, forming a majority of about 58 per cent of the state's population, roughly around 16 million. Substantial communities of Sikhs live in the Indian states or union territories of Haryana, where they number around 1.2 million and form 4.9 percent of the population, Rajasthan (872,000 or 1.3 percent of the population), Uttar Pradesh (643,000, 0.3 percent), Delhi (570,000, 3.4 percent), Uttarakhand (236,000, 2.3 percent), Jammu and Kashmir (234,000, 1.9 percent), Chandigarh (138,000, 13.1 percent) and Himachal Pradesh (86,000, 1.2 percent).\nCanada is home to the largest national Sikh proportion (2.1\u00a0percent of the total population) in the world. A substantial community of Sikhs exist in the western province of British Columbia, numbering nearly 300,000 persons and forming approximately 5.9\u00a0percent of the total population. This represents the third-largest Sikh proportion amongst all global administrative divisions, behind only Punjab and Chandigarh in India. Furthermore, British Columbia, Manitoba and Yukon hold the distinction of being three of the only four administrative divisions in the world with Sikhism as the second most followed religion among the population.\nWhilst Punjab, India has had a majority Sikh population for decades, recent statistics point toward a demographic decline of Sikhs in the state. School data from the Civil Registration System (CRS) shows that Sikh children are now a plurality (49%) at the foundational-level (pre-primary to Class II in the age group of 3\u20138-years-old). The causes for the demographic decline of Sikhs in Indian Punjab has been attributed to low fertility-rates, outbound migration of Sikhs abroad, and internal migration within India of persons from other states, oftentimes Uttar Pradesh or Bihar, settling in Indian Punjab.\nCensus data and official statistics.\nAs a religious minority, Sikhs have fought long and hard to get official status and to be counted in many countries across the world. Through the efforts of Sikh organisations and communities in their respective countries, there is now readily available population data on Sikhs as part of the census or official statistics in the following territories:\nNote: Official statistics do not count unregistered arrivals or those who have not completed the census or surveys. However, they do provide for a much more accurate depiction of Sikh communities as opposed to estimates from various Sikh organisations whose estimates can vary vastly with no statistically valuable source. Thus, official statistics and census data is highly important and Sikh communities continue to push for census inclusion in many countries where they are still not counted.\nMigration.\nSikh migration from British India began in earnest during the second half of the 19th century, when the British completed their annexation of the Punjab, which led to Sikh migration throughout India and the British Empire. During the Raj, semiskilled Sikh artisans were transported from the Punjab to British East Africa to help build railroads. Sikhs emigrated from India after World War II, most going to the United Kingdom but many also to North America. Some Sikhs who had settled in eastern Africa were expelled by Ugandan dictator Idi Amin in 1972. Economics is a major factor in Sikh migration and significant communities exist in the United Kingdom, the United States, Malaysia, East Africa, Australia, Singapore and Thailand.\nAfter the Partition of India in 1947, many Sikhs from what would become the Punjab of Pakistan migrated to India as well as to Afghanistan due to fear of persecution. Afghanistan was home to hundreds of thousands of Sikhs and Hindus as of the 1970s, but due to the wars in Afghanistan in the 2010s, the vast majority of Afghan Sikhs had migrated to India, Pakistan or the west.\nAlthough the rate of Sikh migration from the Punjab has remained high, traditional patterns of Sikh migration favouring English-speaking countries (particularly the United Kingdom) have changed during the past decade due to stricter immigration laws. Moliner (2006) wrote that as a consequence of Sikh migration to the UK becoming \"virtually impossible since the late 1970s,\" migration patterns evolved to continental Europe. Italy is a rapidly growing destination for Sikh migration, with Reggio Emilia and Vicenza having significant Sikh population clusters. Italian Sikhs are generally involved in agriculture, agricultural processing, the manufacture of machine tools and horticulture.\nGrowth.\nJohnson and Barrett (2004) estimate that the global Sikh population increases annually by 392,633 (1.7% per year, based on 2004 figures); this percentage includes births, deaths and conversions. Primarily for socio-economic reasons, Indian Sikhs have the lowest adjusted growth rate of any major religious group in India, at 16.9 percent per decade (estimated from 1991 to 2001) and it has further declined to just 8.4 per cent in 2011 census report. Sikhs in the world have the lowest fertility rate of 1.6 children per women as per (2019\u201320) estimation research. The Sikh population has the lowest gender balance in India, with only 903 women per 1,000 men according to the 2011 Indian census. The estimated world's Sikh population was over 30 million in 2020 and it will reach 42\u00a0million by 2050. It is expected to increase up to 62\u00a0million by 2100, given that the anticipated growth rate of 1.7% per year and adding at least 400,000 followers annually.\nSince the Sikh growth rate dropped from 1.7% (16.9% in 1991 to 2001 estimate) to 0.8% (8.4% in 2001\u20132011) in 2011 report, hence based on their growth rate, their population in India will increase 196,316 (0.8% based on 2011 figures) per year and will reach 36 million in 2050, it expected to reach 52 million in 2100 given that the anticipated growth rate of 0.8% and adding at least 200,000 followers annually.\nSikhism is the fastest growing religion in Canada, Australia and New Zealand. The growth is mainly contributed by the immigration of Indian Sikhs there over the decades. Sikhism is fourth-largest religion in Canada, fifth-largest religion in Australia and New Zealand. The decadal growth of Sikhs is more in those countries as compared to the decadal growth of Sikh population in India, thus making them the fastest-growing religion there. Canada has the highest proportion of Sikhs in the globe, which stands at 2.1% as of 2021, as compared to India which stands at 1.7% as of 2011 respectively.\nCastes.\nSikhs have remained a relatively homogeneous ethnic group with exceptions. Caste may still be practiced by some Sikhs, despite Guru Nanak's calls for treating everyone equally in Guru Granth Sahib.\nAlong with Guru Nanak, other Sikh gurus had also denounced the hierarchy of the caste system, however, they all belonged to the same caste, the Khatris. Most Sikhs belong to the Jat (Jatt), traditionally Agriculturist class in occupation. Despite being very small in numbers, the Khatri and Arora castes wield considerable influence within the Sikh community. Other common Sikh castes include Ahluwalias (Brewers), \"Kambojs\" or \"Kambos\" (Rural caste), \"Ramgarhias\" (Carpenters), Brahmins (Priestly class), Rajputs (Kshatriyas \u2013 Warriors), \"Sainis\", \"Rai\" Sikh (Ironsmiths), \"Labanas\" (Merchants), \"Kumhars\" (Potters), \"Mazhabi\" (Cleaners) and the Ramdasia/\"Ravidasias\"(Chamar \u2013 Tanners).\nSome Sikhs, especially those belonging to the landowning dominant castes, have not shed all their prejudices against the Dalit castes such as the Mazhabi and Ravidasia. While Dalits were allowed entry into the village gurdwaras, in some gurdwaras, they were not permitted to cook or serve \"langar\" (communal meal). Therefore, wherever they could mobilise resources, the Sikh Dalits of Punjab have tried to construct their own gurdwara and other local level institutions in order to attain a certain degree of cultural autonomy. In 1953, Sikh leader and activist Master Tara Singh succeeded in persuading the Indian government to include Sikh castes of the converted untouchables in the list of scheduled castes. In the Shiromani Gurdwara Prabandhak Committee, 20 of the 140 seats are reserved for low-caste Sikhs.\nOther castes (over 1,000 members) include the Arain, Bhatra, Bairagi, Bania, Basith, Bawaria, Bazigar, Bhabra, Chamar, Chhimba (cotton farmers), Darzi, Dhobi, Gujar, Jhinwar, Kahar, Kalal, Kumhar, Lohar, Mahtam, Megh, Mirasi, Mochi, Nai, Ramgharia, Sansi, Sudh, Tarkhan and Kashyap\nKarnail Singh Panjoli, member of the Shiromani Gurdwara Prabandhak Committee, says that there are several communities within the term Nanakpanthis too. Apart from Sindhi Hindus, \"There are groups like Sikhligarh, Vanjaarey, Nirmaley, Lubaney, Johri, Satnamiye, Udaasiyas, Punjabi Hindus, etc. who call themselves Nanakpanthis despite being Hindus.\nDiaspora.\nAs Sikhs wear turbans and keep beards, Sikh men in Western countries have been mistaken for Muslim, Arab and/or Afghan since the September 11 attacks and the Iraq War. Several days after the 9/11 attacks, Sikh-American gas station owner Balbir Singh Sodhi was murdered in Arizona by a man who took Sodhi to be a member of al-Qaeda, marking the first recorded hate-crime in America motivated by 9/11. CNN would go on to suggest an increase in hate crimes against Sikh men in the US and the UK after the 9/11 attacks.\nIn an attempt to foster Sikh leaders in the Western world, youth initiatives by a number of organisations exist. The Sikh Youth Alliance of North America sponsors an annual Sikh Youth Symposium.\nThe Sikh diaspora has been most successful in the UK, and UK Sikhs have the highest percentage of home ownership (82%) of any religious community. UK Sikhs are the second-wealthiest religious group in the UK (after the Jewish community), with a median total household wealth of \u00a3.\nIn May 2019, the UK government exempted \"Kirpan\" from the list of banned knives. The U.K. government passed an amendment by which Sikhs in the country would be allowed to carry kirpans and use them during religious and cultural functions. The bill was amended to ensure that it would not impact the right of the British Sikh community to possess and supply kirpans or religious swords. Similarly, the Sikh American Legal Defense and Education Fund overturned a 1925 Oregon law banning the wearing of turbans by teachers and government officials in 2010.\nAgriculture.\nHistorically, most Indians have been farmers and 66 per cent of the Indian population are engaged in agriculture. Indian Sikhs are employed in agriculture to a lesser extent; India's 2001 census found 39 per cent of the working population of the Punjab employed in this sector. According to the Swedish political scientist Ishtiaq Ahmad, a factor in the success of the Indian green revolution was the \"Sikh cultivator, often the Jat and Kamboj or Kamboh, whose courage, perseverance, spirit of enterprise and muscle prowess proved crucial.\" However, Indian physicist Vandana Shiva wrote that the green revolution made the \"negative and destructive impacts of science (i.e., the green revolution) on nature and society\" invisible and was a catalyst for Punjabi Sikh and Hindu tensions despite a growth in material wealth.\nSikhs in modern history.\nManmohan Singh was an Indian economist, academic and politician who served as the 13th Prime Minister of India from 2004 to 2014. The first and only Sikh and non-Hindu in office, Singh was also the first prime minister since Jawaharlal Nehru to be re-elected after completing a full five-year term.\nNotable Sikhs in science include nuclear scientist Piara Singh Gill, fibre-optics pioneer Narinder Singh Kapany; and physicist, science writer and broadcaster Simon Singh.\nIn business, the UK-based clothing retailers New Look and the Thai-based JASPAL were founded by Sikhs. India's largest pharmaceutical company, Ranbaxy Laboratories, is headed by Sikhs. Apollo Tyres is headed by Onkar Singh Kanwar. In Singapore, Kartar Singh Thakral expanded his family's trading business, Thakral Holdings, into assets totalling almost US$ and is Singapore's 25th-richest person. Sikh Bob Singh Dhillon is the first Indo-Canadian billionaire. Mastercard's CEO was a Sikh named Ajaypal Singh Banga.\nIn sports, Sikhs include England cricketer Monty Panesar; former 400-metre runner Milkha Singh; his son, professional golfer Jeev Milkha Singh; Indian wrestler and actor Dara Singh; former Indian hockey team captains Sandeep Singh, Ajitpal Singh and Balbir Singh Sr.; former Indian cricket captain Bishen Singh Bedi; Harbhajan Singh, India's most successful off spin cricket bowler; Yuvraj Singh, World Cup winning allrounder; Maninder Singh, World Cup winning off spinner; and Navjot Singh Sidhu, former Indian cricketer-turned-politician.\nSikhs in Bollywood, in the arts in general, include poet and lyricist Rajkavi Inderjeet Singh Tulsi; Gulzar; Jagjit Singh; Dharmendra; Sunny Deol; Diljit Dosanjh writer Khushwant Singh; actresses Neetu Singh, Simran Judge, Poonam Dhillon, Mahi Gill, Esha Deol, Parminder Nagra, Gul Panag, Mona Singh, Namrata Singh Gujral; and directors Gurinder Chadha and Parminder Gill.\nSikhs in Punjabi Music industry include Sidhu Moose Wala, Diljit Dosanjh, Babu Singh Maan, Surjit Bindrakhia, Ammy Virk, Karan Aujla, Jazzy B, Sukha, Shubh, Miss Pooja.\nIn December 2022, the U.S. Marine Corps was compelled by a court order to allow two Sikhs to wear the turban and grow beards. This was a milestone for religious freedom and in the prevention of employment discrimination against Sikhs.\nIn the Indian and British armies.\nAccording to a 1994 estimate, Punjabi Sikhs and Hindus comprised 10 to 15% of all ranks in the Indian Army. The Indian government does not release religious or ethnic origins of a military personnel, but a 1991 report by Tim McGirk estimated that 20% of Indian Army officers were Sikhs. Together with the Gurkhas recruited from Nepal, the Maratha Light Infantry from Maharashtra and the Jat Regiment, the Sikhs are one of the few communities to have exclusive regiments in the Indian Army. The Sikh Regiment is one of the most-decorated regiments in the army, with 73 Battle Honours, 14 Victoria Crosses, 21 first-class Indian Orders of Merit (equivalent to the Victoria Cross), 15 Theatre Honours, 5 COAS Unit Citations, two Param Vir Chakras, 14 Maha Vir Chakras, 5 Kirti Chakras, 67 Vir Chakras and 1,596 other awards. The highest-ranking general in the history of the Indian Air Force is a Punjabi Sikh, Marshal of the Air Force Arjan Singh. Plans by the United Kingdom Ministry of Defence for a Sikh infantry regiment were scrapped in June 2007.\nSikhs supported the British during the Indian Rebellion of 1857. By the beginning of World War I, Sikhs in the British Indian Army totaled over 100,000 (20 per cent of the force). Until 1945, fourteen Victoria Crosses (VC) were awarded to Sikhs, a per-capita regimental record. In 2002, the names of all Sikh VC and George Cross recipients were inscribed on the monument of the Memorial Gates on Constitution Hill, next to Buckingham Palace. Chanan Singh Dhillon was instrumental in campaigning for the memorial.\nDuring World War I, Sikh battalions fought in Egypt, Palestine, Mesopotamia, Gallipoli and France. Six battalions of the Sikh Regiment were raised during World War II, serving in the Second Battle of El Alamein, the Burma and Italian campaigns and in Iraq, receiving 27 battle honours. Around the world, Sikhs are commemorated in Commonwealth cemeteries.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nGeneral and cited sources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt; "}
{"id": "29407", "revid": "861759", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29407", "title": "Superworld", "text": "Superhero-themed role-playing game\nSuperworld is a superhero-themed role-playing game published by Chaosium in 1983 that uses the generic \"Basic Role-Playing\" rules system. The game began as just one part of the \"Worlds of Wonder\" product before being published as a stand-alone game. In competition against other well-established and popular superhero games, \"Superworld\" never found an audience, and was discontinued after only three supplements were published for it.\nGame system.\n\"Superworld\" uses Chaosium's \"Basic Role-Playing\" system, with the addition of rules for super-powers.\nComponents.\nThe game box contains \nEditions printed in 1984 and later also contain a 4-page booklet of errata.\nSkills resolution.\nAs with all games using the \"Basic Role-Playing\" rules, skill tests and combat are resolved by rolling percentile dice against skills. Rolls that are much lower than needed can result in increased effect, while high rolls can cause critical failures. Combat rules have many options and take into account three types of energy for damage: Kinetic, Electric, and Radiation.\nPublication history.\nIn 1982, Chaosium published \"Worlds of Wonder\" to demonstrate the flexibility of its generic \"Basic Role-Playing System\"; the game included three separate settings with the idea that player characters could be moved from setting to setting using the same rules system: \nThe following year, \"Superworld\" was published as a stand-alone boxed set designed by Steve Perrin, with interior illustrations by Chris Marrinan, Markus Harrison, and cover art by Michael Dooney.\nThree supplements followed:\nUp against well-established rival superhero games \"Villains &amp; Vigilantes\" (Fantasy Games Unlimited) and including \"Champions\" (Hero Games), \"Superworld\" was not able to establish a strong player base, and no further supplements were released by Chaosium.\nReception.\nJon Sutherland reviewed \"Superworld\" for \"White Dwarf\" #51, giving it an overall rating of 7 out of 10, and stated that \"This represents an intelligent attempt to provide a playable format for a difficult topic to simulate. The only rules that I have ever seen with anything like this in scope was the \"Golden Heroes\" FRP which may soon be available in a modified form from \"GW\".\"\nRussell Grant Collins reviewed \"Superworld\" for \"Different Worlds\" magazine and stated that \"I am going to use \"Superworld\" as the main game I run, although if I had not been between \"Champions\" universes, I might not have switched. If you are looking for a superhero role-playing game, this game is worth looking at. If you are running a campaign using another system, you should probably buy this game as a reference, even if you do not think that you will use it as your main system. Now, Chaosium, how about some support material, like a villain book or some modules?\"\nSteve Marsh reviewed \"Superworld\" in \"Ares Magazine\" #17 and commented that \"The game is anything but chaotic, but should create change in any gaming group that sees it. It is well done, and worth the price.\"\nCrede Lambard reviewed \"Superworld\" in \"Space Gamer\" No. 70. Lambard commented that \"\"Superworld\" is very good. I doubt that it will ever supplant \"Champions\", but it certainly supplements it . . . especially now that both Hero Games and Chaosium are putting out adventures with stats for both games.\"\n\"Wild Cards\".\nThe \"Wild Cards\" series of science fiction books came from a \"Superworld\" campaign gamemastered by George R. R. Martin, and played in by other science fiction writers.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "29408", "revid": "5831124", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29408", "title": "Samuel Taylor Coleridge", "text": "English poet, literary critic and philosopher (1772\u20131834)\nSamuel Taylor Coleridge ( ; 21 October 1772\u00a0\u2013 25 July 1834) was an English poet, literary critic, philosopher, and theologian who was a founder of the Romantic Movement in England and a member of the Lake Poets with his friend William Wordsworth. He also shared volumes and collaborated with Charles Lamb, Robert Southey, and Charles Lloyd. \nHe wrote the poems \"The Rime of the Ancient Mariner\" and \"Kubla Khan\", as well as the major prose work \"Biographia Literaria\". His critical works were highly influential, especially in relation to William Shakespeare, and he helped introduce German idealist philosophy to English-speaking cultures. Coleridge coined many familiar words and phrases, including \"suspension of disbelief\". He had a major influence on Ralph Waldo Emerson and American transcendentalism.\nThroughout his adult life, Coleridge had crippling bouts of anxiety and depression; it has been speculated that he had bipolar disorder, which had not been defined during his lifetime. He was physically unhealthy, which may have stemmed from a bout of rheumatic fever and other childhood illnesses. He was treated for these conditions with laudanum, which fostered a lifelong opium addiction.\nColeridge had a turbulent career and personal life with a variety of highs and lows, but his public esteem grew after his death, and he became considered one of the most influential figures in English literature. For instance, a 2018 report by \"The Guardian\" labelled him \"a genius\" who had progressed into \"one of the most renowned English poets\". Organisations such as the Church of England celebrate his work during public events, such as a \"Coleridge Day\" in June, with activities including literary recitals.\nEarly life and education.\nColeridge was born on 21 October 1772 in the town of Ottery St Mary in Devon, England. Samuel's father was the Reverend John Coleridge, the well-respected vicar of St Mary's Church, Ottery St Mary, and was headmaster of the King's School, a free grammar school established by King Henry VIII in the town. He had previously been master of Hugh Squier's School in South Molton, Devon, and lecturer of nearby Molland.\nJohn Coleridge had three children by his first wife. Samuel was the youngest of ten by the Reverend Mr. Coleridge's second wife, Anne Bowden (1726\u20131809), probably the daughter of John Bowden, mayor of South Molton, Devon, in 1726. Coleridge suggests that he \"took no pleasure in boyish sports\" but instead read \"incessantly\" and played by himself.\nAfter John Coleridge died in 1781, 8-year-old Samuel was sent to Christ's Hospital, a charity school which was founded in the 16th century in Greyfriars, London, where he remained throughout his childhood, studying and writing poetry. At that school Coleridge became friends with Charles Lamb, a schoolmate, and studied the works of Virgil and William Lisle Bowles.\nIn one of a series of autobiographical letters written to Thomas Poole, Coleridge wrote: \"At six years old I remember to have read \"Belisarius\", \"Robinson Crusoe\", and \"Philip Quarll\" \u2013 and then I found the \"Arabian Nights' Entertainments\" \u2013 one tale of which (the tale of a man who was compelled to seek for a pure virgin) made so deep an impression on me (I had read it in the evening while my mother was mending stockings) that I was haunted by spectres whenever I was in the dark \u2013 and I distinctly remember the anxious and fearful eagerness with which I used to watch the window in which the books lay \u2013 and whenever the sun lay upon them, I would seize it, carry it by the wall, and bask, and read.\"\nColeridge seems to have appreciated his teacher, as he wrote in recollections of his school days in \"Biographia Literaria\": I enjoyed the inestimable advantage of a very sensible, though at the same time, a very severe master...At the same time that we were studying the Greek Tragic Poets, he made us read Shakespeare and Milton as lessons: and they were the lessons too, which required most time and trouble to bring up, so as to escape his censure. I learnt from him, that Poetry, even that of the loftiest, and, seemingly, that of the wildest odes, had a logic of its own, as severe as that of science; and more difficult, because more subtle, more complex, and dependent on more, and more fugitive causes...In our own English compositions (at least for the last three years of our school education) he showed no mercy to phrase, metaphor, or image, unsupported by a sound sense, or where the same sense might have been conveyed with equal force and dignity in plainer words...In fancy I can almost hear him now, exclaiming \"Harp? Harp? Lyre? Pen and ink, boy, you mean! Muse, boy, Muse? your Nurse's daughter, you mean! Pierian spring? Oh aye! the cloister-pump, I suppose!\"...Be this as it may, there was one custom of our master's, which I cannot pass over in silence, because I think it ...worthy of imitation. He would often permit our theme exercises...to accumulate, till each lad had four or five to be looked over. Then placing the whole number abreast on his desk, he would ask the writer, why this or that sentence might not have found as appropriate a place under this or that other thesis: and if no satisfying answer could be returned, and two faults of the same kind were found in one exercise, the irrevocable verdict followed, the exercise was torn up, and another on the same subject to be produced, in addition to the tasks of the day.\nHe later wrote of his loneliness at school in the poem \"Frost at Midnight\":\n\"With unclosed lids, already had I dreamt/Of my sweet birth-place.\"\nFrom 1791 until 1794, Coleridge attended Jesus College, Cambridge. In 1792, he won the Browne Medal for an ode he wrote attacking the Atlantic slave trade. In December 1793, he left the college and enlisted in the British Army's 15th Light Dragoons using the false name \"Silas Tomkyn Comberbache\", perhaps because of debt accrued from studying at Jesus College or because the girl that he loved, Mary Evans, had rejected him. His brothers arranged for his discharge a few months later under the reason of \"insanity\" and he was readmitted to Jesus College, though he would never receive a degree from the university.\nPantisocracy and marriage.\nCambridge and Somerset.\nAt Jesus College, Coleridge was introduced to political and theological ideas then considered radical, including those of the poet Robert Southey with whom he collaborated on the play \"The Fall of Robespierre\". Coleridge joined Southey in a plan, later abandoned, to found a utopian commune-like society, called Pantisocracy, in the wilderness of Pennsylvania.\nIn 1795, the two friends became engaged to sisters Sara and Edith Fricker, with Sara becoming the subject of Coleridge's poem \"The Eolian Harp\". They wed that year in St Mary Redcliffe, Bristol, but Coleridge's marriage with Sara proved unhappy. By 1804, they were separated. When Coleridge wrote to his brother he laid all the blame on Sara: \"The few friends who have been Witnesses of my domestic life have long advised separation as the necessary condition of everything desirable for me...\" Subsequent biographers have not agreed with Coleridge's negative view of the wife he called his 'Sally Pally' when he first married her.\nA third sister, Mary, had already married a third poet, Robert Lovell, and both became partners in Pantisocracy. Lovell also introduced Coleridge and Southey to their future patron Joseph Cottle, but died of a fever in April 1796. Coleridge was with him at his death.\nIn 1796, he released his first volume of poems entitled \"Poems on Various Subjects\", which also included four poems by Charles Lamb as well as a collaboration with Robert Southey and a work suggested by his and Lamb's schoolfriend Robert Favell. Among the poems were \"Religious Musings\", \"Monody on the Death of Chatterton\" and an early version of \"The Eolian Harp\" entitled \"Effusion 35\". A second edition was printed in 1797, this time including an appendix of works by Lamb and Charles Lloyd, a young poet to whom Coleridge had become a private tutor.\nIn 1796, he also privately printed \"Sonnets from Various Authors\", including sonnets by Lamb, Lloyd, Southey and himself as well as older poets such as William Lisle Bowles.\nColeridge made plans to establish a journal, \"The Watchman\", to be printed every eight days to avoid a weekly newspaper tax. The first issue of the short-lived journal was published in March 1796. It had ceased publication by May of that year.\nThe years 1797 and 1798, during which he lived in what is now known as Coleridge Cottage, in Nether Stowey, Somerset, were among the most fruitful of Coleridge's life. In 1795, Coleridge met poet William Wordsworth and his sister Dorothy. (Wordsworth, having visited him and being enchanted by the surroundings, rented Alfoxton Park, a little over three miles [5\u00a0km] away.) Besides \"The Rime of the Ancient Mariner\", Coleridge composed the symbolic poem \"Kubla Khan\", written\u2014Coleridge claimed\u2014as a result of an opium dream, in \"a kind of a reverie\"; and the first part of the narrative poem \"Christabel\". The writing of \"Kubla Khan\", written about the Mongol emperor Kublai Khan and his legendary palace at Xanadu, was said to have been interrupted by the arrival of \"a person on business from Porlock\" \u2013 an event that has been embellished upon in such varied contexts as science fiction and Nabokov's \"Lolita\". During this period, he also produced his much-praised \"conversation poems\" \"This Lime-Tree Bower My Prison\", \"Frost at Midnight\", and \"\".\nIn 1798, Coleridge and Wordsworth published a joint volume of poetry, \"Lyrical Ballads\", which proved to be the starting point for the English romantic age. Wordsworth may have contributed more poems, but the real star of the collection was Coleridge's first version of \"The Rime of the Ancient Mariner\". It was the longest work and drew more praise and attention than anything else in the volume. In the spring Coleridge temporarily took over for Rev. Joshua Toulmin at Taunton's Mary Street Unitarian Chapel while Rev. Toulmin grieved over the drowning death of his daughter Jane. Poetically commenting on Toulmin's strength, Coleridge wrote in a 1798 letter to John Prior Estlin, \"I walked into Taunton (eleven miles) and back again, and performed the divine services for Dr. Toulmin. I suppose you must have heard that his daughter, (Jane, on 15 April 1798) in a melancholy derangement, suffered herself to be swallowed up by the tide on the sea-coast between Sidmouth and Bere [\"sic\"] (Beer). These events cut cruelly into the hearts of old men: but the good Dr. Toulmin bears it like the true practical Christian, \u2013 there is indeed a tear in his eye, but that eye is lifted up to the Heavenly Father.\"\nWest Midlands and the North.\nColeridge also worked briefly in Shropshire, where he came in December 1797 as locum to its local Unitarian minister, Dr. Rowe, in their church in the High Street at Shrewsbury. He is said to have read his \"Rime of the Ancient Mariner\" at a literary evening in Mardol. He was then contemplating a career in the ministry, and gave a probationary sermon in High Street church on Sunday, 14 January 1798. William Hazlitt, a Unitarian minister's son, was in the congregation, having walked from Wem to hear him. Coleridge later visited Hazlitt and his father at Wem but within a day or two of preaching he received a letter from Josiah Wedgwood II, who had offered to help him out of financial difficulties with an annuity of \u00a3150 (approximately \u00a313,000 in today's money) per year on condition he give up his ministerial career. Coleridge accepted this, to the disappointment of Hazlitt who had hoped to have him as a neighbour in Shropshire.\nFrom 16 September 1798, Coleridge and the Wordsworths left for a stay in Germany; Coleridge soon went his own way and spent much of his time in university towns. In February 1799 he enrolled at the University of G\u00f6ttingen, where he attended lectures by Johann Friedrich Blumenbach and Johann Gottfried Eichhorn. During this period, he became interested in German philosophy, especially the transcendental idealism and critical philosophy of Immanuel Kant, and in the literary criticism of the 18th-century dramatist Gotthold Lessing. Coleridge studied German and, after his return to England, translated the dramatic trilogy \"Wallenstein\" by the German Classical poet Friedrich Schiller into English. He continued to pioneer these ideas through his own critical writings for the rest of his life (sometimes without attribution), although they were unfamiliar and difficult for a culture dominated by empiricism.\nIn 1799, Coleridge and the Wordsworths stayed at Thomas Hutchinson's farm on the River Tees at Sockburn, near Darlington.\nIt was at Sockburn that Coleridge wrote his ballad-poem \"Love\", addressed to Sara Hutchinson. The knight mentioned is the mailed figure on the Conyers tomb in ruined Sockburn church. The figure has a wyvern at his feet, a reference to the Sockburn Worm slain by Sir John Conyers (and a possible source for Lewis Carroll's \"Jabberwocky\"). The worm was supposedly buried under the rock in the nearby pasture; this was the \"greystone\" of Coleridge's first draft, later transformed into a \"mount\". The poem was a direct inspiration for John Keats' famous poem \"La Belle Dame Sans Merci\".\nColeridge's early intellectual debts, besides German idealists like Kant and critics like Lessing, were first to William Godwin's \"Political Justice\", especially during his Pantisocratic period, and to David Hartley's \"Observations on Man\", which is the source of the psychology which is found in \"Frost at Midnight\". Hartley argued that one becomes aware of sensory events as impressions, and that \"ideas\" are derived by noticing similarities and differences between impressions and then by naming them. Connections resulting from the coincidence of impressions create linkages, so that the occurrence of one impression triggers those links and calls up the memory of those ideas with which it is associated (See Dorothy Emmet, \"Coleridge and Philosophy\").\nColeridge was critical of the literary taste of his contemporaries, and a literary conservative insofar as he was afraid that the lack of taste in the ever growing masses of literate people would mean a continued desecration of literature.\nIn 1800, he returned to England and shortly thereafter settled with his family and friends in Greta Hall at Keswick in the Lake District of Cumberland to be near Grasmere, where Wordsworth had moved. He stayed with the Wordsworths for eighteen months, but was a difficult houseguest, as his dependency on laudanum grew and his frequent nightmares would wake the children. He was also a fussy eater, to the frustration of Dorothy Wordsworth, who had to cook. For example, not content with salt, Coleridge sprinkled cayenne pepper on his eggs, which he ate from a teacup. His marital problems, nightmares, illnesses, increased opium dependency, tensions with Wordsworth, and a lack of confidence in his poetic powers fuelled the composition of \"\" and an intensification of his philosophical studies.\nIn 1802, Coleridge took a nine-day walking holiday in the fells of the Lake District. Coleridge is credited with the first recorded descent of Scafell to Mickledore via Broad Stand, although this may have been more due to his getting lost than a purposeful new route. He coined the term 'mountaineering'.\nLater life and increasing drug use.\nTravel and \"The Friend\".\nIn 1804, he travelled to Sicily and Malta, working for a time as Acting Public Secretary of Malta under the Civil Commissioner, Alexander Ball, a task he performed successfully. He lived in San Anton Palace in the village of Attard. He gave this up and returned to England in 1806. Dorothy Wordsworth was shocked at his condition upon his return.\nFrom 1807 to 1808, Coleridge returned to Malta and then travelled in Sicily and mainland Italy, in the hope that leaving Britain's damp climate would improve his health and thus enable him to reduce his consumption of opium. Thomas De Quincey alleges in his \"Recollections of the Lakes and the Lake Poets\" that it was during this period that Coleridge became a full-blown opium addict, using the drug as a substitute for the lost vigour and creativity of his youth. It has been suggested that this reflects De Quincey's own experiences more than Coleridge's.\nHis opium addiction (he was using as much as two quarts of laudanum a week) now began to take over his life: he separated from his wife Sara in 1808, quarrelled with Wordsworth in 1810, lost part of his annuity in 1811, and put himself under the care of Dr. Daniel in 1814. His addiction caused severe constipation, which required regular and humiliating enemas.\nIn 1809, Coleridge made his second attempt to become a newspaper publisher with the publication of the journal entitled \"The Friend\". It was a weekly publication that, in Coleridge's typically ambitious style, was written, edited, and published almost entirely single-handedly. Given that Coleridge tended to be highly disorganised and had no head for business, the publication was probably doomed from the start. Coleridge financed the journal by selling over five hundred subscriptions, over two dozen of which were sold to members of Parliament, but in late 1809, publication was crippled by a financial crisis and Coleridge was obliged to approach \"Conversation Sharp\", Tom Poole and one or two other wealthy friends for an emergency loan to continue. \"The Friend\" was an eclectic publication that drew upon every corner of Coleridge's remarkably diverse knowledge of law, philosophy, morals, politics, history, and literary criticism.\nAlthough it was often turgid, rambling, and inaccessible to most readers, it ran for 25 issues and was republished in book form a number of times. Years after its initial publication, a revised and expanded edition of \"The Friend\", with added philosophical content including his 'Essays on the Principles of Method', became a highly influential work and its effect was felt on writers and philosophers from John Stuart Mill to Ralph Waldo Emerson.\nLondon: final years and death.\nFrom 1810 to 1820, Coleridge gave a series of lectures in London and Bristol \u2013 those on Shakespeare renewed interest in the playwright as a model for contemporary writers. Much of Coleridge's reputation as a literary critic is founded on the lectures that he undertook in the winter of 1810\u201311, which were sponsored by the Philosophical Institution and given at Scot's Corporation Hall off Fetter Lane, Fleet Street. These lectures were heralded in the prospectus as \"A Course of Lectures on Shakespeare and Milton, in Illustration of the Principles of Poetry.\" Coleridge's ill-health, opium-addiction problems, and somewhat unstable personality meant that all his lectures were plagued with problems of delays and a general irregularity of quality from one lecture to the next.\nAs a result of these factors, Coleridge often failed to prepare anything but the loosest set of notes for his lectures and regularly entered into extremely long digressions which his audiences found difficult to follow. However, it was the lecture on \"Hamlet\" given on 2 January 1812 that was considered the best and has influenced \"Hamlet\" studies ever since. Before Coleridge, \"Hamlet\" was often denigrated and belittled by critics from Voltaire to Dr. Johnson. Coleridge rescued the play's reputation, and his thoughts on it are often still published as supplements to the text.\nIn 1812, he allowed Robert Southey to make use of extracts from his vast number of private notebooks in their collaboration \"Omniana; Or, Horae Otiosiores\".\nIn August 1814, Coleridge was approached by John Murray, Lord Byron's publisher, about the possibility of translating Goethe's classic \"Faust\" (1808). Coleridge was regarded by many as the greatest living writer on the demonic and he accepted the commission, only to abandon work on it after six weeks. Until recently, scholars were in agreement that Coleridge never returned to the project, despite Goethe's own belief in the 1820s that he had in fact completed a long translation of the work. In September 2007, Oxford University Press sparked a heated scholarly controversy by publishing an English translation of Goethe's work that purported to be Coleridge's long-lost masterpiece (the text in question first appeared anonymously in 1821).\nFrom 1814 to 1816, Coleridge rented from a local surgeon, Mr Page, in Calne, Wiltshire. He seemed able to focus on his work and manage his addiction, drafting \"Biographia Literaria\". A blue plaque marks the property today.\nIn April 1816, Coleridge, with his addiction worsening, his spirits depressed, and his family alienated, took residence in the Highgate homes, then just north of London, of the physician James Gillman, first at South Grove and later at the nearby 3, The Grove. It is unclear whether his growing use of opium (and the brandy in which it was dissolved) was a symptom or a cause of his growing depression. Gillman was partially successful in controlling the poet's addiction. Coleridge remained in Highgate for the rest of his life, and the house became a place of literary pilgrimage for writers including Carlyle and Emerson.\nIn Gillman's home, Coleridge finished his major prose work, the \"Biographia Literaria\" (mostly drafted in 1815, and finished in 1817), a volume composed of 23 chapters of autobiographical notes and dissertations on various subjects, including some incisive literary theory and criticism. He composed a considerable amount of poetry, of variable quality. He published other writings while he was living at the Gillman homes, notably the \"Lay Sermons\" of 1816 and 1817, \"Sibylline Leaves\" (1817), \"Hush\" (1820), \"Aids to Reflection\" (1825), and \"On the Constitution of the Church and State\" (1830). He also produced essays published shortly after his death, such as \"Essay on Faith\" (1838) and \"Confessions of an Inquiring Spirit\" (1840). A number of his followers were central to the Oxford Movement, and his religious writings profoundly shaped Anglicanism in the mid-nineteenth century.\nColeridge also worked extensively on the various manuscripts which form his \"Opus Maximum\", a work which was in part intended as a post-Kantian work of philosophical synthesis. The work was never published in his lifetime, and has frequently been seen as evidence for his tendency to conceive grand projects which he then had difficulty in carrying through to completion. But while he frequently berated himself for his \"indolence\", the long list of his published works calls this myth into question. Critics are divided on whether the \"Opus Maximum\", first published in 2002, successfully resolved the philosophical issues he had been exploring for most of his adult life.\nColeridge died in Highgate, London on 25 July 1834 as a result of heart failure compounded by an unknown lung disorder, possibly linked to his use of opium. Coleridge had spent 18 years under the roof of the Gillman family, who built an addition onto their home to accommodate the poet.Faith may be defined as fidelity to our own being, so far as such being is not and cannot become an object of the senses; and hence, by clear inference or implication to being generally, as far as the same is not the object of the senses; and again to whatever is affirmed or understood as the condition, or concomitant, or consequence of the same. This will be best explained by an instance or example. That I am conscious of something within me peremptorily commanding me to do unto others as I would they should do unto me; in other words a categorical (that is, primary and unconditional) imperative; that the maxim (\"regula maxima\", or supreme rule) of my actions, both inward and outward, should be such as I could, without any contradiction arising therefrom, will to be the law of all moral and rational beings. \"Essay on Faith\"\nCarlyle described him at Highgate: \"Coleridge sat on the brow of Highgate Hill, in those years, looking down on London and its smoke-tumult, like a sage escaped from the inanity of life's battle...The practical intellects of the world did not much heed him, or carelessly reckoned him a metaphysical dreamer: but to the rising spirits of the young generation he had this dusky sublime character; and sat there as a kind of \"Magus\", girt in mystery and enigma; his Dodona oak-grove (Mr. Gilman's house at Highgate) whispering strange things, uncertain whether oracles or jargon.\"\nRemains.\nColeridge is now buried in St Michael's Church, Highgate, London. He was originally buried at the Old Highgate Chapel, next to the main entrance of Highgate School. Coleridge could see the red door of the then new St Michael's Church from his last residence across the green, where he lived with a doctor he had hoped might cure him (in a house owned by Kate Moss until 2022).\nWhen it was discovered Coleridge's vault had become derelict, the coffins \u2013 Coleridge's and those of his wife Sarah, daughter Sara Coleridge, son-in-law Henry Nelson Coleridge, and grandson Herbert Coleridge, were moved to St Michael's Highgate after an international fundraising appeal in 1961.\nA recent excavation revealed the coffins were not in the location most believed, the far corner of the crypt, but below a memorial slab in the nave inscribed with: \"Beneath this stone lies the body of Samuel Taylor Coleridge\". St Michael's plans to restore the crypt and allow public access.\nPoetry.\nColeridge is one of the most important figures in English poetry. His poems directly and deeply influenced all the major poets of the age. He was known by his contemporaries as a meticulous craftsman who was more rigorous in his careful reworking of his poems than any other poet, and Southey and Wordsworth were dependent on his professional advice. His influence on Wordsworth is particularly important because many critics have credited Coleridge with the very idea of \"Conversational Poetry\". The idea of utilising common, everyday language to express profound poetic images and ideas for which Wordsworth became so famous may have originated almost entirely in Coleridge's mind. It is difficult to imagine Wordsworth's great poems, \"The Excursion\" or \"The Prelude\", ever having been written without the direct influence of Coleridge's originality.\nAs important as Coleridge was to poetry as a poet, he was equally important to poetry as a critic. His philosophy of poetry, which he developed over many years, has been deeply influential in the field of literary criticism. This influence can be seen in such critics as A. O. Lovejoy and I. A. Richards.\n\"The Rime of the Ancient Mariner\", \"Christabel\", and \"Kubla Khan\".\nColeridge is arguably best known for his longer poems, particularly \"The Rime of the Ancient Mariner\" and \"Christabel\". Even those who have never read the \"Rime\" have come under its influence: its words have given the English language the metaphor of an albatross around one's neck, the quotation of \"water, water everywhere, nor any drop to drink\" (almost always rendered as \"but not a drop to drink\"), and the phrase \"a sadder and a wiser man\" (usually rendered as \"a sadder but wiser man\"). The phrase \"All creatures great and small\" may have been inspired by \"The Rime\": \"He prayeth best, who loveth best;/ All things both great and small;/ For the dear God who loveth us;/ He made and loveth all.\" Millions more who have never read the poem nonetheless know its story thanks to the 1984 song \"Rime of the Ancient Mariner\" by the English heavy metal band Iron Maiden. \"Christabel\" is known for its musical rhythm, language, and its Gothic tale.\n\"Kubla Khan\", although shorter, is also widely known. Both \"Kubla Khan\" and \"Christabel\" have an additional \"Romantic\" aura because they were never finished. Stopford Brooke characterised both poems as having no rival due to their \"exquisite metrical movement\" and \"imaginative phrasing\".\nConversation poems.\nThese eight poems are now often referred to as \"Conversation poems\". The term was coined in 1928 by George McLean Harper, who borrowed the subtitle of \"The Nightingale: A Conversation Poem\" to describe the seven other poems as well. The poems are considered by many critics to be among Coleridge's finest verses; Harold Bloom wrote, \"With \"Dejection\", \"The Ancient Mariner\", and \"Kubla Khan\", \"Frost at Midnight\" shows Coleridge at his most impressive.\" They are also among his most influential poems, as discussed further below.\nHarper considered that the eight poems represented a form of blank verse that is \"...more fluent and easy than Milton's, or any that had been written since Milton\". In 2006, Robert Koelzer wrote about another aspect of this apparent \"easiness\", noting that Conversation poems such as \"Coleridge's \"The Eolian Harp\" and \"The Nightingale\" maintain a middle register of speech, employing an idiomatic language that is capable of being construed as un-symbolic and un-musical: language that lets itself be taken as 'merely talk' rather than rapturous 'song'.\"\nThe last ten lines of \"Frost at Midnight\" were chosen by Harper as the \"best example of the peculiar kind of blank verse Coleridge had evolved, as natural-seeming as prose, but as exquisitely artistic as the most complicated sonnet.\" The speaker of the poem is addressing his infant son, asleep by his side:\n&lt;poem&gt;\nTherefore all seasons shall be sweet to thee,\nWhether the summer clothe the general earth\nWith greenness, or the redbreast sit and sing\nBetwixt the tufts of snow on the bare branch\nOf mossy apple-tree, while the nigh thatch\nSmokes in the sun-thaw; whether the eave-drops fall\nHeard only in the trances of the blast,\nOr if the secret ministry of frost\nShall hang them up in silent icicles,\nQuietly shining to the quiet Moon.\n&lt;/poem&gt;\nIn 1965, M. H. Abrams wrote a broad description that applies to the Conversation poems: \"The speaker begins with a description of the landscape; an aspect or change of aspect in the landscape evokes a varied by integral process of memory, thought, anticipation, and feeling which remains closely intervolved with the outer scene. In the course of this meditation the lyric speaker achieves an insight, faces up to a tragic loss, comes to a moral decision, or resolves an emotional problem. Often the poem rounds itself to end where it began, at the outer scene, but with an altered mood and deepened understanding which is the result of the intervening meditation.\" In fact, Abrams was describing both the Conversation poems and later poems influenced by them. Abrams' essay has been called a \"touchstone of literary criticism\". As Paul Magnuson described it in 2002, \"Abrams credited Coleridge with originating what Abrams called the 'greater Romantic lyric', a genre that began with Coleridge's 'Conversation' poems, and included Wordsworth's \"Lines Written a Few Miles above Tintern Abbey\", Shelley's \"Stanzas Written in Dejection\" and Keats's \"Ode to a Nightingale\", and was a major influence on more modern lyrics by Matthew Arnold, Walt Whitman, Wallace Stevens, and W. H. Auden.\"\nLiterary criticism.\n\"Biographia Literaria\".\nIn addition to his poetry, Coleridge also wrote influential pieces of literary criticism including \"Biographia Literaria\", a collection of his thoughts and opinions on literature which he published in 1817. The work delivered both biographical explanations of the author's life as well as his impressions on literature. The collection also contained an analysis of a broad range of philosophical principles of literature ranging from Aristotle to Immanuel Kant and Schelling and applied them to the poetry of peers such as William Wordsworth. Coleridge's explanation of metaphysical principles were popular topics of discourse in academic communities throughout the 19th and 20th centuries, and T.S. Eliot stated that he believed that Coleridge was \"perhaps the greatest of English critics, and in a sense the last.\" Eliot suggests that Coleridge displayed \"natural abilities\" far greater than his contemporaries, dissecting literature and applying philosophical principles of metaphysics in a way that brought the subject of his criticisms away from the text and into a world of logical analysis that mixed logical analysis and emotion. However, Eliot also criticises Coleridge for allowing his emotion to play a role in the metaphysical process, believing that critics should not have emotions that are provoked by the work being studied. Hugh Kenner in \"Historical Fictions\", discusses Norman Fruman's \"Coleridge, the Damaged Archangel\" and suggests that the term \"criticism\" is too often applied to \"Biographia Literaria\", which both he and Fruman describe as having failed to explain or help the reader understand works of art. To Kenner, Coleridge's attempt to discuss complex philosophical concepts without describing the rational process behind them displays a lack of critical thinking that makes the volume more of a biography than a work of criticism.\nIn \"Biographia Literaria\" and his poetry, symbols are not merely \"objective correlatives\" to Coleridge, but instruments for making the universe and personal experience intelligible and spiritually covalent. To Coleridge, the \"cinque spotted spider,\" making its way upstream \"by fits and starts,\" [\"Biographia Literaria\"] is not merely a comment on the intermittent nature of creativity, imagination, or spiritual progress, but the journey and destination of his life. The spider's five legs represent the central problem that Coleridge lived to resolve, the conflict between Aristotelian logic and Christian philosophy. Two legs of the spider represent the \"me-not me\" of thesis and antithesis, the idea that a thing cannot be itself and its opposite simultaneously, the basis of the clockwork Newtonian world view that Coleridge rejected. The remaining three legs\u2014exothesis, mesothesis and synthesis or the Holy trinity\u2014represent the idea that things can diverge without being contradictory. Taken together, the five legs\u2014with synthesis in the center, form the Holy Cross of Ramist logic. The cinque-spotted spider is Coleridge's emblem of holism, the quest and substance of Coleridge's thought and spiritual life.\nColeridge and the influence of the Gothic.\nColeridge wrote reviews of Ann Radcliffe's books and \"The Mad Monk\", among others. He comments in his reviews: \"Situations of torment, and images of naked horror, are easily conceived; and a writer in whose works they abound, deserves our gratitude almost equally with him who should drag us by way of sport through a military hospital, or force us to sit at the dissecting-table of a natural philosopher. To trace the nice boundaries, beyond which terror and sympathy are deserted by the pleasurable emotions, \u2013 to reach those limits, yet never to pass them, hic labor, hic opus est.\" and \"The horrible and the preternatural have usually seized on the popular taste, at the rise and decline of literature. Most powerful stimulants, they can never be required except by the torpor of an unawakened, or the languor of an exhausted, appetite...We trust, however, that satiety will banish what good sense should have prevented; and that, wearied with fiends, incomprehensible characters, with shrieks, murders, and subterraneous dungeons, the public will learn, by the multitude of the manufacturers, with how little expense of thought or imagination this species of composition is manufactured.\"\nHowever, Coleridge used these elements in poems such as \"The Rime of the Ancient Mariner\" (1798), \"Christabel\" and \"Kubla Khan\" (published in 1816, but known in manuscript form before then) and certainly influenced other poets and writers of the time. Poems like these both drew inspiration from and helped to inflame the craze for Gothic romance. Coleridge also made considerable use of Gothic elements in his commercially successful play \"Remorse\".\nMary Shelley, who knew Coleridge well, mentions \"The Rime of the Ancient Mariner\" twice directly in \"Frankenstein\", and some of the descriptions in the novel echo it indirectly. Although William Godwin, her father, disagreed with Coleridge on some important issues, he respected his opinions and Coleridge often visited the Godwins. Mary Shelley later recalled hiding behind the sofa and hearing his voice chanting \"The Rime of the Ancient Mariner\".\nC. S. Lewis also makes mention of his name in \"The Screwtape Letters\" (as a poor example of prayer, in which the devils should encourage).\nReligious beliefs.\nHis father was an Anglican vicar; although Coleridge worked as a Unitarian preacher from 1796 to 1797, he eventually returned to the Church of England in 1814. His most noteworthy writings on religion are \"Lay Sermons\" (1817), \"Aids to Reflection\" (1825) and \"The Constitution of Church and State\" (1830).\nTheological legacy.\nDespite being mostly remembered today for his poetry and literary criticism, Coleridge was also a theologian. His writings include discussions of the status of scripture, the doctrines of the Fall, justification and sanctification, and the personality and infinity of God. A major figure in the Anglican theology of his day, his writings are still regularly referred to by contemporary Anglican theologians. F. D. Maurice, F. J. A. Hort, F. W. Robertson, B. F. Westcott, John Oman and Thomas Erskine (once called the \"Scottish Coleridge\") were all influenced by him.\nPolitical thinking.\nColeridge was also a political thinker. Early in life he was a political radical, and an enthusiast for the French Revolution. However, he subsequently developed a more conservative view of society, somewhat in the manner of Edmund Burke. He was critical of the French Constitution of 1799, adopted following the Coup of 18 Brumaire, which he regarded as oligarchic.\nAlthough seen as cowardly treachery by the next generation of Romantic poets, Coleridge's later thought became a fruitful source for the evolving radicalism of J. S. Mill. Mill found three aspects of Coleridge's thought especially illuminating:\nColeridge also rejected the ideas of Adam Smith and Thomas Malthus.\nCollected works.\nThe current standard edition is \"The Collected Works of Samuel Taylor Coleridge,\" edited by Kathleen Coburn and many others from 1969 to 2002. This collection appeared across 16 volumes as Bollingen Series 75, published variously by Princeton University Press and Routledge &amp; Kegan Paul. The set is broken down as follows into further parts, resulting in a total of 34 separate printed volumes:\nIn addition, Coleridge's letters are available in: \"The Collected Letters of Samuel Taylor Coleridge\" (1956\u201371), ed. Earl Leslie Griggs, 6 vols. (Oxford: Clarendon Press).\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "29409", "revid": "38557371", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29409", "title": "Spica", "text": "Star in the constellation Virgo\n&lt;/td&gt;\n! style=\"text-align: center; background-color: #FFFFC0;\" colspan=\"2\" | Observation dataEpoch J2000\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0Equinox J2000\n! style=\"text-align:left\" | Constellation\n! style=\"text-align:left\" | \n! style=\"text-align:left\" | Right ascension\n! style=\"text-align:left\" | Declination\n! style=\"text-align:left\" | Apparent\u00a0magnitude\u00a0(V)\n! style=\"background-color: #FFFFC0; text-align: center;\" colspan=\"2\"| Characteristics\n! style=\"text-align:left\" | Spectral\u00a0type\n! style=\"text-align:left\" | U\u2212B \n! style=\"text-align:left\" | B\u2212V \n! style=\"text-align:left\" | Variable\u00a0type\n&lt;/th&gt;&lt;/tr&gt;\n&lt;/th&gt;&lt;/tr&gt;\nSpica is the brightest object in the constellation of Virgo and one of the 20 brightest stars in the night sky. It has the Bayer designation \u03b1 Virginis, which is Latinised to Alpha Virginis and abbreviated Alpha Vir or \u03b1 Vir. Analysis of its parallax shows that it is located 250\u00b110 light-years from the Sun. It is a spectroscopic binary star and rotating ellipsoidal variable; a system whose two stars are so close together they are egg-shaped rather than spherical, and can only be separated by their spectra. The primary is a blue giant and a variable star of the Beta Cephei type.\nSpica, along with Arcturus and Denebola\u2014or Regulus, depending on the source\u2014forms the Spring Triangle asterism, and, by extension, is also part of the Great Diamond together with the star Cor Caroli.\nNomenclature.\nThe star's name is derived from the Latin \"sp\u012bca virginis\" \"the virgin's ear of [wheat] grain\". It was also anglicized as \"Virgin's Spike\". In 2016, the International Astronomical Union organized a Working Group on Star Names (WGSN) to catalog and standardize proper names for stars. The WGSN's first bulletin of July 2016 included a table of the first two batches of names approved by the WGSN; which included \"Spica\" for this star. It is now so entered in the IAU Catalog of Star Names.\n\"\u03b1 Virginis\" (Latinised to \"Alpha Virginis\") is the system's Bayer designation.\nIn the Sumerian Starlist found in Uruk (Iraq), 3200-1500 BC, Spica (or a group of stars in Virgo) is called absinnu or \u0161er'u \ud808\udc0a\ud808\ude46, \"The Seed-Furrow\".\nOther traditional names are \"Azimech\" , from Arabic \u0627\u0644\u0633\u0645\u0627\u0643 \u0627\u0644\u0623\u0639\u0632\u0644 \"al-sim\u0101k al-\u02bca\u02bdzal\" 'the unarmed \"sim\u0101k\" (of unknown meaning, cf. Eta Bo\u00f6tis); \"Alaraph\", Arabic for 'the grape-gatherer' or 'gleaner', and \"Sumbalet\" (\"Sombalet\", \"Sembalet\" and variants), from Arabic \u0633\u0646\u0628\u0644\u0629 \"sunbulah\" \"ear of grain\".\nIn Chinese, (), meaning \"Horn (asterism)\", refers to an asterism consisting of Spica and \u03b6 Virginis. Consequently, the Chinese name for Spica is (, ).\nIn Hindu astronomy, Spica corresponds to the Nakshatra \"Chitr\u0101\".\nObservational history.\nAs one of the nearest massive binary star systems to the Sun, Spica has been the subject of many observational studies.\nSpica is believed to be the star that gave Hipparchus the data that led him to discover the precession of the equinoxes. A temple to Menat (an early Hathor) at Thebes was oriented with reference to Spica when it was built in 3200 BC, and, over time, precession slowly but noticeably changed Spica's location relative to the temple. Nicolaus Copernicus made many observations of Spica with his home-made triquetrum for his researches on precession.\nObservation.\nSpica is 2.06 degrees from the ecliptic and can be occulted by the Moon and sometimes by planets. The last planetary occultation of Spica occurred when Venus passed in front of the star (as seen from Earth) on November 10, 1783. The next occultation will occur on September 2, 2197, when Venus again passes in front of Spica. The Sun passes a little more than 2\u00b0 north of Spica around October 16 every year, and the star's heliacal rising occurs about two weeks later. Every 8 years, Venus passes Spica around the time of the star's heliacal rising, as in 2009 when it passed 3.5\u00b0 north of the star on November 3.\nA method of finding Spica is to follow the arc of the handle of the Big Dipper (or Plough) to Arcturus, and then continue on the same angular distance to Spica. This can be recalled by the mnemonic phrase, \"arc to Arcturus and spike to Spica.\"\nStars that can set (not in a circumpolar constellation for the viewer) culminate at midnight\u2014noticeable where viewed away from any polar region experiencing midnight sun\u2014when at opposition, meaning they can be viewed from dusk until dawn. This applies to \u03b1 Virginis on 12 April, in the current astronomical epoch.\nPhysical properties.\nSpica is a close binary star whose components orbit each other every four days. They stay close enough together that they cannot be resolved as two stars through a telescope. The changes in the orbital motion of this pair results in a Doppler shift in the absorption lines of their respective spectra, making them a double-lined spectroscopic binary. Initially, the orbital parameters for this system were inferred using spectroscopic measurements. Between 1966 and 1970, the Narrabri Stellar Intensity Interferometer was used to observe the pair and to directly measure the orbital characteristics and the angular diameter of the primary, which was found to be (0.90 \u00b1 0.04) \u00d7 10\u22123 arcseconds, and the angular size of the semi-major axis of the orbit was found to be only slightly larger at (1.54 \u00b1 0.05) \u00d7 10\u22123 arcseconds.\nSpica is a rotating ellipsoidal variable, which is a non-eclipsing close binary star system where the stars are mutually distorted through their gravitational interaction. This effect causes the apparent magnitude of the star system to vary by 0.03 over an interval that matches the orbital period. This slight dip in magnitude is barely noticeable visually. Both stars rotate faster than their mutual orbital period. This lack of synchronization and the high ellipticity of their orbit may indicate that this is a young star system. Over time, the mutual tidal interaction of the pair may lead to rotational synchronization and orbit circularization.\nSpica is a polarimetric variable, first discovered to be such in 2016. The majority of the polarimetric signal is the result of the reflection of the light from one star off the other (and vice versa). The two stars in Spica were the first ever to have their reflectivity (or geometric albedo) measured. The geometric albedos of Spica A and B are, respectively, 3.61 percent and 1.36 percent, values that are low compared to planets.\nThe MK spectral classification of Spica is typically considered to be an early B-type main-sequence star. Individual spectral types for the two components are difficult to assign accurately, especially for the secondary due to the Struve\u2013Sahade effect. The Bright Star Catalogue listed a spectral class of B1III-IV for the primary and B2V for the secondary, but later studies have given various different values.\nThe primary star has a stellar classification of B1III-IV. The luminosity class matches the spectrum of a star that is midway between a subgiant and a giant star, and it is no longer a main-sequence star. The evolutionary stage has been calculated to be near or slightly past the end of the main-sequence phase. This is a massive star with more than 10 times the mass of the Sun and seven times its radius. The bolometric luminosity of the primary is about 20,500 times that of the Sun, and nine times the luminosity of its companion. The primary is one of the nearest stars to the Sun that has enough mass to end its life in a Type II supernova explosion. Since Spica has only recently left the main sequence, this event is not likely to occur for several more million years.\nThe primary is classified as a Beta Cephei variable star that varies in brightness over a 0.1738-day period. The spectrum shows a radial velocity variation with the same period, indicating that the surface of the star is regularly pulsating outward and then contracting. This star is rotating rapidly, with a rotational velocity of 199\u00a0km/s along the equator.\nThe secondary member of this system is one of the few stars whose spectrum is affected by the Struve\u2013Sahade effect. This is an anomalous change in the strength of the spectral lines over the course of an orbit, where the lines become weaker as the star is moving away from the observer. It may be caused by a strong stellar wind from the primary scattering the light from secondary when it is receding. This star is smaller than the primary, with about 4 times the mass of the Sun and 3.6 times the Sun's radius. Its stellar classification is B4-7\u00a0V, making this a main-sequence star.\nIn culture.\nBoth a rocket and crew capsule designed and under development by Copenhagen Suborbitals, a crowd-funded space program, is named Spica. Spica aims to make Denmark the first country to launch its own astronaut to space after Russia, the US and China.\nSpica is one of the Behenian fixed stars. In his \"Three Books of Occult Philosophy\", Cornelius Agrippa attributes Spica's kabbalistic symbol to Hermes Trismegistus..\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "29410", "revid": "9796402", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29410", "title": "Sir Swamphole McDuck", "text": ""}
{"id": "29411", "revid": "9796402", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29411", "title": "Sir Roast McDuck", "text": ""}
{"id": "29412", "revid": "8066546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29412", "title": "Skybolt missile", "text": ""}
{"id": "29413", "revid": "9796402", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29413", "title": "Sir Stuft McDuck", "text": ""}
{"id": "29414", "revid": "18474721", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29414", "title": "Stuart Little", "text": "1945 children's novel by E.B. White\nStuart Little is a 1945 American children's novel by E. B. White. It was White's first children's book, and became recognized as a classic in children's literature. \"Stuart Little\" was illustrated by the artist Garth Williams, also his first work for children.\nThe book is a realistic yet fantastical story about a boy named Stuart Little. According to the first chapter, he looked very much like a mouse in every way.\nBackground.\nMichael Sims, author of \"The Story of Charlotte's Web,\" wrote that Stuart \"arrived in [White's] mind in a direct shipment from the subconscious.\"(p145) In a letter White wrote in response to inquiries from readers, he described how he came to conceive of \"Stuart Little:\" \"Many years ago, I went to bed one night in a railway sleeping car, and during the night I dreamed about a tiny boy who acted rather like a rat. That's how the story of \"Stuart Little\" got started\". White had that dream in the spring of 1926, while sleeping on a train on his way back to New York from a visit to the Shenandoah Valley.(p145) \nWhite typed up a few stories about Stuart, which he told to his 18\u00a0nieces and nephews when they asked him to tell them a story.\nIn 1935, White's wife Katharine showed these stories to Clarence Day, then a regular contributor to \"The New Yorker\". Day liked the stories and encouraged White not to neglect them, but neither Oxford University Press nor Viking Press was interested in the stories,(p254) and White did not immediately develop them further.(p146)\nIn the fall of 1938, as his wife wrote her annual collection of children's book reviews for \"The New Yorker\", White wrote a few paragraphs in his \"One Man's Meat\" column in \"Harper's Magazine\" about writing children's books.(p254) Anne Carroll Moore, the head children's librarian at the New York Public Library, read this column and responded by encouraging him to write a children's book that would \"make the library lions roar\".(p254)\nWhite's editor at Harper, who had heard about the Stuart stories from Katherine, asked to see them, and by March\u00a01939 was intent on publishing them. Around that time, White wrote to James Thurber that he was \"about half done\" with the book; however, he did not finish it until the winter of 1944\u20131945.(p255)\nPlot.\nA white mouse looking boy named Stuart is born to an ordinary family in New York City. He is normal in every way except that he is only just over tall and looks exactly like a mouse, despite being a human child. At first, the family is concerned with how Stuart will survive in a human-sized world, but by the age of seven, he speaks, thinks, and behaves on the level of a human of sixteen and shows surprising ingenuity in adapting, performing such helpful family tasks as fishing his mother's wedding ring from a sink drain. The family's white Persian cat, Snowbell, dislikes Stuart because while he feels a natural instinct to chase him, he is aware that Stuart is a human family member and is thus off-limits.\nOn a cold winter's day, the family discovers a yellow canary named Margalo half-frozen on their doorstep. Margalo is taken in and spends the winter in the family home, where she befriends Stuart; Stuart in turn protects her from Snowbell. The bird repays his kindness by saving Stuart when he is trapped in a garbage barge and shipped out to sea for disposal. In the spring, when she is set free from the house, she continues to visit Stuart, much to Snowbell's annoyance, who now finds himself with two small animals he is not allowed to eat.\nSnowbell makes a deal with the Angora cat to eat Margalo to get rid of one of his temptations (reasoning that it's only wrong if he eats her). Margalo is warned and flees in the middle of the night. Stuart is heartbroken but becomes determined to find her. He first goes to the local dentist, Dr. Carey. The dentist's patient, Edward Clydesdale, suggests that Margalo may have flown to Connecticut, and Dr. Carey loans Stuart his miniature car for the long journey.\nStuart travels from adventure to adventure and finds himself in the town of Ames Crossing, where he takes work as a substitute teacher. There he learns that living in Ames Crossing is a fifteen-year-old girl named Harriet Ames who is the same size as Stuart but looks like a human being. Stuart purchases a miniature souvenir canoe, prepping it to make it comfortable and waterproof, and invites Harriet out on a boating date. However, when the two arrive for the date, the canoe has been discovered and played with by local children, who have ruined it. Harriet tries to be polite but is put off by Stuart's sulking over his broken boat. Stuart decides to leave Ames Crossing and continue on his quest to find Margalo. He sets off once more in his car, continuing on his mission of exploring the world and finding his friend.\nReception.\nLucien Agosta, in his overview of the critical reception of the book, notes that \"Critical reactions to \"Stuart Little\" have varied from disapprobation to unqualified admiration since the book was published in 1945, though generally it has been well received.\"(p59) Anne Carroll Moore, who had initially encouraged White to write the book, was critical of it when she read a proof of it. She wrote letters to White, his wife Katharine, and \"Harper's\" children's editor Ursula Nordstrom, advising that the book not be published.\nA 1945 book reviewer wrote, \"Mr.\u00a0White has a tendency to write amusing scenes instead of telling a story. To say that \"Stuart Little\" is one of the best children\u2019s books published this year is very modest praise for a writer of his talent.\"\nThe book has become a children's classic, and is widely read by children and used by teachers.\nWhite was awarded the Laura Ingalls Wilder Medal in 1970 for \"Stuart Little\" and \"Charlotte's Web\".\nAdaptations.\nAudio.\nActress Julie Harris narrated an unabridged adaptation on LP in two volumes for Pathways of Sound (POS\u00a01036 and 1037). The complete recording was later released on audio cassette by Bantam Audio and on CD by Listening Library.\nFilms.\nThe book was very loosely adapted into a 1999 film of the same name, which combines live-action with computer animation. In the film, Stuart is an anthropomorphic mouse instead of a mouse-like boy, he is adopted instead of being born into the Little family. Margalo is absent, with the plot instead focusing on Stuart's search for his real parents, later revealed to have died years ago, and Snowbell's attempt to get rid of him. The 2002 sequel \"Stuart Little 2\" features Margalo and more closely follows the plot of the book, albeit with the inclusion of an evil falcon who holds Margalo captive. A third film, \"\" was released direct-to-video in 2006. This film is entirely computer-animated, with its plot not derived from the book. None of the film adaptations include the subplot of Stuart being a one-time substitute teacher in a schoolhouse, meeting Dr. Paul Carey, or encountering a girl his size named Harriet.\nAll three films feature Hugh Laurie as Mr.\u00a0Little, Geena Davis as Mrs.\u00a0Little, and Michael J. Fox as the voice of Stuart Little.\nIn 2015, it was announced that a remake of \"Stuart Little\" is in the works at Sony Pictures Entertainment and Red Wagon Entertainment. The movie will remain hybrid live-action\u202f/\u202fcomputer animation. Douglas Wick, the producer of the original films, will produce the remake.\nIn Blue Moon (2025 film), Lorenz Hart and E. B. White have an extended interaction at Sardi's bar. White, who is working alone on his writing, is recognized by Hart, to whom he reveals he's writing a first novel, for children. Later, Hart insists on telling White the story of a recurrent mouse in his 19th floor apartment who keeps coming back after Hart takes him daily to Central Park and releases him. White is taken enough with the story that he asks Hart if he had named the mouse. Hart reflects and comes up with Stuart. White, taking notes, asks 'Is that with a 'u' or a 'w'?\" and Hart says \"u.\" Et voil\u00e0, if that was comparably true to life with the bulk of the film's narrative about Hart, it would seem the famed but moribund lyricist was the source of the name \"Stuart\" for White's title character.\nTelevision.\n\"The World of Stuart Little\", a 1966 episode of NBC's \"Children's Theater\", narrated by Johnny Carson, won a Peabody Award and was nominated for an Emmy. An animated television series, \"Stuart Little: The Animated Series\" (based on the film adaptations) was produced for HBO Family and aired for 13\u00a0episodes in 2003.\nVideo games.\nFour video games based on the film adaptations have been produced. \"Stuart Little: Big City Adventures\", released for Microsoft Windows in 1999, is based on the 1999 film. \"\", which was released only for the Game Boy Color in 2001, is also based on the 1999 film. A game based on \"Stuart Little 2\" was released for the PlayStation, Game Boy Advance and Microsoft Windows in 2002. A fourth game, entitled \"Stuart Little 3: Big Photo Adventure\", was released exclusively for the PlayStation 2 in 2005.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "29415", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29415", "title": "Schizophrenic", "text": ""}
{"id": "29417", "revid": "234689", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29417", "title": "Statite", "text": "Hypothetical satellite which would use a solar sail to modify its orbit\nA statite (a portmanteau of the words \"static\" and \"satellite\") is a hypothetical type of artificial satellite that employs a solar sail to continuously modify its orbit in ways that gravity alone would not allow. Typically, a statite would use the solar sail to \"hover\" in a location that would not otherwise be available as a stable geosynchronous orbit. Statites have been proposed that would remain in fixed locations high over Earth's poles, using reflected sunlight to counteract the gravity pulling them down. Statites might also employ their sails to change the shape or velocity of more conventional orbits, depending upon the purpose of the particular statite.\nThe concept of the statite was invented independently and at about the same time by Robert L. Forward (who coined the term \"statite\") and Colin McInnes, who used the term \"halo orbit\" (not to be confused with the type of halo orbit discovered by Robert Farquhar). Subsequently, the terms \"non-Keplerian orbit\" and \"artificial Lagrange point\" have been used as a generalization of the above terms.\nNo statites have been deployed to date, as solar sail technology remains in its infancy. NASA's cancelled \"Sunjammer\" solar sail mission had the stated objective of flying to an artificial Lagrange point near the Earth/Sun L1 point, to demonstrate the feasibility of the Geostorm geomagnetic storm warning mission concept proposed by NOAA's Patricia Mulligan. A constellation of statites have been proposed for performing a rendezvous with an interstellar object.\nA so-called\"quasite\" is a variation of a statite, being slightly unbalanced to allow other forces to balance its position, though having a slow orbit. This is employed in the proposal by David Kipping for a so-called \"Torqued Accelerator using Radiation from the Sun\" (\"TARS\") slingshot accelerator, essentially being a light mill in space.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "29419", "revid": "44062", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29419", "title": "Stanford (disambiguation)", "text": "Stanford is a university in northern California, United States.\nStanford may also refer to: \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "29420", "revid": "765510", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29420", "title": "Solar sail", "text": "Space propulsion method using Sun radiation\nSolar sails (also known as lightsails, light sails, and photon sails) are a method of spacecraft propulsion using radiation pressure exerted by sunlight on large surfaces. A number of spaceflight missions to test solar propulsion and navigation have been proposed since the 1980s. The two spacecraft to successfully use the technology for propulsion were IKAROS, launched in 2010, and LightSail-2, launched in 2019.\nA useful analogy to solar sailing may be a sailing boat; the light exerting a force on the large surface is akin to a sail being blown by the wind. High-energy laser beams could be used as an alternative light source to exert much greater force than would be possible using sunlight, a concept known as beam sailing. Solar sail craft offer the possibility of low-cost operations combined with high speeds (relative to chemical rockets) and long operating lifetimes. Since they have few moving parts and use no propellant, they can potentially be used numerous times for the delivery of payloads.\nSolar sails use a phenomenon that has a proven, measured effect on astrodynamics. Solar pressure affects all spacecraft, whether in interplanetary space or in orbit around a planet or small body. A typical spacecraft going to Mars, for example, will be displaced thousands of kilometers by solar pressure, so the effects must be accounted for in trajectory planning, which has been done since the time of the earliest interplanetary spacecraft of the 1960s. Solar pressure also affects the orientation of a spacecraft, a factor that must be included in spacecraft design.\nThe total force exerted on an solar sail, for example, is about at Earth's distance from the Sun, making it a low-thrust propulsion system, similar to spacecraft propelled by electric engines, but as it uses no propellant, that force is exerted almost constantly and the collective effect over time is great enough to be considered a potential manner of propelling spacecraft.\nHistory of concept.\nJohannes Kepler observed that comet tails point away from the Sun and suggested that the Sun caused the effect. In a letter to Galileo in 1610, he wrote, \"Provide ships or sails adapted to the heavenly breezes, and there will be some who will brave even that void.\" He might have had the comet tail phenomenon in mind when he wrote those words, although his publications on comet tails came several years later.\nThe theory of electromagnetic fields and radiation, first published by James Clerk Maxwell in 1861\u20131864, shows that light has momentum and thus can exert pressure on objects. Maxwell's equations provide the theoretical foundation for sailing with light pressure. So by 1864, the physics community and beyond knew sunlight carried momentum that would exert a pressure on objects.\nJules Verne, in \"From the Earth to the Moon\", published in 1865, wrote \"there will some day appear velocities far greater than these [of the planets and the projectile], of which light or electricity will probably be the mechanical agent ... we shall one day travel to the moon, the planets, and the stars.\" This is possibly the first published recognition that light could move ships through space.\nPyotr Lebedev was first to successfully demonstrate light pressure, which he did in 1899 with a torsional balance; Ernest Nichols and Gordon Hull conducted a similar independent experiment in 1901 using a Nichols radiometer.\nSvante Arrhenius predicted in 1908 the possibility of solar radiation pressure distributing life spores across interstellar distances, providing one means to explain the concept of panspermia. He was apparently the first scientist to state that light could move objects between stars.\nKonstantin Tsiolkovsky first proposed using the pressure of sunlight to propel spacecraft through space in 1921 and suggested \"using tremendous mirrors of very thin sheets to utilize the pressure of sunlight to attain cosmic velocities\".\nFriedrich Zander (Tsander) published a technical paper in 1925 that included technical analysis of solar sailing. Zander wrote of \"applying small forces\" using \"light pressure or transmission of light energy to distances by means of very thin mirrors\".\nJBS Haldane speculated in 1927 about the invention of tubular spaceships that would take humanity to space and how \"wings of metallic foil of a square kilometre or more in area are spread out to catch the Sun's radiation pressure\".\nJ. D. Bernal wrote in 1929, \"A form of space sailing might be developed which used the repulsive effect of the Sun's rays instead of wind. A space vessel spreading its large, metallic wings, acres in extent, to the full, might be blown to the limit of Neptune's orbit. Then, to increase its speed, it would tack, close-hauled, down the gravitational field, spreading full sail again as it rushed past the Sun.\"\nArthur C. Clarke wrote \"Sunjammer\", a science fiction short story originally published in the March 1964 issue of \"Boys' Life\" depicting a yacht race between solar sail spacecraft. \nCarl Sagan, in the 1970s, popularized the idea of sailing on light using a giant structure which would reflect photons in one direction, creating momentum. He brought up his ideas in college lectures, books, and television shows. He was fixated on quickly launching this spacecraft in time to perform a rendezvous with Halley's Comet. Unfortunately, the mission didn't take place in time and he would never live to finally see it through.\nThe first formal technology and design effort for a solar sail began in 1976 at Jet Propulsion Laboratory for a proposed mission to rendezvous with Halley's Comet.\nTypes.\nReflective.\nMost solar sails are based on reflection. The surface of the sail is highly reflective, like a mirror, and light reflecting off of the surface imparts a force.\nDiffractive.\nIn 2018, diffraction was proposed as a different solar sail propulsion mechanism, which is claimed to have several advantages.\nAlternatives.\nElectric solar wind.\nPekka Janhunen from FMI has proposed a type of solar sail called the electric solar wind sail. Mechanically it has little in common with the traditional solar sail design. The sails are replaced with straightened conducting tethers (wires) placed radially around the host ship. The wires are electrically charged to create an electric field around the wires. The electric field extends a few tens of metres into the plasma of the surrounding solar wind. The solar electrons are reflected by the electric field (like the photons on a traditional solar sail). The radius of the sail is from the electric field rather than the actual wire itself, making the sail lighter. The craft can also be steered by regulating the electric charge of the wires. A practical electric sail would have 50\u2013100 straightened wires with a length of about 20\u00a0km each.\nElectric solar wind sails can adjust their electrostatic fields and sail attitudes.\nMagnetic.\nA magnetic sail would also employ the solar wind. However, the magnetic field deflects the electrically charged particles in the wind. It uses wire loops, and runs a static current through them instead of applying a static voltage.\nAll these designs maneuver, though the mechanisms are different.\nMagnetic sails bend the path of the charged protons that are in the solar wind. By changing the sails' attitudes, and the size of the magnetic fields, they can change the amount and direction of the thrust.\nPhysical principles for reflective sails.\nSolar radiation pressure.\nThe force imparted to a solar sail arises from the momentum of photons. The momentum of a photon or an entire flux is given by Einstein's relation:\nformula_1\nwhere p is the momentum, E is the energy (of the photon or flux), and c is the speed of light. Specifically, the momentum of a photon depends on its wavelength \"p\" \n \"h/\u03bb\"\nSolar radiation pressure can be related to the irradiance (solar constant) value of 1361\u00a0W/m2 at 1\u00a0AU (Earth-Sun distance), as revised in 2011:\nAn ideal sail is flat and has 100% specular reflection. An actual sail will have an overall efficiency of about 90%, about 8.17\u00a0\u03bcN/m2, due to curvature (billow), wrinkles, absorbance, re-radiation from front and back, non-specular effects, and other factors.\nThe force on a sail and the actual acceleration of the craft vary by the inverse square of distance from the Sun (unless extremely close to the Sun), and by the square of the cosine of the angle between the sail force vector and the radial from the Sun, so\nformula_2 (for an ideal sail)\nwhere R is distance from the Sun in AU. An actual square sail can be modelled as:\nformula_3\nNote that the force and acceleration approach zero generally around \u03b8 = 60\u00b0 rather than 90\u00b0 as one might expect with an ideal sail.\nIf some of the energy is absorbed, the absorbed energy will heat the sail, which re-radiates that energy from the front and rear surfaces, depending on the emissivity of those two surfaces.\nSolar wind, the flux of charged particles blown out from the Sun, exerts a nominal dynamic pressure of about 3 to 4 nPa, three orders of magnitude less than solar radiation pressure on a reflective sail.\nSail parameters.\nSail loading (areal density) is an important parameter, which is the total mass divided by the sail area, expressed in g/m2. It is represented by the Greek letter \u03c3 (sigma).\nA sail craft has a characteristic acceleration, ac, which it would experience at 1\u00a0AU when facing the Sun. Note this value accounts for both the incident and reflected momentums. Using the value from above of 9.08 \u03bcN per square metre of radiation pressure at 1 AU, ac is related to areal density by:\nac = 9.08(efficiency) / \u03c3 mm/s2\nAssuming 90% efficiency, ac = 8.17 / \u03c3 mm/s2\nThe lightness number, \u03bb, is the dimensionless ratio of maximum vehicle acceleration divided by the Sun's local gravity. Using the values at 1\u00a0AU:\n\u03bb = ac / 5.93\nThe lightness number is also independent of distance from the Sun because both gravity and light pressure fall off as the inverse square of the distance from the Sun. Therefore, this number defines the types of orbit maneuvers that are possible for a given vessel.\nThe table presents some example values. Payloads are not included. The first two are from the detailed design effort at JPL in the 1970s. The third, the lattice sailer, might represent about the best possible performance level. The dimensions for square and lattice sails are edges. The dimension for heliogyro is blade tip to blade tip.\nAttitude control.\nAn active attitude control system (ACS) is essential for a sail craft to achieve and maintain a desired orientation. The required sail orientation changes slowly (often less than 1 degree per day) in interplanetary space, but much more rapidly in a planetary orbit. The ACS must be capable of meeting these orientation requirements. Attitude control is achieved by a relative shift between the craft's center of pressure and its center of mass. This can be achieved with control vanes, movement of individual sails, movement of a control mass, or altering reflectivity.\nHolding a constant attitude requires that the ACS maintain a net torque of zero on the craft. The total force and torque on a sail, or set of sails, is not constant along a trajectory. The force changes with solar distance and sail angle, which changes the billow in the sail and deflects some elements of the supporting structure, resulting in changes in the sail force and torque.\nSail temperature also changes with solar distance and sail angle, which changes sail dimensions. The radiant heat from the sail changes the temperature of the supporting structure. Both factors affect total force and torque.\nTo hold the desired attitude the ACS must compensate for all of these changes.\nConstraints.\nIn Earth orbit, solar pressure and drag pressure are typically equal at an altitude of about 800\u00a0km, which means that a sail craft would have to operate above that altitude. Sail craft must operate in orbits where their turn rates are compatible with the orbits, which is generally a concern only for spinning disk configurations.\nSail operating temperatures are a function of solar distance, sail angle, reflectivity, and front and back emissivities. A sail can be used only where its temperature is kept within its material limits. Generally, a sail can be used rather close to the Sun, around 0.25\u00a0AU, or even closer if carefully designed for those conditions.\nApplications.\nPotential applications for sail craft range throughout the Solar System, from near the Sun to the comet clouds beyond Neptune. The craft can make outbound voyages to deliver loads or to take up station keeping at the destination. They can be used to haul cargo and possibly also used for human travel.\nInner planets.\nFor trips within the inner Solar System, they can deliver payloads and then return to Earth for subsequent voyages, operating as an interplanetary shuttle. For Mars in particular, the craft could provide economical means of routinely supplying operations on the planet. According to Jerome Wright, \"The cost of launching the necessary conventional propellants from Earth are enormous for manned missions. Use of sailing ships could potentially save more than $10 billion in mission costs.\"\nSolar sail craft can approach the Sun to deliver observation payloads or to take up station keeping orbits. They can operate at 0.25 AU or closer. They can reach high orbital inclinations, including polar.\nSolar sails can travel to and from all of the inner planets. Trips to Mercury and Venus are for rendezvous and orbit entry for the payload. Trips to Mars could be either for rendezvous or swing-by with release of the payload for aerodynamic braking.\nOuter planets.\nMinimum transfer times to the outer planets benefit from using an indirect transfer (solar swing-by). However, this method results in high arrival speeds. Slower transfers have lower arrival speeds.\nThe minimum transfer time to Jupiter for \"ac\" of 1\u00a0mm/s2 with no departure velocity relative to Earth is 2 years when using an indirect transfer (solar swing-by). The arrival speed (\"V\"\u221e) is close to 17\u00a0km/s. For Saturn, the minimum trip time is 3.3 years, with an arrival speed of nearly 19\u00a0km/s.\nOort Cloud/Sun's inner gravity focus.\nThe Sun's inner gravitational focus point lies at minimum distance of 550 AU from the Sun, and is the point to which light from distant objects is focused by gravity as a result of it passing by the Sun. This is thus the distant point to which solar gravity will cause the region of deep space on the other side of the Sun to be focused, thus serving effectively as a very large telescope objective lens.\nIt has been proposed that an inflated sail, made of beryllium, that starts at 0.05 AU from the Sun would gain an initial acceleration of 36.4\u00a0m/s2, and reach a speed of 0.00264c (about 950\u00a0km/s) in less than a day. Such proximity to the Sun could prove to be impractical in the near term due to the structural degradation of beryllium at high temperatures, diffusion of hydrogen at high temperatures as well as an electrostatic gradient, generated by the ionization of beryllium from the solar wind, posing a burst risk. A revised perihelion of 0.1 AU would reduce the aforementioned temperature and solar flux exposure.\nSuch a sail would take \"Two and a half years to reach the heliopause, six and a half years to reach the Sun\u2019s inner gravitational focus, with arrival at the inner Oort Cloud in no more than thirty years.\" \"Such a mission could perform useful astrophysical observations en route, explore gravitational focusing techniques, and image Oort Cloud objects while exploring particles and fields in that region that are of galactic rather than solar origin.\"\nSatellites.\nRobert L. Forward has commented that a solar sail could be used to modify the orbit of a satellite about the Earth. In the limit, a sail could be used to \"hover\" a satellite above one pole of the Earth. Spacecraft fitted with solar sails could also be placed in close orbits such that they are stationary with respect to either the Sun or the Earth, a type of satellite named by Forward a \"statite\". This is possible because the propulsion provided by the sail offsets the gravitational attraction of the Sun. Such an orbit could be useful for studying the properties of the Sun for long durations. Likewise a solar sail-equipped spacecraft could also remain on station nearly above the polar solar terminator of a planet such as the Earth by tilting the sail at the appropriate angle needed to counteract the planet's gravity.\nIn his book \"The Case for Mars\", Robert Zubrin points out that the reflected sunlight from a large statite, placed near the polar terminator of the planet Mars, could be focused on one of the Martian polar ice caps to significantly warm the planet's atmosphere. Such a statite could be made from asteroid material.\nA group of satellites designed to act as sails has been proposed to measure Earth's energy imbalance which is the most fundamental measure of the planet's rate of global warming. On-board state-of-the-art accelerometers would measure shifts in the pressure differential between incoming solar and outgoing thermal radiation on opposing sides of each satellite. Measurement accuracy has been projected to be better than that achievable with compact radiometric detectors.\nTrajectory corrections.\nThe MESSENGER probe orbiting Mercury used light pressure on its solar panels to perform fine trajectory corrections on the way to Mercury. By changing the angle of the solar panels relative to the Sun, the amount of solar radiation pressure was varied to adjust the spacecraft trajectory more delicately than possible with thrusters. Minor errors are greatly amplified by gravity assist maneuvers, so using radiation pressure to make very small corrections saved large amounts of propellant.\nInterstellar flight.\nIn the 1970s, Robert Forward proposed two beam-powered propulsion schemes using either lasers or masers to push giant sails to a significant fraction of the speed of light.\nIn the science fiction novel \"Rocheworld\", Forward described a light sail propelled by super lasers. As the starship neared its destination, the outer portion of the sail would detach. The outer sail would then refocus and reflect the lasers back onto a smaller, inner sail. This would provide braking thrust to stop the ship in the destination star system.\nBoth methods pose monumental engineering challenges. The lasers would have to operate for years continuously at gigawatt strength. Forward's solution to this requires enormous solar panel arrays to be built at or near the planet Mercury. A planet-sized mirror or Fresnel lens would need to be located at several dozen astronomical units from the Sun to keep the lasers focused on the sail. The giant braking sail would have to act as a precision mirror to focus the braking beam onto the inner \"deceleration\" sail.\nA potentially easier approach would be to use a maser to drive a \"solar sail\" composed of a mesh of wires with the same spacing as the wavelength of the microwaves directed at the sail, since the manipulation of microwave radiation is somewhat easier than the manipulation of visible light. The hypothetical \"Starwisp\" interstellar probe design would use microwaves, rather than visible light, to push it. Masers spread out more rapidly than optical lasers owing to their longer wavelength, and so would not have as great an effective range.\nMasers could also be used to power a painted solar sail, a conventional sail coated with a layer of chemicals designed to evaporate when struck by microwave radiation. The momentum generated by this evaporation could significantly increase the thrust generated by solar sails, as a form of lightweight ablative laser propulsion.\nTo further focus the energy on a distant solar sail, Forward proposed a lens designed as a large zone plate. This would be placed at a location between the laser or maser and the spacecraft.\nAnother more physically realistic approach would be to use the light from the Sun to accelerate the spacecraft. The ship would first drop into an orbit making a close pass to the Sun, to maximize the solar energy input on the sail, then it would begin to accelerate away from the system using the light from the Sun. Acceleration will drop approximately as the inverse square of the distance from the Sun, and beyond some distance, the ship would no longer receive enough light to accelerate it significantly, but would maintain the final velocity attained. When nearing the target star, the ship could turn its sails toward it and begin to use the outward pressure of the destination star to decelerate. Rockets could augment the solar thrust.\nSimilar solar sailing launch and capture were suggested for directed panspermia to expand life in other solar systems. Velocities of 0.05% the speed of light could be obtained by solar sails carrying 10\u00a0kg payloads, using thin solar sail vehicles with effective areal densities of 0.1\u00a0g/m2 with thin sails of 0.1\u00a0\u03bcm thickness and sizes on the order of one square kilometer. Alternatively, swarms of 1\u00a0mm capsules could be launched on solar sails with radii of 42\u00a0cm, each carrying 10,000 capsules of a hundred million extremophile microorganisms to seed life in diverse target environments.\nTheoretical studies suggest relativistic speeds if the solar sail harnesses a supernova.\nDeorbiting artificial satellites.\nSmall solar sails have been proposed to accelerate the deorbiting of small artificial satellites from Earth orbits. Satellites in low Earth orbit can use a combination of solar pressure on the sail and increased atmospheric drag to accelerate satellite reentry. A de-orbit sail developed at Cranfield University is part of the UK satellite TechDemoSat-1, launched in 2014. The sail deployed at the end of the satellite's five-year useful life in May 2019. The sail's purpose is to bring the satellite out of orbit over a period of about 25 years. In July 2015 British 3U CubeSat called DeorbitSail was launched into space with the purpose of testing 16 m2 deorbit structure, but eventually it failed to deploy it. A student 2U CubeSat mission called PW-Sat2, launched in December 2018 and tested a 4 m2 deorbit sail. It successfully deorbited in February 2021. In June 2017, a second British 3U CubeSat called InflateSail deployed a 10 m2 deorbit sail at an altitude of .\nIn June 2017 the 3U Cubesat URSAMAIOR has been launched in low Earth orbit to test the deorbiting system ARTICA developed by Spacemind. The device, which occupies only 0.4 U of the cubesat, shall deploy a sail of 2.1 m2 to deorbit the satellite at the end of the operational life.\nSail configurations.\nIKAROS, launched in 2010, was the first practical solar sail vehicle. As of 2015, it was still under thrust, proving the practicality of a solar sail for long-duration missions. It is spin-deployed, with tip-masses in the corners of its square sail. The sail is made of thin polyimide film, coated with evaporated aluminium. It steers with electrically controlled liquid crystal panels. The sail slowly spins, and these panels turn on and off to control the attitude of the vehicle. When on, they diffuse light, reducing the momentum transfer to that part of the sail. When off, the sail reflects more light, transferring more momentum. In that way, they turn the sail. Thin-film solar cells are also integrated into the sail, powering the spacecraft. The design is very reliable, because spin deployment, which is preferable for large sails, simplified the mechanisms to unfold the sail and the LCD panels have no moving parts.\nParachutes have very low mass, but a parachute is not a workable configuration for a solar sail. Analysis shows that a parachute configuration would collapse from the forces exerted by shroud lines, since radiation pressure does not behave like aerodynamic pressure, and would not act to keep the parachute open.\nThe highest thrust-to-mass designs for ground-assembled deploy-able structures are square sails with the masts and guy lines on the dark side of the sail. Usually there are four masts that spread the corners of the sail, and a mast in the center to hold guy-wires. One of the largest advantages is that there are no hot spots in the rigging from wrinkling or bagging, and the sail protects the structure from the Sun. This form can, therefore, go close to the Sun for maximum thrust. Most designs steer with small moving sails on the ends of the spars.\nIn the 1970s JPL studied many rotating blade and ring sails for a mission to rendezvous with Halley's Comet. The intention was to stiffen the structures using angular momentum, eliminating the need for struts, and saving mass. In all cases, surprisingly large amounts of tensile strength were needed to cope with dynamic loads. Weaker sails would ripple or oscillate when the sail's attitude changed, and the oscillations would add and cause structural failure. The difference in the thrust-to-mass ratio between practical designs was almost nil, and the static designs were easier to control.\nJPL's reference design was called the \"heliogyro\". It had plastic-film blades deployed from rollers and held out by centrifugal forces as it rotated. The spacecraft's attitude and direction were to be completely controlled by changing the angle of the blades in various ways, similar to the cyclic and collective pitch of a helicopter. Although the design had no mass advantage over a square sail, it remained attractive because the method of deploying the sail was simpler than a strut-based design. The CubeSail (UltraSail) is an active project aiming to deploy a heliogyro sail.\nHeliogyro design is similar to the blades on a helicopter. The design is faster to manufacture due to lightweight centrifugal stiffening of sails. Also, they are highly efficient in cost and velocity because the blades are lightweight and long. Unlike the square and spinning disk designs, heliogyro is easier to deploy because the blades are compacted on a reel. The blades roll out when they are deploying after the ejection from the spacecraft. As the heliogyro travels through space the system spins around because of the centrifugal acceleration. Finally, payloads for the space flights are placed in the center of gravity to even out the distribution of weight to ensure stable flight.\nJPL also investigated \"ring sails\" (Spinning Disk Sail in the above diagram), panels attached to the edge of a rotating spacecraft. The panels would have slight gaps, about one to five percent of the total area. Lines would connect the edge of one sail to the other. Masses in the middles of these lines would pull the sails taut against the coning caused by the radiation pressure. JPL researchers said that this might be an attractive sail design for large crewed structures. The inner ring, in particular, might be made to have artificial gravity roughly equal to the gravity on the surface of Mars.\nA solar sail can serve a dual function as a high-gain antenna. Designs differ, but most modify the metalization pattern to create a holographic monochromatic lens or mirror in the radio frequencies of interest, including visible light.\nReflective sail making.\nMaterials.\nThe most common material in current designs is a thin layer of aluminum coating on a polymer (plastic) sheet, such as aluminized 2\u00a0\u03bcm Kapton film. The polymer provides mechanical support as well as flexibility, while the thin metal layer provides the reflectivity. Such material resists the heat of a pass close to the Sun and still remains reasonably strong. The aluminum reflecting film is on the Sun side. The sails of \"Cosmos 1\" were made of aluminized PET film (Mylar).\nEric Drexler developed a concept for a sail in which the polymer was removed. He proposed very high thrust-to-mass solar sails, and made prototypes of the sail material. His sail would use panels of thin aluminium film (30 to 100 nanometres thick) supported by a tensile structure. The sail would rotate and would have to be continually under thrust. He made and handled samples of the film in the laboratory, but the material was too delicate to survive folding, launch, and deployment. The design planned to rely on space-based production of the film panels, joining them to a deployable tension structure. Sails in this class would offer high area per unit mass and hence accelerations up to \"fifty times higher\" than designs based on deploy-able plastic films.\nThe material developed for the Drexler solar sail was a thin aluminium film with a baseline thickness of 0.1\u00a0\u03bcm, to be fabricated by vapor deposition in a space-based system. Drexler used a similar process to prepare films on the ground. As anticipated, these films demonstrated adequate strength and robustness for handling in the laboratory and for use in space, but not for folding, launch, and deployment.\nResearch by Geoffrey Landis in 1998\u20131999, funded by the NASA Institute for Advanced Concepts, showed that various materials such as alumina for laser lightsails and carbon fiber for microwave pushed lightsails were superior sail materials to the previously standard aluminium or Kapton films.\nIn 2000, Energy Science Laboratories developed a new carbon fiber material that might be useful for solar sails. The material is over 200 times thicker than conventional solar sail designs, but it is so porous that it has the same mass. The rigidity and durability of this material could make solar sails that are significantly sturdier than plastic films. The material could self-deploy and should withstand higher temperatures.\nThere has been some theoretical speculation about using molecular manufacturing techniques to create advanced, strong, hyper-light sail material, based on nanotube mesh weaves, where the weave \"spaces\" are less than half the wavelength of light impinging on the sail. While such materials have so far only been produced in laboratory conditions, and the means for manufacturing such material on an industrial scale are not yet available, such materials could mass less than 0.1\u00a0g/m2, making them lighter than any current sail material by a factor of at least 30. For comparison, 5 micrometre thick Mylar sail material mass 7\u00a0g/m2, aluminized Kapton films have a mass as much as 12\u00a0g/m2, and Energy Science Laboratories' new carbon fiber material masses 3\u00a0g/m2.\nThe least dense metal is lithium, about 5 times less dense than aluminium. Fresh, unoxidized surfaces are reflective. At a thickness of 20\u00a0nm, lithium has an area density of 0.011\u00a0g/m2. A high-performance sail could be made of lithium alone at 20\u00a0nm (no emission layer). It would have to be fabricated in space and not used to approach the Sun. In the limit, a sail craft might be constructed with a total areal density of around 0.02\u00a0g/m2, giving it a lightness number of 67 and ac of about 400\u00a0mm/s2. Magnesium and beryllium are also potential materials for high-performance sails. These 3 metals can be alloyed with each other and with aluminium.\nReflection and emissivity layers.\nAluminium is the common choice for the reflection layer. It typically has a thickness of at least 20\u00a0nm, with a reflectivity of 0.88 to 0.90. Chromium is a good choice for the emission layer on the face away from the Sun. It can readily provide emissivity values of 0.63 to 0.73 for thicknesses from 5 to 20\u00a0nm on plastic film. Usable emissivity values are empirical because thin-film effects dominate; bulk emissivity values do not hold up in these cases because material thickness is much thinner than the emitted wavelengths.\nFabrication.\nSails are fabricated on Earth on long tables where ribbons are unrolled and joined to create the sails. Sail material needed to have as little weight as possible because it would require the use of the shuttle to carry the craft into orbit. Thus, these sails are packed, launched, and unfurled in space.\nIn the future, fabrication could take place in orbit inside large frames that support the sail. This would result in lower mass sails and elimination of the risk of deployment failure.\nOperations.\nChanging orbits.\nSailing operations are simplest in interplanetary orbits, where altitude changes are done at low rates. For outward bound trajectories, the sail force vector is oriented forward of the Sun line, which increases orbital energy and angular momentum, resulting in the craft moving farther from the Sun. For inward trajectories, the sail force vector is oriented behind the Sun line, which decreases orbital energy and angular momentum, resulting in the craft moving in toward the Sun. It is worth noting that only the Sun's gravity pulls the craft toward the Sun\u2014there is no analog to a sailboat's tacking to windward. To change orbital inclination, the force vector is turned out of the plane of the velocity vector.\nIn orbits around planets or other bodies, the sail is oriented so that its force vector has a component along the velocity vector, either in the direction of motion for an outward spiral, or against the direction of motion for an inward spiral.\nTrajectory optimizations can often require intervals of reduced or zero thrust. This can be achieved by rolling the craft around the Sun line with the sail set at an appropriate angle to reduce or remove the thrust.\nSwing-by maneuvers.\nA close solar passage can be used to increase a craft's energy. The increased radiation pressure combines with the efficacy of being deep in the Sun's gravity well to substantially increase the energy for runs to the outer Solar System. The optimal approach to the Sun is done by increasing the orbital eccentricity while keeping the energy level as high as practical. The minimum approach distance is a function of sail angle, thermal properties of the sail and other structure, load effects on structure, and sail optical characteristics (reflectivity and emissivity). A close passage can result in substantial optical degradation. Required turn rates can increase substantially for a close passage. A sail craft arriving at a star can use a close passage to reduce energy, which also applies to a sail craft on a return trip from the outer Solar System.\nA lunar swing-by can have important benefits for trajectories leaving from or arriving at Earth. This can reduce trip times, especially in cases where the sail is heavily loaded. A swing-by can also be used to obtain favorable departure or arrival directions relative to Earth.\nA planetary swing-by could also be employed similar to what is done with coasting spacecraft, but good alignments might not exist due to the requirements for overall optimization of the trajectory.\nLaser powered.\nThe following table lists some example concepts using beamed laser propulsion as proposed by the physicist Robert L. Forward:\nProjects operating or completed.\nAttitude (orientation) control.\nBoth the Mariner 10 mission, which flew by the planets Mercury and Venus, and the MESSENGER mission to Mercury demonstrated the use of solar pressure as a method of attitude control in order to conserve attitude-control propellant.\nHayabusa also used solar pressure on its solar paddles as a method of attitude control to compensate for broken reaction wheels and chemical thruster.\nMTSAT-1R (Multi-Functional Transport Satellite)'s solar sail counteracts the torque produced by sunlight pressure on the solar array. The trim tab on the solar array makes small adjustments to the torque balance.\nGround deployment tests.\nNASA has successfully tested deployment technologies on small scale sails in vacuum chambers.\nIn 1999, a full-scale deployment of a solar sail was tested on the ground at DLR/ESA in Cologne.\nSuborbital tests.\nCosmos 1, a joint private project between Planetary Society, Cosmos Studios and Russian Academy of Science attempted to launch a suborbital prototype vehicle in 2005, which was destroyed due to a rocket failure.\nA 15-meter-diameter solar sail (SSP, solar sail sub payload, \"soraseiru sabupeiro-do\") was launched together with ASTRO-F on a M-V rocket on February 21, 2006, and made it to orbit. It deployed from the stage, but opened incompletely.\nOn August 9, 2004, the Japanese ISAS successfully deployed two prototype solar sails from a sounding rocket. A clover-shaped sail was deployed at 122\u00a0km altitude and a fan-shaped sail was deployed at 169\u00a0km altitude. Both sails used 7.5-micrometer film. The experiment purely tested the deployment mechanisms, not propulsion.\nZnamya 2.\nOn February 4, 1993, the Znamya 2, a 20-meter wide aluminized-mylar reflector, was successfully deployed from the Russian Mir space station. It was the first thin film reflector of such type successfully deployed in space using the mechanism based on centrifugal force. Although the deployment succeeded, propulsion was not demonstrated. A second test in 1999, Znamya 2.5, failed to deploy properly.\nIKAROS 2010.\nOn 21 May 2010, Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency (JAXA) launched the world's first interplanetary solar sail spacecraft \"IKAROS\" (Interplanetary Kite-craft Accelerated by Radiation Of the Sun) to Venus. Using a new solar-photon propulsion method, it was the first true solar sail spacecraft fully propelled by sunlight, and was the first spacecraft to succeed in solar sail flight.\nJAXA successfully tested IKAROS in 2010. The goal was to deploy and control the sail and, for the first time, to determine the minute orbit perturbations caused by light pressure. Orbit determination was done by the nearby AKATSUKI probe from which IKAROS detached after both had been brought into a transfer orbit to Venus. The total effect over the six month flight was 100\u00a0m/s.\nUntil 2010, no solar sails had been successfully used in space as primary propulsion systems. On 21 May 2010, the Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency (JAXA) launched the IKAROS spacecraft, which deployed a 200 m2 polyimide experimental solar sail on June 10.&lt;ref name=\"jaxa.jp/press/2010/06/20100611_ikaros_e\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; In July, the next phase for the demonstration of acceleration by radiation began. On 9 July 2010, it was verified that IKAROS collected radiation from the Sun and began photon acceleration by the orbit determination of IKAROS by range-and-range-rate (RARR) that is newly calculated in addition to the data of the relativization accelerating speed of IKAROS between IKAROS and the Earth that has been taken since before the Doppler effect was utilized.&lt;ref name=\"http://www.jaxa.jp/press/2010/07/20100709_ikaros_j.html\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; The data showed that IKAROS appears to have been solar-sailing since 3 June when it deployed the sail.\nIKAROS has a diagonal spinning square sail 14\u00d714 m (196 m2) made of a thick sheet of polyimide. The polyimide sheet had a mass of about 10 grams per square metre. A thin-film solar array is embedded in the sail. Eight LCD panels are embedded in the sail, whose reflectance can be adjusted for attitude control. IKAROS spent six months traveling to Venus, and then began a three-year journey to the far side of the Sun.\nNanoSail-D 2010.\nA team from the NASA Marshall Space Flight Center (Marshall), along with a team from the NASA Ames Research Center, developed a solar sail mission called NanoSail-D, which was lost in a launch failure aboard a Falcon 1 rocket on 3 August 2008. The second backup version, NanoSail-D2, also sometimes called simply NanoSail-D, was launched with FASTSAT on a Minotaur IV on November 19, 2010, becoming NASA's first solar sail deployed in low earth orbit. The objectives of the mission were to test sail deployment technologies, and to gather data about the use of solar sails as a simple, \"passive\" means of de-orbiting dead satellites and space debris. The NanoSail-D structure was made of aluminium and plastic, with the spacecraft massing less than . The sail has about of light-catching surface. After some initial problems with deployment, the solar sail was deployed and over the course of its 240-day mission reportedly produced a \"wealth of data\" concerning the use of solar sails as passive deorbit devices. \nNASA launched the second NanoSail-D unit stowed inside the FASTSAT satellite on the Minotaur IV on November 19, 2010. The ejection date from the FASTSAT microsatellite was planned for December 6, 2010, but deployment only occurred on January 20, 2011.\nPlanetary Society LightSail Projects.\nOn June 21, 2005, a joint private project between Planetary Society, Cosmos Studios and Russian Academy of Science launched a prototype sail \"Cosmos 1\" from a submarine in the Barents Sea, but the Volna rocket failed, and the spacecraft failed to reach orbit. They intended to use the sail to gradually raise the spacecraft to a higher Earth orbit over a mission duration of one month. The launch attempt sparked public interest according to Louis Friedman. Despite the failed launch attempt of Cosmos 1, The Planetary Society received applause for their efforts from the space community and sparked a rekindled interest in solar sail technology.\nOn Carl Sagan's 75th birthday (November 9, 2009) the Planetary Society announced plans to make three further attempts, dubbed LightSail-1, -2, and -3. The new design will use a 32 m2 Mylar sail, deployed in four triangular segments like NanoSail-D. The launch configuration is a 3U CubeSat format, and as of 2015, it was scheduled as a secondary payload for a 2016 launch on the first SpaceX Falcon Heavy launch.\n\"LightSail-1\" was launched on 20 May 2015. The purpose of the test was to allow a full checkout of the satellite's systems in advance of LightSail-2. Its deployment orbit was not high enough to escape Earth's atmospheric drag and demonstrate true solar sailing.\n\"LightSail-2\" was launched on 25 June 2019, and deployed into a much higher low Earth orbit. Its solar sails were deployed on 23 July 2019. It reentered the atmosphere on 17 November 2022. LightSail-2 successfully demonstrated propulsion by solar sail.\nNEA Scout.\nThe Near-Earth Asteroid Scout (NEA Scout) was a mission jointly developed by NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) and the Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL), consisting of a controllable low-cost CubeSat solar sail spacecraft capable of encountering near-Earth asteroids (NEA). Four booms were to deploy, unfurling the aluminized polyimide solar sail. In 2015, NASA announced it had selected NEA Scout to launch as one of several secondary payloads aboard Artemis 1, the first flight of the agency's heavy-lift SLS launch vehicle. However, the craft was considered lost with the failure to establish communications shortly after launch in 2022.\nAdvanced Composite Solar Sail System (ACS3).\nThe NASA Advanced Composite Solar Sail System (ACS3) is a technology demonstration of solar sail technology for future small spacecraft. It was selected in 2019 by NASA's CubeSat Launch Initiative (CSLI) to be launched as part of the ELaNa program.\nACS3 consists of a 12U (unit) CubeSat small satellite (23 cm x 23 cm x 34 cm; 16 kg) that unfolds a quadratic solar sail consisting of a polyethylene naphthalate film coated on one side with aluminum for reflectivity and on the other side with chromium to increase thermal emissivity. The sail is held by a novel unfolding system of four long carbon fiber reinforced polymer booms that roll-up for storage.\nACS3 was launched on 23\u00a0April 2024 on the Electron \"Beginning Of The Swarm\" mission. The ACS3 successfully made contact with ground stations following deployment in early May. The solar sail was confirmed as successfully operational by mission operators on 29\u00a0August 2024. \nOn 25\u00a0October 2024 it was reported \"... a bent support arm has made it (ACS3) lose direction and spin out of control in space.\"\nProjects proposed or cancelled or not selected.\nDespite the losses of \"Cosmos 1\" and NanoSail-D (about 23cm x 23cm x 34cm) which were due to failure of their launchers, scientists and engineers around the world remain encouraged and continue to work on solar sails. While most direct applications created so far intend to use the sails as inexpensive modes of cargo transport, some scientists are investigating the possibility of using solar sails as a means of transporting humans. This goal is strongly related to the management of very large (i.e. well above 1\u00a0km2) surfaces in space and the sail making advancements. Development of solar sails for crewed space flight is still in its infancy.\nSunjammer 2015.\nA technology demonstration sail craft, dubbed \"Sunjammer\", was in development with the intent to prove the viability and value of sailing technology. \"Sunjammer\" had a square sail, wide on each side, giving it an effective area of . It would have traveled from the Sun-Earth L1 Lagrangian point from Earth to a distance of . The demonstration was expected to launch on a Falcon 9 in January 2015. It would have been a secondary payload, released after the placement of the DSCOVR climate satellite at the L1 point. Citing a lack of confidence in the ability of its contractor L'Garde to deliver, the mission was cancelled by NASA in October 2014.\nOKEANOS.\nOKEANOS (Outsized Kite-craft for Exploration and Astronautics in the Outer Solar System) was a proposed mission concept by Japan's JAXA to Jupiter's Trojan asteroids using a hybrid solar sail for propulsion; the sail would have been covered with thin solar panels to power an ion engine. \"In-situ\" analysis of the collected samples would have been performed by either direct contact or using a lander carrying a high-resolution mass spectrometer. A lander and a sample-return to Earth were options under study. The OKEANOS Jupiter Trojan Asteroid Explorer was a finalist for Japan's ISAS' 2nd Large-class mission to be launched in the late 2020s. However, it was not selected.\n\"Solar Cruiser\".\nIn August 2019, NASA awarded the \"Solar Cruiser\" team $400,000 for nine-month mission concept studies. The spacecraft would have a solar sail and would orbit the Sun in a polar orbit, while the coronagraph instrument would enable simultaneous measurements of the Sun's magnetic field structure and velocity of coronal mass ejections. If selected for further development, it would have launched in 2025. However, \"Solar Cruiser\" was not approved to advance to phase C of its development cycle and was subsequently discontinued.\nProjects still in development or unknown status.\nGossamer deorbit sail.\n, the European Space Agency (ESA) has a proposed deorbit sail, named \"Gossamer\", that would be intended to be used to accelerate the deorbiting of small (less than ) artificial satellites from low Earth orbits. The launch mass is with a launch volume of only . Once deployed, the sail would expand to and would use a combination of solar pressure on the sail and increased atmospheric drag to accelerate satellite reentry.\nBreakthrough Starshot.\nThe well-funded Breakthrough Starshot project, announced in 2016, aimed to build 1000 light-sail nanocraft carrying miniature cameras, and propel them by ground-based lasers to Alpha Centauri at 20% the speed of light, a 20-year trip. In 2025, it was reported that there were no plans to continue the project.\nIn popular culture.\nCordwainer Smith gives a description of solar-sail-powered spaceships in \"The Lady Who Sailed The Soul\", published first in April 1960.\nJack Vance wrote a short story about a training mission on a solar-sail-powered spaceship in \"Sail 25\", published in 1961.\nArthur C. Clarke and Poul Anderson (writing as Winston P. Sanders) independently published stories featuring solar sails, both stories titled \"Sunjammer,\" in 1964. Clarke retitled his story \"The Wind from the Sun\" when it was reprinted, in order to avoid confusion.\nIn Larry Niven and Jerry Pournelle's 1974 novel \"The Mote in God's Eye\", aliens are discovered when their laser-sail propelled probe enters human space.\nA similar technology was the theme in the \" episode \". In the episode, Lightships are described as an ancient technology used by Bajorans to travel beyond their solar system by using light from the Bajoran sun and specially constructed sails to propel them through space ().\nIn the 2002 \"Star Wars\" film \"Attack of the Clones\", the main villain Count Dooku was seen using a spacecraft with solar sails.\nIn the 2002 animated movie \"Treasure Planet\", the ships in the movie use solar sails to propell themselves, although they appear to be thruster assisted and act more like sailing watercraft then spaceships.\nIn the 2009 film \"Avatar\", the spacecraft which transports the protagonist Jake Sully to the Alpha Centauri system, the \"ISV Venture Star\", uses solar sails as a means of propulsion to accelerate the vehicle away from the Earth towards Alpha Centauri.\nIn the third season of Apple TV+'s alternate history TV show \"For All Mankind\", the fictional NASA spaceship Sojourner 1 utilises solar sails for additional propulsion on its way to Mars.\nIn the 2022 show Pantheon, a solar sail is used to send the SafeSurf program to Alpha Centauri.\nIn the final episode of the first season of 2024 Netflix TV show, \"3 Body Problem\", one of the protagonists, Will Downing, has his cryogenically frozen brain launched into space toward the oncoming Trisolarian spaceship, using solar sails and nuclear pulse propulsion to accelerate it to a fraction of the speed of light.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "29421", "revid": "9796402", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29421", "title": "Sir Quackly McDuck", "text": ""}
{"id": "29422", "revid": "24198", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29422", "title": "Eider McDuck", "text": ""}
{"id": "29423", "revid": "8066546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29423", "title": "Second International Bahai Council", "text": ""}
{"id": "29425", "revid": "50510567", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29425", "title": "Sabellianism", "text": "Christian theological position\nIn Christian theology, Sabellianism is the belief that there is only one Person ('hypostasis' in the Greek language of the fourth century Arian Controversy) in the Godhead. For example, Hanson defines Sabellianism as the \"refusal to acknowledge the distinct existence of the Persons\" and \"Eustathius was condemned for Sabellianism. His insistence that there is only one distinct reality \"(hypostasis)\" in the Godhead, and his confusion about distinguishing Father, Son and Holy Spirit laid him open to such a charge.\" Condemned as heresy, Sabellianism has been rejected by the majority of Christian churches.\nMonarchianism.\nSabellianism appeared for the first time in the second century in the form of Monarchianism. While \"this movement called themselves 'Monarchians', the Greek Fathers called them 'Sabellians', as Sabellius was the person who has put this doctrine in its philosophical form.\" \nMonarchianism opposed the Logos-theology. As from the late second century, non-Jewish Christianity was dominated by Logos-theology which taught a two-stage existence for the Logos: He always existed inside God but became a separate Being \u2013 a distinct Reality \u2013 when God decided to create. Monarchians claimed \"that the theology of the Apologists involves a division in the being and unity of God that is unacceptable\" and that Logos-theology teaches two creators and two Gods (bi-theism), \"inconsistent with monotheism.\"\nIn Monarchianism, \"the Father and Son were different expressions of the same being, without any personal distinctions between them. In other words, the Father is himself the Son, and therefore experiences the Son\u2019s human frailties.\" \"In the words of Noetus: \u2026the Father\u2026 Himself became His own Son.\" \"It was therefore God who was born from a virgin and who confessed himself to humankind as the Son of God. At the cross, God commended his spirit to himself, as he acted to be dead, but he was not dead in reality, although he raised himself on the 3rd day.\" \nTertullian was one of the Logos theologians and strongly opposed Monarchianism. \"The treatise \"Against Praxeas\" is widely recognized as Tertullian's greatest work on the Trinity. The view apparently taught by Praxeas has come to be called 'modalism', thanks to that designation appearing in Adolf von Harnack's History of Dogma (1897). Tertullian simply calls his opponent a 'monarchian'.\" \n\"Adolph Von Harnack coined the term 'Modalism' for this 2nd-century doctrine, which referred to the Trinity as consisting of 'three modes or aspects of one divine existence'.\"\nFollowing Tertullian, \"The Latin Fathers... called them 'patripassians' because they have identified the Father and the Son to such an extent that they believed that it was the Father who suffered and died on the cross.\"\nSabellius.\nSabellianism is named after Sabellius (fl. c. 215), who taught a form of it in Rome in the 3rd century. None of his writings have survived, and all that is known about him comes from his opponents.\nMonarchianism had come to Sabellius via the teachings of Noetus and Praxeas. Noetus was excommunicated from the Church after being examined by council, and Praxeas is said to have recanted his modalistic views in writing, teaching again his former faith. Sabellius likewise was excommunicated by council in Alexandria, and after complaint of this was made to Rome, a second council then assembled in Rome and also ruled against Sabellianism.\nJohann Lorenz von Mosheim, German Lutheran theologian who founded the pragmatic school of church historians, argued that Sabellius described God as three in one sense but one in another. \"Sabellius held to the simple unity of the person and nature of God.\" However, the form of Sabellianism taught by Sabellius is not the same as Monarchianism. He did not believe that the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit are simply three names for the same Reality. He \"believed the distinction of Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, described in the Scriptures, to be a real distinction, and not a mere appellative or nominal one.\" He maintained that, just like a man is one person, but has a body, a soul, and a spirit, so God is one Person, yet in that Person, the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit can be discriminated.\nHippolytus of Rome knew Sabellius personally, writing how he and others had admonished Sabellius in \"Refutation of All Heresies\". He knew Sabellius opposed Trinitarian theology, yet he called Modal Monarchism the heresy of Noetus, not that of Sabellius.\nJesus Christ.\nIn (Modalistic) Monarchianism, Jesus Christ is God. In Dynamic Monarchianism, Jesus Christ is a mere man.\nHomoousios.\nIt has been reported that Sabellius used the Greek term \"homoousian\" (, 'same substance', 'consubstantial'), which is also used by the Nicene Creed. The term describes the relationship between Father and Son. Many who held with Athanasius were uneasy about the term. Their objection was that it was considered to be un-scriptural, suspicious, and \"of a Sabellian tendency.\" For Sabellius, this term means that the Father and Son were one essential person, operating as different manifestations or modes.\nOther Competing Views.\nSimonetti sees Arianism \"as an extreme reaction against a Sabellianism which was at the time rife in the East.\" Arianism advocated three hypostases. The Trinitarian view also presents three distinct persons within the Godhead, but while Arianism taught three distinct substances, the Trinity doctrine asserts that the three Persons exist in one substance.\nHistory and development.\nSabellianism was embraced by Christians in Cyrenaica, to whom Dionysius, Patriarch of Alexandria (who was instrumental in the excommunication of Sabellius in Alexandria), wrote letters arguing against this belief. Hippolytus wrote:\nSome others are secretly introducing another doctrine, who have become disciples of one Noetus, who was a native of Smyrna, (and) lived not very long ago. ... This person introduced a heresy from the tenets of Heraclitus. Now a certain man called Epigonus becomes his minister and pupil, and this person during his sojourn at Rome disseminated his godless opinion. But Cleomenes, who had become his disciple, an alien both in way of life and habits from the Church, was wont to corroborate the (Noetian) doctrine. | But in like manner, also, Noetus, being by birth a native of Smyrna ... introduced (among us) this heresy which originated from one Epigonus. It reached Rome, and was adopted by Cleomenes, and so has continued to this day among his successors. \nTertullian also perceived modalism as entering into the Church from without as a new idea, and opposing the doctrine which had been received through succession. After setting forth his understanding of the manner of faith which had been received by the Church, he then describes how the \"simple\" who always constitute the majority of believers are often startled at the idea that the One God exists in three and were opposed to his understanding of \"the rule of faith.\" Proponents of Tertullian argue that he described the \"simple\" as the majority, rather than those who opposed him as the majority. This is contended from Tertullian's argument that they were putting forth ideas of their own which had not been taught to them by their elders:\nWe, however, as we indeed always have done (and more especially since we have been better instructed by the Paraclete, who leads men indeed into all truth), believe that there is one only God, but under the following dispensation, or \u03bf\u1f30\u03ba\u03bf\u03bd\u03bf\u03bc\u03af\u03b1, as it is called, that this one only God has also a Son, His Word, who proceeded from Himself, by whom all things were made, and without whom nothing was made. Him we believe to have been sent by the Father into the Virgin, and to have been born of her\u2014being both Man and God, the Son of Man and the Son of God, and to have been called by the name of Jesus Christ; we believe Him to have suffered, died, and been buried, according to the Scriptures, and, after He had been raised again by the Father and taken back to heaven, to be sitting at the right hand of the Father, and that He will come to judge the quick and the dead; who sent also from heaven from the Father, according to His own promise, the Holy Ghost, the Paraclete, the sanctifier of the faith of those who believe in the Father, and in the Son, and in the Holy Ghost. That this rule of faith has come down to us from the beginning of the gospel, even before any of the older heretics, much more before Praxeas, a pretender of yesterday, will be apparent both from the lateness of date which marks all heresies, and also from the absolutely novel character of our new-fangled Praxeas. In this principle also we must henceforth find a presumption of equal force against all heresies whatsoever\u2014that whatever is first is true, whereas that is spurious which is later in date.\nThe simple, indeed, (I will not call them unwise and unlearned,) who always constitute the majority of believers, are startled at the dispensation (of the Three in One), on the ground that their very rule of faith withdraws them from the world\u2019s plurality of gods to the one only true God; not understanding that, although He is the one only God, He must yet be believed in with His own \u03bf\u1f30\u03ba\u03bf\u03bd\u03bf\u03bc\u03af\u03b1 . The numerical order and distribution of the Trinity they assume to be a division of the Unity; whereas the Unity which derives the Trinity out of its own self is so far from being destroyed, that it is actually supported by it. They are constantly throwing out against us that we are preachers of two gods and three gods, while they take to themselves pre-eminently the credit of being worshippers of the One God; just as if the Unity itself with irrational deductions did not produce heresy, and the Trinity rationally considered constitute the truth.\nAccording to modalism and Sabellianism, God is said to be only one person who reveals himself in different ways called \"modes\", \"faces\", \"aspects\", \"roles\" or \"masks\" (Greek \u03c0\u03c1\u03cc\u03c3\u03c9\u03c0\u03b1 \"prosopa\"; Latin \"personae\") of the One God, as perceived by \"the believer\", rather than \"three co-eternal persons\" within \"the Godhead\", or a \"co-equal Trinity\". Modalists note that the only number expressly and repeatedly ascribed to God in the Old Testament is \"One,\" do not accept interpreting this number as denoting union (i.e. Gen 2:24) when it is applied to God, and dispute the meaning or validity of related New Testament passages cited by Trinitarians. \nThe Comma Johanneum, which is generally regarded as a spurious text in First John (1 John 5:7) known primarily from the King James Version and some versions of the Textus Receptus, but not included in modern critical texts, is an instance (the only one expressly stated) of the word \"Three\" describing God. Many modalists point out the lack of the word \"Trinity\" in any canonical scripture.\nPassages such as Deut 6:4-5; Deut 32:12; 2Kings 19:15-19; Job 6:10; Job 31:13-15; Psalm 71:22; Psalm 83:16,18; Is 42:8; Is 45:5-7; Is 48:2,9,11-13; Mal 2:8,10; Matt 19:17; Romans 3:30; 2Cor 11:2-3; Gal 3:20; and Jude 1:25 are referenced by modalists as affirming that the Being of the One God is solidly single, and although known in several modes, precludes any concept of divine co-existence. Hippolytus described similar reasoning by Noetus and his followers saying: Now they seek to exhibit the foundation for their dogma by citing the word in the law, \"I am the God of your fathers: ye shall have no other gods beside me;\" and again in another passage, \"I am the first,\" He saith, \"and the last; and beside me there is none other.\" Thus they say they prove that God is one... And we cannot express ourselves otherwise, he says; for the apostle also acknowledges one God, when he says, \"Whose are the fathers, (and) of whom as concerning the flesh Christ came, who is over all, God blessed for ever.\"\nOneness Pentecostals, an identifier used by some modern modalists, claim that Colossians 1:12-20 refers to Christ's relationship with the Father in the sense of different roles of God:\ngiving thanks to the Father, who has qualified you to share in the inheritance of the saints in light. He has delivered us from the domain of darkness and transferred us to the kingdom of his beloved Son, in whom we have redemption, the forgiveness of sins. He is the image of the invisible God, the firstborn of all creation. For by him all things were created, in heaven and on earth, visible and invisible, whether thrones or dominions or rulers or authorities; all things were created through him and for him. And he is before all things, and in him all things hold together. And he is the head of the body, the church. He is the beginning, the firstborn from the dead, that in everything he might be preeminent. For in him all the fullness of God was pleased to dwell, and through him to reconcile to himself all things, whether on earth or in heaven, making peace by the blood of his cross.\nOneness Pentecostals also cite Christ's response to Philip's query on who the Father was in John 14:10 to support this assertion:\n Jesus answered: \"Don't you know me, Philip, even after I have been among you such a long time? Anyone who has seen me has seen the Father. How can you say, 'Show us the Father'?\nTrinitarian Christians hold that verses such as Colossians 1:12-20 remove all reasonable doubt that scripture teaches the Son, Who IS the Word of God (i.e. John 1:1-3), is literally \"living,\" and literally Creator of everything together with God the Father and the Spirit of God. In the Trinitarian view, the above usage not only takes John 14:10 out of its immediate context, but is also resolutely contrary to the congruence of the Gospel of John as a whole, and strongly suspected of begging the question in interpretation. Trinitarians understand John 14:10 as informed by parallel verses such as John 1:14 and John 1:18, and as affirming the eternal union of the Son with His Father:\n And the Word became flesh, and dwelt among us, and we saw His glory, glory as of the only begotten from the Father, full of grace and truth ... No one has seen God at any time; the only begotten God who is in the bosom of the Father, He has explained Him.\nMany doctrinal exchanges between modalists and Trinitarians are similar to the above. Passages such as Gen 1:26-27; Gen 16:11-13; Gen 32:24,30; Judg 6:11-16; Is 48:16; Zech 2:8-9; Matt 3:16-17; Mark 13:32; Luke 12:10; John 5:18-27; John 14:26-28; John 15:26; John 16:13-16; John 17:5,20-24; Acts 1:6-9; and Heb 1:1-3,8-10 are referenced by Trinitarians as affirming that the Being of the One God is an eternal, personal, and mutually indwelling communion of Father [God], Son [the Word of God], and Holy Spirit [the Spirit of God]. \nAddressing the fact that the word \"Trinity\" does not occur in scripture, Trinitarians attest that extra-biblical doctrinal language often summarizes our understanding scripture in a clear and concise manner\u2014other examples being even the words \"modalism\", \"mode\", and \"role\"\u2014and that use of such language does not of itself demonstrate accuracy or inaccuracy. The accusative implication that the word \"Trinity\" gained common use apart from careful and pious fidelity to scripture may be associated with ad hominem argumentation. Hippolytus described his own response to Noetus' doctrine, claiming the truth to be more evident than either of the two mutually opposed views of Arianism and Sabellianism : In this way, then, they choose to set forth these things, and they make use only of one class of passages; just in the same one-sided manner that Theodotus employed when he sought to prove that Christ was a mere man. But neither has the one party nor the other understood the matter rightly, as the Scriptures themselves confute their senselessness, and attest the truth. See, brethren, what a rash and audacious dogma they have introduced... For who will not say that there is one God? Yet he will not on that account deny the economy [i.e., the number and disposition of persons in the Trinity]. The proper way, therefore, to deal with the question is first of all to refute the interpretation put upon these passages by these men, and then to explain their real meaning.\nTertullian said of Praxeas' followers:For, confuted on all sides on the distinction between the Father and the Son, which we maintain without destroying their inseparable union ... they endeavour to interpret this distinction in a way which shall nevertheless tally with their own opinions: so that, all in one Person, they distinguish two, Father and Son, understanding the Son to be flesh, that is man, that is Jesus; and the Father to be spirit, that is God, that is Christ. Thus they, while contending that the Father and the Son are one and the same, do in fact begin by dividing them rather than uniting them.\u201d\nA comparison of the above statement by Tertullian with the following example statement made by Oneness Pentecostals today is striking: \"Jesus is the Son of God according to the flesh ... and the very God Himself according to the Spirit ...\"\nThe form of the Lord's Name appearing in verse nineteen of the Great Commission, Matthew 28:16-20, has also historically been spoken during Christian baptism, Trinitarian Christians believing the three distinct, albeit co-inherent, persons of the Holy Trinity received witness by Jesus' baptism. Many modalists do not use this form as the Lord's Name. It is also suggested by some modern Oneness Pentecostal critics, that Matthew 28:19 is not part of the original text, because Eusebius of Caesarea quoted it by saying \"In my name\", and in that source there was no mention of baptism in the verse. Eusebius quoted the \"trinitarian\" formula in his later writings. (Conybeare (\"Hibbert Journal\" i (1902-3), page 102). \nMatthew 28:19 is quoted also in the Didache (Didache 7:1), which dates to the late 1st Century or early 2nd Century) and in the Diatesseron (Diatesseron 55:5-7), which dates to the mid 2nd Century harmony of the Synoptic Gospels. The \"Shem-Tob's Hebrew Gospel of Matthew\" (George Howard), written during the 14th century, also has no reference of baptism or a \"trinitarian\" formula in Matthew 28:19. \nHowever, it is also true that no Greek manuscript of the Gospel of Matthew has ever been found which does not contain Matthew 28:19. The earliest extant copies of Matthew's Gospel date to the 3rd Century, and they contain Matthew 28:19. Therefore, scholars generally agree that Matthew 28:19 is likely part of the original Gospel of Matthew, though a minority disputes this.\nIn passages of scripture such as Matthew 3:16-17 where the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit are separated in the text and witness, modalists view this phenomenon as confirming God's omnipresence, and His ability to manifest himself as he pleases. Oneness Pentecostals and Modalists attempt to dispute the traditional doctrine of eternal co-existent union, while affirming the Christian doctrine of God taking on flesh as Jesus Christ. Like Trinitarians, Oneness adherents attest that Jesus Christ is fully God and fully man. However, Trinitarians believe that the \"Word of God,\" the eternal second Person of the Trinity, was manifest as the Son of God by taking humanity to Himself and by glorifying that Humanity to equality with God through His resurrection, in eternal union with His own Divinity. \nIn contrast, Oneness adherents hold that the One and Only true God\u2014Who manifests Himself in any way He chooses, including as Father, Son and Holy Spirit (though not choosing to do so in an eternally simultaneous manner)\u2014became man in the temporary role of Son. Many Oneness Pentecostals have also placed a strongly Nestorian distinction between Jesus' humanity and Divinity as in the example compared with Tertullian's statement above.\nOneness Pentecostals and other modalists are regarded by Roman Catholic, Greek Orthodox, and most other mainstream Christians as heretical for denying the literal existence of God's Beloved Son from Heaven, including His eternal Being; rejecting the direct succession of apostolic gifts and authority through the ordination of the Christian bishops; rejecting the identity of mainstream Christians as the God-begotten Body and Church which Christ founded; and rejecting the affirmations of the ecumenical councils such as the Councils of Nicaea and Constantinople, including the Holy Trinity. \nWhile many Unitarians are Arians, modalists differentiate themselves from Arian or Semi-Arian Unitarians by affirming Christ's full Godhead, whereas both the Arian and Semi-Arian views assert Christ as not of one substance (Greek: \u03bf\u1f50\u03c3\u03af\u03b1) with, and therefore also not equal with, God the Father. Dionysius, bishop of Rome, set forth the understanding of traditional Christianity concerning both Arianism and Sabellianism in \"Against the Sabellians\", ca. AD 262. He, in similarity to Hippolytus, explained that the two errors are at opposite extremes in seeking to understand the Son of God, Arianism misusing that the Son is distinct respecting the Father, and Sabellianism misusing that the Son is equal respecting the Father. He also repudiated the idea of three Gods as error. \nWhile Arianism and Sabellianism may appear to be diametrically opposed, the former claiming Christ to be created and the latter claiming Christ is God, both in common deny the Trinitarian belief that Christ is God Eternal in His Humanity, and that this is the very basis of man's hope of salvation. \"One, not by conversion of the Godhead into flesh, but by taking of the manhood into God.\"\nHippolytus' account of the excommunication of Noetus is as follows: When the blessed presbyters heard this, they summoned him before the Church, and examined him. But he denied at first that he held such opinions. Afterwards, however, taking shelter among some, and having gathered round him some others who had embraced the same error, he wished thereafter to uphold his dogma openly as correct. And the blessed presbyters called him again before them, and examined him. But he stood out against them, saying, \"What evil, then, am I doing in glorifying Christ?\" And the presbyters replied to him, \"We too know in truth one God; we know Christ; we know that the Son suffered even as He suffered, and died even as He died, and rose again on the third day, and is at the right hand of the Father, and cometh to judge the living and the dead. And these things which we have learned we allege.\" Then, after examining him, they expelled him from the Church. And he was carried to such a pitch of pride, that he established a school.\nToday's Oneness Pentecostal organisations left their original organization when a council of Pentecostal leaders officially adopted Trinitarianism, and have since established schools.\nEpiphanius (Haeres 62) about 375 notes that the adherents of Sabellius were still to be found in great numbers, both in Mesopotamia and at Rome. The First Council of Constantinople in 381 in canon VII and the Third Council of Constantinople in 680 in canon XCV declared the baptism of Sabellius to be invalid, which indicates that Sabellianism was still extant.\nPatripassianism.\nThe chief critics of Sabellianism were Tertullian and Hippolytus. In his work \"Adversus Praxeas\", Chapter I, Tertullian wrote \"By this Praxeas did a twofold service for the devil at Rome: he drove away prophecy, and he brought in heresy; he put to flight the Paraclete, and he crucified the Father.\" Likewise Hippolytus wrote,\nDo you see, he says, how the Scriptures proclaim one God? And as this is clearly exhibited, and these passages are testimonies to it, I am under necessity, he says, since one is acknowledged, to make this One the subject of suffering. For Christ was God, and suffered on account of us, being Himself the Father, that He might be able also to save us... See, brethren, what a rash and audacious dogma they have introduced, when they say without shame, the Father is Himself Christ, Himself the Son, Himself was born, Himself suffered, Himself raised Himself. But it is not so.\nFrom these notions came the pejorative term \"Patripassianism\" for the movement, from the Latin words \"pater\" for \"father\", and \"passus\" from the verb \"to suffer\" because it implied that the Father suffered on the Cross.\nIt is important to note that our only sources extant for our understanding of Sabellianism are from their detractors. Scholars today are not in agreement as to what exactly Sabellius or Praxeas taught. It is easy to suppose that Tertullian and Hippolytus at least at times misrepresented the opinions of their opponents.\nEastern Orthodox view.\nThe Greek Orthodox teach that God is not of a substance that is comprehensible since God the Father has no origin and is eternal and infinite. Thus it is improper to speak of things as \"physical\" and \"metaphysical\"; rather it is correct to speak of things as \"created\" and \"uncreated.\" God the Father is the origin and source of the Trinity of Whom the Son is begotten and the Spirit proceeding, all Three being Uncreated. \nTherefore, the consciousness of God is not obtainable to created beings either in this life or the next (see apophatism). Through co-operation with the Holy Spirit (called theosis), Mankind can become good (God-like), not becoming uncreated, but partaker of His divine energies (). From such a perspective Mankind can be reconciled from the Knowledge of Good and the Knowledge of Evil he obtained in the Garden of Eden (see the Fall of Man), his created substance thus partaking of Uncreated God through the indwelling Presence of the eternally incarnate () Son of God and His Father by the Spirit (, ).\nCurrent adherents.\nAt the Arroyo Seco World Wide Camp Meeting, near Los Angeles, in 1913, Canadian evangelist R.E. McAlister stated at a baptismal service that the apostles had baptized in the name of Jesus only and not in the triune Name of Father, Son, and Holy Spirit. Later that night, John G. Schaeppe, a German immigrant, had a vision of Jesus and woke up the camp shouting that the name of Jesus needed to be glorified. From that point, Frank J. Ewart began requiring that anyone baptized using the Trinitarian formula needed to be rebaptized in the name of Jesus \"only\". Support for this position began to spread, along with a belief in one Person in the Godhead, acting in different modes or offices.\nThe General Council of the Assemblies of God convened in St. Louis, Missouri in October 1916, to confirm their belief in Trinitarian orthodoxy. The Oneness camp was faced by a majority who required acceptance of the Trinitarian baptismal formula and the orthodox doctrine of the Trinity or remove themselves from the denomination. In the end, about a quarter of the ministers withdrew.\nOneness Pentecostalism teaches that God is one Person, and that the Father (a spirit) is united with Jesus (a man) as the Son of God. However, Oneness Pentecostalism differs somewhat by rejecting sequential modalism, and by the full acceptance of the begotten humanity of the Son, not eternally begotten, who was the man Jesus and was born, crucified, and risen, and not the deity. This directly opposes the pre-existence of the Son as a pre-existent mode, which Sabellianism generally does not oppose.\nOneness Pentecostals believe that Jesus was \"Son\" only when he became flesh on earth, but was the Father before being made man. They refer to the Father as the \"Spirit\" and the Son as the \"Flesh\", but they believe that Jesus and the Father are one essential Person, though operating as different \"manifestations\" or \"modes\". Oneness Pentecostals reject the Trinity doctrine, viewing it as pagan and nonscriptural, and hold to the Jesus' Name doctrine with respect to baptisms. They are often referred to as \"Modalists\" or \"Jesus Only\". Oneness Pentecostalism can be compared to Sabellianism, or can be described as holding to a form of Sabellianism, as both are nontrinitarian, and as both believe that Jesus Christ was \"Almighty God in the Flesh\", as being the same essential person as the Father, and not a distinct person from Him, although being a distinct mode or manifestation, but Oneness Pentecostalism and original Sabellianism do not totally identify each other.\nIt cannot be certain whether Sabellius taught Modalism completely as it is taught today as Oneness doctrine, since only a few fragments of his writings are extant and, therefore, all we have of his teachings comes through the writing of his detractors.\nThe following excerpts which demonstrate some of the known doctrinal characteristics of ancient Sabellians may be seen to compare with the doctrines in the modern Oneness movement:\nCurrent opposition.\nWhile Oneness Pentecostals seek to differentiate themselves from ancient Sabellianism, modern theologians such as James R. White and Robert Morey see no significant difference between the ancient heresy of Sabellianism and current Oneness doctrine. This is based on the denial by Oneness Pentecostals of the Trinity, believing that there is no distinction between the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit. Sabellianism, Patripassianism, Modalistic Monarchianism, functionalism, Jesus Only, Father Only, and Oneness Pentecostalism are viewed by these theologians as being derived from a Platonic doctrine that God was an indivisible Monad and could not be differentiated as distinct Persons.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "29426", "revid": "48025157", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29426", "title": "Sino-Indian War", "text": "1962 war between China and India\nThe Sino-Indian War, also known as the China\u2013India War or the Indo-China War, was an armed conflict between China and India that took place from October to November 1962. It was a military escalation of the Sino-Indian border dispute. Fighting occurred along India's border with China, in India's North-East Frontier Agency east of Bhutan, and in Aksai Chin west of Nepal.\nThere had been a series of border skirmishes between the two countries after the 1959 Tibetan uprising, when India granted asylum to the Dalai Lama. Chinese military action grew increasingly aggressive after India rejected proposed Chinese diplomatic settlements throughout 1960\u20131962, with China resuming previously banned \"forward patrols\" in Ladakh after 30 April 1962. Amidst the Cuban Missile Crisis, seeing that the U.S. was pre-occupied with dealing with it, China abandoned all attempts towards a peaceful resolution on 20 October 1962, invading disputed territory along the border in Ladakh and across the McMahon Line in the northeastern frontier. Chinese troops pushed Indian forces back in both theatres, capturing all of their claimed territory in the western theatre and the Tawang Tract in the eastern theatre. The conflict ended when China unilaterally declared a ceasefire on 20 November 1962, which can be attributed to the end of the Cuban Missile Crisis and fears of U.S. intervention to support India, and simultaneously announced its withdrawal to its pre-war position, the effective China\u2013India border (also known as the Line of Actual Control).\nMuch of the fighting comprised mountain warfare, entailing large-scale combat at altitudes of over . Notably, the war took place entirely on land, without the use of naval or air assets by either side.\nAs the Sino-Soviet split deepened, the Soviet Union made a major effort to support India, especially with the sale of advanced MiG fighter aircraft. Simultaneously, the United States and the United Kingdom refused to sell advanced weaponry to India, further compelling it to turn to the Soviets for military aid.\nLocation.\nChina and India shared a long border, sectioned into three stretches by Nepal, Sikkim (then an Indian protectorate), and Bhutan, which follows the Himalayas between Burma and what was then West Pakistan. A number of disputed regions lie along this border. At its western end is the Aksai Chin region, an area the size of Switzerland, that sits between the Chinese autonomous region of Xinjiang and Tibet, which China declared as an autonomous region in 1965. The eastern border, between Burma and Bhutan, comprises the present Indian state of Arunachal Pradesh, formerly the North-East Frontier Agency. Both of these regions were overrun by China in the 1962 conflict.\nMost combat took place at high elevations. The Aksai Chin region is a desert of salt flats around above sea level, and Arunachal Pradesh is mountainous with a number of peaks exceeding . The Chinese Army had possession of one of the highest ridges in the region. The high altitude and freezing conditions caused logistical and welfare difficulties. In past similar conflicts, such as the Italian Campaign of World War I, harsh conditions have caused more casualties than have enemy actions. The Sino-Indian War was no different, with many troops on both sides succumbing to the freezing cold temperatures.\nBackground.\nThe main cause of the war was a dispute over the sovereignty of the widely separated Aksai Chin and Arunachal Pradesh border regions. Aksai Chin, claimed by India to belong to Ladakh and by China to be part of Xinjiang, contains an important road link that connects the Chinese regions of Tibet and Xinjiang. China's construction of this road was one of the triggers of the conflict.\nAksai Chin.\nThe western portion of the Sino-Indian boundary originated in 1834, with the conquest of Ladakh by the armies of Raja Gulab Singh (Dogra) under the suzerainty of the Sikh Empire. Following an unsuccessful campaign into Tibet, Gulab Singh and the Tibetans signed a treaty in 1842 agreeing to stick to the \"old, established frontiers\", which were left unspecified. The British defeat of the Sikhs in 1846 resulted in the transfer of the Jammu and Kashmir region including Ladakh to the British, who then installed Gulab Singh as the Maharaja under their suzerainty. British commissioners contacted Chinese officials to negotiate the border, who did not show any interest. The British boundary commissioners fixed the southern end of the boundary at Pangong Lake, but regarded the area north of it till the Karakoram Pass as \"terra incognita\".\nThe Maharaja of Kashmir and his officials were keenly aware of the trade routes from Ladakh. Starting from Leh, there were two main routes into Central Asia: one passed through the Karakoram Pass to Shahidulla at the foot of the Kunlun Mountains and went on to Yarkand through the Kilian and Sanju passes; the other went east via the Chang Chenmo Valley, passed the Lingzi Tang Plains in the Aksai Chin region, and followed the course of the Karakash River to join the first route at Shahidulla. The Maharaja regarded Shahidulla as his northern outpost, in effect treating the Kunlun mountains as the boundary of his domains. His British suzerains were sceptical of such an extended boundary because Shahidulla was away from the Karakoram Pass and the intervening area was uninhabited. Nevertheless, the Maharaja was allowed to treat Shahidulla as his outpost for more than 20 years.\nChinese Turkestan regarded the \"northern branch\" of the Kunlun range with the Kilian and Sanju passes as its southern boundary. Thus the Maharaja's claim was uncontested. After the 1862 Dungan Revolt, which saw the expulsion of the Chinese from Turkestan, the Maharaja of Kashmir constructed a small fort at Shahidulla in 1864. The fort was most likely supplied from Khotan, whose ruler was now independent and on friendly terms with Kashmir. When the Khotanese ruler was deposed by the Kashgaria strongman Yakub Beg, the Maharaja was forced to abandon his post in 1867. It was then occupied by Yakub Beg's forces until the end of the Dungan Revolt.\nIn the intervening period, W. H. Johnson of Survey of India was commissioned to survey the Aksai Chin region. While in the course of his work, he was \"invited\" by the Khotanese ruler to visit his capital. After returning, Johnson noted that Khotan's border was at Brinjga, in the Kunlun mountains, and the entire Karakash Valley was within the territory of Kashmir. The boundary of Kashmir that he drew, stretching from Sanju Pass to the eastern edge of Chang Chenmo Valley along the Kunlun mountains, is referred to as the \"Johnson Line\" (or \"Ardagh-Johnson Line\").\nAfter the Chinese reconquered Turkestan in 1878, renaming it Xinjiang, they again reverted to their traditional boundary. By now, the Russian Empire was entrenched in Central Asia, and the British were anxious to avoid a common border with the Russians. After creating the Wakhan corridor as the buffer in the northwest of Kashmir, they wanted the Chinese to fill out the \"no man's land\" between the Karakoram and Kunlun ranges. Under British (and possibly Russian) encouragement, the Chinese occupied the area up to the Yarkand River valley (called Raskam), including Shahidulla, by 1890. They also erected a boundary pillar at the Karakoram pass by about 1892. These efforts appear half-hearted. A map provided by Hung Ta-chen, a senior Chinese official at St. Petersburgh, in 1893 showed the boundary of Xinjiang up to Raskam. In the east, it was similar to the Johnson line, placing Aksai Chin in Kashmir territory.\nBy 1892, the British settled on the policy that their preferred boundary for Kashmir was the \"Indus watershed\", i.e., the water-parting from which waters flow into the Indus river system on one side and into the Tarim basin on the other. In the north, this water-parting was along the Karakoram range. In the east, it was more complicated because the Chip Chap River, Galwan River and the Chang Chenmo River flow into the Indus whereas the Karakash River flows into the Tarim basin. A boundary alignment along this water-parting was defined by the Viceroy Lord Elgin and communicated to London. The British government in due course proposed it to China via its envoy Sir Claude MacDonald in 1899. This boundary, which came to be called the Macartney\u2013MacDonald Line, ceded to China the Aksai Chin plains in the northeast, and the Trans-Karakoram Tract in the north. In return, the British wanted China to cede its 'shadowy suzerainty' on Hunza.\nFollowing the Xinhai Revolution in 1911 which resulted in power shifts in China, the fall of Tzarist Russia in 1917 and the end of World War I in 1918, the British officially used the Johnson Line but had lost the urgency to enforce this boundary. They took no steps to establish outposts or assert control on the ground. According to Neville Maxwell, the British had used as many as 11 different boundary lines in the region, as their claims shifted with the political situation. From 1917 to 1933, the \"Postal Atlas of China\", published by the Government of China in Peking had shown the boundary in Aksai Chin as per the Johnson line, which runs along the Kunlun Mountains. The \"Peking University Atlas\", published in 1925, also put the Aksai Chin in India.\nThe use of Johnson line or Macartney-MacDonald line was neglected by the colonial administrators and by 1947, when India gained independence, the British left the government of India with high ambiguity about the settled border to the North. The Indian government choose to lay claim to Aksai Chin after 1947. On 1 July 1954, India's first Prime Minister Jawaharlal Nehru definitively stated the Indian position, claiming that Aksai Chin had been part of the Indian Ladakh region for centuries, and that the border (as defined by the Johnson Line) was non-negotiable. According to George N. Patterson, when the Indian government finally produced a report detailing the alleged proof of India's claims to the disputed area, \"the quality of the Indian evidence was very poor, including some very dubious sources indeed\".\nIn 1956\u201357, China constructed a road through Aksai Chin, connecting Xinjiang and Tibet, which ran south of the Johnson Line in many places. Aksai Chin was easily accessible to the Chinese, but access from India, which meant negotiating the Karakoram mountains, was much more difficult. The road came on Chinese maps published in 1958.\nThe McMahon Line.\nIn 1826, British India gained a common border with Tibet after the British wrested control of Manipur and Assam from the Burmese, following the First Anglo-Burmese War of 1824\u20131826. In 1847, Major J. Jenkins, agent for the North East Frontier, reported that the Tawang was part of Tibet. In 1872, four monastic officials from Tibet arrived in Tawang and supervised a boundary settlement with Major R. Graham, NEFA official, which included the Tawang Tract as part of Tibet. In 1873, the British drew an \"Inner Line\" as an administrative line to inhibit their subjects from encroaching into the tribal territory within its control. The British boundary, also called the \"Outer Line\", was defined to mark the limits of British jurisdiction. But it was not significantly different from the Inner Line in this region.\nBy 1873, it was clear that the British treated the Tawang Tract as part of Tibet. This boundary was confirmed in a 1 June 1912 note from the British General Staff in India.\nIn 1904, in order to skew Tibet away from Russian influence, an Anglo-Tibetan treaty was written called the Convention of Lhasa. This treaty alarmed the Chinese which started displaying power by crushing rebellions and erecting flags and boundary stones in the Lohit Valley which were mostly removed by the British by 1910. Such aggression from the Chinese conveyed to the Colonial administration that the Tawang tract could serve as a route of invasion in the future.\nAfter the 1911 Revolution, UK sat a weakened China along with Tibet in the Simla Convention to settle the borders between Tibet, China and British India. The foreign secretary of the British Indian government, Henry McMahon was the driving force in this conference. After carrying out surveys, the conference drew the McMahon Line. Whilst all three representatives initialed the agreement, Beijing later objected to the proposed boundary and did not ratify it. McMahon decided to bypass the Chinese (although instructed not to by his superiors) and settle the border bilaterally by negotiating directly with Tibet.\nAccording to later Indian claims, this border was intended to run through the highest ridges of the Himalayas, as the areas south of the Himalayas were traditionally Indian. The McMahon Line lay south of the boundary India claims. India's government held the view that the Himalayas were the ancient boundaries of the Indian subcontinent, and thus should be the modern boundaries of India, while it is the position of the Chinese government that the disputed area in the Himalayas have been geographically and culturally part of Tibet since ancient times.\nThe British-run Government of India initially rejected the Simla Agreement as incompatible with the Anglo-Russian Convention of 1907, which stipulated that neither party was to negotiate with Tibet \"except through the intermediary of the Chinese government\". The British and Russians cancelled the 1907 agreement by joint consent in 1921. It was not until the late 1930s that the British started to use the McMahon Line on official maps of the region.\nChina took the position that the Tibetan government should not have been allowed to make such a treaty, rejecting Tibet's claims of independent rule. For its part, Tibet did not object to any section of the McMahon Line excepting the demarcation of the trading town of Tawang, which the Line placed under British-Indian jurisdiction. Up until World War II, Tibetan officials were allowed to administer Tawang with complete authority. Due to the increased threat of Japanese and Chinese expansion during this period, British Indian troops secured the town as part of the defence of India's eastern border.\nIn the 1950s, India began patrolling the region. It found that, at multiple locations, the highest ridges actually fell north of the McMahon Line. Given India's historic position that the original intent of the line was to separate the two nations by the highest mountains in the world, in these locations India extended its forward posts northward to the ridges, regarding this move as compliant with the original border proposal, although the Simla Convention did not explicitly state this intention.\nEvents leading up to war.\nBorder dispute after Partition of India and formation of the PRC.\nBritish India was partitioned in 1947 and split into India and Pakistan while the Chinese Civil War resulted in the formation of People's Republic of China in 1949. One of the most basic policies for the new Indian government was that of maintaining cordial relations with China, reviving its ancient friendly ties. India was among the first nations to grant diplomatic recognition to the newly created PRC.\nIn 1950, the Chinese People's Liberation Army (PLA) invaded Tibet, which the Chinese governments regarded as still part of China. Later the Chinese extended their influence by building a road in 1956\u201367 and placing border posts in Aksai Chin. India protested against these moves and decided to look for a diplomatic solution to ensure a stable Sino-Indian border. To resolve any doubts about the Indian position, Prime Minister Jawaharlal Nehru declared in parliament that India regarded the McMahon Line as its official border. The Chinese expressed no concern at this statement.\nAt the time, Chinese officials issued no condemnation of Nehru's claims or made any opposition to Nehru's open declarations of control over Aksai Chin. In 1956, Chinese Premier Zhou Enlai stated that he had no claims over Indian-controlled territory. He later argued that Aksai Chin was already under Chinese jurisdiction and that the McCartney-MacDonald Line was the line China could accept. Zhou later argued that as the boundary was undemarcated and had never been defined by treaty between any Chinese or Indian government, the Indian government could not unilaterally define Aksai Chin's borders.\nIn 1954, Nehru wrote a memo calling for India's borders to be clearly defined and demarcated; in line with previous Indian philosophy, Indian maps showed a border that, in some places, lay north of the McMahon Line. Chinese Premier Zhou Enlai, in November 1956, assured India that China had no claims on Indian territory, although official Chinese maps showed of territory claimed by India as Chinese. They also allege that Zhou purposefully told Nehru that there were no border issues with India.\nIn 1954, China and India negotiated the Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence, by which the two nations agreed to abide in settling their disputes. India presented a frontier map which was accepted by China, and the slogan \"Hindi-Chini bhai-bhai\" (Indians and Chinese are brothers) was popularised. Nehru in 1958 had privately told G. Parthasarathi, the Indian envoy to China not to trust the Chinese at all and send all communications directly to him, bypassing the Defence Minister VK Krishna Menon since his communist background clouded his thinking about China. According to John W Garver, Nehru's policy on Tibet was to create a strong Sino-Indian partnership which would be catalysed through agreement and compromise on Tibet. Garver believes that Nehru's previous actions had given him confidence that China would be ready to form an \"Asian Axis\" with India.\nThis apparent progress in relations suffered a major setback when, in 1959, Nehru accommodated the Tibetan religious leader at the time, the 14th Dalai Lama, who fled Lhasa after a failed Tibetan uprising against Chinese rule. The Chairman of the Chinese Communist Party, Mao Zedong, was enraged and asked the Xinhua News Agency to produce reports on Indian expansionists operating in Tibet.\nArmed clashes increased over summer 1959.131 On 25 August 1959, a group of Indian soldiers crossed into the Longju area, north of the McMahon Line.131 The PLA took an Indian prisoner.\nOn 2 October, Soviet first secretary Nikita Khrushchev defended Nehru in a meeting with Mao. This action reinforced China's impression that the Soviet Union, the United States and India all had expansionist designs on China. The PLA went so far as to prepare a self-defence counterattack plan. Negotiations were restarted between the nations, but no progress was made.\nOn 21 October, there was a small scale clash at Kongka Pass.131 The Chinese and Indian sides each claimed that the other side shot first.131 Zhou Enlai proposed a mutual withdrawal to 12.4 miles behind the McMahon Line.131 The Indian government did not respond.131\nAs a consequence of their non-recognition of the McMahon Line, China's maps showed both the North East Frontier Area (NEFA) and Aksai Chin to be Chinese territory. In 1960, Zhou Enlai unofficially suggested that India drop its claims to Aksai Chin in return for a Chinese withdrawal of claims over NEFA. Adhering to his stated position, Nehru believed that China did not have a legitimate claim over either of these territories, and thus was not ready to concede them. This adamant stance was perceived in China as Indian opposition to Chinese rule in Tibet. Nehru declined to conduct any negotiations on the boundary until Chinese troops withdrew from Aksai Chin, a position supported by the international community.\nIndia produced numerous reports on the negotiations, and translated Chinese reports into English to help inform the international debate. China believed that India was simply securing its claim lines in order to continue its \"grand plans in Tibet\". India's stance that China withdraw from Aksai Chin caused continual deterioration of the diplomatic situation to the point that internal forces were pressuring Nehru to take a military stance against China.\n1960 meetings to resolve the boundary question.\nIn 1960, based on an agreement between Nehru and Zhou Enlai, officials from India and China held discussions in order to settle the boundary dispute. China and India disagreed on the major watershed that defined the boundary in the western sector. The Chinese statements with respect to their border claims often misrepresented the cited sources. The failure of these negotiations was compounded by successful Chinese border agreements with Nepal (Sino-Nepalese Treaty of Peace and Friendship) and Burma in the same year.\nForward policy.\nIn the summer of 1961, China began patrolling along the McMahon Line. They entered parts of Indian administered regions. The Chinese, however, did not believe they were intruding upon Indian territory. In response the Indians launched a policy of creating outposts behind the Chinese troops so as to cut off their supplies and force their return to China.\nOn 5 December 1961 orders went to the Eastern and Western commands:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;[...] We are to patrol as far forward as possible from our present positions towards the International Border as recognized by us. This will be done with a view to establishing additional posts located to prevent the Chinese from advancing further and also to dominate any Chinese posts already established in our territory. [...]This has been referred to as the \"forward policy\". There were eventually 60 such outposts, including 43 along the Chinese-claimed frontier in Aksai Chin.\nIndian leaders believed, based on previous diplomacy, that the Chinese would not react with force. According to the Indian Official History, Indian posts and Chinese posts were separated by a narrow stretch of land. China had been steadily spreading into those lands and India reacted with the forward policy to demonstrate that those lands were not unoccupied. Neville Maxwell traces this confidence to the Intelligence Bureau chief Mullik.\nThe initial reaction of the Chinese forces was to withdraw when Indian outposts advanced towards them. However, this appeared to encourage the Indian forces to accelerate their forward policy even further. In response, the Central Military Commission adopted a policy of \"armed coexistence\". In response to Indian outposts encircling Chinese positions, Chinese forces would build more outposts to counter-encircle these Indian positions. This pattern of encirclement and counter-encirclement resulted in an interlocking, chessboard-like deployment of Chinese and Indian forces. Despite the leapfrogging encirclements by both sides, no hostile fire occurred from either side as troops from both sides were under orders to fire only in defense. On the situation, Mao commented, &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Nehru wants to move forward and we won't let him. Originally, we tried to guard against this, but now it seems we cannot prevent it. If he wants to advance, we might as well adopt armed coexistence. You wave a gun, and I'll wave a gun. We'll stand face to face and can each practice our courage.The attacks by China beginning on 20 October 1962 were retaliation for the forward policy.252 That year, the CPC Central Committee and the Central Military Commission instructed the PLA to mobilize frontier troops for a counteroffensive campaign.131\nEarly incidents.\nVarious border conflicts and \"military incidents\" between India and China flared up throughout the summer and autumn of 1962. In May, the Indian Air Force was told not to plan for close air support, although it was assessed as being a feasible way to counter the unfavourable ratio of Chinese to Indian troops. In June, a skirmish caused the deaths of dozens of Chinese troops. The Indian Intelligence Bureau received information about a Chinese buildup along the border which could be a precursor to war.\nDuring June\u2013July 1962, Indian military planners began advocating \"probing actions\" against the Chinese, and accordingly, moved mountain troops forward to cut off Chinese supply lines. According to Patterson, the Indian motives were threefold:\nOn 10 July 1962, 350 Chinese troops surrounded an Indian post in Chushul (north of the McMahon Line) but withdrew after a heated argument via loudspeaker. On 22 July, the forward policy was extended to allow Indian troops to push back Chinese troops already established in disputed territory. Whereas Indian troops were previously ordered to fire only in self-defence, all post commanders were now given discretion to open fire upon Chinese forces if threatened. In August, the Chinese military improved its combat readiness along the McMahon Line and began stockpiling ammunition, weapons and fuel.\nGiven his foreknowledge of the coming Cuban Missile Crisis, Mao was able to persuade Khrushchev to reverse the Russian policy of backing India, at least temporarily. In mid-October, the Communist organ \"Pravda\" encouraged peace between India and China. When the Cuban Missile Crisis ended and Mao's rhetoric changed, Russia reversed course.\nConfrontation at Thagla Ridge.\nIn June 1962, Indian forces established an outpost called the Dhola Post on the northern slopes of Tsangdhar Range, in the right-side of Namka Chu valley, facing the southern slopes of Thagla Ridge. Clearly, the Dhola Post lay north of the map-marked McMahon Line which straight across Tsangdhar Range but south of Thagla Ridge along which India interpreted the McMahon Line to run. In August, China issued diplomatic protests and began occupying positions at the top of Thagla Ridge.\nOn 8 September, a 60-strong PLA unit descended to the south side of the ridge and occupied positions that dominated one of the Indian posts at Namka Chu. Fire was not exchanged, but Nehru told the media that the Indian Army had instructions to \"free our territory\" and the troops had been given discretion to use force. On 11 September, it was decided that \"all forward posts and patrols were given permission to fire on any armed Chinese who entered Indian territory\".\nThe operation to occupy Thagla Ridge was flawed in that Nehru's directives were unclear, delaying it. In addition, each man had to carry over the long trek, greatly slowing the reaction. By the time the Indian battalion reached the point of conflict, Chinese units controlled both banks of the Namka Chu River. On 20 September, Chinese troops threw grenades at Indian troops and a firefight developed, triggering a long series of skirmishes for the rest of September.\nSome Indian troops, including Brigadier Dalvi who commanded the forces at Thagla Ridge, were also concerned that the territory they were fighting for was not strictly territory that \"we should have been convinced was ours\". According to Neville Maxwell, even members of the Indian defence ministry were categorically concerned with the validity of the fighting in Thagla Ridge.\nOn 4 October, Brij Mohan Kaul, commanding IV Corps, assigned some troops to secure regions south of the Thagla Ridge. Kaul decided to first secure Yumtso La, a strategically important position, before re-entering the lost Dhola Post. Kaul had then realised that the attack would be desperate and the Indian government tried to stop an escalation into all-out war. Indian troops marching to Thagla Ridge had suffered in the previously unexperienced conditions; two Gurkha soldiers died of pulmonary edema.\nOn 10 October, an Indian Rajput patrol of 50 troops to Yumtso La were met by an emplaced Chinese position of some 1,000 soldiers. Indian troops were in no position for battle, as Yumtso La was above sea level and Kaul did not plan on having artillery support for the troops. The Chinese troops opened fire on the Indians, thinking they were north of the McMahon Line. The Indians were surrounded by Chinese positions, which used mortar fire. They managed to hold off the first Chinese assault, inflicting heavy casualties.\nAt this point, the Indian troops were in a position to push the Chinese back with mortar and machine gun fire. Brigadier Dalvi opted not to fire, as it would mean decimating the Rajput who were still in the area of the Chinese regrouping. They helplessly watched the Chinese ready themselves for a second assault. In the second Chinese assault, the Indians began their retreat, realising the situation was hopeless. The Indian patrol suffered 25 casualties and the Chinese 33. The Chinese troops held their fire as the Indians retreated, and then buried the Indian dead with military honours, as witnessed by the retreating soldiers. This was the first occurrence of heavy fighting in the war.\nThis attack had grave implications for India and Nehru tried to solve the issue, but by 18 October, it was clear that the Chinese were preparing for an attack, with a massive troop buildup. A long line of mules and porters had also been observed supporting the buildup and reinforcement of positions south of the Thagla Ridge.\nChinese preparations.\nChinese motives.\nTwo of the major factors leading up to China's eventual conflicts with Indian troops were India's stance on the disputed borders and perceived Indian subversion in Tibet. There was \"a perceived need to punish and end perceived Indian efforts to undermine Chinese control of Tibet, Indian efforts which were perceived as having the objective of restoring the pre-1949 status quo ante of Tibet\". The other was \"a perceived need to punish and end perceived Indian aggression against Chinese territory along the border\". John W. Garver argues that the first perception was incorrect based on the state of the Indian military and polity in the 1960s. It was, nevertheless a major reason for China's going to war. He argues that while the Chinese perception of Indian border actions were \"substantially accurate\", Chinese perceptions of the supposed Indian policy towards Tibet were \"substantially inaccurate\".\nThe CIA's declassified POLO documents reveal contemporary American analysis of Chinese motives during the war. According to this document, \"Chinese apparently were motivated to attack by one primary consideration\u00a0\u2014 their determination to retain the ground on which PLA forces stood in 1962 and to punish the Indians for trying to take that ground\". In general terms, they tried to show the Indians once and for all that China would not acquiesce in a military \"reoccupation\" policy. Secondary reasons for the attack were to damage Nehru's prestige by exposing Indian weakness and to expose as traitorous Khrushchev's policy of supporting Nehru against a Communist country.\nAnother factor which might have affected China's decision for war with India was a perceived need to stop a Soviet-U.S.-India encirclement and isolation of China. India's relations with the Soviet Union and United States were both strong at this time, but the Soviets (and Americans) were preoccupied by the Cuban Missile Crisis and would not interfere with the Sino-Indian War. P. B. Sinha suggests that China waited until October to attack because the timing of the war was exactly in parallel with American actions so as to avoid any chance of American or Soviet involvement. Although American buildup of forces around Cuba occurred on the same day as the first major clash at Dhola Post, and China's buildup between 10 and 20 October appeared to coincide exactly with the United States establishment of a blockade against Cuba which began 20 October, the Chinese probably prepared for this before they could anticipate what would happen in Cuba.\nIn May to June 1962, the KMT government of Republic of China on Taiwan under Chiang Kai-shek's leadership was propagating the policy of 'Reclaim the mainland China', causing fear of invasion from Taiwan among Chinese Communist leadership and the shift of concern to the Southeast. Reluctant to divert resources to the hostitlies in the Himalayas, Chinese leadership thought a two-front war undesirable. From July on, after receiving American assurances that KMT government would not invade, China began to focus on the Indian border.\nGarver argues that the Chinese correctly assessed Indian border policies, particularly the forward policy, as attempts for incremental seizure of Chinese-controlled territory. On Tibet, Garver argues that one of the major factors leading to China's decision for war with India was a common tendency of humans \"to attribute others' behavior to interior motivations, while attributing their own behavior to situational factors\". Studies from China published in the 1990s confirmed that the root cause for China going to war with India was the perceived Indian aggression in Tibet, with the forward policy simply catalysing the Chinese reaction.\nNeville Maxwell and Allen Whiting argue that the Chinese leadership believed they were defending territory that was legitimately Chinese, and which was already under de facto Chinese occupation prior to Indian advances, and regarded the forward policy as an Indian attempt at creeping annexation. Mao Zedong himself compared the forward policy to a strategic advance in Chinese chess:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Their [India's] continually pushing forward is like crossing the Chu Han boundary. What should we do? We can also set out a few pawns, on our side of the river. If they don't then cross over, that\u2019s great. If they do cross, we'll eat them up [chess metaphor meaning to take the opponent's pieces]. Of course, we cannot blindly eat them. Lack of forbearance in small matters upsets great plans. We must pay attention to the situation.\nChinese policy toward India, therefore, operated on two seemingly contradictory assumptions in the first half of 1961. On the one hand, the Chinese leaders continued to entertain a hope, although a shrinking one, that some opening for talks would appear. On the other hand, they read Indian statements and actions as clear signs that Nehru wanted to talk only about a Chinese withdrawal. Regarding the hope, they were willing to negotiate and tried to prod Nehru into a similar attitude. Regarding Indian intentions, they began to act politically and to build a rationale based on the assumption that Nehru already had become a lackey of imperialism; for this reason he opposed border talks.\nKrishna Menon is reported to have said that when he arrived in Geneva on 6 June 1961 for an international conference in Laos, Chinese officials in Chen Yi's delegation indicated that Chen might be interested in discussing the border dispute with him. At several private meetings with Menon, Chen avoided any discussion of the dispute and Menon surmised that the Chinese wanted him to broach the matter first. He did not, as he was under instructions from Nehru to avoid taking the initiative, leaving the Chinese with the impression that Nehru was unwilling to show any flexibility.\nIn September, the Chinese took a step toward criticising Nehru openly in their commentary. After citing Indonesian and Burmese press criticism of Nehru by name, the Chinese critiqued his moderate remarks on colonialism (People's Daily Editorial, 9 September): \"Somebody at the Non-Aligned Nations Conference advanced the argument that the era of classical colonialism is gone and dead...contrary to facts.\" This was a distortion of Nehru's remarks but appeared close enough to be credible. On the same day, Chen Yi referred to Nehru by implication at the Bulgarian embassy reception: \"Those who attempted to deny history, ignore reality, and distort the truth and who attempted to divert the Conference from its important object have failed to gain support and were isolated.\" On 10 September, they dropped all circumlocutions and criticised him by name in a China Youth article and NCNA report\u2014the first time in almost two years that they had commented extensively on the Prime Minister.\nBy early 1962, the Chinese leadership began to believe that India's intentions were to launch a massive attack against Chinese troops, and that the Indian leadership wanted a war. In 1961, the Indian Army had been sent into Goa, a small region without any other international borders apart from the Indian one, after Portugal refused to surrender the exclave colony to the Indian Union. Although this action met little to no international protest or opposition, China saw it as an example of India's expansionist nature, especially in light of heated rhetoric from Indian politicians. India's Home Minister declared, \"If the Chinese will not vacate the areas occupied by it, India will have to repeat what it did in Goa. India will certainly drive out the Chinese forces\", while another member of the Indian Congress Party pronounced, \"India will take steps to end [Chinese] aggression on Indian soil just as it ended Portuguese aggression in Goa\".\nBy mid-1962, it was apparent to the Chinese leadership that negotiations had failed to make any progress, and the forward policy was increasingly perceived as a grave threat as Delhi increasingly sent probes deeper into border areas and cut off Chinese supply lines. Foreign Minister Marshal Chen Yi commented at one high-level meeting, \"Nehru's forward policy is a knife. He wants to put it in our heart. We cannot close our eyes and await death.\" The Chinese leadership believed that their restraint on the issue was being perceived by India as weakness, leading to continued provocations, and that a major counterblow was needed to stop perceived Indian aggression.\nXu Yan, prominent Chinese military historian and professor at the PLA's National Defense University, gives an account of the Chinese leadership's decision to go to war. By late September 1962, the Chinese leadership had begun to reconsider their policy of \"armed coexistence\", which had failed to address their concerns with the forward policy and Tibet, and consider a large, decisive strike. On 22 September 1962, the \"People's Daily\" published an article which claimed that \"the Chinese people were burning with 'great indignation' over the Indian actions on the border and that New Delhi could not 'now say that warning was not served in advance'.\"\nMilitary planning.\nThe Indian side was confident war would not be triggered and made little preparations. India had only two divisions of troops in the region of the conflict. In August 1962, Brigadier D. K. Palit claimed that a war with China in the near future could be ruled out. Even in September 1962, when Indian troops were ordered to \"expel the Chinese\" from Thagla Ridge, Maj. General J. S. Dhillon expressed the opinion that \"experience in Ladakh had shown that a few rounds fired at the Chinese would cause them to run away.\" Because of this, the Indian Army was completely unprepared when the attack at Yumtso La occurred.\nDeclassified CIA documents which were compiled at the time reveal that India's estimates of Chinese capabilities made them neglect their military in favour of economic growth. It is claimed that if a more military-minded man had been in place instead of Nehru, India would have been more likely to have been ready for the threat of a counter-attack from China.\nOn 6 October 1962, the Chinese leadership convened. Defence minister, Lin Biao, reported that PLA intelligence units had determined that Indian units might assault Chinese positions at Thagla Ridge on 10 October (Operation Leghorn). The Chinese leadership and the Central Military Council decided upon war to launch a large-scale attack to punish perceived military aggression from India. In Beijing, a larger meeting of Chinese military was convened in order to plan for the coming conflict.\nMao and the Chinese leadership issued a directive laying out the objectives for the war. A main assault would be launched in the eastern sector, which would be coordinated with a smaller assault in the western sector. All Indian troops within China's claimed territories in the eastern sector would be expelled, and the war would be ended with a unilateral Chinese ceasefire and withdrawal, followed by a return to the negotiating table. India led the Non-Aligned Movement, Nehru enjoyed international prestige, and China, with a larger military, would be portrayed as an aggressor. He said that a well-fought war \"will guarantee at least thirty years of peace\" with India, and determined the benefits to offset the costs.\nChina also reportedly bought a significant amount of Indian rupee currency from Hong Kong, supposedly to distribute amongst its soldiers in preparation for the war.\nOn 8 October, additional veteran and elite divisions were ordered to prepare to move into Tibet from the Chengdu and Lanzhou military regions.\nOn 14 October, an editorial on \"People's Daily\" issued China's final warning to India: \"So it seems that Mr. Nehru has made up his mind to attack the Chinese frontier guards on an even bigger scale.\u00a0... It is high time to shout to Mr. Nehru that the heroic Chinese troops, with the glorious tradition of resisting foreign aggression, can never be cleared by anyone from their own territory\u00a0... If there are still some maniacs who are reckless enough to ignore our well-intentioned advice and insist on having another try, well, let them do so. History will pronounce its inexorable verdict\u00a0... At this critical moment\u00a0... we still want to appeal once more to Mr. Nehru: better rein in at the edge of the precipice and do not use the lives of Indian troops as stakes in your gamble.\"\nMarshal Liu Bocheng headed a group to determine the strategy for the war. He concluded that the opposing Indian troops were among India's best, and to achieve victory would require deploying crack troops and relying on force concentration to achieve decisive victory. On 16 October, this war plan was approved, and on the 18th, the final approval was given by the Politburo for a \"self-defensive counter-attack\", scheduled for 20 October.\nChinese offensive.\nOn 20 October 1962, the PLA launched two attacks, apart. In the western theatre, the PLA sought to expel Indian forces from the Chip Chap valley in Aksai Chin while in the eastern theatre, the PLA sought to capture both banks of the Namka Chu river. Gurkha rifles travelling north were targeted by Chinese artillery fire. After four days of fierce fighting, the three regiments of Chinese troops succeeded in securing a substantial portion of the disputed territory.\nEastern theatre.\nChinese troops launched an attack on the southern banks of the Namka Chu River on 20 October. The Indian forces were undermanned, with only an understrength battalion to support them, while the Chinese troops had three regiments positioned on the north side of the river. The Indians expected Chinese forces to cross via one of five bridges over the river and defended those crossings. The PLA bypassed the defenders by fording the river, which was shallow at that time of year, instead. They formed up into battalions on the Indian-held south side of the river under cover of darkness, with each battalion assigned against a separate group of Rajputs.\nAt 5:14 am, Chinese mortar fire began attacking the Indian positions. Simultaneously, the Chinese cut the Indian telephone lines, preventing the defenders from making contact with their headquarters. At about 6:30 am, the Chinese infantry launched a surprise attack from the rear and forced the Indians to leave their trenches. The Chinese overwhelmed the Indian troops in a series of flanking manoeuvres south of the McMahon Line and prompted their withdrawal from Namka Chu. Fearful of continued losses, Indian troops retreated into Bhutan. Chinese forces respected the border and did not pursue. Chinese forces now held all of the territory that was under dispute at the time of the Thagla Ridge confrontation, but they continued to advance into the rest of NEFA.\nOn 22 October, at 12:15 am, PLA mortars fired on Walong, on the McMahon line. Flares launched by Indian troops the next day revealed numerous Chinese milling around the valley. The Indians tried to use their mortars against the Chinese but the PLA responded by lighting a bush fire, causing confusion among the Indians. Some 400 PLA troops attacked the Indian position. The initial Chinese assault was halted by accurate Indian mortar fire. The Chinese were then reinforced and launched a second assault. The Indians managed to hold them back for four hours, but the Chinese used weight of numbers to break through. Most Indian forces were withdrawn to established positions in Walong, while a company supported by mortars and medium machine guns remained to cover the retreat.\nElsewhere, Chinese troops launched a three-pronged attack on Tawang, which the Indians evacuated without any resistance.\nOver the following days, there were clashes between Indian and Chinese patrols at Walong as the Chinese rushed in reinforcements. On 25 October, the Chinese made a probe, which was met with resistance from the 4th Sikhs. The following day, a patrol from the 4th Sikhs was encircled, and after being unable to break the encirclement, an Indian unit was able to flank the Chinese, allowing the Sikhs to break free.\nWestern theatre.\nOn the Aksai Chin front, China already controlled most of the disputed territory. Chinese forces quickly swept the region of any remaining Indian troops. Late on 19 October, Chinese troops launched a number of attacks throughout the western theatre. By 22 October, all posts north of Chushul had been cleared.\nOn 20 October, the Chinese easily took the Chip Chap Valley and Pangong Lake. Many outposts and garrisons along the Western front were unable to defend against the surrounding Chinese troops. Most Indian troops positioned in these posts offered resistance but were either killed or taken prisoner. Indian support for these outposts was not forthcoming, as evidenced by the Galwan post, which had been surrounded by enemy forces in August, but no attempt made to relieve the besieged garrison. Following the 20 October attack, nothing was heard from Galwan.\nOn 24 October, Indian forces fought hard to hold the Rezang La Ridge, in order to prevent a nearby airstrip from falling.\nAfter realising the magnitude of the attack, the Indian Western Command withdrew many of the isolated outposts to the south-east. Daulet Beg Oldi was also evacuated, but it was south of the Chinese claim line and was not approached by Chinese forces. Indian troops were withdrawn in order to consolidate and regroup in the event that China probed south of their claim line.\nLull in the fighting.\nBy 24 October, the PLA had entered territory previously administered by India to give the PRC a diplomatically strong position over India. The majority of Chinese forces had advanced south of the control line prior to the conflict. Four days of fighting were followed by a three-week lull. Zhou ordered the troops to stop advancing as he attempted to negotiate with Nehru. The Indian forces had retreated into more heavily fortified positions around Se La and Bomdi La which would be difficult to assault. Zhou sent Nehru a letter, proposing\nNehru's 27 October reply expressed interest in the restoration of peace and friendly relations and suggested a return to the \"boundary prior to 8 September 1962\". He was categorically concerned about a mutual withdrawal after \"40 or 60 kilometres (25 or 40 miles) of blatant military aggression\". He wanted the creation of a larger immediate buffer zone and thus resist the possibility of a repeat offensive. Zhou's 4 November reply repeated his 1959 offer to return to the McMahon Line in NEFA and the Chinese traditionally claimed MacDonald Line in Aksai Chin.\nFacing Chinese forces maintaining themselves on Indian soil and trying to avoid political pressure, the Indian parliament announced a national emergency and passed a resolution which stated their intent to \"drive out the aggressors from the sacred soil of India\". The United States and the United Kingdom supported India's response. The Soviet Union was preoccupied with the Cuban Missile Crisis and did not offer the support it had provided in previous years. With the backing of other great powers, a 14 November letter by Nehru to Zhou once again rejected his proposal.\nNeither side declared war, used their air force, or fully broke off diplomatic relations, but the conflict is commonly referred to as a war. This war coincided with the Cuban Missile Crisis and was viewed by the western nations at the time as another act of aggression by the Communist bloc. According to Calvin, the Chinese side evidently wanted a diplomatic resolution and discontinuation of the conflict.\nContinuation of war.\nAfter Zhou received Nehru's letter (rejecting Zhou's proposal), the fighting resumed on the eastern theatre on 14 November (Nehru's birthday), with an Indian attack on Walong, claimed by China, launched from the defensive position of Se La and inflicting heavy casualties on the Chinese. The Chinese resumed military activity on Aksai Chin and NEFA hours after the Walong battle.\nContinuation of Eastern theatre.\nIn the eastern theatre, the PLA attacked Indian forces near Se La and Bomdi La on 17 November. These positions were defended by the Indian 4th Infantry Division. Instead of attacking by road as expected, PLA forces approached via a mountain trail, and their attack cut off a main road and isolated 10,000 Indian troops.\nSe La occupied high ground, and rather than assault this commanding position, the Chinese captured Thembang, which was a supply route to Se La.\nThe PLA penetrated close to the outskirts of Tezpur, Assam, a major frontier town nearly from the Assam-North-East Frontier Agency border. The local government ordered the evacuation of the civilians in Tezpur to the south of the Brahmaputra River, all prisons were thrown open, and government officials who stayed behind destroyed Tezpur's currency reserves in anticipation of a Chinese advance.\nContinuation of Western theatre.\nOn the western theatre, PLA forces launched a heavy infantry attack on 18 November near Chushul. Their attack started at 4:35 am, despite a mist surrounding most of the areas in the region. At 5:45 the Chinese troops advanced to attack two platoons of Indian troops at Gurung Hill.\nThe Indians did not know what was happening, as communications were dead. As a patrol was sent, China attacked with greater numbers. Indian artillery could not hold off the superior Chinese forces. By 9:00 am, Chinese forces attacked Gurung Hill directly and Indian commanders withdrew from the area and also from the connecting Spangur Gap.\nThe Chinese had been simultaneously attacking Rezang La which was held by 123 Indian troops. At 5:05 am, Chinese troops launched their attack audaciously. Chinese medium machine gun fire pierced through the Indian tactical defences.\nAt 6:55 am the sun rose and the Chinese attack on the 8th platoon began in waves. Fighting continued for the next hour, until the Chinese signaled that they had destroyed the 7th platoon. Indians tried to use light machine guns on the medium machine guns from the Chinese but after 10 minutes the battle was over. Logistical inadequacy once again hurt the Indian troops. The Chinese gave the Indian troops a respectful military funeral. The battles also saw the death of Major Shaitan Singh of the Kumaon Regiment, who had been instrumental in the first battle of Rezang La. The Indian troops were forced to withdraw to high mountain positions. Indian sources believed that their troops were just coming to grips with the mountain combat and finally called for more troops. The Chinese declared a ceasefire, ending the bloodshed.\nIndian forces suffered heavy casualties, with dead Indian troops' bodies being found in the ice, frozen with weapons in hand. The Chinese forces also suffered heavy casualties, especially at Rezang La. This signalled the end of the war in Aksai Chin as China had reached their claim line\u00a0\u2013 many Indian troops were ordered to withdraw from the area. China claimed that the Indian troops wanted to fight on until the bitter end. The war ended with their withdrawal, so as to limit the number of casualties.\nCeasefire.\nChina had reached its claim lines so the PLA did not advance farther, and on 19 November, it declared a unilateral cease-fire. Zhou Enlai declared a unilateral ceasefire to start on midnight, 21 November. Zhou's ceasefire declaration stated,\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Beginning from 21 November 1962, the Chinese frontier guards will cease fire along the entire Sino-Indian border. Beginning from 1 December 1962, the Chinese frontier guards will withdraw to positions behind the line of actual control which existed between China and India on 7 November 1959. In the eastern sector, although the Chinese frontier guards have so far been fighting on Chinese territory north of the traditional customary line, they are prepared to withdraw from their present positions to the north of the illegal McMahon Line, and to withdraw back from that line. In the middle and western sectors, the Chinese frontier guards will withdraw from the line of actual control.\nZhou had first given the ceasefire announcement to Indian charg\u00e9 d'affaires on 19 November (before India's request for United States air support), but New Delhi did not receive it until 24 hours later. The aircraft carrier was ordered back after the ceasefire, and thus, American intervention on India's side in the war was avoided. Retreating Indian troops, who hadn't come into contact with anyone knowing of the ceasefire, and Chinese troops in NEFA and Aksai Chin, were involved in some minor battles, but for the most part, the ceasefire signalled an end to the fighting. The United States Air Force flew in supplies to India in November 1962, but neither side wished to continue hostilities.\nAfter 1 December, Chinese forces began leaving Indian territories and returning to the old boundary.132\nToward the end of the war India increased its support for Tibetan refugees and revolutionaries, some of them having settled in India, as they were fighting the same common enemy in the region. The Nehru administration ordered the raising of an elite Indian-trained \"Tibetan Armed Force\" composed of Tibetan refugees.\nInternational reactions.\nAccording to James Calvin, western nations at the time viewed China as an aggressor during the China\u2013India border war, and saw the war as part of a monolithic communist objective for a world dictatorship of the proletariat. This was further triggered by Mao's statement that: \"the way to world conquest lies through Havana, Accra and Calcutta\". The United States was unequivocal in its recognition of the Indian boundary claims in the eastern sector, while not supporting the claims of either side in the western sector. Britain, on the other hand, agreed with the Indian position completely, with the foreign secretary stating, 'we have taken the view of the government of India on the present frontiers and the disputed territories belong to India.'\nThe Chinese military action has been viewed by the United States as part of the PRC's policy of making use of aggressive wars to settle its border disputes and to distract both its own population and international opinion from its internal issues. The Kennedy administration was disturbed by what they considered \"blatant Chinese communist aggression against India\". In a May 1963 National Security Council meeting, contingency planning on the part of the United States in the event of another Chinese attack on India was discussed and nuclear options were considered. After listening to advisers, Kennedy stated \"We should defend India, and therefore we will defend India.\" By 1964, China had developed its own nuclear weapon which would have likely caused any American nuclear policy in defense of India to be reviewed.\nThe non-aligned nations remained mostly uninvolved, and only Egypt (officially the United Arab Republic) openly supported India. Of the non-aligned nations, six, Egypt, Burma, Cambodia, Sri Lanka, Ghana and Indonesia, met in Colombo on 10 December 1962. The proposals stipulated a Chinese withdrawal of from the customary lines without any reciprocal withdrawal on India's behalf. The failure of these six nations to unequivocally condemn China deeply disappointed India.\nPakistan also shared a disputed boundary with China, and had proposed to India that the two countries adopt a common defence against \"northern\" enemies (i.e. China), which was rejected by India, citing nonalignment. In 1962, Pakistani president Muhammad Ayub Khan made clear to India that Indian troops could safely be transferred from the Pakistan frontier to the Himalayas. But, after the war, Pakistan improved its relations with China. It began border negotiations on 13 October 1962, concluding them in December. In 1963, the China-Pakistan Border Treaty was signed, as well as trade, commercial, and barter treaties. Pakistan conceded its northern claim line in Pakistani-controlled Kashmir to China in favour of a more southerly boundary along the Karakoram Range. The border treaty largely set the border along the MacCartney-Macdonald Line. India's military failure against China would embolden Pakistan to initiate the Second Kashmir War with India in 1965.\nForeign involvement.\nDuring the conflict, Nehru wrote two letters on 19 November 1962 to U.S. President Kennedy, asking for 12 squadrons of fighter jets and a modern radar system. These jets were seen as necessary to beef up Indian air strength so that air-to-air combat could be initiated safely from the Indian perspective. Bombing troops was seen as unwise for fear of Chinese retaliatory action. Nehru also asked that these aircraft be manned by American pilots until Indian airmen were trained to replace them. These requests were rejected by the Kennedy Administration, which was involved in the Cuban Missile Crisis during most of the Sino-Indian War. The U.S. nonetheless provided non-combat assistance to Indian forces and planned to send the carrier to the Bay of Bengal to support India in case of an air war.\nAs the Sino-Soviet split had already emerged, Moscow, while remaining formally neutral, made a major effort to render military assistance to India, especially with the sale of advanced MiG warplanes. The U.S. and Britain refused to sell these advanced weapons so India turned to the USSR. India and the USSR reached an agreement in August 1962 (before the Cuban Missile Crisis) for the immediate purchase of twelve MiG-21s as well as for Soviet technical assistance in the manufacture of these aircraft in India. According to P.R. Chari, \"The intended Indian production of these relatively sophisticated aircraft could only have incensed Peking so soon after the withdrawal of Soviet technicians from China.\" In 1964, further Indian requests for American jets were rejected. However, Moscow offered loans, low prices and technical help in upgrading India's armaments industry. By 1964, India was a major purchaser of Soviet arms.\nAccording to Indian diplomat G. Parthasarathy, \"only after we got nothing from the US did arms supplies from the Soviet Union to India commence.\" India's favored relationship with Moscow continued into the 1980s, but ended after the collapse of Soviet Communism in 1991. In his memoirs, the then Soviet leader, Nikita Khrushchev, says: \"I think Mao created the Sino-Indian conflict precisely in order to draw the Soviet Union into it. He wanted to put us in the position of having no choice but to support him. He wanted to be the one who decided what we should do. But Mao made a mistake in thinking we would agree to sacrifice our independence in foreign policy.\"\nAftermath.\nChina.\nAccording to China's official military history, the war achieved China's policy objectives of securing borders in its western sector, as China continued its de facto control of the Aksai Chin.\nAccording to James Calvin, even though China won a military victory it lost in terms of its international image. China's first nuclear weapon test in October 1964 and its support of Pakistan in the 1965 India-Pakistan War tended to confirm the American view of communist world objectives, including Chinese influence over Pakistan.\nLora Saalman opined in a 2011 study of Chinese military publications, that while the war led to much blame, debates and acted as catalyst for the military modernisation of India, the war is now treated as basic reportage of facts with relatively diminished interest by Chinese analysts.\nThis changed during the 2017 Doklam crisis, when the Chinese official media made reference to the 1962 war in the context of renewed border tensions with India.\nIndia.\nThe aftermath of the war saw sweeping changes in the Indian military to prepare it for similar conflicts in the future, and placed pressure on Nehru, who was seen as responsible for failing to anticipate the Chinese attack on India. Indians reacted with a surge in patriotism and memorials were erected for many of the Indian troops who died in the war. Arguably, the main lesson India learned from the war was the need to strengthen its own defences and a shift from Nehru's foreign policy with China based on his stated concept of \"brotherhood\". Because of India's inability to anticipate Chinese aggression, Nehru faced harsh criticism from government officials, for having promoted pacifist relations with China. Indian President Radhakrishnan said that Nehru's government was naive and negligent about preparations, and Nehru admitted \"We had been living in a world of our own making\". According to Inder Malhotra, a former editor of \"The Times of India\" and a commentator for \"The Indian Express\", Indian politicians invested more effort in removing Defence Minister Krishna Menon than in actually waging war. Menon's favouritism weakened the Indian Army, and national morale dimmed. The public saw the war as a political and military debacle. Though the demand to deploy air force was raised, American envoy John Kenneth Galbraith and Indian intelligence officer B. N. Mullick had advised against the use of air force believing that the Chinese would bomb Indian cities in retaliation. India ultimately refrained from using the Indian Air Force as it lacked the defence equipments to counter Chinese retaliation. Indians in general became highly sceptical of China and its military. Many Indians view the war as a betrayal of India's attempts at establishing a long-standing peace with China and started to question the once popular \"Hindi-Chini bhai-bhai\" (meaning \"Indians and Chinese are brothers\"). The war also put an end to Nehru's earlier hopes that India and China would form a strong Asian Axis to counteract the increasing influence of the Cold War bloc superpowers.\nThe unpreparedness of the army was blamed on Defence Minister Menon, who resigned his government post to allow for someone who might modernise India's military. India's policy of weaponisation via indigenous sources and self-sufficiency was thus cemented. Sensing a weakened army, Pakistan, a close ally of China, began a policy of provocation against India by infiltrating Jammu and Kashmir and ultimately triggering the Second Kashmir War with India in 1965 and Indo-Pakistani war of 1971. The attack of 1965 was successfully stopped and ceasefire was negotiated under international pressure. In the Indo-Pakistani war of 1971 India won a clear victory, resulting in liberation of Bangladesh (formerly East-Pakistan).\nAs a result of the war, the Indian government commissioned an investigation, resulting in the classified Henderson Brooks\u2013Bhagat Report on the causes of the war and the reasons for failure. India's performance in high-altitude combat in 1962 led to an overhaul of the Indian Army in terms of doctrine, training, organisation and equipment. Neville Maxwell claimed that the Indian role in international affairs after the border war was also greatly reduced after the war and India's standing in the non-aligned movement suffered. The Indian government has attempted to keep the Hendersen-Brooks-Bhagat Report secret for decades, although portions of it have recently been leaked by Neville Maxwell.\nAccording to James Calvin, India gained many benefits from the 1962 conflict. This war united the country as never before. India got 32,000 square miles (8.3 million hectares, 83,000\u00a0km2) of disputed territory even if it felt that NEFA was hers all along. The new Indian republic had avoided international alignments; by asking for help during the war, India demonstrated its willingness to accept military aid from several sectors. And, finally, India recognised the serious weaknesses in its army. It would more than double its military manpower in the next two years and it would work hard to resolve the military's training and logistic problems to later become the second-largest army in the world. India's efforts to improve its military posture significantly enhanced its army's capabilities and preparedness.\nInternment and deportation of Chinese Indians.\nSoon after the end of the war, the Indian government passed the Defence of India Act in December 1962, permitting the \"apprehension and detention in custody of any person [suspected] of being of hostile origin.\" The broad language of the act allowed for the arrest of any person simply for having a Chinese surname, Chinese ancestry or a Chinese spouse. The Indian government incarcerated thousands of Chinese-Indians in an internment camp in Deoli, Rajasthan, where they were held for years without trial. The last internees were not released until 1967. Thousands more Chinese-Indians were forcibly deported or coerced to leave India. Nearly all internees had their properties sold off or looted. Even after their release, the Chinese Indians faced many restrictions in their freedom. They could not travel freely until the mid-1990s.\nSubsequent conflicts between India and China.\nIndia has also had some military conflicts with China after the 1962 war. In late 1967, there were two conflicts in which both countries clashed in Sikkim. These conflicts were dubbed the \"Nathu La\" and \"Cho La\" clashes respectively, in which advancing Chinese forces were forced to withdraw from Sikkim, then a protectorate of India and later a state of India after its annexation in 1975. In the 1987 Sino-Indian skirmish, both sides showed military restraint and it was a bloodless conflict. In 2017 the two countries once again were involved in a military standoff, in which several troops were injured. In 2020, soldiers were killed in skirmishes for the first time since the war ended. In 2022, dozens of Chinese and Indian soldiers were injured after a clash in Yangtse between both countries.\nImpacts in Pakistan.\nAfter the Sino-Indian border war, Pakistan established close military and strategic relations with China and signed the Sino-Pakistan Agreement to delineate the Sino-Pakistan border.\nIn the aftermath of India's defeat the United States shipped arms to India, which prompted a cooling off in Pakistan-United States relations. The United States did not provide advance notice to Pakistan of the arms' shipment and ignored Pakistan's concerns that these arms might be used by India against Pakistan. Additionally, Ayub Khan was disappointed that Pakistan's decision not to take advantage of Indian vulnerabilities during its war with China was not rewarded with serious United States efforts in negotiations to settle the Kashmir dispute. Convinced that diplomatic solutions would not favor Pakistan, Pakistan launched \"Operation Gibraltar\" against India, which escalated to the Indo-Pakistani War of 1965, with results favoring India.\nDiplomatic process.\nIn 1993 and 1996, the two sides signed the Sino-Indian Bilateral Peace and Tranquility Accords, agreements to maintain peace and tranquility along the Line of Actual Control. Ten meetings of a Sino-Indian Joint Working Group (SIJWG) and five of an expert group have taken place to determine where the LoAC lies, but little progress has occurred.\nOn 20 November 2006, Indian politicians from Arunachal Pradesh expressed their concern over Chinese military modernization and appealed to parliament to take a harder stance on the PRC following a military buildup on the border similar to that in 1962. Additionally, China's military aid to Pakistan as well is a matter of concern to the Indian public, as the two sides have engaged in various wars.\nOn 6 July 2006, the historic Silk Road passing through this territory via the Nathu La pass was reopened. Both sides have agreed to resolve the issues by peaceful means.\nIn October 2011, it was stated that India and China will formulate a border mechanism to handle different perceptions as to the Line of Actual Control and resume the bilateral army exercises between the Indian and Chinese army from early 2012.\nMilitary awards.\nIndian gallantry award winners from the army include 3 Param Vir Chakra awardees, 20 Maha Vir Chakra awardees and 67 Vir Chakra awardees. Indian Air Force personnel to get the award include 1 Maha Vir Chakra awardee and 8 Vir Chakra awardees.\nSantu Jouharmal Shahaney, an IOFS officer, who served as the first Indian Director General Indian Ordnance Factories (DGOF). He was awarded Padma Shri in 1962, by the Government of India, in the Civil Service category, for his contributions during the war.\nIndia.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Legend/styles.css\" /&gt;\u00a0\u00a0This along with the *, indicates posthumously presented awards.\nIn popular culture.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe old soldier broke in. \"All the time they were quarreling with us these last two years over the boundary lines, they were planning. 'Our line is five thousand years old,' we said. 'Ours is eight thousand,' they said. Bitterness on both sides! But we never thought then that they would attack.\"\n -- Pearl S. Buck\n, \"Mandala\"\nPearl S. Buck's \"Mandala\" has an account of the war and the predicament of the Indian government and the army in the face of the better-equipped and organised Chinese forces. The central character in the novel, a Maharana of Mewar, has his son fighting the Chinese in the war and dies in the battle of Chushul. Australian author Jon Cleary wrote a novel set during the conflict, \"The Pulse of Danger\" (1966).\nIn 1963, against the backdrop of the Sino-Indian War, Lata Mangeshkar sang the patriotic song \"Aye Mere Watan Ke Logo\" (literally, \"Oh, the People of My Country\") in the presence of Nehru. The song, composed by C. Ramchandra and written by Pradeep, is said to have brought the Prime Minister to tears.\nDepictions of the 1962 war in Indian cinema include: \"Haqeeqat\" (1964), \"Ratha Thilagam\" (1963), \"1962: My Country Land\" (2016), \"Tubelight\" (2017), \"\" (2019) based on the life of Jaswant Singh Rawat, \"Subedar Joginder Singh\" (2017) about soldier Joginder Singh. \"Paltan\" (2018) is based on the later 1967 Nathu La and Cho La clashes along the Sikkim border and is set just after 1962 war.\n\"\" is a 2021 Indian web series based on the Battle of Rezang La during the war. It released on Hotstar, with its release being advanced due to the 2020\u20132021 China\u2013India skirmishes.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "29427", "revid": "962881908", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29427", "title": "Spacetime interval", "text": ""}
{"id": "29429", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29429", "title": "Spiel Des Jahres", "text": ""}
{"id": "29430", "revid": "23939382", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29430", "title": "Simple module", "text": "Type of module over a ring\nIn mathematics, specifically in ring theory, the simple modules over a ring \"R\" are the (left or right) modules over \"R\" that are non-zero and have no non-zero proper submodules. Equivalently, a module \"M\" is simple if and only if every cyclic submodule generated by a non-zero element of \"M\" equals \"M\". Simple modules form building blocks for the modules of finite length, and they are analogous to the simple groups in group theory.\nIn this article, all modules will be assumed to be right unital modules over a ring \"R\".\nExamples.\nZ-modules are the same as abelian groups, so a simple Z-module is an abelian group which has no non-zero proper subgroups. These are the cyclic groups of prime order.\nIf \"I\" is a right ideal of \"R\", then \"I\" is simple as a right module if and only if \"I\" is a minimal non-zero right ideal: If \"M\" is a non-zero proper submodule of \"I\", then it is also a right ideal, so \"I\" is not minimal. Conversely, if \"I\" is not minimal, then there is a non-zero right ideal \"J\" properly contained in \"I\". \"J\" is a right submodule of \"I\", so \"I\" is not simple.\nIf \"I\" is a right ideal of \"R\", then the quotient module \"R\"/\"I\" is simple if and only if \"I\" is a maximal right ideal: If \"M\" is a non-zero proper submodule of \"R\"/\"I\", then the preimage of \"M\" under the quotient map \"R\" \u2192 \"R\"/\"I\" is a right ideal which is not equal to \"R\" and which properly contains \"I\". Therefore, \"I\" is not maximal. Conversely, if \"I\" is not maximal, then there is a right ideal \"J\" properly containing \"I\". The quotient map \"R\"/\"I\" \u2192 \"R\"/\"J\" has a non-zero kernel which is not equal to \"R\"/\"I\", and therefore \"R\"/\"I\" is not simple.\nEvery simple \"R\"-module is isomorphic to a quotient \"R\"/\"m\" where \"m\" is a maximal right ideal of \"R\". By the above paragraph, any quotient \"R\"/\"m\" is a simple module. Conversely, suppose that \"M\" is a simple \"R\"-module. Then, for any non-zero element \"x\" of \"M\", the cyclic submodule \"xR\" must equal \"M\". Fix such an \"x\". The statement that \"xR\" = \"M\" is equivalent to the surjectivity of the homomorphism \"R\" \u2192 \"M\" that sends \"r\" to \"xr\". The kernel of this homomorphism is a right ideal \"I\" of \"R\", and a standard theorem states that \"M\" is isomorphic to \"R\"/\"I\". By the above paragraph, we find that \"I\" is a maximal right ideal. Therefore, \"M\" is isomorphic to a quotient of \"R\" by a maximal right ideal.\nIf \"k\" is a field and \"G\" is a group, then a group representation of \"G\" is a left module over the group ring \"k\"[\"G\"] (for details, see the main page on this relationship). The simple \"k\"[\"G\"]-modules are also known as irreducible representations. A major aim of representation theory is to understand the irreducible representations of groups.\nBasic properties of simple modules.\nThe simple modules are precisely the modules of length 1; this is a reformulation of the definition.\nEvery simple module is indecomposable, but the converse is in general not true.\nEvery simple module is cyclic, that is it is generated by one element.\nNot every module has a simple submodule; consider for instance the Z-module Z in light of the first example above.\nLet \"M\" and \"N\" be (left or right) modules over the same ring, and let \"f\" : \"M\" \u2192 \"N\" be a module homomorphism. If \"M\" is simple, then \"f\" is either the zero homomorphism or injective because the kernel of \"f\" is a submodule of \"M\". If \"N\" is simple, then \"f\" is either the zero homomorphism or surjective because the image of \"f\" is a submodule of \"N\". If \"M\" = \"N\", then \"f\" is an endomorphism of \"M\", and if \"M\" is simple, then the prior two statements imply that \"f\" is either the zero homomorphism or an isomorphism. Consequently, the endomorphism ring of any simple module is a division ring. This result is known as Schur's lemma.\nThe converse of Schur's lemma is not true in general. For example, the Z-module Q is not simple, but its endomorphism ring is isomorphic to the field Q.\nSimple modules and composition series.\nIf \"M\" is a module which has a non-zero proper submodule \"N\", then there is a short exact sequence\nformula_1\nA common approach to proving a fact about \"M\" is to show that the fact is true for the center term of a short exact sequence when it is true for the left and right terms, then to prove the fact for \"N\" and \"M\"/\"N\". If \"N\" has a non-zero proper submodule, then this process can be repeated. This produces a chain of submodules\nformula_2\nIn order to prove the fact this way, one needs conditions on this sequence and on the modules \"M\"\"i\"\u2009/\"M\"\"i\"+1. One particularly useful condition is that the length of the sequence is finite and each quotient module \"M\"\"i\"\u2009/\"M\"\"i\"+1 is simple. In this case the sequence is called a composition series for \"M\". In order to prove a statement inductively using composition series, the statement is first proved for simple modules, which form the base case of the induction, and then the statement is proved to remain true under an extension of a module by a simple module. For example, the Fitting lemma shows that the endomorphism ring of a finite length indecomposable module is a local ring, so that the strong Krull\u2013Schmidt theorem holds and the category of finite length modules is a Krull-Schmidt category.\nThe Jordan\u2013H\u00f6lder theorem and the Schreier refinement theorem describe the relationships amongst all composition series of a single module. The Grothendieck group ignores the order in a composition series and views every finite length module as a formal sum of simple modules. Over semisimple rings, this is no loss as every module is a semisimple module and so a direct sum of simple modules. Ordinary character theory provides better arithmetic control, and uses simple C\"G\" modules to understand the structure of finite groups \"G\". Modular representation theory uses Brauer characters to view modules as formal sums of simple modules, but is also interested in how those simple modules are joined together within composition series. This is formalized by studying the Ext functor and describing the module category in various ways including quivers (whose nodes are the simple modules and whose edges are composition series of non-semisimple modules of length 2) and Auslander\u2013Reiten theory where the associated graph has a vertex for every indecomposable module.\nThe Jacobson density theorem.\nAn important advance in the theory of simple modules was the Jacobson density theorem. The Jacobson density theorem states:\nLet \"U\" be a simple right \"R\"-module and let \"D\" = End\"R\"(\"U\"). Let \"A\" be any \"D\"-linear operator on \"U\" and let \"X\" be a finite \"D\"-linearly independent subset of \"U\". Then there exists an element \"r\" of \"R\" such that \"x\"\u22c5\"A\" = \"x\"\u22c5\"r\" for all \"x\" in \"X\".\nIn particular, any primitive ring may be viewed as (that is, isomorphic to) a ring of \"D\"-linear operators on some \"D\"-space.\nA consequence of the Jacobson density theorem is Wedderburn's theorem; namely that any right Artinian simple ring is isomorphic to a full matrix ring of \"n\"-by-\"n\" matrices over a division ring for some \"n\". This can also be established as a corollary of the Artin\u2013Wedderburn theorem.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "29431", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29431", "title": "Skew field", "text": ""}
{"id": "29438", "revid": "34074157", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29438", "title": "Sonar", "text": "Acoustic sensing method\nSonar (sound navigation and ranging or sonic navigation and ranging) is a technique that uses sound propagation (usually underwater, as in submarine navigation) to navigate, measure distances (ranging), communicate with or detect objects on or under the surface of the water, such as other vessels.\n\"Sonar\" can refer to one of two types of technology: \"passive\" sonar means listening for the sound made by vessels; \"active\" sonar means emitting pulses of sounds and listening for echoes. Sonar may be used as a means of acoustic location and of measurement of the echo characteristics of \"targets\" in the water. Acoustic location in air was used before the introduction of radar. Sonar may also be used for robot navigation, and sodar (an upward-looking in-air sonar) is used for atmospheric investigations. The term \"sonar\" is also used for the equipment used to generate and receive the sound. The acoustic frequencies used in sonar systems vary from very low (infrasonic) to extremely high (ultrasonic). The study of underwater sound is known as underwater acoustics or hydroacoustics.\nThe first recorded use of the technique was in 1490 by Leonardo da Vinci, who used a tube inserted into the water to detect vessels by ear. It was developed during World War I to counter the growing threat of submarine warfare, with an operational passive sonar system in use by 1918. Modern active sonar systems use an acoustic transducer to generate a sound wave which is reflected from target objects.\nHistory.\nAlthough some animals (dolphins, bats, some shrews, and others) have used sound for communication and object detection for millions of years, use by humans in the water was initially recorded by Leonardo da Vinci in 1490: a tube inserted into the water was said to be used to detect vessels by placing an ear to the tube.\nIn the late 19th century, an underwater bell was used as an ancillary to lighthouses or lightships to provide warning of hazards.\nThe use of sound to \"echo-locate\" underwater in the same way as bats use sound for aerial navigation seems to have been prompted by the disaster of 1912. The world's first patent for an underwater echo-ranging device was filed at the British Patent Office by English meteorologist Lewis Fry Richardson a month after the sinking of \"Titanic\". A German physicist Alexander Behm obtained a patent for an echo sounder in 1913.\nThe Canadian engineer Reginald Fessenden, while working for the Submarine Signal Company in Boston, Massachusetts, built an experimental system beginning in 1912, a system later tested in Boston Harbor, and in 1914 from the U.S. Revenue Cutter \"Miami\" on the Grand Banks off Newfoundland. In that test, Fessenden demonstrated depth sounding, underwater communications (Morse code) and echo ranging, detecting an iceberg at a range. The \"Fessenden oscillator\", operated at about 500\u00a0Hz frequency, was unable to determine the bearing of the iceberg due to the 3-metre wavelength and the small dimension of the transducer's radiating face, less than &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u20443 wavelength in diameter. In 1915, the ten Montreal-built British H-class submarines launched were equipped with Fessenden oscillators.\nDuring World War I the need to detect submarines prompted more research into the use of sound. The British made early use of underwater listening devices called hydrophones. The French physicist Paul Langevin, working with a Russian immigrant electrical engineer Constantin Chilowsky, worked on the development of active sound devices for detecting submarines in 1915. Although piezoelectric and magnetostrictive transducers later superseded the electrostatic transducers they used, this work influenced future designs. Lightweight sound-sensitive plastic film and fibre optics have been used for hydrophones. Terfenol-D and lead magnesium niobate (PMN) have been developed for projectors.\nASDIC.\nIn 1916, under the British Board of Invention and Research, Canadian physicist Robert William Boyle took on the active sound detection project with A. B. Wood, producing a prototype for testing in mid-1917. This work for the Anti-Submarine Division of the British Naval Staff was undertaken in utmost secrecy, and used quartz piezoelectric crystals to produce the world's first practical underwater active sound detection apparatus.\nTo maintain secrecy, no mention of sound experimentation or quartz was made \u2013 the word used to describe the early work (\"supersonics\") was changed to \"ASD\"ics, and the quartz material to \"ASD\"ivite: \"ASD\" for \"Anti-Submarine Division\", hence the British acronym \"ASDIC\". In 1939, in response to a question from the \"Oxford English Dictionary\", the Admiralty made up the story that it stood for \"Allied Submarine Detection Investigation Committee\", and this is still widely believed, though no committee bearing this name has been found in the Admiralty archives.\nBy 1918, Britain and France had built prototype active systems. The British tested their ASDIC on in 1920 and started production in 1922. The 6th Destroyer Flotilla had ASDIC-equipped vessels in 1923. An anti-submarine school HMS \"Osprey\" and a training flotilla of four vessels were established on Portland in 1924.\nBy the outbreak of World War II, the Royal Navy had five sets for different surface ship classes, and others for submarines, incorporated into a complete anti-submarine system. The effectiveness of early ASDIC was hampered by the use of the depth charge as an anti-submarine weapon. This required an attacking vessel to pass over a submerged contact before dropping charges over the stern, resulting in a loss of ASDIC contact in the moments leading up to attack. The hunter was effectively firing blind, during which time a submarine commander could take evasive action. This situation was remedied with new tactics and new weapons.\nThe tactical improvements developed by Frederic John Walker included the creeping attack. Two anti-submarine ships were needed for this, usually sloops or corvettes. One, the \"directing ship\" tracked the target submarine on ASDIC, while the second ship, with her ASDIC turned off and running at 5 knots, started an attack as directed. The low speed of the approach meant the submarine could not predict when depth charges were going to be released. Any evasive action was detected by the directing ship and steering orders to the attacking ship given accordingly.\nThe new weapons to deal with the ASDIC blind spot were \"ahead-throwing weapons\", such as Hedgehogs and later Squids, which projected warheads at a target ahead of the attacker and still in ASDIC contact. These allowed a single escort to make better aimed attacks on submarines. Developments during the war resulted in British ASDIC sets that used several different shapes of beam, such as the Q attachment to the Type 144 set, which was aligned at a deeper angle. The Type 147B set, which had an articulated transducer, enabled operators to cover the blind spot. Another development was the FIDO Homing Torpedo, which aimed itself at the target submarine using passive sonar.\nEarly in World War II (September 1940), British ASDIC technology was transferred for free to the United States. Research on ASDIC and underwater sound was expanded in the UK and in the US. Many new types of military sound detection were developed. These included sonobuoys, first developed by the British in 1944 under the codename \"High Tea\", dipping/dunking sonar and mine-detection sonar. This work formed the basis for post-war developments related to countering the nuclear submarine.\nSONAR.\nDuring the 1930s American engineers developed their own underwater sound-detection technology, and important discoveries were made, such as the existence of thermoclines and their effects on sound waves. Americans began to use the term \"SONAR\" for their systems, coined by Frederick Hunt to be the equivalent of RADAR.\nUS Navy Underwater Sound Laboratory.\nIn 1917, the US Navy acquired J. Warren Horton's services for the first time. On leave from Bell Labs, he served the government as a technical expert, first at the experimental station at Nahant, Massachusetts, and later at US Naval Headquarters, in London, England. At Nahant he applied the newly developed vacuum tube, then associated with the formative stages of the field of applied science now known as electronics, to the detection of underwater signals. As a result, the carbon button microphone, which had been used in earlier detection equipment, was replaced by the precursor of the modern hydrophone. Also during this period, he experimented with methods for towing detection. This was due to the increased sensitivity of his device. The principles are still used in modern towed sonar systems.\nTo meet the defense needs of Great Britain, Horton was sent to England to install in the Irish Sea bottom-mounted hydrophones connected to a shore listening post by submarine cable. While this equipment was being loaded on the cable-laying vessel, World War I ended and he returned home.\nDuring World War II, Horton continued to develop sonar systems that could detect submarines, mines, and torpedoes. He published \"Fundamentals of Sonar\" in 1957 as chief research consultant at the US Navy Underwater Sound Laboratory. He held this position until 1959 when he became technical director, a position he held until mandatory retirement in 1963.\nMaterials and designs in the US and Japan.\nThere was little progress in US sonar from 1915 to 1940. In 1940, US sonars typically consisted of a magnetostrictive transducer and an array of nickel tubes connected to a 1-foot-diameter steel plate attached back-to-back to a Rochelle salt crystal in a spherical housing. This assembly penetrated the ship hull and was manually rotated to the desired angle. The piezoelectric Rochelle salt crystal had better parameters, but the magnetostrictive unit was much more reliable. \nHigh losses to US merchant supply shipping early in World War II led to large scale high priority US research in the field, pursuing both improvements in magnetostrictive transducer parameters and Rochelle salt reliability. Ammonium dihydrogen phosphate (ADP), a superior alternative, was found as a replacement for Rochelle salt; the first application was a replacement of the 24\u00a0kHz Rochelle-salt transducers. Within nine months, Rochelle salt was obsolete. The ADP manufacturing facility grew from few dozen personnel in early 1940 to several thousands in 1942.\nOne of the earliest application of ADP crystals were hydrophones for acoustic mines. The crystals were specified for low-frequency cutoff at 5\u00a0Hz, withstanding mechanical shock for deployment from aircraft from , and ability to survive neighbouring mine explosions. One of key features of ADP reliability is its zero aging characteristics; the crystal keeps its parameters even over prolonged storage.\nAnother application was for acoustic homing torpedoes. Two pairs of directional hydrophones were mounted on the torpedo nose, in the horizontal and vertical plane; the difference signals from the pairs were used to steer the torpedo left-right and up-down. A countermeasure was developed: the targeted submarine discharged an effervescent chemical, and the torpedo went after the noisier fizzy decoy. The counter-countermeasure was a torpedo with active sonar \u2013 a transducer was added to the torpedo nose, and the microphones were listening for its reflected periodic tone bursts. The transducers comprised identical rectangular crystal plates arranged to diamond-shaped areas in staggered rows.\nPassive sonar arrays for submarines were developed from ADP crystals. Several crystal assemblies were arranged in a steel tube, vacuum-filled with castor oil, and sealed. The tubes then were mounted in parallel arrays.\nThe standard US Navy scanning sonar at the end of World War II operated at 18\u00a0kHz, using an array of ADP crystals. Desired longer range, however, required use of lower frequencies. The required dimensions were too big for ADP crystals, so in the early 1950s magnetostrictive and barium titanate piezoelectric systems were developed, but these had problems achieving uniform impedance characteristics, and the beam pattern suffered. Barium titanate was then replaced with more stable lead zirconate titanate (PZT), and the frequency was lowered to 5\u00a0kHz.\nThe US fleet used this material in the AN/SQS-23 sonar for several decades. The SQS-23 sonar first used magnetostrictive nickel transducers, but these weighed several tons, and nickel was expensive and considered a critical material; piezoelectric transducers were therefore substituted. The sonar was a large array of 432 individual transducers. At first, the transducers were unreliable, showing mechanical and electrical failures and deteriorating soon after installation; they were also produced by several vendors, had different designs, and their characteristics were different enough to impair the array's performance. The policy to allow repair of individual transducers was then sacrificed, and \"expendable modular design\", sealed non-repairable modules, was chosen instead, eliminating the problem with seals and other extraneous mechanical parts.\nThe Imperial Japanese Navy at the onset of World War II used projectors based on quartz. These were big and heavy, especially if designed for lower frequencies; the one for Type 91 set, operating at 9\u00a0kHz, had a diameter of and was driven by an oscillator with 5\u00a0kW power and 7\u00a0kV of output amplitude. The Type 93 projectors consisted of solid sandwiches of quartz, assembled into spherical cast iron bodies. \nThe Type 93 sonars were later replaced with Type 3, which followed German design and used magnetostrictive projectors. The projectors consisted of two rectangular identical independent units in a cast-iron rectangular body about . The exposed area was half the wavelength wide and three wavelengths high. The magnetostrictive cores were made from 4\u00a0mm stampings of nickel, and later of an iron-aluminium alloy with aluminium content between 12.7% and 12.9%. The power was provided from a 2\u00a0kW at 3.8\u00a0kV, with polarization from a 20\u00a0V, 8\u00a0A DC source.\nThe passive hydrophones of the Imperial Japanese Navy were based on moving-coil design, Rochelle salt piezo transducers, and carbon microphones.\nLater developments in transducers.\nMagnetostrictive transducers were pursued after World War II as an alternative to piezoelectric ones. Nickel scroll-wound ring transducers were used for high-power low-frequency operations, with size up to in diameter, probably the largest individual sonar transducers ever. The advantage of metals is their high tensile strength and low input electrical impedance, but they have electrical losses and lower coupling coefficient than PZT, whose tensile strength can be increased by prestressing. \nOther materials were also tried. Nonmetallic ferrites were promising for their low electrical conductivity resulting in low eddy current losses, Metglas offered high coupling coefficient, but they were inferior to PZT overall. In the 1970s, compounds of rare earths and iron were discovered with superior magnetomechanic properties, namely the Terfenol-D alloy. This made possible new designs, e.g. a hybrid magnetostrictive-piezoelectric transducer. The most recent of these improved magnetostrictive materials is Galfenol.\nOther types of transducers include variable-reluctance (or moving-armature, or electromagnetic) transducers, where magnetic force acts on the surfaces of gaps, and moving coil (or electrodynamic) transducers, similar to conventional speakers; the latter are used in underwater sound calibration, due to their very low resonance frequencies and flat broadband characteristics above them.\nActive sonar.\nActive sonar uses a sound transmitter (or projector) and a receiver. When the two are in the same place it is monostatic operation. When the transmitter and receiver are separated it is bistatic operation. When more transmitters (or more receivers) are used, again spatially separated, it is multistatic operation. Most sonars are used monostatically with the same array often being used for transmission and reception. Active sonobuoy fields may be operated multistatically.\nActive sonar creates a pulse of sound, often called a \"ping\", and then listens for reflections (echo) of the pulse. This pulse of sound is generally created electronically using a sonar projector consisting of a signal generator, power amplifier and electro-acoustic transducer/array. A transducer is a device that can transmit and receive acoustic signals (\"pings\"). A beamformer is usually employed to concentrate the acoustic power into a beam, which may be swept to cover the required search angles. \nGenerally, the electro-acoustic transducers are of the Tonpilz type and their design may be optimised to achieve maximum efficiency over the widest bandwidth, in order to optimise performance of the overall system. Occasionally, the acoustic pulse may be created by other means, e.g. chemically using explosives, airguns or plasma sound sources.\nTo measure the distance to an object, the time from transmission of a pulse to reception is measured and converted into a range using the known speed of sound. To measure the bearing, several hydrophones are used, and the set measures the relative arrival time to each, or with an array of hydrophones, by measuring the relative amplitude in beams formed through a process called beamforming. Use of an array reduces the spatial response so that to provide wide cover multibeam systems are used.\nThe target signal, if present, together with noise is then passed through forms of signal processing, which for simple sonars may be just energy measurement. It is then presented to some form of decision device, that calls the output either the required signal or noise. This decision device may be an operator with headphones or a display. In more sophisticated sonars this function may be carried out by software. Further processes may be carried out to classify the target and localise it, as well as measuring its velocity.\nThe pulse may be at constant frequency or a chirp of changing frequency, to allow pulse compression on reception. Simple sonars generally use the former with a filter wide enough to cover possible Doppler changes due to target movement, while more complex ones generally include the latter technique. Since digital processing became available pulse compression has usually been implemented using digital correlation techniques. Military sonars often have multiple beams to provide all-round cover, while simple ones only cover a narrow arc, although the beam may be rotated, relatively slowly, by mechanical scanning.\nParticularly when single frequency transmissions are used, the Doppler effect can be used to measure the radial speed of a target. The difference in frequency between the transmitted and received signal is measured and converted into a velocity. Since Doppler shifts can be introduced by either receiver or target motion, allowance has to be made for the radial speed of the searching platform.\nOne useful small sonar is similar in appearance to a waterproof flashlight. The head is pointed into the water, a button is pressed, and the device displays the distance to the target. Another variant is a \"fishfinder\" that shows a small display with shoals of fish. Some civilian sonars, which are not designed for stealth, approach active military sonars in capability, with three-dimensional displays of the area near the boat.\nWhen active sonar is used to measure the distance from the transducer to the bottom, it is known as echo sounding. Similar methods may be used looking upward for wave measurement.\nActive sonar is also used to measure distance through water between two sonar transducers or a combination of a hydrophone (underwater acoustic microphone) and projector (underwater acoustic speaker). When a hydrophone/transducer receives a specific interrogation signal it responds by transmitting a specific reply signal. To measure distance, one transducer/projector transmits an interrogation signal and measures the time between this transmission and the receipt of the other transducer/hydrophone reply. \nThe time difference, scaled by the speed of sound through water and divided by two, is the distance between the two platforms. This technique, when used with multiple transducers/hydrophones/projectors, can calculate the relative positions of static and moving objects in water.\nIn combat situations, an active pulse can be detected by an enemy and will reveal a submarine's position at twice the maximum distance that the submarine can itself detect a contact and give clues as to the submarine's identity based on the characteristics of the outgoing ping. For these reasons, active sonar is not frequently used by military submarines.\nA very directional, but low-efficiency, type of sonar, used by fisheries, military, and for port security, makes use of a complex nonlinear feature of water known as non-linear sonar, the virtual transducer being known as a \"parametric array\".\nProject Artemis.\nProject Artemis was an experimental research and development project in the late 1950s to mid 1960s to examine acoustic propagation and signal processing for a low-frequency active sonar system that might be used for ocean surveillance. A secondary objective was examination of engineering problems of fixed active bottom systems. The receiving array was located on the slope of Plantagnet Bank off Bermuda. The active source array was deployed from the converted World War II tanker . Elements of Artemis were used experimentally after the main experiment was terminated.\nTransponder.\nThis is an active sonar device that receives a specific stimulus and immediately (or with a delay) retransmits the received signal or a predetermined one. Transponders can be used to remotely activate or recover subsea equipment.\nPerformance prediction.\nA sonar target is small relative to the sphere, centred around the emitter, on which it is located. Therefore, the power of the reflected signal is very low, several orders of magnitude less than the original signal. Even if the reflected signal was of the same power, the following example (using hypothetical values) shows the problem: Suppose a sonar system is capable of emitting a 10,000\u00a0W/m2 signal at 1\u00a0m, and detecting a 0.001 W/m2\u00a0signal. At 100\u00a0m the signal will be 1\u00a0W/m2, due to the inverse-square law. \nIf the entire signal is reflected from a 10\u00a0m2 target, it will be at 0.001\u00a0W/m2 when it reaches the emitter, i.e. just detectable. However, the original signal will remain above 0.001\u00a0W/m2 until 3000\u00a0m. Any 10\u00a0m2 target between 100 and 3000\u00a0m using a similar or better system would be able to detect the pulse, but would not be detected by the emitter. The detectors must be very sensitive to pick up the echoes. Since the original signal is much more powerful, it can be detected many times further than twice the range of the sonar (as in the example).\nActive sonar have two performance limitations: due to noise and reverberation. In general, one or other of these will dominate, so that the two effects can be initially considered separately.\nIn noise-limited conditions at initial detection:\nSL \u2212 2PL + TS \u2212 (NL \u2212 AG) = DT,\nwhere SL is the source level, PL is the propagation loss (sometimes referred to as transmission loss), TS is the target strength, NL is the noise level, AG is the array gain of the receiving array (sometimes approximated by its directivity index) and DT is the detection threshold.\nIn reverberation-limited conditions at initial detection (neglecting array gain):\nSL \u2212 2PL + TS = RL + DT,\nwhere RL is the reverberation level, and the other factors are as before.\nUpward looking sonar.\nAn upward looking sonar (ULS) is a sonar device pointed upwards looking towards the surface of the sea. It is used for similar purposes as downward looking sonar, but has some unique applications such as measuring sea ice thickness, roughness and concentration, or measuring air entrainment from bubble plumes during rough seas. Often it is moored on the bottom of the ocean or floats on a taut line mooring at a constant depth of perhaps 100 m. They may also be used by submarines, AUVs, and floats such as the Argo float.\nPassive sonar.\nPassive sonar listens without transmitting. It is often employed in military settings, although it is also used in science applications, \"e.g.\", detecting fish for presence/absence studies in various aquatic environments \u2013 see also passive acoustics and passive radar. In the very broadest usage, this term can encompass virtually any analytical technique involving remotely generated sound, though it is usually restricted to techniques applied in an aquatic environment.\nIdentifying sound sources.\nPassive sonar has a wide variety of techniques for identifying the source of a detected sound. For example, U.S. vessels usually operate 60 Hertz (Hz) alternating current power systems. If transformers or generators are mounted without proper vibration insulation from the hull or become flooded, the 60\u00a0Hz sound from the windings can be emitted from the submarine or ship. This can help to identify its nationality, as all European submarines and nearly every other nation's submarine have 50\u00a0Hz power systems. Intermittent sound sources (such as a wrench being dropped), called \"transients,\" may also be detectable to passive sonar. Until fairly recently, an experienced, trained operator identified signals, but now computers may do this.\nPassive sonar systems may have large sonic databases, but the sonar operator usually finally classifies the signals manually. A computer system frequently uses these databases to identify classes of ships, actions (i.e. the speed of a ship, or the type of weapon released and the most effective countermeasures to employ), and even particular ships.\nNoise limitations.\nPassive sonar on vehicles is usually severely limited because of noise generated by the vehicle. For this reason, many submarines operate nuclear reactors that can be cooled without pumps, using silent convection, or fuel cells or batteries, which can also run silently. Vehicles' propellers are also designed and precisely machined to emit minimal noise. High-speed propellers often create tiny bubbles in the water, and this cavitation has a distinct sound.\nThe sonar hydrophones may be towed behind the ship or submarine in order to reduce the effect of noise generated by the watercraft itself. Towed units also combat the thermocline, as the unit may be towed above or below the thermocline.\nThe display of most passive sonars used to be a two-dimensional waterfall display. The horizontal direction of the display is bearing. The vertical is frequency, or sometimes time. Another display technique is to color-code frequency-time information for bearing. More recent displays are generated by the computers, and mimic radar-type plan position indicator displays.\nPerformance prediction.\nUnlike active sonar, only one-way propagation is involved. Because of the different signal processing used, the minimal detectable signal-to-noise ratio will be different. The equation for determining the performance of a passive sonar is\nSL \u2212 PL = NL \u2212 AG + DT,\nwhere SL is the source level, PL is the propagation loss, NL is the noise level, AG is the array gain and DT is the detection threshold. The figure of merit of a passive sonar is\nFOM = SL + AG \u2212 (NL + DT).\nPerformance factors.\nThe detection, classification and localisation performance of a sonar depends on the environment and the receiving equipment, as well as the transmitting equipment in an active sonar or the target radiated noise in a passive sonar.\nSound propagation.\nSonar operation is affected by variations in sound speed, particularly in the vertical plane. Sound travels more slowly in fresh water than in sea water, though the difference is small. The speed is determined by the water's bulk modulus and mass density. The bulk modulus is affected by temperature, dissolved impurities (usually salinity), and pressure. The density effect is small. The speed of sound (in feet per second) is approximately:\n4388 + (11.25 \u00d7 temperature (in \u00b0F)) + (0.0182 \u00d7 depth (in feet)) + salinity (in parts-per-thousand ).\nThis empirically derived approximation equation is reasonably accurate for normal temperatures, concentrations of salinity and the range of most ocean depths. Ocean temperature varies with depth, but at between 30 and 100 meters there is often a marked change, called the thermocline, dividing the warmer surface water from the cold, still waters that make up the rest of the ocean. This can frustrate sonar, because a sound originating on one side of the thermocline tends to be bent, or refracted, through the thermocline. \nThe thermocline may be present in shallower coastal waters. Wave action will often mix the water column and eliminate the thermocline. Water pressure also affects sound propagation: higher pressure increases the sound speed, which causes the sound waves to refract away from the area of higher sound speed. The mathematical model of refraction is called Snell's law.\nIf the sound source is deep and the conditions are right, propagation may occur in the 'deep sound channel'. This provides extremely low propagation loss to a receiver in the channel. This is because of sound trapping in the channel with no losses at the boundaries. Similar propagation can occur in the 'surface duct' under suitable conditions. In this case, there are reflection losses at the surface.\nIn shallow water propagation is generally by repeated reflection at the surface and bottom, where considerable losses can occur.\nSound propagation is affected by absorption in the water itself as well as at the surface and bottom. This absorption depends upon frequency, with several different mechanisms in sea water. Long-range sonar uses low frequencies to minimise absorption effects.\nThe sea contains many sources of noise that interfere with the desired target echo or signature. The main noise sources are waves and shipping. The motion of the receiver through the water can also cause speed-dependent low frequency noise.\nScattering.\nWhen active sonar is used, scattering occurs from small objects in the sea as well as from the bottom and surface. This can be a major source of interference. This acoustic scattering is analogous to the scattering of the light from a car's headlights in fog: a high-intensity pencil beam will penetrate the fog to some extent, but broader-beam headlights emit much light in unwanted directions, much of which is scattered back to the observer, overwhelming that reflected from the target (\"white-out\"). For analogous reasons active sonar needs to transmit in a narrow beam to minimize scattering.\nThe scattering of sonar from objects (mines, pipelines, zooplankton, geological features, fish etc.) is how active sonar detects them, but this ability can be masked by strong scattering from false targets, or 'clutter'. Where they occur (under breaking waves; in ship wakes; in gas emitted from seabed seeps and leaks etc.), gas bubbles are powerful sources of clutter, and can readily hide targets. TWIPS (Twin Inverted Pulse Sonar) is currently the only sonar that can overcome this clutter problem. This is important as many recent conflicts have occurred in coastal waters, and the inability to detect whether mines are present or not present hazards and delays to military vessels, and also to aid convoys and merchant shipping trying to support the region long after the conflict has ceased.\nTarget characteristics.\nThe sound \"reflection\" characteristics of the target of an active sonar, such as a submarine, are known as its target strength. A complication is that echoes are also obtained from other objects in the sea such as whales, wakes, schools of fish and rocks.\nPassive sonar detects the target's \"radiated\" noise characteristics. The radiated spectrum comprises a continuous spectrum of noise with peaks at certain frequencies which can be used for classification.\nCountermeasures.\n\"Active\" (powered) countermeasures may be launched by a vessel under attack to raise the noise level, provide a large false target, and obscure the signature of the vessel itself.\n\"Passive\" (i.e., non-powered) countermeasures include:\nMilitary applications.\nModern naval warfare makes extensive use of both passive and active sonar from water-borne vessels, aircraft and fixed installations. Although active sonar was used by surface craft in World War II, submarines avoided the use of active sonar due to the potential for revealing their presence and position to enemy forces. However, the advent of modern signal-processing enabled the use of passive sonar as a primary means for search and detection operations. In 1987 a division of Japanese company Toshiba reportedly sold machinery to the Soviet Union that allowed their submarine propeller blades to be milled so that they became radically quieter, making the newer generation of submarines more difficult to detect.\nThe use of active sonar by a submarine to determine bearing is extremely rare and will not necessarily give high quality bearing or range information to the submarines fire control team. However, use of active sonar on surface ships is very common and is used by submarines when the tactical situation dictates that it is more important to determine the position of a hostile submarine than conceal their own position. With surface ships, it might be assumed that the threat is already tracking the ship with satellite data as any vessel around the emitting sonar will detect the emission. Having heard the signal, it is easy to identify the sonar equipment used (usually with its frequency) and its position (with the sound wave's energy). Active sonar is similar to radar in that, while it allows detection of targets at a certain range, it also enables the emitter to be detected at a far greater range, which is undesirable.\nSince active sonar reveals the presence and position of the operator, and does not allow exact classification of targets, it is used by fast (planes, helicopters) and by noisy platforms (most surface ships) but rarely by submarines. When active sonar is used by surface ships or submarines, it is typically activated very briefly at intermittent periods to minimize the risk of detection. Consequently, active sonar is normally considered a backup to passive sonar. In aircraft, active sonar is used in the form of disposable sonobuoys that are dropped in the aircraft's patrol area or in the vicinity of possible enemy sonar contacts.\nPassive sonar has several advantages, most importantly that it is silent. If the target radiated noise level is high enough, it can have a greater range than active sonar, and allows the target to be identified. Since any motorized object makes some noise, it may in principle be detected, depending on the level of noise emitted and the ambient noise level in the area, as well as the technology used. To simplify, passive sonar \"sees\" around the ship using it. On a submarine, nose-mounted passive sonar detects in directions of about 270\u00b0, centered on the ship's alignment, the hull-mounted array of about 160\u00b0 on each side, and the towed array of a full 360\u00b0. The invisible areas are due to the ship's own interference. \nOnce a signal is detected in a certain direction (which means that something makes sound in that direction, this is called broadband detection) it is possible to zoom in and analyze the signal received (narrowband analysis). This is generally done using a Fourier transform to show the different frequencies making up the sound. Since every engine makes a specific sound, it is straightforward to identify the object. Databases of unique engine sounds are part of what is known as \"acoustic intelligence\" or ACINT.\nAnother use of passive sonar is to determine the target's trajectory. This process is called target motion analysis (TMA), and the resultant \"solution\" is the target's range, course, and speed. TMA is done by marking from which direction the sound comes at different times, and comparing the motion with that of the operator's own ship. Changes in relative motion are analyzed using standard geometrical techniques along with some assumptions about limiting cases.\nPassive sonar is stealthy and very useful. I requires high-tech electronic components and is costly. It is generally deployed on expensive ships in the form of arrays to enhance detection. Surface ships use it to good effect. It is even better used by submarines, and it is used by airplanes and helicopters, mostly to a \"surprise effect\", since submarines can hide under thermal layers. If a submarine's commander believes he is alone, he may bring his boat closer to the surface and be easier to detect, or go deeper and faster, and thus make more sound.\nExamples of sonar applications in military use are given below. Many of the civil uses given in the following section may also be applicable to naval use.\nAnti-submarine warfare.\nUntil recently, ship sonars were usually made with hull mounted arrays, either amidships or at the bow. It was soon found after their initial use that a means of reducing flow noise was required. The first were made of canvas on a framework, then steel ones were used. Now domes are usually made of reinforced plastic or pressurized rubber. Such sonars are primarily active in operation. An example of a conventional hull mounted sonar is the SQS-56.\nBecause of the problems of ship noise, towed sonars are also used. These have the advantage of being able to be placed deeper in the water, but have limitations on their use in shallow water. These are called towed arrays (linear) or variable depth sonars (VDS) with 2/3D arrays. A problem is that the winches required to deploy/recover them are large and expensive. VDS sets are primarily active in operation, while towed arrays are passive.\nAn example of a modern active-passive ship towed sonar is Sonar 2087 made by Thales Underwater Systems.\nTorpedoes.\nModern torpedoes are generally fitted with an active/passive sonar. This may be used to home directly on the target, but wake homing torpedoes are also used. An early example of an acoustic homer was the Mark 37 torpedo.\nTorpedo countermeasures can be towed or free. An early example was the German \"Sieglinde\" device while the \"Bold\" was a chemical device. A widely used US device was the towed AN/SLQ-25 Nixie while the mobile submarine simulator (MOSS) was a free device. A modern alternative to the Nixie system is the UK Royal Navy S2170 Surface Ship Torpedo Defence system.\nMines.\nMines may be fitted with a sonar to detect, localize and recognize the required target. An example is the CAPTOR mine.\nMine countermeasures.\nMine countermeasure (MCM) sonar, sometimes called \"mine and obstacle avoidance sonar (MOAS)\", is a specialized type of sonar used for detecting small objects. Most MCM sonars are hull mounted but a few types are VDS design. An example of a hull mounted MCM sonar is the Type 2193 while the SQQ-32 mine-hunting sonar and Type 2093 systems are VDS designs.\nSubmarine navigation.\nSubmarines rely on sonar to a greater extent than surface ships as they cannot use radar in water. The sonar arrays may be hull mounted or towed. Information fitted on typical fits is given in and .\nAircraft.\nHelicopters can be used for antisubmarine warfare by deploying fields of active-passive sonobuoys or can operate dipping sonar, such as the AQS-13. Fixed wing aircraft can also deploy sonobuoys and have greater endurance and capacity to deploy them. Processing from the sonobuoys or dipping sonar can be on the aircraft or on ship. Dipping sonar has the advantage of being deployable to depths appropriate to daily conditions. Helicopters have also been used for mine countermeasure missions using towed sonars such as the AQS-20A.\nUnderwater communications.\nDedicated sonars can be fitted to ships and submarines for underwater communication.\nOcean surveillance.\nThe United States began a system of passive, fixed ocean surveillance systems in 1950 with the classified name Sound Surveillance System (SOSUS) with American Telephone and Telegraph Company (AT&amp;T), with its Bell Laboratories research and Western Electric manufacturing entities being contracted for development and installation. The systems exploited the SOFAR channel, also known as the deep sound channel, where a sound speed minimum creates a waveguide in which low frequency sound travels thousands of miles.\nAnalysis was based on an AT&amp;T sound spectrograph, which converted sound into a visual spectrogram representing a time\u2013frequency analysis of sound that was developed for speech analysis and modified to analyze low-frequency underwater sounds. That process was Low Frequency Analysis and Recording and the equipment was termed the Low Frequency Analyzer and Recorder, both with the acronym LOFAR. LOFAR research was termed \"Jezebel\" and led to usage in air and surface systems, particularly sonobuoys using the process and sometimes using \"Jezebel\" in their name. The proposed system offered such promise of long-range submarine detection that the Navy ordered immediate moves for implementation.\nBetween installation of a test array followed by a full scale, forty element, prototype operational array in 1951 and 1958 systems were installed in the Atlantic and then the Pacific under the unclassified name \"Project Caesar\". The original systems were terminated at classified shore stations designated Naval Facility (NAVFAC) explained as engaging in \"ocean research\" to cover their classified mission. The system was upgraded multiple times with more advanced cable allowing the arrays to be installed in ocean basins and upgraded processing.\nThe shore stations were eliminated in a process of consolidation and rerouting the arrays to central processing centers into the 1990s. In 1985, with new mobile arrays and other systems becoming operational the collective system name was changed to Integrated Undersea Surveillance System (IUSS). In 1991, the mission of the system was declassified. The year before IUSS insignia were authorized for wear. Access was granted to some systems for scientific research.\nA similar system is believed to have been operated by the Soviet Union.\nUnderwater security.\nSonar can be used to detect frogmen and other scuba divers. This can be applicable around ships or at entrances to ports. Active sonar can also be used as a deterrent and/or disablement mechanism. One such device is the Cerberus system.\nHand-held sonar.\nLimpet mine imaging sonar (LIMIS) is a hand-held or ROV-mounted imaging sonar designed for patrol divers (combat frogmen or clearance divers) to look for limpet mines in low visibility water.\nThe LUIS is another imaging sonar for use by a diver.\nIntegrated navigation sonar system (INSS) is a small flashlight-shaped handheld sonar for divers that displays range.\nIntercept sonar.\nThis is a sonar designed to detect and locate the transmissions from hostile active sonars. An example of this is the Type 2082 fitted on the British s.\nCivilian applications.\nFisheries.\nFishing is an important industry that is seeing growing demand, but world catch tonnage is falling as a result of serious resource problems. The industry faces a future of continuing worldwide consolidation until a point of sustainability can be reached. However, the consolidation of the fishing fleets are driving increased demands for sophisticated fish finding electronics such as sensors, sounders and sonars. Historically, fishermen have used many different techniques to find and harvest fish. However, acoustic technology has been one of the most important driving forces behind the development of the modern commercial fisheries.\nSound waves travel differently through fish than through water because a fish's air-filled swim bladder has a different density than seawater. This density difference allows the detection of schools of fish by using reflected sound. Acoustic technology is especially well suited for underwater applications since sound travels farther and faster underwater than in air. Today, commercial fishing vessels rely almost completely on acoustic sonar and sounders to detect fish. Fishermen also use active sonar and echo sounder technology to determine water depth, bottom contour, and bottom composition.\nCompanies such as eSonar, Raymarine, Marport Canada, Wesmar, Furuno, Krupp, and Simrad make a variety of sonar and acoustic instruments for the deep sea commercial fishing industry. For example, net sensors take various underwater measurements and transmit the information back to a receiver on board a vessel. Each sensor is equipped with one or more acoustic transducers depending on its specific function. Data is transmitted from the sensors using wireless acoustic telemetry and is received by a hull mounted hydrophone. The analog signals are decoded and converted by a digital acoustic receiver into data which is transmitted to a bridge computer for graphical display on a high resolution monitor.\nEcho sounding.\nEcho sounding is a process used to determine the depth of water beneath ships and boats. A type of active sonar, echo sounding is the transmission of an acoustic pulse directly downwards to the seabed, measuring the time between transmission and echo return, after having hit the bottom and bouncing back to its ship of origin. The acoustic pulse is emitted by a transducer which receives the return echo as well. The depth measurement is calculated by multiplying the speed of sound in water (averaging 1,500 meters per second) by the time between emission and echo return.\nThe value of underwater acoustics to the fishing industry has led to the development of other acoustic instruments that operate in a similar fashion to echo-sounders but, because their function is slightly different from the initial model of the echo-sounder, have been given different terms.\nNet location.\nThe net sounder is an echo sounder with a transducer mounted on the headline of the net rather than on the bottom of the vessel. Nevertheless, to accommodate the distance from the transducer to the display unit, which is much greater than in a normal echo-sounder, several refinements have to be made. Two main types are available. The first is the cable type in which the signals are sent along a cable. In this case, there has to be the provision of a cable drum on which to haul, shoot and stow the cable during the different phases of the operation. The second type is the cable-less net-sounder \u2013 such as Marport's Trawl Explorer \u2013 in which the signals are sent acoustically between the net and hull mounted receiver-hydrophone on the vessel. In this case, no cable drum is required but sophisticated electronics are needed at the transducer and receiver.\nThe display on a net sounder shows the distance of the net from the bottom (or the surface), rather than the depth of water as with the echo-sounder's hull-mounted transducer. Fixed to the headline of the net, the footrope can usually be seen which gives an indication of the net performance. Any fish passing into the net can also be seen, allowing fine adjustments to be made to catch the most fish possible. In other fisheries, where the amount of fish in the net is important, catch sensor transducers are mounted at various positions on the cod-end of the net. As the cod-end fills up these catch sensor transducers are triggered one by one and this information is transmitted acoustically to display monitors on the bridge of the vessel. The skipper can then decide when to haul the net.\nModern versions of the net sounder, using multiple element transducers, function more like a sonar than an echo sounder and show slices of the area in front of the net and not merely the vertical view that the initial net sounders used.\nThe sonar is an echo-sounder with a directional capability that can show fish or other objects around the vessel.\nROV and UUV.\nSmall sonars have been fitted to remotely operated vehicles (ROVs) and unmanned underwater vehicles (UUVs) to allow their operation in murky conditions. These sonars are used for looking ahead of the vehicle. The AN/BLQ-11 Long-Term Mine Reconnaissance System is a UUV for MCM purposes.\nVehicle location.\nSonars which act as beacons are fitted to aircraft to allow their location in the event of a crash in the sea. Short and long baseline sonars may be used for caring out the location, such as LBL.\nProsthesis for the visually impaired.\nIn 2013 an inventor in the United States unveiled a \"spider-sense\" bodysuit, equipped with ultrasonic sensors and haptic feedback systems, which alerts the wearer of incoming threats; allowing them to respond to attackers even when blindfolded.\nScientific applications.\nBiomass estimation.\nDetection of fish, and other marine and aquatic life, and estimation their individual sizes or total biomass using active sonar techniques. Sound pulses reflect off any object that has a different density than the surrounding medium. This includes fish, or more specifically, the air-filled swim bladder on fish. These echoes provide information on fish size, location, abundance and behavior. This is especially effective for fish swim bladders (e.g. herring, cod, and pollock), and less useful for fish without them (e.g. sharks, mackerel, and flounder). Data from the watercolumn is usually processed differently than seafloor or object detection data, this data type can be processed with specialized software.\nWave measurement.\nAn upward looking echo sounder mounted on the bottom or on a platform may be used to make measurements of wave height and period. From this statistics of the surface conditions at a location can be derived.\nWater velocity measurement.\nSpecial short range sonars have been developed to allow measurements of water velocity.\nBottom type assessment.\nSonars have been developed that can be used to characterise the sea bottom into, for example, mud, sand, and gravel. Relatively simple sonars such as echo sounders can be promoted to seafloor classification systems via add-on modules, converting echo parameters into sediment type. Different algorithms exist, but they are all based on changes in the energy or shape of the reflected sounder pings. Advanced substrate classification analysis can be achieved using calibrated (scientific) echosounders and parametric or fuzzy-logic analysis of the acoustic data.\nBathymetric mapping.\nSide-scan sonars can be used to derive maps of seafloor topography (bathymetry) by moving the sonar across it just above the bottom. Low frequency sonars such as GLORIA have been used for continental shelf wide surveys while high frequency sonars are used for more detailed surveys of smaller areas.\nHull-mounted multibeam echosounders on large surface vessels produce swathes of bathymetric data in near real time. One example, the General Instrument \"Seabeam\" system, uses a projector array along the keel to ensonify the bottom with a fan beam. Signals from a hydrophone array mounted athwartships are processed to synthesize multiple virtual fan beams crossing the projector beam at right angles.\nSonar imaging.\nCreating two and three-dimensional images using sonar data.\nSub-bottom profiling.\nPowerful low frequency echo-sounders have been developed for providing profiles of the upper layers of the ocean bottom. One of the most recent devices is Innomar's SES-2000 quattro multi-transducer parametric SBP, used for example in the Puck Bay for underwater archaeological purposes.\nGas leak detection from the seabed.\nGas bubbles can leak from the seabed, or close to it, from multiple sources. These can be detected by both passive and active sonar (shown in schematic figure by yellow and red systems respectively).\n Natural seeps of methane and carbon dioxide occur. Gas pipelines can leak, and it is important to be able to detect whether leakage occurs from Carbon Capture and Storage Facilities (CCSFs; e.g. depleted oil wells into which extracted atmospheric carbon is stored). Quantification of the amount of gas leaking is difficult, and although estimates can be made use active and passive sonar, it is important to question their accuracy because of the assumptions inherent in making such estimations from sonar data.\nSynthetic aperture sonar.\nVarious synthetic aperture sonars have been built in the laboratory and some have entered use in mine-hunting and search systems. An explanation of their operation is given in synthetic aperture sonar.\nParametric sonar.\nParametric sources use the non-linearity of water to generate the difference frequency between two high frequencies. A virtual end-fire array is formed. Such a projector has advantages of broad bandwidth, narrow beamwidth, and when fully developed and carefully measured it has no obvious sidelobes: see Parametric array. Its major disadvantage is very low efficiency of only a few percent. P.J. Westervelt summarizes the trends involved.\nSonar in extraterrestrial contexts.\nThe use of both active and passive sonar has been proposed for various extraterrestrial environments. One example is Titan, where active sonar could be used to determine the depth of its hydrocarbon seas, and passive sonar could be used to detect methanefalls.\nProposals that do not take proper account of the difference between terrestrial and extraterrestrial environments could lead to erroneous measurements.\nEcological impact.\nEffect on marine mammals.\nResearch has shown that use of active sonar can lead to mass strandings of marine mammals. Beaked whales, the most common casualty of the strandings, have been shown to be highly sensitive to mid-frequency active sonar. Other marine mammals such as the blue whale also flee from the source of the sonar, while naval activity was suggested to be the most probable cause of a mass stranding of dolphins. \nThe US Navy, which part-funded some of the studies, said that the findings only showed behavioural responses to sonar, not actual harm, but they \"will evaluate the effectiveness of [their] marine mammal protective measures in light of new research findings\". A 2008 US Supreme Court ruling on the use of sonar by the US Navy noted that there had been no cases where sonar had been conclusively shown to have harmed or killed a marine mammal.\nSome marine animals, such as whales and dolphins, use echolocation systems, sometimes called \"biosonar\" to locate predators and prey. Research on the effects of sonar on blue whales in the Southern California Bight shows that mid-frequency sonar use disrupts the whales' feeding behavior. This indicates that sonar-induced disruption of feeding and displacement from high-quality prey patches could have significant and previously undocumented impacts on baleen whale foraging ecology, individual fitness and population health.\nA review of evidence on the mass strandings of beaked whale linked to naval exercises where sonar was used was published in 2019. It concluded that the effects of mid-frequency active sonar are strongest on Cuvier's beaked whales but vary among individuals or populations. The review suggested the strength of response of individual animals may depend on whether they had prior exposure to sonar, and that symptoms of decompression sickness have been found in stranded whales that may be a result of such response to sonar. It noted that in the Canary Islands where multiple strandings had been previously reported, no more mass strandings had occurred once naval exercises during which sonar was used were banned in the area, and recommended that the ban be extended to other areas where mass strandings continue to occur.\nEffect on fish.\nLow frequency sonar can create a small temporary shift in the hearing threshold of some fish.\nFrequencies and resolutions.\nThe frequencies of sonars range from infrasonic to above a megahertz. Generally, the lower frequencies have longer range, while the higher frequencies offer better resolution, and smaller size for a given directionality.\nTo achieve reasonable directionality, frequencies below 1\u00a0kHz generally require large size, usually achieved as towed arrays.\nLow frequency sonars are loosely defined as 1\u20135\u00a0kHz, albeit some navies regard 5\u20137\u00a0kHz also as low frequency. Medium frequency is defined as 5\u201315\u00a0kHz. Another style of division considers low frequency to be under 1\u00a0kHz, and medium frequency at between 1\u201310\u00a0kHz.\nAmerican World War II era sonars operated at a relatively high frequency of 20\u201330\u00a0kHz, to achieve directionality with reasonably small transducers, with typical maximum operational range of 2,500 yd. Postwar sonars used lower frequencies to achieve longer range; e.g. SQS-4 operated at 10\u00a0kHz with range up to 5,000 yd. SQS-26 and SQS-53 operated at 3\u00a0kHz with range up to 20,000 yd; their domes had size of approx. a 60-ft personnel boat, an upper size limit for conventional hull sonars. Achieving larger sizes by conformal sonar array spread over the hull has not been effective so far, for lower frequencies linear or towed arrays are therefore used.\nJapanese WW2 sonars operated at a range of frequencies. The Type 91, with 30 inch quartz projector, worked at 9\u00a0kHz. The Type 93, with smaller quartz projectors, operated at 17.5\u00a0kHz (model 5 at 16 or 19\u00a0kHz magnetostrictive) at powers between 1.7 and 2.5 kilowatts, with range of up to 6\u00a0km. The later Type 3, with German-design magnetostrictive transducers, operated at 13, 14.5, 16, or 20\u00a0kHz (by model), using twin transducers (except model 1 which had three single ones), at 0.2 to 2.5 kilowatts. The simple type used 14.5\u00a0kHz magnetostrictive transducers at 0.25\u00a0kW, driven by capacitive discharge instead of oscillators, with range up to 2.5\u00a0km.\nThe sonar's resolution is angular; objects further apart are imaged with lower resolutions than nearby ones.\nAnother source lists ranges and resolutions vs frequencies for sidescan sonars. 30\u00a0kHz provides low resolution with range of 1000\u20136,000 m, 100\u00a0kHz gives medium resolution at 500\u20131,000 m, 300\u00a0kHz gives high resolution at 150\u2013500 m, and 600\u00a0kHz gives high resolution at 75\u2013150 m. Longer range sonars are more adversely affected by nonhomogenities of water. Some environments, typically shallow waters near the coasts, have complicated terrain with many features; higher frequencies become necessary there.\nExplanatory notes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "29440", "revid": "10175747", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29440", "title": "Slavs", "text": "Ethnolinguistic grouping of related Eurasian ethnicities\nThe Slavs or Slavic people are a major ethnic group in Europe. They speak Slavic languages and preserve Slavic culture. There are 13 Slavic countries in Europe, which include: Poland, the Czech Republic, Slovakia, Russia, Belarus, Ukraine, Slovenia, Croatia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Serbia, Montenegro, North Macedonia, and Bulgaria; the Slavs comprise a population of around 300 million people. There are three different Slavic ethnic groups: the West Slavs, the East Slavs, and the South Slavs; the Poles, Silesians, Kashubians, Sorbs, Czechs, and Slovaks are West Slavs; Russians, Belarusians, Ukrainians, and Rusyns are East Slavs; while Slovenes, Resians, Croats, Bosniaks, Serbs, Montenegrins, Torlakians, the Gorani, the Torbe\u0161i, Macedonians, and Bulgarians are South Slavs. Slavs are geographically distributed throughout the northern parts of Eurasia; they predominantly inhabit Central Europe, Eastern Europe, Southeastern Europe, and Northern Asia, though there is a large Slavic minority scattered across the Baltic states and Central Asia, and a substantial Slavic diaspora in the Americas, Western Europe, and Northern Europe.\nEarly Slavs lived during the Migration Period and the Early Middle Ages (approximately from the 5th to the 10th century AD), and came to control large parts of Central, Eastern, and Southeast Europe between the sixth and seventh centuries. Beginning in the 7th century, they were gradually Christianized. By the 12th century, they formed the core population of a number of medieval Christian states: East Slavs in the Kievan Rus', South Slavs in the Bulgarian Empire, the Principality of Serbia, the Duchy of Croatia and the Banate of Bosnia, and West Slavs in the Principality of Nitra, Great Moravia, the Duchy of Bohemia, and the Kingdom of Poland.\nThe Slavic people are the largest ethnic and linguistic group in Europe. Beginning in the mid-19th century, a pan-Slavic movement has emphasized the common heritage and unity of all the Slavic peoples. The main focus of the movement was in the Balkans, whereas the Russian Empire was opposed to it.\nThe Slavic languages belong to the Balto-Slavic branch of the Indo-European language family. Present-day Slavs are classified into three groups:\nThough the majority of Slavs are Christians, some groups, such as the Bosniaks, mostly identify as Muslims. Modern Slavic nations and ethnic groups are considerably diverse, both genetically and culturally, and relations between them may range from \"ethnic solidarity to mutual feelings of hostility\" \u2014 even within the individual groups.\nEthnonym.\nThe oldest mention of the Slavic ethnonym is from the 6th century AD, when Procopius, writing in Byzantine Greek, used various forms such as \"Sklaboi\" (), \"Sklab\u0113noi\" (), \"Sklauenoi\" (), \"Sthlabenoi\" (), or \"Sklabinoi\" (), and his contemporary Jordanes refers to the in Latin. The oldest documents written in Old Church Slavonic, dating from the 9th century, attest the autonym as \"Slov\u011bne\" (). Those forms point back to a Slavic autonym, which can be reconstructed in Proto-Slavic as , plural \"Slov\u011bne\".\nThe reconstructed autonym is usually considered a derivation from (\"word\"), originally denoting \"people who speak (the same language)\", meaning \"people who understand one another\", in contrast to the Slavic word denoting \"German people\", namely , meaning \"silent, mute people\" (from Slavic \"mute, mumbling\"). The word \"slovo\" (\"word\") and the related \"slava\" (\"glory, fame\") and \"\" (\"hearing\") originate from the Proto-Indo-European root (\"be spoken of, glory\"), cognate with Ancient Greek ( \"fame\"), as in the name Pericles, Latin (\"be called\"), and English .\nIn medieval and early modern sources written in Latin, Slavs are most commonly referred to as \"Sclaveni\" or the shortened version \"Sclavi\".\nHistory.\nOrigins.\nFirst mentions.\nAncient Roman sources refer to the Early Slavic peoples as \"Veneti\", who dwelt in a region of central Europe east of the Germanic tribe of Suebi and west of the Iranian Sarmatians in the 1st and 2nd centuries AD, between the upper Vistula and Dnieper rivers. Slavs \u2013 called \"Antes\" and \"Sclaveni\" \u2013 first appear in Byzantine records in the early 6th century AD. Byzantine historiographers of the era of the emperor Justinian I (r.\u2009527\u00a0\u2013\u00a0565), such as Procopius of Caesarea, Jordanes and Theophylact Simocatta, describe tribes of these names emerging from the area of the Carpathian Mountains, the lower Danube and the Black Sea to invade the Danubian provinces of the Eastern Empire.\nJordanes, in his work \"Getica\" (written in 551 AD), describes the Veneti as a \"populous nation\" whose dwellings begin at the sources of the Vistula and occupy \"a great expanse of land\". He also describes the Veneti as the ancestors of Antes and Slaveni, two early Slavic tribes, who appeared on the Byzantine frontier in the early-6th century.\nProcopius wrote in 545 that \"the Sclaveni and the Antae actually had a single name in the remote past; for they were both called \"Sporoi\" in olden times\". The name \"Sporoi\" derives from Greek \u03c3\u03c0\u03b5\u03af\u03c1\u03c9 (\"to sow\"). He described them as barbarians, who lived under democracy and believed in one god, \"the maker of lightning\" (Perun), to whom they made sacrifice. They lived in scattered housing and constantly changed settlement. In war, they were mainly foot soldiers with shields, spears, bows, and little armour, which was reserved mainly for chiefs and their inner circle of warriors. Their language is \"barbarous\" (that is, not Greek), and the two tribes are alike in appearance, being tall and robust, \"while their bodies and hair are neither very fair or blond, nor indeed do they incline entirely to the dark type, but they are all slightly ruddy in color. And they live a hard life, giving no heed to bodily comforts...\"\nJordanes describes the Sclaveni as having swamps and forests for their cities. Another 6th-century source refers to them living among nearly-impenetrable forests, rivers, lakes, and marshes.\nMenander Protector mentions Daurentius (r.\u2009c. 577\u00a0\u2013\u00a0579) who slew an Avar envoy of Khagan Bayan I for asking the Slavs to accept the suzerainty of the Avars; Daurentius declined and is reported as saying: \"Others do not conquer our land, we conquer theirs \u2013 so it shall always be for us as long as there are wars and weapons\".\nMigrations.\nThe Slavs emerged from obscurity when the westward movement of Germanic tribes in the 5th and 6th centuries AD (thought to be in conjunction with the movement of peoples from Siberia and Eastern Europe: Huns, and later Avars and Bulgars) started the great migration of the Slavs, who settled the lands abandoned by Germanic tribes who had fled from the Huns and their allies. Slavs, according to this account, moved westward into the country between the Oder and the Elbe-Saale line; southward into Bohemia, Moravia, much of present-day Austria, the Pannonian plain and the Balkans; and northward along the upper Dnieper river. It has also been suggested that some Slavs migrated with the Vandals to the Iberian Peninsula and even to North Africa.\nAround the 6th century, Slavs appeared on Byzantine borders in large numbers. Byzantine records note that Slav numbers were so great, that grass would not regrow where the Slavs had marched through. Military movements resulted in even the Peloponnese and Anatolia being reported to have Slavic settlements. This southern movement has traditionally been seen as an invasive expansion. By the end of the 6th century, Slavs had settled the Eastern Alps regions.\nPope Gregory I in 600 AD wrote to Maximus, the bishop of Salona (in Dalmatia), expressing concern about the arrival of the Slavs,\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Latin: \"Et quidem de Sclavorum gente, quae vobis valde imminet, et affligor vehementer et conturbor. Affligor in his quae jam in vobis patior; conturbor, quia per Istriae aditum jam ad Italiam intrare coeperunt.\"\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;English: I am both distressed and disturbed about the Slavs, who are pressing hard on you. I am distressed because I sympathize with you; I am disturbed because they have already begun to arrive in Italy through the entry-point of Istria.\nMiddle Ages.\nWhen Slav migrations ended, their first state organizations appeared, each headed by a prince with a treasury and a defense force. In the 7th century, the Frankish merchant Samo supported the Slavs against their Avar rulers and became the ruler of the first known Slav state in Central Europe, Samo's Empire. This early Slavic polity probably did not outlive its founder and ruler, but it was the foundation for later West Slavic states on its territory.\nThe oldest of them was Carantania; others are the Principality of Nitra, the Moravian principality (see under Great Moravia) and the Balaton Principality. The First Bulgarian Empire was founded in 681 as an alliance between the ruling Bulgars and the numerous Slavs in the area, and their South Slavic language, the Old Church Slavonic, became the main and official language of the empire in 864 AD. Bulgaria was instrumental in the spread of Slavic literacy and Christianity to the rest of the Slavic world. Duchy of Croatia was founded in 7th century and later became Kingdom of Croatia. Principality of Serbia was founded in 8th, Duchy of Bohemia and Kievan Rus' both in the 9th century.\nThe expansion of the Magyars into the Carpathian Basin and the Germanization of Austria gradually separated the South Slavs from the West and East Slavs. Later Slavic states, which formed in the following centuries included the Second Bulgarian Empire, the Kingdom of Poland, Banate of Bosnia, Duklja and Kingdom of Serbia which later grew into Serbian Empire.\nModern era.\nPan-Slavism, a movement which came into prominence in the mid-19th century, emphasized the common heritage and unity of all the Slavic peoples. The main focus was in the Balkans where the South Slavs had been ruled for centuries by other empires: the Byzantine Empire, Austria-Hungary, the Ottoman Empire, and Venice. Austria-Hungary envisioned its own political concept of Austro-Slavism, in opposition of Pan-Slavism that was predominantly led by the Russian Empire. \nAs of 1878, there were only three majority Slavic states in the world: the Russian Empire, Principality of Serbia and Principality of Montenegro. Bulgaria was effectively independent but was \"de jure\" vassal to the Ottoman Empire until official independence was declared in 1908. The Slavic peoples who were, for the most part, denied a voice in the affairs of the Austro-Hungarian Empire, were calling for national self-determination. \nDuring World War I, representatives of the Czechs, Slovaks, Poles, Serbs, Croats, and Slovenes set up organizations in the Allied countries to gain sympathy and recognition. In 1918, after World War I ended, the Slavs established such independent states as Czechoslovakia, the Second Polish Republic, and the Kingdom of Serbs, Croats and Slovenes.\nThe first half of the 20th century in Russia and the Soviet Union was marked by a succession of wars, famines and other disasters, each accompanied by large-scale population losses. The two major famines were in 1921 to 1922 and 1932 to 1933, which caused millions of deaths mostly around the Volga region, Ukraine and the Northern Caucasus. The latter resulted from Soviet leader Joseph Stalin's collectivization of agriculture in Ukraine. \nDuring the war, Nazi Germany used hundreds of thousands of people for slave labor in their concentration camps, the majority of whom were Jewish or Slavic. Both groups were a part of what Germans claimed to be a \"vast racially subhuman surplus population\" that they \"intended to eliminate in time from their new empire\", their term for \"racial subhumans\" being \"Untermensch\". Thus, one of Adolf Hitler's ambitions at the start of World War II was to exterminate, expel, or enslave most or all West and East Slavs from their native lands, so as to make \"living space\" for German settlers.\nIn early 1941, Germany began planning Generalplan Ost, the genocide of Slavs in Eastern Europe which was supposed to start after a major expansion of German concentration camps in occupied Poland and the fall of Stalin's regime. This plan was to be carried out gradually over 25 to 30 years. After an approximate 30 million Slavs would be killed through starvation and their major cities depopulated, the Germans were supposed to repopulate Eastern Europe. In June 1941, when Germany invaded the Soviet Union in Operation Barbarossa, Hitler paused the plan to focus on the extermination of the Jews. However, some of the plan was nonetheless implemented. Millions of Slavs were murdered in Eastern Europe; this includes victims of the Hunger Plan, Germany's intentional starvation of the region, as well as the murders of 3.3. million Soviet prisoners of war. Germany's Heinrich Himmler also ordered his subordinate Ludolf-Hermann von Alvensleben to start repopulating Crimea, and hundreds of ethnic Germans were forcibly moved to cities and villages there. The Soviet Red Army took back their land from the Germans in 1944. Stephen J. Lee estimates that, by the end of World War II in 1945, the Russian population was about 90 million fewer than it could have been otherwise. \nThe ultra-nationalist, fascist Usta\u0161e committed genocide against Serbs during World War II. The Serbian nationalist Chetniks committed genocide against Croats and Bosniaks. Also during World War II, fascist Italy sent tens of thousands of Slavs to concentration camps in mainland Italy, Libya, and the Balkans.\nIn 1991, the Soviet Union collapsed, and many former Soviet republics became independent countries. Currently, former Soviet states in Central Asia such as Kazakhstan and Kyrgyzstan have very large minority Slavic populations, with most being Russians. Kazakhstan has the largest Slavic minority population.\nLanguages.\nProto-Slavic, the supposed ancestor language of all Slavic languages, is a descendant of common Proto-Indo-European, via a Balto-Slavic stage in which it developed numerous lexical and morphophonological isoglosses with the Baltic languages. In the framework of the Kurgan hypothesis, \"the Indo-Europeans who remained after the migrations [from the steppe] became speakers of Balto-Slavic\".\nProto-Slavic is defined as the last stage of the language preceding the geographical split of the historical Slavic languages. That language was uniform, and on the basis of borrowings from foreign languages and Slavic borrowings into other languages, it cannot be said to have any recognizable dialects, which suggests that there was, at one time, a relatively-small Proto-Slavic homeland. However, from a historical and archaeological point of view, the existence of a homogeneous Proto-Slavic people is judged improbable.\nSlavic linguistic unity was to some extent visible as late as Old Church Slavonic manuscripts which, though based on local Slavic speech of Thessaloniki, could still serve the purpose of the first common Slavic literary language.\nStandardised Slavic languages that have official status in at least one country are: Belarusian, Bosnian, Bulgarian, Croatian, Czech, Macedonian, Montenegrin, Polish, Russian, Serbian, Slovak, Slovene, and Ukrainian. Russian is the most spoken Slavic language, and is the most spoken native language in Europe.\nThe alphabets used for Slavic languages are usually connected to the dominant religion among the respective ethnic groups. Orthodox Christians use the Cyrillic alphabet while Catholics use the Latin alphabet; the Bosniaks, who are Muslim, also use the Latin alphabet and Cyrillic alphabet in Serbia. Additionally, some Eastern Catholics and Western Catholics use the Cyrillic alphabet. Serbian and Montenegrin use both the Cyrillic and Latin alphabets. There is also a Latin script to write in Belarusian, called \u0141acinka and in Ukrainian, called Latynka.\nEthno-cultural subdivisions.\nWest Slavs originate from early Slavic tribes which settled in Central Europe after the East Germanic tribes had left this area during the migration period. They are noted as having mixed with Germans, Hungarians, Celts (particularly the Boii), Old Prussians, and the Pannonian Avars. The West Slavs came under the influence of the Western Roman Empire (Latin) and of the Catholic Church.\nEast Slavs have origins in early Slavic tribes who mixed and contacted with Finns, Balts and with the remnants of the people of the Goths. Their early Slavic component, Antes, mixed or absorbed Iranians, and later received influence from the Khazars and Vikings. The East Slavs trace their national origins to the tribal unions of Kievan Rus' and Rus' Khaganate, beginning in the 10th century. They came particularly under the influence of the Byzantine Empire and of the Eastern Orthodox Church.\nSouth Slavs from most of the region have origins in early Slavic tribes who mixed with the local Proto-Balkanic tribes (Illyrian, Dacian, Thracian, Paeonian, Hellenic tribes), and Celtic tribes (particularly the Scordisci), as well as with Romans (and the Romanized remnants of the former groups), and also with remnants of temporarily settled invading East Germanic, Asiatic or Caucasian tribes such as Gepids, Huns, Avars, Goths and Bulgars. The original inhabitants of present-day Slovenia and continental Croatia have origins in early Slavic tribes who mixed with Romans and romanized Celtic and Illyrian people as well as with Avars and Germanic peoples (Lombards and East Goths). The South Slavs (except the Slovenes and Croats) came under the cultural sphere of the Eastern Roman Empire (Byzantine Empire), of the Ottoman Empire and of the Eastern Orthodox Church and Islam, while the Slovenes and the Croats were influenced by the Western Roman Empire (Latin) and thus by the Catholic Church in a similar fashion to that of the West Slavs.\nGenetics.\nConsistent with the proximity of their languages, analyses of Y chromosomes, mDNA, and autosomal marker CCR5 delta 32 shows that East Slavs and West Slavs are genetically very similar, but demonstrating significant differences from neighboring Finno-Ugric, Turkic, and North Caucasian peoples. Such genetic homogeneity is somewhat unusual, given such a wide dispersal of Slavic populations. Together they form the basis of the \"\"East European\" gene cluster, which also includes non-Slavic Hungarians and Aromanians. Only Northern Russians among East and West Slavs belong to a different, \"Northern European\"\" genetic cluster, along with Balts, Germanic and Baltic Finnic peoples (Northern Russian populations are very similar to Balts).\nThe 2006 Y-DNA study results \"suggest that the Slavic expansion started from the territory of present-day Ukraine, thus supporting the hypothesis placing the earliest known homeland of Slavs in the basin of the middle Dnieper\". According to genetic studies until 2020, the distribution, variance and frequency of the Y-DNA haplogroups R1a and I2 and their subclades R-M558, R-M458 and I-CTS10228 among South Slavs correlate with the spread of Slavic languages during the medieval Slavic expansion from Eastern Europe, most probably from the territory of present-day Ukraine and Southeastern Poland.\nAccording to a 2017 study, Slavic speakers like Russians, Ukrainians and Belarusians have similar genetic components. Ukrainians and Belarusians have near-equal amounts of two \"European components\", which are commonly found in North Europe and Caucasus respectively. There is also no evidence of Asian admixture. However, samples of Novosibirsk residents and Old Believers in Siberia have 5-10% Central Siberian ancestry despite being genetically close to European Slavs.\nReligion.\nThe pagan Slavic populations were Christianized between the 7th and 12th centuries. Orthodox Christianity is predominant among East and South Slavs, while Catholicism is predominant among West Slavs and some western South Slavs. The religious borders are largely comparable to the East\u2013West Schism which began in the 11th century. Islam first arrived in the 7th century during the early Muslim conquests, and was gradually adopted by a number of Slavic ethnic groups through the centuries in the Balkans.\nAmong Slavic populations who profess a religion, the majority of contemporary Christian Slavs are Orthodox, followed by Catholic. The majority of Muslim Slavs follow the Hanafi school of the Sunni branch of Islam. Religious delineations by nationality can be very sharp; usually in the Slavic ethnic groups, the vast majority of religious people share the same religion.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nRelations with non-Slavic people.\nThroughout their history, Slavs came into contact with non-Slavic groups. In the postulated homeland region (present-day Ukraine), they had contacts with the Iranian Sarmatians and the Germanic Goths. After their subsequent spread, the Slavs began assimilating non-Slavic peoples. For example, in the Northern Black Sea region, the Slavs assimilated the remnants of the Goths. In the Balkans, there were Paleo-Balkan peoples, such as Romanized and Hellenized (Jire\u010dek Line) Illyrians, Thracians and Dacians, as well as Greeks and Celtic Scordisci and Serdi. Because Slavs were so numerous, most indigenous populations of the Balkans were Slavicized. Thracians and Illyrians mixed as ethnic groups in this period. \nA notable exception is Greece, where Slavs were Hellenized because Greeks were more numerous, especially with more Greeks returning to Greece in the 9th century and the influence of the church and administration, however, Slavicized regions within Macedonia, Thrace and Moesia Inferior also had a larger portion of locals compared to migrating Slavs. Other notable exceptions are the territory of present-day Romania and Hungary, where Slavs settled en route to present-day Greece, North Macedonia, Bulgaria and East Thrace but assimilated, and the modern Albanian nation which claims descent from Illyrians and other Balkan tribes.\nThe status of the Bulgars as a ruling class and their control of the land nominally left their legacy in the Bulgarian country and people, but Bulgars were gradually also Slavicized into the present-day South Slavic ethnic group known as Bulgarians. The Romance speakers within the fortified Dalmatian cities retained their culture and language for a long time. Dalmatian Romance was spoken until the high Middle Ages, but, they too were eventually assimilated into the body of Slavs.\nIn the Western Balkans, South Slavs and Germanic Gepids intermarried with invaders, eventually producing a Slavicized population. In Central Europe, the West Slavs intermixed with Germanic, Hungarian, and Celtic peoples, while in Eastern Europe the East Slavs had encountered Finnic and Scandinavian peoples. Scandinavians (Varangians) and Finnic peoples were involved in the early formation of the Rus' state but were completely Slavicized after a century. Some Finno-Ugric tribes in the north were also absorbed into the expanding Rus population. In the 11th and 12th centuries, constant incursions by nomadic Turkic tribes, such as the Kipchak and the Pecheneg, caused a massive migration of East Slavic populations to the safer, heavily forested regions of the north. In the Middle Ages, groups of Saxon ore miners settled in medieval Bosnia, Serbia and Bulgaria, where they were Slavicized.\n\"Saqaliba\" refers to the Slavic mercenaries and slaves in the medieval Arab world in North Africa, Sicily and Al-Andalus. Saqaliba served as caliph's guards. In the 12th century, Slavic piracy in the Baltics increased. The Wendish Crusade was started against the Polabian Slavs in 1147, as a part of the Northern Crusades. The pagan chief of the Slavic Obodrite tribes, Niklot, began his open resistance when Lothar III, Holy Roman Emperor, invaded Slavic lands. In August 1160, Niklot was killed, and German colonization (\"Ostsiedlung\") of the Elbe-Oder region began. In Hanoverian Wendland, Mecklenburg-Vorpommern and Lusatia, invaders started germanization. Early forms of germanization were described by German monks: Helmold in the manuscript \"Chronicon Slavorum\" and Adam of Bremen in \"Gesta Hammaburgensis ecclesiae pontificum.\" The Polabian language survived until the beginning of the 19th century in what is now the German state of Lower Saxony. In Eastern Germany, around 20% of Germans have historic Slavic paternal ancestry, as revealed in Y-DNA testing. Similarly, in Germany, around 20% of the foreign surnames are of Slavic origin.\nCossacks, although Slavic and practicing Orthodox Christianity, came from a mix of ethnic backgrounds, including Tatars and other peoples. The Gorals of southern Poland and northern Slovakia are partially descended from the originally Balkan Romance speaking Vlachs, who migrated into the region from the 14th to 17th centuries and were quickly absorbed into the local population, especially since the majority of Vlachs were already slavicized and the term became synonymous with Ruthenians. The populations of Moravian Wallachia, Carpathian Ruthenia and parts of northern Slovakia are also descended partially from the Vlachs. Conversely, some Slavs were assimilated into other populations. Although the majority continued towards Southeast Europe, attracted by the riches of the area that became the state of Bulgaria, a few remained in the Carpathian Basin in Central Europe and were assimilated into the Magyar people. Numerous rivers and places in Romania have a name with Slavic origins.\nPopulation.\n\"Winkler Prins\" (2002) estimated the number of Slavs worldwide to be around c. 260 million at the time. Currently it is estimated that there are 300 million Slavic inhabitants in Central, Eastern, and Southeastern Europe.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "29441", "revid": "1601788", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29441", "title": "Skylab", "text": "First space station launched and operated by NASA (1973\u20131979)\nSkylab was the United States' first space station, launched by NASA, occupied for about 24 weeks between May 1973 and February 1974. It was operated by three trios of astronaut crews: Skylab 2, Skylab 3, and Skylab 4. Skylab was constructed from a repurposed Saturn V third stage (the S-IVB), and took the place of the stage during launch. Operations included an orbital workshop, a solar observatory, Earth observation and hundreds of experiments. Skylab's orbit eventually decayed and it disintegrated in the atmosphere on July 11, 1979, scattering debris across the Indian Ocean and Western Australia.\nOverview.\nAs of 2025,[ [update]] Skylab has been the only space station operated exclusively by the United States. A permanent station was planned starting in 1988, but its funding was canceled and U.S. participation shifted to the International Space Station in 1993.\nSkylab had a mass of with a Apollo command and service module (CSM) attached and included a workshop, a solar observatory, and several hundred life science and physical science experiments. It was launched uncrewed into low Earth orbit by a Saturn V rocket modified to be similar to the Saturn INT-21, with the S-IVB, with Skylab itself being the repurposed third stage. This was the final flight for the rocket more commonly known for carrying the crewed Apollo Moon landing missions. Three subsequent missions delivered three-astronaut crews in the Apollo CSM launched by the smaller Saturn IB rocket.\nConfiguration.\nSkylab included the Apollo Telescope Mount (a multi-spectral solar observatory), a multiple docking adapter with two docking ports, an airlock module with extravehicular activity (EVA) hatches, and the orbital workshop, the main habitable space inside Skylab. Electrical power came from solar arrays and fuel cells in the docked Apollo CSM. The rear of the station included a large waste tank, propellant tanks for maneuvering jets, and a heat radiator. Astronauts conducted numerous experiments aboard Skylab during its operational life.\nOperations.\nFor the final two crewed missions to Skylab, NASA assembled a backup Apollo CSM/Saturn IB in case an in-orbit rescue mission was needed, but this vehicle was never flown. The station was damaged during launch when the micrometeoroid shield tore away from the workshop, taking one of the main solar panel arrays with it and jamming the other main array. This deprived Skylab of most of its electrical power and also removed protection from intense solar heating, threatening to make it unusable. The first crew deployed a replacement heat shade and freed the jammed solar panels to save Skylab. This was the first time that a repair of this magnitude was performed in space.\nThe Apollo Telescope significantly advanced solar science, and observation of the Sun was unprecedented. Astronauts took thousands of photographs of Earth, and the Earth Resources Experiment Package (EREP) viewed Earth with sensors that recorded data in the visible, infrared, and microwave spectral regions. The record for human time spent in orbit was extended beyond the 23 days set by the Soyuz 11 crew aboard Salyut 1 to 84 days by the Skylab 4 crew.\nLater plans to reuse Skylab were stymied by delays in the development of the Space Shuttle, and Skylab's decaying orbit could not be stopped. Skylab's atmospheric reentry began on July 11, 1979, amid worldwide media attention. Before re-entry, NASA ground controllers tried to adjust Skylab's orbit to minimize the risk of debris landing in populated areas, targeting the south Indian Ocean, which was partially successful. Debris showered Western Australia, and recovered pieces indicated that the station had disintegrated lower than expected. As the Skylab program drew to a close, NASA's focus had shifted to the development of the Space Shuttle. NASA space station and laboratory projects included Spacelab, Shuttle-\"Mir\", and Space Station \"Freedom\", which was merged into the International Space Station.\nBackground.\nRocket engineer Wernher von Braun, science fiction writer Arthur C. Clarke, and other early advocates of crewed space travel, expected until the 1960s that a space station would be an important early step in space exploration. Von Braun participated in the publishing of a series of influential articles in \"Collier's\" magazine from 1952 to 1954, titled \"Man Will Conquer Space Soon!\". He envisioned a large, circular station in diameter that would rotate to generate artificial gravity and require a fleet of space shuttles for construction in orbit. The 80 men aboard the station would include astronomers operating a telescope, meteorologists to forecast the weather, and soldiers to conduct surveillance. Von Braun expected that future expeditions to the Moon and Mars would leave from the station.\nThe development of the transistor, the solar cell, and telemetry led, in the 1950s and early 1960s, to uncrewed satellites that could take photographs of weather patterns or enemy nuclear weapons and send them to Earth. A large station was no longer necessary for such purposes, and the United States Apollo program to send men to the Moon chose a mission mode that would not need in-orbit assembly. A smaller station that a single rocket could launch retained value, however, for scientific purposes.\nEarly studies.\nIn 1959, von Braun, head of the Development Operations Division at the Army Ballistic Missile Agency, submitted his final Project Horizon plans to the U.S. Army. The overall goal of Horizon was to place men on the Moon, a mission that would soon be taken over by the rapidly forming NASA. Although concentrating on the Moon missions, von Braun also detailed an orbiting laboratory built out of a Horizon upper stage, an idea used for Skylab. A number of NASA centers studied various space station designs in the early 1960s. Studies generally looked at platforms launched by the Saturn V, followed up by crews launched on Saturn IB using an Apollo command and service module, or a Gemini capsule on a Titan II-C, the latter being much less expensive in the case where cargo was not needed. Proposals ranged from an Apollo-based station with two to three men, or a small \"canister\" for four men with Gemini capsules resupplying it, to a large, rotating station with 24 men and an operating lifetime of about five years. A proposal to study the use of a Saturn S-IVB as a crewed space laboratory was documented in 1962 by the Douglas Aircraft Company.\nAir Force plans.\nThe Department of Defense (DoD) and NASA cooperated closely in many areas of space. In September 1963, NASA and the DoD agreed to cooperate in building a space station. The DoD wanted its own crewed facility, however, and in December 1963 it announced Manned Orbital Laboratory (MOL), a small space station primarily intended for photo reconnaissance using large telescopes directed by a two-person crew. The station was the same diameter as a Titan II upper stage, and would be launched with the crew riding atop in a modified Gemini capsule with a hatch cut into the heat shield on the bottom of the capsule. MOL competed for funding with a NASA station for the next five years and politicians and other officials often suggested that NASA participate in MOL or use the DoD design. The military project led to changes to the NASA plans so that they would resemble MOL less.\nDevelopment.\nApollo Applications Program.\nNASA management was concerned about losing the 400,000 workers involved in Apollo after landing on the Moon in 1969. A reason von Braun, head of NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center during the 1960s, advocated a smaller station after his large one was not built was that he wished to provide his employees with work beyond developing the Saturn rockets, which would be completed relatively early during Project Apollo. NASA set up the Apollo Logistic Support System Office, originally intended to study various ways to modify the Apollo hardware for scientific missions. The office initially proposed a number of projects for direct scientific study, including an extended-stay lunar mission which required two Saturn V launchers, a \"lunar truck\" based on the Lunar Module (LM), a large, crewed solar telescope using an LM as its crew quarters, and small space stations using a variety of LM or CSM-based hardware. Although it did not look at the space station specifically, over the next two years the office became increasingly dedicated to this role. In August 1965, the office was renamed, becoming the Apollo Applications Program (AAP).\nAs part of their general work, in August 1964 the Manned Spacecraft Center (MSC) presented studies on an expendable lab known as \"Apollo X\", short for \"Apollo Extension System\". \"Apollo X\" would have replaced the LM carried on the top of the S-IVB stage with a small space station slightly larger than the CSM's service area, containing supplies and experiments for missions between 15 and 45 days' duration. Using this study as a baseline, several mission profiles were looked at over the next six months.\nWet workshop.\nIn November 1964, von Braun proposed a more ambitious plan to build a much larger station built from the S-II second stage of a Saturn V. His design replaced the S-IVB third stage with an aeroshell, primarily as an adapter for the CSM on top. Inside the shell was a cylindrical equipment section. On reaching orbit, the S-II second stage would be vented to remove any remaining hydrogen fuel, then the equipment section would be slid into it via a large inspection hatch. This became known as a \"wet workshop\" concept, because of the conversion of an active fuel tank. The station filled the entire interior of the S-II stage's hydrogen tank, with the equipment section forming a \"spine\" and living quarters located between it and the walls of the booster. This would have resulted in a very large living area. Power was to be provided by solar cells lining the outside of the S-II stage.\nOne problem with this proposal was that it required a dedicated Saturn V launch to fly the station. At the time the design was being proposed, it was not known how many of the then-contracted Saturn Vs would be required to achieve a successful Moon landing. However, several planned Earth-orbit test missions for the LM and CSM had been canceled, leaving some Saturn IBs free for use. Further work led to the idea of building a smaller \"wet workshop\" based on the S-IVB, launched as the second stage of a Saturn IB.\nA number of S-IVB-based stations were studied at MSC from mid-1965, which had much in common with the Skylab design that eventually flew. An airlock would be attached to the hydrogen tank, in the area designed to hold the LM, and a minimum amount of equipment would be installed in the tank in order to avoid taking up too much fuel volume. Floors of the station would be made from an open metal framework that allowed the fuel to flow through it. After launch, a follow-up mission launched by a Saturn IB would launch additional equipment, including solar panels, an equipment section and docking adapter, and various experiments. Douglas Aircraft Company, builder of the S-IVB stage, was asked to prepare proposals along these lines. The company had for several years been proposing stations based on the S-IV stage, before it was replaced by the S-IVB.\nOn April 1, 1966, MSC sent out contracts to Douglas, Grumman, and McDonnell for the conversion of an S-IVB spent stage, under the name Saturn S-IVB spent-stage experiment support module (SSESM). In May 1966, astronauts voiced concerns over the purging of the stage's hydrogen tank in space. Nevertheless, in late July 1966, it was announced that the Orbital Workshop would be launched as a part of Apollo mission AS-209, originally one of the Earth-orbit CSM test launches, followed by two Saturn I/CSM crew launches, AAP-1 and AAP-2.\nThe Manned Orbiting Laboratory (MOL) remained AAP's chief competitor for funds, although the two programs cooperated on technology. NASA considered flying experiments on MOL or using its Titan IIIC booster instead of the much more expensive Saturn IB. The agency decided that the Air Force station was not large enough and that converting Apollo hardware for use with Titan would be too slow and too expensive. The DoD canceled MOL in June 1969.\nDry workshop.\nDesign work continued over the next two years, in an era of shrinking budgets. (NASA sought US$450 million for Apollo Applications in fiscal year 1967, for example, but received US$42 million.) In August 1967, the agency announced that the lunar mapping and base construction missions examined by the AAP were being canceled. Only the Earth-orbiting missions remained, namely the Orbital Workshop and Apollo Telescope Mount solar observatory. The success of Apollo 8 in December 1968, launched on the third flight of a Saturn V, made it likely that one would be available to launch a dry workshop. Later, several Moon missions were canceled as well, originally to be Apollo missions 18 through 20. The cancellation of these missions freed up three Saturn V boosters for the AAP program. Although this would have allowed them to develop von Braun's original S-II-based mission, by this time so much work had been done on the S-IV-based design that work continued on this baseline. With the extra power available, the wet workshop was no longer needed; the S-IC and S-II lower stages could launch a \"dry workshop\", with its interior already prepared, directly into orbit.\nHabitability.\nA dry workshop simplified plans for the interior of the station. Industrial design firm Raymond Loewy/William Snaith recommended emphasizing habitability and comfort for the astronauts by providing a wardroom for meals and relaxation and a window to view Earth and space, although astronauts were dubious about the designers' focus on details such as color schemes. Habitability had not previously been an area of concern when building spacecraft due to their small size and brief mission durations, but the Skylab missions would last for months. NASA sent a scientist on Jacques Piccard's \"Ben Franklin\" submarine in the Gulf Stream in July and August 1969 to learn how six people would live in an enclosed space for four weeks.\nAstronauts were uninterested in watching movies on a proposed entertainment center or in playing games, but they did want books and individual music choices. Food was also important; early Apollo crews complained about its quality, and a NASA volunteer found it intolerable to live on the Apollo food for four days on Earth. Its taste and composition were unpleasant, in the form of cubes and squeeze tubes. Skylab food significantly improved on its predecessors by prioritizing palatability over scientific needs.\nFor sleeping in space, each astronaut had a private area the size of a small walk-in closet, with a curtain, sleeping bag, and locker. Designers also added a shower and a toilet for comfort and to obtain precise urine and feces samples for examination on Earth. The waste samples were so important that they would have been priorities in any rescue mission.\nSkylab did not have recycling systems such as the conversion of urine to drinking water; it also did not dispose of waste by dumping it into space. The S-IVB's liquid oxygen tank below the Orbital Work Shop was used to store trash and wastewater, passed through an airlock.\nOperational history.\nCompletion and launch.\nOn August 8, 1969, the McDonnell Douglas Corporation received a contract for the conversion of two existing S-IVB stages to the Orbital Workshop configuration. One of the S-IV test stages was shipped to McDonnell Douglas for the construction of a mock-up in January 1970. The Orbital Workshop was renamed \"Skylab\" in February 1970 as a result of a NASA contest. The actual stage that flew was the upper stage of the AS-212 rocket (the S-IVB stage, S-IVB 212). The mission computer used aboard Skylab was the IBM System/4Pi TC-1, a relative of the AP-101 Space Shuttle computers. The Saturn V with serial number SA-513, originally produced for the Apollo program \u2013 before the cancellation of Apollo 18, 19, and 20 \u2013 was repurposed and redesigned to launch Skylab. The Saturn V's third stage was removed and replaced with Skylab, but with the controlling instrument unit remaining in its standard position.\nSkylab was launched on May 14, 1973, by the modified Saturn V. The launch is sometimes referred to as Skylab 1. Severe damage was sustained during launch and deployment, including the loss of the station's micrometeoroid shield/sun shade and one of its main solar panels. Debris from the lost micrometeoroid shield became tangled in the remaining solar panel, preventing its full deployment and thus leaving the station with a huge power deficit.\nImmediately following Skylab's launch, Pad 39A at Kennedy Space Center was deactivated, and construction proceeded to modify it for the Space Shuttle program, originally targeting a maiden launch in March 1979. The crewed missions to Skylab would occur using a Saturn IB rocket from Launch Pad 39B.\nSkylab 1 was the last uncrewed launch from LC-39A until February 19, 2017, when SpaceX CRS-10 was launched from there.\nCrewed missions.\nThree crewed missions, designated Skylab 2, Skylab 3, and Skylab 4, were made to Skylab in Apollo command and service modules. The first crewed mission, Skylab 2, was launched on May 25, 1973, by a Saturn IB and involved extensive repairs to the station. The crew deployed a parasol-like sunshade through a small instrument port from the inside of the station, bringing station temperatures down to acceptable levels and preventing overheating that would have melted the plastic insulation inside the station and released poisonous gases. This solution was designed by Jack Kinzler, who won the NASA Distinguished Service Medal for his efforts. The crew conducted further repairs via two spacewalks (extravehicular activity or EVA). The crew stayed in orbit with Skylab for 28 days. Two additional missions followed, with the launch dates of July 28, 1973, (Skylab 3) and November 16, 1973, (Skylab 4), and mission durations of 59 and 84 days, respectively. The last Skylab crew returned to Earth on February 8, 1974.\nIn addition to the three crewed missions, there was a rescue mission on standby that had a crew of two, but could take five back down.\nAlso of note was the three-man crew of Skylab Medical Experiment Altitude Test (SMEAT), who spent 56 days in 1972 at low-pressure on Earth to evaluate medical experiment equipment. This was a spaceflight analog test in full gravity, but Skylab hardware was tested and medical knowledge was gained.\nOrbital operations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Bar chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\nOriginally intended to be visited by one 28\u2013day and two 56\u2013day missions for a total of 140 days, Skylab was ultimately occupied for 171 days and 13 hours during its three crewed expeditions, orbiting the Earth 2,476 times. Each of these extended the human record of 23 days for amount of time spent in space set by the Soviet Soyuz 11 crew aboard the space station Salyut 1 on June 30, 1971. Skylab\u00a02 lasted 28 days, Skylab\u00a03\u00a0\u2013 56\u00a0days, and Skylab\u00a04\u00a0\u2013 84\u00a0days. Astronauts performed ten spacewalks, totaling 42 hours and 16 minutes. Skylab logged about 2,000 hours of scientific and medical experiments, 127,000 frames of film of the Sun and 46,000 of Earth. Solar experiments included photographs of eight solar flares and produced valuable results that scientists stated would have been impossible to obtain with uncrewed spacecraft. The existence of the Sun's coronal holes was confirmed because of these efforts. Many of the experiments conducted investigated the astronauts' adaptation to extended periods of microgravity.\nA typical day began at 6 a.m. Central Time Zone. Although the toilet was small and noisy, both veteran astronauts\u00a0\u2013 who had endured earlier missions' rudimentary waste-collection systems\u00a0\u2013 and rookies complimented it. The first crew enjoyed taking a shower once a week, but found drying themselves in weightlessness and vacuuming excess water difficult; later crews usually cleaned themselves daily with wet washcloths instead of using the shower. Astronauts also found that bending over in weightlessness to put on socks or tie shoelaces strained their abdominal muscles.\nBreakfast began at 7 a.m. Astronauts usually stood to eat, as sitting in microgravity also strained their abdominal muscles. They reported that their food\u00a0\u2013 although greatly improved from Apollo\u00a0\u2013 was bland and repetitive, and weightlessness caused utensils, food containers, and bits of food to float away; also, gas in their drinking water contributed to flatulence. After breakfast and preparation for lunch, experiments, tests and repairs of spacecraft systems and, if possible, 90 minutes of physical exercise followed; the station had a bicycle and other equipment, and astronauts could jog around the water tank. After dinner, which was scheduled for 6\u00a0p.m., crews performed household chores and prepared for the next day's experiments. Following lengthy daily instructions (some of which were up to 15 meters long) sent via teleprinter, the crews were often busy enough to postpone sleep. The station offered what a later study called \"a highly satisfactory living and working environment for crews\", with enough room for personal privacy. Although it had a dart set, playing cards, and other recreational equipment in addition to books and music players, the window with its view of Earth became the most popular way to relax in orbit.\nExperiments.\nPrior to departure about 80 experiments were named, although they are also described as \"almost 300 separate investigations\".\nExperiments were divided into six broad categories:\nBecause the solar scientific airlock \u2013 one of two research airlocks \u2013 was unexpectedly occupied by the \"parasol\" that replaced the missing meteorite shield, a few experiments were instead installed outside with the telescopes during spacewalks or shifted to the Earth-facing scientific airlock.\nSkylab 2 spent less time than planned on most experiments due to station repairs. On the other hand, Skylab 3 and Skylab 4 far exceeded the initial experiment plans, once the crews adjusted to the environment and established comfortable working relationships with ground control.\nThe figure (below) lists an overview of most major experiments. Skylab 4 carried out several more experiments, such as to observe Comet Kohoutek.\nAstronaut maneuvering equipment.\nAs a technology demonstration, the crew practiced flying the Automatically Stabilized Maneuvering Unit (ASMU) inside the spacious dome of the Orbital Workshop. Designed to enable astronauts to perform untethered movements in microgravity. The ASMU tests established key piloting characteristics and capability base for the MMU systems used on the Space Shuttle missions.\nNobel Prize.\nRiccardo Giacconi shared the 2002 Nobel Prize in Physics for his study of X-ray astronomy, including the study of emissions from the Sun onboard Skylab, contributing to the birth of X-ray astronomy.\nFilm vaults and window radiation shield.\nSkylab had certain features to protect vulnerable technology from radiation. The window was vulnerable to darkening, and this darkening could affect experiment S190. As a result, a light shield that could be open or shut was designed and installed on Skylab. To protect a wide variety of films, used for a variety of experiments and for astronaut photography, there were five film vaults. There were four smaller film vaults in the Multiple Docking Adapter, mainly because the structure could not carry enough weight for a single larger film vault. The orbital workshop could handle a single larger safe, which is also more efficient for shielding. A later example of a radiation vault is the Juno Radiation Vault for the Juno Jupiter orbiter, launched in 2011, which was designed to protect much of the uncrewed spacecraft's electronics, using 1\u00a0cm thick walls of titanium.\nThe large vault in the orbital workshop had an empty mass of . The four smaller vaults had combined mass of . The primary construction material of all five safes was aluminum. When Skylab re-entered there was one chunk of aluminum found that was thought to be a door to one of the film vaults. The large film vault was one of the heaviest single pieces of Skylab to re-enter Earth's atmosphere.\nThe Skylab film vault was used for storing film from various sources including the Apollo Telescope Mount solar instruments. Six ATM experiments used film to record data, and over the course of the missions over 150,000 successful exposures were recorded. The film canister had to be manually retrieved on crewed spacewalks to the instruments during the missions. The film canisters were returned to Earth aboard the Apollo capsules when each mission ended, and were among the heaviest items that had to be returned at the end of each mission. The heaviest canisters weighed 40\u00a0kg and could hold up to 16,000 frames of film.\nGyroscopes.\nThere were two types of gyroscopes on Skylab. Control-moment gyroscopes (CMG) could physically move the station, and rate gyroscopes measured the rate of rotation to find its orientation. The CMG helped provide the fine pointing needed by the Apollo Telescope Mount, and to resist various forces that can change the station's orientation.\nSome of the forces acting on Skylab that the pointing system needed to resist:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The Skylab-A attitude and pointing control system has been developed to meet the high accuracy requirements established by the desired experiment conditions. Conditions must be maintained by the control system under the influence of external and internal disturbance torques, such as gravity gradient and aerodynamic disturbances and onboard astronaut motion.\u2014\u200a\nSkylab was the first large spacecraft to use big gyroscopes, capable of controlling its attitude. The control could also be used to help point the instruments. The gyroscopes took about ten hours to get spun up if they were turned off. There was also a thruster system to control Skylab's attitude. There were 9 rate-gyroscope sensors, 3 for each axis. These were sensors that fed their output to the Skylab digital computer. Two of three were active and their input was averaged, while the third was a backup. From NASA SP-400 \"Skylab, Our First Space Station\", \"each Skylab control-moment gyroscope consisted of a motor-driven rotor, electronics assembly, and power inverter assembly. The rotor weighed and rotated at approximately 8950 revolutions per minute\".\nThere were three control moment gyroscopes on Skylab, but only two were required to maintain pointing. The control and sensor gyroscopes were part of a system that help detect and control the orientation of the station in space. Other sensors that helped with this were a Sun tracker and a star tracker. The sensors fed data to the main computer, which could then use the control gyroscopes and or the thruster system to keep Skylab pointed as desired.\nShower.\nSkylab had a zero-gravity shower system in the work and experiment section of the Orbital Workshop designed and built at the Manned Spaceflight Center. It had a cylindrical curtain that went from floor to ceiling and a vacuum system to suck away water. The floor of the shower had foot restraints.\nTo bathe, the user coupled a pressurized bottle of warmed water to the shower's plumbing, then stepped inside and secured the curtain. A push-button shower nozzle was connected by a stiff hose to the top of the shower. The system was designed for about 6 pints (2.8 liters) of water per shower, the water being drawn from the personal hygiene water tank. The use of both the liquid soap and water was carefully planned out, with enough soap and warm water for one shower per week per person.\nThe first astronaut to use the space shower was Paul J. Weitz on Skylab 2, the first crewed mission. He said, \"It took a fair amount longer to use than you might expect, but you come out smelling good\". A Skylab shower took about two and a half hours, including the time to set up the shower and dissipate used water. The procedure for operating the shower was as follows:\nOne of the big concerns with bathing in space was control of droplets of water so that they did not cause an electrical short by floating into the wrong area. The vacuum water system was thus integral to the shower. The vacuum fed to a centrifugal separator, filter, and collection bag to allow the system to vacuum up the fluids. Waste water was injected into a disposal bag which was in turn put in the waste tank. The material for the shower enclosure was fire-proof beta cloth wrapped around hoops of diameter; the top hoop was connected to the ceiling. The shower could be collapsed to the floor when not in use. Skylab also supplied astronauts with rayon terrycloth towels which had a color-coded stitching for each crew-member. There were 420 towels on board Skylab initially.\nA simulated Skylab shower was also used during the 56-day SMEAT simulation; the crew used the shower after exercise and found it a positive experience.\nCameras and film.\nThere was a variety of hand-held and fixed experiments that used various types of film. In addition to the instruments in the ATM solar observatory, 35 and 70\u00a0mm film cameras were carried on board. An analog TV camera was carried that recorded video electronically. These electronic signals could be recorded to magnetic tape or be transmitted to Earth by radio signal.\nIt was determined that film would fog up due to radiation over the course of the mission. To prevent this, film was stored in vaults.\nPersonal (hand-held) camera equipment:\nFilm for the DAC was contained in DAC film magazines, which contained up to of film. At 24 frames per second this was enough for 4 minutes of filming, with progressively longer film times with lower frame rates such as 16 minutes at 6 frames per second. The film had to be loaded or unloaded from the DAC in a photographic dark room.\nExperiment S190B was the Actron Earth Terrain Camera.\nThe S190A was the \"Multispectral Photographic Camera\":\nThere was also a Polaroid SX-70 instant camera, and a pair of Leitz Trinovid 10 \u00d7 40 binoculars modified for use in space to aid in Earth observations.\nThe SX-70 was used to take pictures of the Extreme Ultraviolet monitor by Dr. Garriot, as the monitor provided a live video feed of the solar corona in ultraviolet light as observed by Skylab solar observatory instruments located in the Apollo Telescope Mount.\nComputers.\nSkylab was controlled in part by a digital computer system, and one of its main jobs was to control the pointing of the station; pointing was especially important for its solar power collection and observatory functions. The computer consisted of two actual computers, a primary and a secondary. The system ran several thousand words of code, which was also backed up on the Memory Load Unit (MLU). The two computers were linked to each other and various input and output items by the workshop computer interface. Operations could be switched from the primary to the backup, which were the same design, either automatically if errors were detected, by the Skylab crew, or from the ground.\nThe Skylab computer was a space-hardened and customized version of the TC-1 computer, a version of the IBM System/4 Pi, itself based on the System 360 computer. The TC-1 had a 16,000-word memory based on ferrite memory cores, while the MLU was a read-only tape drive that contained a backup of the main computer programs. The tape drive would take 11 seconds to upload the backup of the software program to a main computer. The TC-1 used 16-bit words and the central processor came from the 4Pi computer. There was a 16k and an 8k version of the software program.\nThe computer had a mass of , and consumed about ten percent of the station's electrical power.\nAfter launch the computer is what the controllers on the ground communicated with to control the station's orientation. When the sun-shield was torn off the ground staff had to balance solar heating with electrical production. On March 6, 1978, the computer system was re-activated by NASA to control the re-entry.\nThe system had a user interface that consisted of a display, ten buttons, and a three-position switch. Because the numbers were in octal (base-8), it only had numbers zero to seven (8 keys), and the other two keys were enter and clear. The display could show minutes and seconds which would count down to orbital benchmarks, or it could display keystrokes when using the interface. The interface could be used to change the software program. The user interface was called the Digital Address System (DAS) and could send commands to the computer's command system. The command system could also get commands from the ground.\nFor personal computing needs Skylab crews were equipped with models of the then new hand-held electronic scientific calculator, which was used in place of slide-rules used on prior space missions as the primary personal computer. The model used was the Hewlett Packard HP 35. Some slide rules continued in use aboard Skylab, and a circular slide rule was at the workstation.\nPlans for re-use after the last mission.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Calculations made during the mission, based on current values for solar activity and expected atmospheric density, gave the workshop just over nine years in orbit. Slowly at first \u2013 dropping 30 kilometers by 1980 \u2013 and then faster \u2013 another 100 kilometers by the end of 1982 \u2013 Skylab would come down, and some time around March 1983 it would burn up in the dense atmosphere.\nAfter nearly 172 days, Skylab considerably exceeded its planned 140 day habitation. The station had held up relatively well, but its onboard supplies were low and its systems were beginning to degrade. One of the three control-moment gyroscopes (CMGs) failed 8 days into Skylab 4, and by the end of the mission another was showing signs of impending failure. With just a single CMG Skylab would be unable to control its attitude, and it was not possible to repair or replace one of the broken gyroscopes on-orbit. Virtually all of the prepackaged food launched with the station had been consumed, Skylab 4's mission extension from 56 to 84 days required the crew take an extra 28 days worth of food with them, but there was still enough water to support three men for 60 days, and enough oxygen/nitrogen to support the same for 140 days.\nA fourth crewed mission using an Apollo CSM was considered, which would have used the launch vehicle kept on standby for the Skylab Rescue mission. This would have been a 20-day mission to boost Skylab to a higher altitude and do more scientific experiments. Another plan was to use a Teleoperator Retrieval System (TRS) launched aboard the Space Shuttle (then under development), to robotically re-boost the orbit. When Skylab 5 was cancelled, it was expected Skylab would stay in orbit until the 1980s, which was enough time to overlap with the beginning of Shuttle launches. Other options for launching TRS included the Titan III and Atlas-Agena. No option received the level of effort and funding needed for execution before Skylab's sooner-than-expected re-entry.\nThe Skylab 4 crew left a bag filled with supplies to welcome visitors, and left the hatch unlocked. Skylab's internal systems were evaluated and tested from the ground, and effort was put into plans for re-using it, as late as 1978. NASA discouraged any discussion of additional visits due to the station's age, but in 1977 and 1978, when the agency still believed the Space Shuttle would be ready by 1979, it completed two studies on reusing the station. By September 1978, the agency believed Skylab was safe for crews, with all major systems intact and operational. It still had 180 man-days of water and 420-man-days of oxygen, and astronauts could refill both; the station could hold up to about 600 to 700 man-days of drinkable water and 420 man-days of food. Before Skylab 4 left they did one more boost, running the Skylab thrusters for 3 minutes which added 11\u00a0km in height to its orbit. Skylab was left in a 433 by 455\u00a0km orbit on departure. At this time, the NASA-accepted estimate for its re-entry was nine years.\nThe studies cited several benefits from reusing Skylab, which one called a resource worth \"hundreds of millions of dollars\" with \"unique habitability provisions for long duration space flight\". Because no more operational Saturn V rockets were available after the Apollo program, four to five shuttle flights and extensive space architecture would have been needed to build another station as large as Skylab's volume. Its ample size \u2013 much greater than that of the shuttle alone, or even the shuttle plus Spacelab \u2013 was enough, with some modifications, for up to seven astronauts of both sexes, and experiments needing a long duration in space; even a movie projector for recreation was possible.\nProponents of Skylab's reuse also said repairing and upgrading Skylab would provide information on the results of long-duration exposure to space for future stations. The most serious issue for reactivation was attitude control, as one of the station's gyroscopes had failed and the attitude control system needed refueling; these issues would need EVA to fix or replace. The station had not been designed for extensive resupply. However, although it was originally planned that Skylab crews would only perform limited maintenance, they successfully made major repairs during EVA, such as the Skylab 2 crew's deployment of the solar panel and the Skylab 4 crew's repair of the primary coolant loop. The Skylab 2 crew fixed one item during EVA by, reportedly, \"hit[ting] it with [a] hammer\".\nSome studies also said, beyond the opportunity for space construction and maintenance experience, reactivating the station would free up shuttle flights for other uses, and reduce the need to modify the shuttle for long-duration missions. Even if the station were not crewed again, went one argument, it might serve as an experimental platform.\nShuttle mission plans.\nThe reactivation would likely have occurred in four phases: \nThe first three phases would have required about US$60 million in 1980s dollars, not including launch costs. Other options for launching TRS were Titan III or Atlas-Agena.\nAfter departure.\nAfter a boost of by Skylab 4's Apollo CSM before its departure in 1974, Skylab was left in a parking orbit of by that was expected to last until at least the early 1980s, based on estimates of the 11-year sunspot cycle that began in 1976. In 1962, NASA first considered the potential risks of a space station reentry, but decided not to incorporate a retrorocket system in Skylab due to cost and acceptable risk.\nThe spent 49-ton Saturn V S-II stage which had launched Skylab in 1973 remained in orbit for almost two years, and made a controlled reentry on January 11, 1975. The second stage's reentry was mistimed however and deorbited slightly earlier in the orbit than planned.\nSolar activity.\nBritish mathematician Desmond King-Hele of the Royal Aircraft Establishment (RAE) predicted in 1973 that Skylab would de-orbit and crash to Earth in 1979, sooner than NASA's forecast, because of increased solar activity. Greater-than-expected solar activity heated the outer layers of Earth's atmosphere and increased drag on Skylab. By late 1977, NORAD also forecast a reentry in mid-1979; a National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) scientist criticized NASA for using an inaccurate model for the second most-intense sunspot cycle in a century, and for ignoring NOAA predictions published in 1976.\nThe reentry of the USSR's nuclear powered Kosmos 954 in January 1978, and the resulting radioactive debris fall in northern Canada, drew more attention to Skylab's orbit. Although Skylab did not contain radioactive materials, the State Department warned NASA about the potential diplomatic repercussions of station debris. Battelle Memorial Institute forecast that up to 25 tons of metal debris could land in 500 pieces over an area long and wide. The lead-lined film vault, for example, might land intact at .\nGround controllers re-established contact with Skylab in March 1978 and recharged its batteries. Although NASA worked on plans to reboost Skylab with the Space Shuttle through 1978 and the TRS was almost complete, the agency gave up in December 1978 when it became clear that the shuttle would not be ready in time; its first flight, STS-1, did not occur until April 1981. Also rejected were proposals to launch the TRS using one or two uncrewed rockets or to attempt to destroy the station with missiles.\nRe-entry and debris.\nSkylab's impending demise in 1979 was an international media event, with T-shirts and hats with bullseyes and \"Skylab Repellent\" with a money-back guarantee, wagering on the time and place of re-entry, and nightly news reports. The \"San Francisco Examiner\" offered a US$10,000 prize (equivalent to $ today) for the first piece of Skylab delivered to its offices; the rival \"San Francisco Chronicle\" offered US$200,000 ($ today) if a subscriber suffered personal or property damage. A Nebraska neighborhood painted a target so that the station would have \"something to aim for\", a resident said.\nThe \"Examiner\" created the prize to compete with the \"Chronicle\" and its popular columnist Herb Caen. Publisher Reg Murphy was reluctant to pay the money, Jeff Jarvis recalled, but NASA assured Jarvis\u2014Caen's counterpart at the \"Examiner\"\u2014that the station would not hit land. A report commissioned by NASA calculated that the odds were 1 in 152 of debris hitting any human, and odds of 1 in 7 of debris hitting a city of 100,000 people or more. Special teams were readied to head to any country hit by debris. The event caused so much panic in the Philippines that President Ferdinand Marcos appeared on national television to reassure the public.\nA week before re-entry, NASA forecast that it would occur between July 10 and 14, with the 12th the most likely date, and the Royal Aircraft Establishment (RAE) predicted the 14th. In the hours before the event, ground controllers adjusted Skylab's orientation to minimize the risk of re-entry on a populated area. They aimed the station at a spot south-southeast of Cape Town, South Africa, and re-entry began at approximately 16:37 UTC, July 11, 1979. The station did not burn up as fast as NASA expected. Debris landed about east of Perth, Western Australia due to a four-percent calculation error, and was found between Esperance, Western Australia and Rawlinna, from 31\u00b0 to 34\u00b0 S and 122\u00b0 to 126\u00b0 E, about radius around Balladonia, Western Australia. Residents and an airline pilot saw dozens of colorful flares as large pieces broke up in the atmosphere; the debris landed in an almost unpopulated area, but the sightings still caused NASA to fear human injury or property damage. Don Lind, in a 2005 interview, reports no human injuries or deaths.\nStan Thornton found 24 pieces of Skylab at his home in Esperance. After obtaining his first passport, Thornton flew to San Francisco. After waiting one week for Marshall Space Flight Center to authenticate the wreckage, he collected the \"Examiner\" prize and another US$1,000 from a Philadelphia businessman who had flown Thornton's family and girlfriend there. Analysis of the debris showed that the station had disintegrated above the Earth, much lower than expected.\nThe Shire of Esperance light-heartedly fined NASA A$400 for littering, and while the fine was indeed written off three months later, it was nonetheless eventually paid on behalf of NASA in April 2009, after Scott Barley of Highway Radio raised the funds from his morning show listeners.\nAfter the demise of Skylab, NASA focused on the reusable Spacelab module, an orbital workshop that could be deployed with the Space Shuttle and returned to Earth. The next American major space station project was Space Station Freedom, which was merged into the International Space Station in 1993 and launched starting in 1998. Shuttle-Mir was another project and led to the US funding Spektr, Priroda, and the Mir Docking Module in the 1990s.\nLaunchers, rescue, and cancelled missions.\nLaunchers.\nLaunch vehicles:\nSkylab Revisit.\nIn 1971, before Skylab launched, NASA studied the potential of adding another mission to the three already planned. Called Skylab Revisit, two options were examined. First was an open ended mission that would launch within 30 days after Skylab 4, aiming to last 56 days. The second would visit the station a year after the last crew had left to determine the health and habitability of the station after two years in space.\nNeither option was rated highly. The first option's chance of mission success was considered uncertain at best, and the second's even worse given the expected dearth of food, water, and oxygen supplies and the degraded condition of Skylab's system after two years in orbit.\nSkylab Rescue.\nThere was a Skylab Rescue mission assembled for the second crewed mission to Skylab, but it was not needed. Another rescue mission was assembled for the last Skylab and was also on standby for ASTP. These missions used a backup Saturn IB rocket (SA-209) and CSM module (CSM-119).\nSkylab 5.\nSkylab 5 would have been a short 20-day mission in April 1974 to conduct more scientific experiments and use the Apollo's Service Propulsion System engine to boost Skylab into a higher orbit, supporting later station use by the Space Shuttle.\nVance Brand (commander), William B. Lenoir (science pilot), and Don Lind (pilot) would have been the crew for this mission, with Brand and Lind being the prime crew for the Skylab Rescue flights. Brand and Lind also trained for a mission that would have aimed Skylab for a controlled deorbit.\nSkylab 5 would have used the SA-209 rocket and CMS-119 on standby for Skylab Rescue. Upon its cancellation the rocket was put on display at NASA Kennedy Space Center.\nSkylab B.\nIn addition to the flown Skylab space station, a second flight-quality backup Skylab space station had been built during the program. NASA considered using it for a second station in May 1973 or later, to be called Skylab B (S-IVB 515), but decided against it. Launching another Skylab with another Saturn V rocket would have been very costly, and it was decided to spend this money on the development of the Space Shuttle instead.\nNASA transferred Skylab B to the National Air and Space Museum in 1975. On display in the museum's Space Hall since 1976, the orbital workshop has been slightly modified to permit viewers to walk through the living quarters.\nEngineering mock-ups.\nA full-size 1G training mock-up once used for astronaut training is located at the Lyndon B. Johnson Space Center visitor center in Houston, Texas.\nAnother training mockup, originally used at the Neutral Buoyancy Simulator (NBS), is at the U.S. Space &amp; Rocket Center in Huntsville, Alabama. Originally displayed indoors, it was subsequently stored outdoors for several years to make room for other exhibits. To mark the 40th anniversary of the Skylab program, the Orbital Workshop portion of the trainer was restored and moved into the Davidson Center in 2013.\nMission designations.\nThe numerical identification of the crewed Skylab missions was the cause of some confusion. Originally, the uncrewed launch of Skylab and the three crewed missions to the station were numbered \"SL-1\" through \"SL-4\". During the preparations for the crewed missions, some documentation was created with a different scheme \u2013 \"SLM-1\" through \"SLM-3\" \u2013 for those missions only. William Pogue credits Pete Conrad with asking the Skylab program director which scheme should be used for the mission patches, and the astronauts were told to use 1\u20132\u20133, not 2\u20133\u20134. By the time NASA administrators tried to reverse this decision, it was too late, as all the in-flight clothing had already been manufactured and shipped with the 1\u20132\u20133 mission patches.\nL.B. James of NASA Marshall predicted in 1970 that an astronomer, medical doctor, and third scientist might compose each Skylab crew. NASA Astronaut Group 4 and NASA Astronaut Group 6 were scientists recruited as astronauts. They and the scientific community hoped to have two on each Skylab mission, but Deke Slayton, director of flight crew operations, insisted that two trained pilots fly on each. Although the scientists were qualified jet pilots, NASA headquarters made the final decision of one scientist in each Skylab crew on 6 July 1971, after the deaths of three cosmonauts on Soyuz 11.\nKerwin was the first Skylab scientist-astronaut. NASA chose a medical doctor to better understand the effect of spaceflight on the human body on a long-duration mission. Astronauts trained for minor medical procedures at a Houston hospital emergency department.\nSMEAT.\nThe \"Skylab Medical Experiment Altitude Test\" or SMEAT was a 56-day (8-week) Earth analog Skylab test. The test had a low-pressure high oxygen-percentage atmosphere but it operated under full gravity, as SMEAT was not in orbit. The test had a three-astronaut crew with Commander Robert Crippen, Pilot Karol J. Bobko, and Science Pilot William E. Thornton; there was a focus on medical studies and Thornton was an M.D. The crew lived and worked in the pressure chamber, converted to be like Skylab, from July 26 to September 20, 1972.\nProgram cost.\nFrom 1966 to 1974, the Skylab program cost a total of US$2.2 billion, (equivalent to $\u00a0billion in 2024). As its three three-person crews spent 510 total man-days in space, each man-day cost approximately US$20 million, compared to US$7.5 million for the International Space Station.\nDepictions in film.\nA minor storyline of the 1986 film \"Dogs in Space\" is an attempt by characters of the Melbourne household to fabricate pieces of Skylab and win a radio station's competition to locate debris from the space station as it fell to earth in Australia.\nThe documentary \"Searching for Skylab\" was released online in March 2019. It was written and directed by Dwight Steven-Boniecki and was partly crowdfunded.\nThe alternate history Apple TV+ original series \"For All Mankind\" (2019) depicts the use of the space station in the first episode of the second season, surviving to the 1980s and coexisting with the Space Shuttle program in the alternate timeline.\nIn the 2011 film \"Skylab\", a family gathers in France and waits for the station to fall out of orbit. It was directed by Julie Delpy.\nThe 2021 Indian film \"Skylab\" depicts fictitious incidents in a Telangana village preceding the disintegration of the space station.\nThe 2024 series \"Last Days of the Space Age\" is set in 1979 Western Australia, during Skylab's reentry near Perth.\nReferences.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWorks cited.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "29442", "revid": "7852030", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29442", "title": "Sacramento (disambiguation)", "text": "Sacramento is the capital of the U.S. state of California.\nSacramento may also refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "29444", "revid": "48911350", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29444", "title": "SSTO", "text": ""}
{"id": "29445", "revid": "150280", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29445", "title": "StrongARM", "text": "Family of computer microprocessors\nThe StrongARM is a family of computer microprocessors developed by Digital Equipment Corporation and manufactured from the mid 1990s which implemented the ARM v4 instruction set architecture. It was acquired by Intel in 1997 from DEC's Digital Semiconductor division as part of a settlement of a lawsuit between the two companies over patent infringement. Intel continued to manufacture it before replacing it with a StrongARM-derived ARM-based architecture called XScale in the early 2000s.\nHistory.\nAccording to Allen Baum, the StrongARM traces its history to attempts to make a low-power version of the DEC Alpha, which DEC's engineers quickly concluded was not possible. They then became interested in designs dedicated to low-power applications which led them to the ARM family. One of the only major users of the ARM for performance-related products at that time was Apple, whose Newton device was based on the ARM platform. DEC approached Apple wondering if they might be interested in a high-performance ARM, to which the Apple engineers replied \"Phhht, yeah. You can't do it, but, yeah, if you could we'd use it.\"\nThe StrongARM was a collaborative project between DEC and Advanced RISC Machines to create a faster ARM microprocessor. The StrongARM was designed to address the upper end of the low-power embedded market, where users needed more performance than the ARM could deliver while being able to accept more external support. Targets were devices such as newer personal digital assistants and set-top boxes.\nTraditionally, the semiconductor division of DEC was located in Massachusetts. In order to gain access to the design talent in Silicon Valley, DEC opened a design center in Palo Alto, California. This design center was led by Dan Dobberpuhl and was the main design site for the StrongARM project. Another design site that worked on the project was in Austin, Texas that was created by some ex-DEC designers returning from Apple Computer and Motorola. The project was set up in 1995, and quickly delivered their first design, the SA-110.\nDEC agreed to sell StrongARM to Intel as part of a lawsuit settlement in 1997. Intel used the StrongARM to replace their ailing line of RISC processors, the i860 and i960.\nWhen the semiconductor division of DEC was sold to Intel, many engineers from the Palo Alto design group moved to SiByte, a start-up company designing MIPS system-on-a-chip (SoC) products for the networking market. The Austin design group spun off to become Alchemy Semiconductor, another start-up company designing MIPS SoCs for the hand-held market. A new StrongARM core was developed by Intel and introduced in 2000 as the XScale.\nSA-110.\nThe SA-110 was the first microprocessor in the StrongARM family. The first versions, operating at 100, 160, and 200\u00a0MHz, were announced on 5 February 1996. When announced, samples of these versions were available, with volume production slated for mid-1996. Faster 166 and 233\u00a0MHz versions were announced on 12 September 1996. Samples of these versions were available at announcement, with volume production slated for December 1996. Throughout 1996, the SA-110 was the highest performing microprocessor for portable devices. Towards the end of 1996 it was a leading CPU for internet/intranet appliances and thin client systems. The SA-110's first design win was the Apple MessagePad 2000. It was also used in a number of products including the Acorn Computers Risc PC and Eidos Optima video editing system. The SA-110's lead designers were Daniel W. Dobberpuhl, Gregory W. Hoeppner, Liam Madden, and Richard T. Witek.\nDescription.\nThe SA-110 had a simple microarchitecture. It was a scalar design that executed instructions in-order with a five-stage classic RISC pipeline. The microprocessor was partitioned into several blocks, the IBOX, EBOX, IMMU, DMMU, BIU, WB and PLL. The IBOX contained hardware that operated in the first two stages of the pipeline such as the program counter. It fetched, decoded and issued instructions. Instruction fetch occurs during the first stage, decode and issue during the second. The IBOX decodes the more complex instructions in the ARM instruction set by translating them into sequences of simpler instructions. The IBOX also handled branch instructions. The SA-110 did not have branch prediction hardware, but had mechanisms for their speedy processing.\nExecution starts at stage three. The hardware that operates during this stage is contained in the EBOX, which comprises the register file, arithmetic logic unit (ALU), barrel shifter, multiplier and condition code logic. The register file had three read ports and two write ports. The ALU and barrel shifter executed instructions in a single cycle. The multiplier is not pipelined and has a latency of multiple cycles.\nThe IMMU and DMMU are memory management units for instructions and data, respectively. Each MMU contained a 32-entry fully associative translation lookaside buffer (TLB) that can map 4\u00a0KB, 64\u00a0KB or 1\u00a0MB pages. The write buffer (WB) has eight 16-byte entries. It enables the pipelining of stores. The bus interface unit (BIU) provided the SA-110 with an external interface.\nThe PLL generates the internal clock signal from an external 3.68\u00a0MHz clock signal. It was not designed by DEC, but was contracted to the Centre Suisse d'Electronique et de Microtechnique (CSEM) located in Neuch\u00e2tel, Switzerland.\nThe instruction cache and data cache each have a capacity of 16\u00a0KB and are 32-way set-associative and virtually addressed. The SA-110 was designed to be used with slow (and therefore low-cost) memory and therefore the high set associativity allows a higher hit rate than competing designs, and the use of virtual addresses allows memory to be simultaneously cached and uncached. The caches are responsible for most of the transistor count and they take up half the die area.\nThe SA-110 contained 2.5 million transistors and is 7.8\u00a0mm by 6.4\u00a0mm large (49.92\u00a0mm2). It was fabricated by DEC in its proprietary CMOS-6 process at its Fab 6 fab in Hudson, Massachusetts. CMOS-6 was DEC's sixth-generation complementary metal\u2013oxide\u2013semiconductor (CMOS) process. CMOS-6 has a 0.35\u00a0\u03bcm feature size, a 0.25\u00a0\u03bcm effective channel length but for use with the SA-110, only three levels of aluminium interconnect. It used a power supply with a variable voltage of 1.2 to 2.2 volts (V) to enable designs to find a balance between power consumption and performance (higher voltages enable higher clock rates). The SA-110 was packaged in a 144-pin thin quad flat pack (TQFP).\nSA-1100.\nThe SA-1100 was a derivative of the SA-110 developed by DEC. Announced in 1997, the SA-1100 was targeted for portable applications such as PDAs and differs from the SA-110 by providing a number of features that are desirable for such applications. To accommodate these features, the data cache was reduced in size to 8\u00a0KB.\nThe extra features are integrated memory, PCMCIA, and color LCD controllers connected to an on-die system bus, and five serial I/O channels that are connected to a peripheral bus attached to the system bus. The memory controller supported FPM and EDO DRAM, SRAM, flash, and ROM. The PCMCIA controller supports two slots. The memory address and data bus is shared with the PCMCIA interface. Glue logic is required. The serial I/O channels implement a slave USB interface, a SDLC, two UARTs, an IrDA interface, a MCP, and a synchronous serial port.\nThe SA-1100 had a companion chip, the SA-1101. It was introduced by Intel on 7 October 1998. The SA-1101 provided additional peripherals to complement those integrated on the SA-1100 such as a video output port, two PS/2 ports, a USB controller and a PCMCIA controller that replaces that on the SA-1100. Design was started by DEC, but only partially complete when acquired by Intel, who finished the design. It was fabricated at DEC's former Hudson, Massachusetts fabrication plant, which was also sold to Intel.\nThe SA-1100 contained 2.5 million transistors and measured 8.24\u00a0mm by 9.12\u00a0mm (75.15\u00a0mm2). It was fabricated in a 0.35\u00a0\u03bcm CMOS process with three levels of aluminium interconnect and was packaged in a 208-pin TQFP.\nOne of the early recipients of this processor was the ill-fated Psion netBook and its more consumer oriented sibling Psion Series 7.\nSA-1110.\nThe SA-1110 was a Intel developed derivative of the SA-110. It was announced on 31 March 1999, positioned as an alternative to the SA-1100. At announcement, samples were set for June 1999 and volume later that year. Intel discontinued the SA-1110 in early 2003. The SA-1110 was available in 133 or 206\u00a0MHz versions. It differed from the SA-1100 by featuring support for 66\u00a0MHz (133\u00a0MHz version only) or 103\u00a0MHz (206\u00a0MHz version only) SDRAM. Its companion chip, which provided additional support for peripherals, was the SA-1111. The SA-1110 was packaged in a 256-pin micro ball grid array. It was used in mobile phones, personal data assistants (PDAs) such as the Compaq (later HP) iPAQ and HP Jornada, the Sharp SL-5x00 Linux Based Platforms and the Simputer. It was also used to run the Intel Web Tablet, a tablet device that is considered potentially the first to introduce large screen, portable web browsing. Intel dropped the product just prior to launch in 2001.\nSA-1500.\nThe SA-1500 was a derivative of the SA-110 developed by DEC initially targeted for set-top boxes. It was designed and manufactured in low volumes by DEC but was never put into production by Intel. The SA-1500 was available at 200 to 300\u00a0MHz. The SA-1500 featured an enhanced SA-110 core, an on-chip coprocessor called the \"Attached Media Processor\" (AMP), and an on-chip SDRAM and I/O bus controller. The SDRAM controller supported 100\u00a0MHz SDRAM, and the I/O controller implemented a 32-bit I/O bus that may run at frequencies up to 50\u00a0MHz for connecting to peripherals and the SA-1501 companion chip.\nThe AMP implemented a long-instruction-word instruction set containing instructions designed for multimedia, such as integer and floating-point multiply\u2013accumulate operations and SIMD arithmetic. Each long-instruction word is 64\u00a0bits wide and specifies an arithmetic operation and a branch or a load/store. Instructions operate on operands from a 64-entry 36-bit register file, and on a set of control registers. The AMP communicates with the SA-110 core via an on-chip bus and it shares the data cache with the SA-110. The AMP contained an ALU with a shifter, a branch unit, a load/store unit, a multiply\u2013accumulate unit, and a single-precision floating-point unit. The AMP supported user-defined instructions via a 512-entry writable control store.\nThe SA-1501 companion chip provided additional video and audio processing capabilities and various I/O functions such as PS/2 ports, a parallel port, and interfaces for various peripherals.\nThe SA-1500 contains 3.3 million transistors and measures 60\u00a0mm2. It was fabricated in a 0.28\u00a0\u03bcm CMOS process. It used a 1.5 to 2.0\u00a0V internal power supply and 3.3\u00a0V I/O, consuming less than 0.5\u00a0W at 100\u00a0MHz and 2.5\u00a0W at 300\u00a0MHz. It was packaged in a 240-pin metal quad flat package or a 256-ball plastic ball grid array.\nStrongARM latch.\nThe StrongARM latch is an electronic latch circuit topology first proposed by Toshiba engineers Tsuguo Kobayashi \"et al.\" and got significant attention after being used in StrongARM microprocessors. It is widely used as a sense amplifier, a comparator, or just a robust latch with high sensitivity.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "29447", "revid": "408908", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29447", "title": "Symptothermal method", "text": ""}
{"id": "29450", "revid": "125972", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29450", "title": "Shaul Mofaz", "text": "Israeli politician and military officer\nShaul Mofaz (; 4 November 1948) is a retired Israeli military officer and politician. He joined the Israel Defense Forces in 1966 and served in the Paratroopers Brigade. He fought in the Six-Day War, Yom Kippur War, 1982 Lebanon War, and Operation Entebbe with the paratroopers and Sayeret Matkal, an elite special forces unit. In 1998 he became the IDF's sixteenth Chief of staff, serving until 2002. He is of Iranian Jewish ancestry.\nAfter leaving the army, he entered politics. He was appointed Minister of Defense in 2002, holding the position until 2006, when he was elected to the Knesset on the Kadima list. He then served as Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Transportation and Road Safety until 2009. After becoming Kadima leader in March 2012, he became Leader of the Opposition, before returning to the cabinet during a 70-day spell in which he served as Acting Prime Minister, Vice Prime Minister and Minister without Portfolio. Kadima was reduced to just two seats in the 2013 elections, and Mofaz retired from politics shortly before the 2015 elections.\nEarly life.\nShaul Mofaz was born Shahr\u0101m Mofazzazk\u0101r () on 4 November 1948 in Tehran, Iran, to Iranian Jewish parents from Isfahan and Gilan of Gilaki Jewish origin, and lived in Tehran until his family moved to Israel. His father was the principal of the ORT school in Tehran. Mofaz immigrated to Israel with his family in 1957 when he was nine years old. The family settled in Eilat, where Mofaz grew up. His father's attempt to open a small factory in Eilat failed, and he had to support the family by working as a menial laborer. His family lived in a one-and-a-half-room apartment and his parents struggled to put food on the table. At age 10 he had to work in construction to help support his family. Mofaz attended a religious elementary school in Eilat. At age 14, his father sent him to an agricultural boarding school in Nahalal in the Jezreel Valley, where studies were combined with agricultural work. Mofaz recalled the boarding school as his first real exposure to wider Israeli society and struggling to fit in and be seen as a \"real Israeli\", recalling that \"you're in a class with children from Nahalal who are Israelis with real roots in the country, children of the valley nobility. These princes who live in the big houses on the big farms of Nahalal, and where do you come from? From nowhere, from Tehran, from Eilat, from a tiny apartment in a housing project.\" He became determined to become a paratrooper in the army, seeing it as a way to become fully Israeli.\nMilitary service.\nUpon graduating from high school in 1966, he was conscripted into Israel Defense Forces and served in the Paratroopers Brigade. He fought in the Six-Day War as a paratrooper on the southern front against the Egyptian Army. After his mandatory service, Mofaz remained in the IDF as a career officer. He became an officer in 1969, commanded a paratrooper platoon in the 890th Battalion of the Paratroopers Brigade, then commanded a company of the 890th Battalion in 1971. He took part in the War of Attrition and the Yom Kippur War. During the Yom Kippur War, he participated in Operation Gown and Operation Davidka, two raids deep in Syrian territory. Mofaz became Deputy Commander of the 890th Battalion in 1974. He was appointed Deputy Commander of Sayeret Matkal, an elite commando unit, in 1975 and took part in Operation Entebbe the following year. After taking a sabbatical to study at Bar-Ilan University in 1976, he returned to active service in 1978. He was appointed commander of the 202nd Battalion of the Paratroopers Brigade, and became Deputy Commander of the Paratroopers Brigade in 1980. He commanded the 769th Territorial Brigade in 1981.\nMofaz was an infantry brigade commander during the 1982 Lebanon War. Afterward, he attended the US Marine Corps Command and Staff College in Quantico, Virginia, United States. On his return, he was briefly appointed IDF Command and Staff College commander before returning to active service. He was appointed Commander of the Paratroopers Brigade in 1986, and led its forces in counterinsurgency operations in the South Lebanon security zone. He played a major role in Operation Law and Order.\nMofaz served in a series of senior military posts and was promoted to Brigadier General in 1988. In 1993 he was made commander of the IDF forces in the West Bank. In 1994, he was promoted to Major General, commanding the Southern Command, during which the IDF battled Hamas and Islamic Jihad networks in the Gaza Strip. In 1996, he served as head of the Planning Directorate of the IDF General Staff. His rapid rise continued; in 1997, Mofaz was appointed Deputy Chief of the General Staff and Commander of the Operations Directorate. In 1998, he was appointed Chief of the General Staff.\nHis term as Chief of Staff was noted for financial and structural reforms of the IDF. His tenure also saw continued operations in the South Lebanon security zone and the withdrawal from the security zone in 2000. But the most significant event in his tenure was the Second Intifada eruption in September 2000. The tough tactics undertaken by Mofaz drew widespread concern from the international community but were broadly supported by the Israeli public. Controversy erupted over Israeli actions during the Battle of Jenin, intermittent raids in the Gaza Strip, and the continued isolation of Yasser Arafat.\nMofaz had foreseen the wave of violence as early as 1999 and prepared the IDF for intense guerrilla warfare in the territories. He fortified posts in the Gaza Strip and kept Israeli military casualties low. While he was known for claiming, \"Israel has the most moral army in the world,\" he drew criticism from both Israeli and international human rights monitoring groups because of the methods he had undertaken, including using armored bulldozers to demolish 2,500 Palestinian civilian homes, displacing thousands, to create a security \"buffer zone\" along the Rafah border.\nPolitical career.\nFollowing a government crisis in 2002, Shaul Mofaz was appointed Defense Minister by Ariel Sharon. Although he supported an agreement with the Palestinians, he was willing to make no compromise in the war against militant groups such as Hamas, Islamic Jihad, Tanzim, and Al-Aqsa Martyrs Brigades.\nThe fact that he had only recently left his position as IDF Chief of Staff prevented him from participating in the 2003 election (by which time Mofaz had joined Sharon's Likud). Nevertheless, Sharon reappointed him as Defense Minister in the new government.\nOn 21 November 2005, Mofaz rejected Sharon's invitation to join his new party, Kadima, and instead announced his candidacy for the leadership of Likud. But, on 11 December 2005, one day after he promised he would never leave the Likud, he withdrew from both the leadership race and the Likud to join Kadima.\nFollowing the elections in late March 2006, Mofaz was moved from the position of Defense Minister and received the Transport ministry in the new Cabinet installed on 4 May 2006.\nIn 2008, with Israel's then prime minister, Ehud Olmert, being pressured to resign due to corruption charges, Mofaz announced that he would run for the leadership of the Kadima party.\nOn 5 August 2008, Mofaz officially entered the race to be the leader of Kadima. That same day he received a blessing from Shas spiritual leader Rabbi Ovadia Yosef. On 17 September 2008, he lost the Kadima party election, losing to Tzipi Livni for the spot of Kadima's Prime Minister and leader. Livni's narrow margin of 431 votes was 43.1% to Shaul Mofaz's 42.0%, a huge difference from the 10 to 12-point exit polls margins. She said the \"national responsibility (bestowed) by the public brings me to approach this job with great reverence\". Mofaz accepted the Kadima primary's result, despite his lawyer, Yehuda Weinstein's appeal advice, and telephoned Livni congratulating her. Livni got 16,936 votes, with 16,505 votes, for Mofaz. Public Security Minister Avi Dichter and Interior Minister Meir Sheetrit had 6.5% and 8.5%, respectively.\nPlaced second on the Kadima list, Mofaz retained his seat in the 2009 elections, but lost his cabinet position after Likud formed the government.\nOn 27 March 2012, Shaul Mofaz won the Kadima party leadership primaries by a landslide, defeating party chairwoman Tzipi Livni. Mofaz became Vice Prime Minister as part of a deal reached for a government of national unity with Binyamin Netanyahu. Mofaz said during the Kadima primaries that he would not join a government led by Netanyahu.\nMofaz had Kadima withdraw from the government coalition over Netanyahu's indecision over a draft reform law and warned that the prime minister was trying to patch together a majority for a vote to plunge the region into war.\nIn 2013 Kadima, only four years after having been the ruling party, received a mere 2% of the votes, barely passing meeting the electoral threshold of the Knesset.\nIn the buildup to the 2015 elections Kadima was not expected to pass the threshold, as it was raised to 3.25%. Mofaz negotiated with the Zionist Union alliance to bring Kadima onto their slate, but ended negotiations when it became clear he would not be their candidate for Defense Minister. Immediately after Mofaz announced he was not joining the Zionist Union slate, it was announced the former Military Intelligence Directorate (Israel) head Amos Yadlin was appointed to the Zionist Union slate and would be their candidate for Defense Minister. Within a week of his announcement that he was not running with the Zionist Union, Mofaz announced his retirement from politics.\nPersonal life.\nMofaz is married to Orit with four children. His son Yonatan, named for Yonatan Netanyahu, also became an IDF officer and attained the rank of Colonel. He lives in Kochav Yair.\nIn popular culture.\nA fictionalized version of Mofaz appeared in the 2008 drama film \"Lemon Tree\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "29452", "revid": "456858", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29452", "title": "Stasi", "text": "East German intelligence agency and secret police\nThe Ministry for State Security (, ; abbreviated MfS), commonly known as the (, an abbreviation of ), was the intelligence service and secret police of East Germany (the German Democratic Republic) from 1950 to 1990. It was one of the most repressive police organisations in the world, infiltrating almost every aspect of life in East Germany, using torture, intimidation, and a vast network of informants to crush dissent.\nThe function of the Stasi in East Germany resembled that of the KGB in the Soviet Union,\u2060 in that it served to maintain state authority and the position of the ruling party, in this case the Socialist Unity Party of Germany (SED). This was accomplished primarily through the use of tens of thousands of civilian informants called unofficial collaborators, who contributed to the arrest of approximately 250,000 people in the GDR alone. It also had a large elite paramilitary force, the Felix Dzerzhinsky Guards Regiment, that served as its armed wing. Known as \"the shield and the sword of the party\", the Stasi locked up opponents of the regime. Officers tortured prisoners by isolating them, depriving them of sleep and using psychological tricks such as threatening to arrest relatives.\nThe Stasi also conducted espionage and other clandestine operations outside the GDR through its subordinate foreign intelligence service, the Office of Reconnaissance, or Head Office A ( or HVA). Its operatives also maintained contacts in West Germany and throughout the western world, and are alleged to have occasionally cooperated with West German far-right terrorist groups, such as the Hepp-Kexel-Group.\nThe Stasi had its headquarters in East Berlin, with an extensive complex in Berlin-Lichtenberg and several smaller facilities throughout the city. Erich Mielke, the Stasi's longest-serving chief, controlled the organisation from 1957 to 1989 \u2014 32 of the 40 years of the GDR's existence. The HVA, under the leadership of Markus Wolf from 1952 to 1986, gained a reputation as one of the most effective intelligence agencies of the Cold War.\nAfter the German reunification of 1989 through 1991, some former Stasi officials were prosecuted for their crimes, and the surveillance files that the Stasi had maintained on millions of East German citizens were declassified so that all citizens could inspect their personal files on request. The Stasi Records Agency maintained the files until June 2021, when they became part of the German Federal Archives.\nCreation.\nThe Stasi was founded on 8 February 1950. Wilhelm Zaisser was the first Minister of State Security of the GDR, and Erich Mielke was his deputy. Zaisser tried to depose SED General Secretary Walter Ulbricht after the June 1953 uprising, but was instead removed by Ulbricht and replaced with Ernst Wollweber thereafter. Following the June 1953 uprising, the Politb\u00fcro decided to downgrade the apparatus to a State Secretariat and incorporate it under the Ministry of the Interior under the leadership of Willi Stoph. The Minister of State Security simultaneously became a State Secretary of State Security. The Stasi held this status until November 1955, when it was restored to a ministry. Wollweber resigned in 1957 after clashes with Ulbricht and Erich Honecker, and was succeeded by his deputy, Erich Mielke.\nIn 1957, Markus Wolf became head of the Hauptverwaltung Aufkl\u00e4rung (HVA) (Main Reconnaissance Administration), the foreign-intelligence section of the Stasi. As intelligence chief, Wolf achieved great success in penetrating the government, political and business circles of West Germany with spies. The most influential case was that of G\u00fcnter Guillaume, which led to the downfall of West German Chancellor Willy Brandt in May 1974. In 1986, Wolf retired and was succeeded by Werner Grossmann.\nRelationship with Soviet Intelligence Services.\nAlthough Mielke's Stasi was superficially granted independence in 1957, the KGB continued to maintain liaison officers in all eight main Stasi directorates at the Stasi headquarters and in each of the fifteen district headquarters around the GDR. The Stasi had also been invited by the KGB to establish operational bases in Moscow and Leningrad to monitor visiting East German tourists. Due to their close ties with Soviet intelligence services, Mielke referred to the Stasi officers as \"Chekists\". The KGB used 'low-visibility harassment' in order to control the population, and repress politically incorrect people and dissidents. This could involve causing unemployment, social isolation, and inducing mental and emotional health problems. Such methods formed the basis of the Stasi's use of \"Zersetzung\" (trans. decomposition) which has been considered to be a perfected version. \nIn 1978, Mielke formally granted KGB officers in East Germany the same rights and powers that they enjoyed in the Soviet Union. The BBC noted that KGB officer (and future Russian President) Vladimir Putin worked in Dresden, from 1985 to 1989, as a liaison officer to the Stasi from the KGB. Kremlin spokesperson Dmitry Peskov responded to the reports by stating that 'The KGB and the Stasi were partner intelligence agencies'.\nOperations.\nPersonnel and recruitment.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe ratio for the Stasi was one secret policeman per 166 East Germans. When the regular informers are added, these ratios become much higher: In the Stasi's case, there would have been at least one spy watching every 66 citizens! When one adds in the estimated numbers of part-time snoops, the result is nothing short of monstrous: one informer per 6.5 citizens. It would not have been unreasonable to assume that at least one Stasi informer was present in any party of ten or twelve dinner guests. Like a giant octopus, the Stasi's tentacles probed every aspect of life.\n \u2014 John O. Koehler, German-born American journalist\nBetween 1950 and 1989, the Stasi employed a total of 274,000 people in an effort to root out the class enemy. In 1989, the Stasi employed 91,015 people full-time, including 2,000 fully employed unofficial collaborators, 13,073 soldiers and 2,232 officers of the GDR army, along with 173,081 unofficial informants inside the GDR and 1,553 informants in West Germany.\nRegular commissioned Stasi officers were recruited from conscripts who had been honourably discharged from their 18 months' compulsory military service, had been members of the SED, had had a high level of participation in the Party's youth wing's activities and had been Stasi informers during their service in the Military. The candidates would then have to be recommended by their military unit political officers and Stasi agents, the local chiefs of the District (Bezirk) Stasi and Volkspolizei office, of the district in which they were permanently resident, and the District Secretary of the SED. These candidates were then made to sit through several tests and exams, which identified their intellectual capacity to be an officer, and their political reliability. University graduates who had completed their military service did not need to take these tests and exams. They then attended a two-year officer training programme at the Stasi college (\"Hochschule\") in Potsdam. Less mentally and academically endowed candidates were made ordinary technicians and attended a one-year technology-intensive course for non-commissioned officers.\nBy 1995, some 174,000 \"inoffizielle Mitarbeiter\" (IMs) Stasi informants had been identified, almost 2.5% of East Germany's population between the ages of 18 and 60. 10,000 IMs were under 18 years of age. According to an interview with Joachim Gauck, there could have been as many as 500,000 informers. A former Stasi Colonel who served in the counterintelligence directorate estimated that the figure could be as high as 2 million if occasional informants were included. There is significant debate about how many IMs were actually employed.\nInfiltration.\nFull-time officers were posted to all major industrial plants (the extent of any surveillance largely depended on how valuable a product was to the economy) and one tenant in every apartment building was designated as a watchdog reporting to an area representative of the Volkspolizei (Vopo). Spies reported every relative or friend who stayed the night at another's apartment. Tiny holes were drilled in apartment and hotel room walls through which Stasi agents filmed citizens with special video cameras. Schools, universities, and hospitals were extensively infiltrated, as were organizations, such as computer clubs where teenagers exchanged Western video games.\nThe Stasi had formal categorizations of each type of informant, and had official guidelines on how to extract information from, and control, those with whom they came into contact. The roles of informants ranged from those already in some way involved in state security (such as the police and the armed services) to those in the dissident movements (such as in the arts and the Protestant Church). Information gathered about the latter groups was frequently used to divide or discredit members. Informants were made to feel important, given material or social incentives, and were imbued with a sense of adventure, and only around 7.7%, according to official figures, were coerced into cooperating. A significant proportion of those informing were members of the SED. Use of some form of blackmail was not uncommon. A large number of Stasi informants were tram conductors, janitors, doctors, nurses and teachers. Mielke believed that the best informants were those whose jobs entailed frequent contact with the public.\nThe Stasi's ranks swelled considerably after Eastern Bloc countries signed the 1975 Helsinki Accords, which GDR leader Erich Honecker viewed as a grave threat to his regime because they contained language binding signatories to respect \"human and basic rights, including freedom of thought, conscience, religion, and conviction\". The number of IMs peaked at around 180,000 in that year, having slowly risen from 20,000 to 30,000 in the early 1950s, and reaching 100,000 for the first time in 1968, in response to \"Ostpolitik\" and protests worldwide. The Stasi also acted as a proxy for the KGB to conduct activities in other Eastern Bloc countries, such as Poland, where the Soviets were despised.\nThe Stasi infiltrated almost every aspect of GDR life. In the mid-1980s, a network of IMs began growing in both German states. By the time that East Germany collapsed in 1989, the Stasi employed 91,015 employees and 173,081 informants. About one out of every 63 East Germans collaborated with the Stasi. By at least one estimate, the Stasi maintained greater surveillance over its own people than any secret police force in history. The Stasi employed one secret policeman for every 166 East Germans. By comparison, the Gestapo deployed one secret policeman per 2,000 people. As ubiquitous as this was, the ratios swelled when informers were factored in: counting part-time informers, the Stasi had one agent per 6.5 people. This comparison led Nazi hunter Simon Wiesenthal to call the Stasi even more oppressive than the Gestapo. Stasi agents infiltrated and undermined West Germany's government and spy agencies.\nIn some cases, spouses even spied on each other. A high-profile example of this was peace activist Vera Lengsfeld, whose husband, Knud Wollenberger, was a Stasi informant.\n\"Zersetzung\" (Decomposition).\nThe Stasi perfected the technique of psychological harassment of perceived enemies known as \"Zersetzung\" () \u2013 a term borrowed from chemistry which literally means \"decomposition\".\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe goal was to destroy secretly the self-confidence of people, for example by damaging their reputation, by organizing failures in their work, and by destroying their personal relationships. Considering this, East Germany was a very modern dictatorship. The Stasi didn't try to arrest every dissident. It preferred to paralyze them, and it could do so because it had access to so much personal information and to so many institutions.\n\u2014Hubertus Knabe, German historian\nBy the 1970s, the Stasi had decided that the methods of overt persecution that had been employed up to that time, such as arrest and torture, were too crude and obvious. Such forms of oppression were drawing significant international condemnation. It was realised that psychological harassment was far less likely to be recognised for what it was, so its victims, and their supporters, were less likely to be provoked into active resistance, given that they would often not be aware of the source of their problems, or even their exact nature. International condemnation could also be avoided. \"Zersetzung\" was designed to side-track and \"switch off\" perceived enemies so that they would lose the will to continue any \"inappropriate\" activities. Anyone who was judged to display politically, culturally, or religiously incorrect attitudes could be viewed as a \"hostile-negative\" force and targeted with \"Zersetzung\" methods. For this reason members of the Church, writers, artists, and members of youth sub-cultures were often the victims. Zersetzung methods were applied and further developed in a \"creative and differentiated\" manner based upon the specific person being targeted i.e. they were tailored based upon the target's psychology and life situation.\nTactics employed under \"Zersetzung\" usually involved the disruption of the victim's private or family life. This often included psychological attacks, such as breaking into their home and subtly manipulating the contents, in a form of gaslighting i.e. moving furniture around, altering the timing of an alarm, removing pictures from walls, or replacing one variety of tea with another etc. Other practices included property damage, sabotage of cars, travel bans, career sabotage, administering purposely incorrect medical treatment, smear campaigns which could include sending falsified, compromising photos or documents to the victim's family, denunciation, provocation, psychological warfare, psychological subversion, wiretapping, bugging, mysterious phone calls or unnecessary deliveries, even including sending a vibrator to a target's wife. Increasing degrees of unemployment and social isolation could and frequently did occur due to the negative psychological, physical, and social ramifications of being targeted. Usually, victims had no idea that the Stasi were responsible. Many thought that they were losing their minds, and mental breakdowns and suicide were sometimes the result. Direct physical attacks were not part of the process, even covertly. In 2000, the research group \"Projektgruppe Strahlen\" disputed claims that the Stasi had used X-ray projection against victims. The claims persisted, however, and in 2001 the Gauck Commission, a modern government agency investigating the activities of the Stasi, claimed that 'unusual non-medical X-ray machines' found in political prisons could have been weapons and used to irradiate inmates. It was suspected that such exposure resulted in the deaths from cancer of a number of prominent dissidents.\nOne great advantage of the harassment perpetrated under \"Zersetzung\" was that its relatively subtle nature meant that it was able to be plausibly denied, including in diplomatic circles. This was important given that the GDR was trying to improve its international standing during the 1970s and 1980s, especially in conjunction with the \"Ostpolitik\" of West German Chancellor Willy Brandt massively improving relations between the two German states. For these political and operational reasons \"Zersetzung\" became the primary method of repression in the GDR.\nStructure.\nBy the late 1970s and early 1980s, the Stasi had more than 100,000 employees, 11,000 of which were in the Felix Dzerzhinsky Guards Regiment, and the rest in the agency's various departments. \nThe MfS was organized into more than 40 different departments and branches, known as \"Hauptabteilungen\" (Main Departments), each covering a different aspect of its work:\nDirectors.\n! data-sort-type=\"number\"| No.\n! class=\"unsortable\"| Portrait\n! Director!! data-sort-type=\"date\"| Took office!! data-sort-type=\"date\"| Left office!! Time in office!! colspan=\"1\"| Party\nInternational operations.\nAfter German reunification, revelations of the Stasi's international activities were publicized, such as its military training of the West German Red Army Faction.\nGiven the close relationship between the KGB and the Stasi, their Third World operations featured a clear cut division in responsibilities. The Soviets supplied military hardware, money and military advisors, and the East Germans organized and trained secret police forces and intelligence departments. Cuba was the first main test run of setting up a new secret police and first-rate intelligence service. This operation helped to strengthen Cuban-East German relations, as well as open up the Stasi to intelligence collected by Cubans in the United States. The reputation of the Stasi was quite international, with the newly independent nation of Zanzibar making an immediate request for establishing a state security service, and East Germany being the first to recognize the country. Around the same time, Kwame Nkrumah of Ghana also made a request, saying it was critical to his Pan-African movement. The Politburo decided to help African liberation movements with military and security assistance, under the de facto supervision of Honecker. The Derg regime was given assistance to build a state security apparatus, however there were several problems with the 100 Ethiopians sent to East German institutions. As Koehler puts it, \"For one thing, many of the Ethiopians lacked even an elementary education.\" Additionally, the Stasi began training liberation movement members in Rhodesia, Mozambique, Namibia and Zimbabwe, as well as members of the ANC. The ANC operations were financed via counterfeit currencies under the auspices of Colonel Kurt Lewinsky. The Stasi was also operational in South Yemen, to keep control of the port of Aden in a friendly camp, so that it could keep weapons flowing to the PLO.\nFall of the Soviet Union.\nRecruitment of informants became increasingly difficult towards unification, and after 1986 there was a negative turnover rate of IMs. This had a significant impact on the Stasi's ability to survey the populace in a period of growing unrest, and knowledge of the Stasi's activities became more widespread. Stasi had been tasked during this period with preventing the country's economic difficulties becoming a political problem, through suppression of the very worst problems the state faced, but it failed to do so.\nOn 7 November 1989, in response to the rapidly changing political and social situation in the GDR in late 1989, Erich Mielke resigned. On 17 November 1989, the Council of Ministers \"(Ministerrat der DDR)\" renamed the Stasi the Office for National Security \"(Amt f\u00fcr Nationale Sicherheit\" \u2013 AfNS), which was headed by \"Generalleutnant\" Wolfgang Schwanitz. On 8 December 1989, GDR Prime Minister Hans Modrow directed the dissolution of the AfNS, which was confirmed by a decision of the \"Ministerrat\" on 14 December 1989.\nAs part of this decision, the \"Ministerrat\" originally called for the evolution of the AfNS into two separate organizations: a new foreign intelligence service \"(Nachrichtendienst der DDR)\" and an \"Office for the Protection of the Constitution of the GDR\" \"(Verfassungsschutz der DDR)\", along the lines of the West German \"Bundesamt f\u00fcr Verfassungsschutz\". However, the public reaction was extremely negative, and under pressure from the \"Round Table\" \"(Runder Tisch)\", the government dropped the creation of the \"Verfassungsschutz der DDR\" and directed the immediate dissolution of the AfNS on 13 January 1990. Certain functions of the AfNS reasonably related to law enforcement were handed over to the GDR Ministry of Internal Affairs. The same ministry also took guardianship of remaining AfNS facilities.\nWhen the parliament of unified Germany investigated public funds that disappeared after the Fall of the Berlin Wall, it found out that East Germany had transferred large amounts of money to Martin Schlaff through accounts in Vaduz, the capital of Liechtenstein, in return for goods \"under Western embargo\".\nMoreover, high-ranking Stasi officers continued their post-GDR careers in management positions in Schlaff's group of companies. For example, in 1990, Herbert Kohler, Stasi commander in Dresden, transferred 170 million marks to Schlaff for \"harddisks\" and months later went to work for him.\nThe investigations concluded that \"Schlaff's empire of companies played a crucial role\" in the Stasi attempts to secure the financial future of Stasi agents and keep the intelligence network alive.\nRecovery of Stasi files.\nDuring the Peaceful Revolution of 1989, Stasi offices and prisons throughout the country were occupied by citizens, but not before the Stasi destroyed a number of documents (approximately 5%) consisting of, by one calculation, 1 billion sheets of paper.\nStorming the Stasi headquarters.\nWith the fall of the GDR, the Stasi was dissolved. Stasi employees began to destroy the extensive files and documents they held, either by hand or by using incineration or shredders. When these activities became known, a protest began in front of the Stasi headquarters. On the evening of 15 January 1990 a large crowd formed outside the gates and called for a stop to the destruction of sensitive files. The building contained vast records of personal files, many of which would supply important evidence in convicting those who had committed crimes for the Stasi. The protesters continued to grow in number until they were able to overcome the police and gain entry into the complex. Once inside, specific targets of the protesters' anger were portraits of Erich Honecker and Erich Mielke, which were torn down, trampled upon or burnt. Defenestration occurred as some Stasi employees were thrown out of upper floor windows and beaten after falling to the streets below, but there were no deaths or serious injuries. Among some of the protesters were former Stasi collaborators seeking to destroy incriminating documents.\nStasi file controversy.\nWith German reunification on 3 October 1990, a new government agency was founded, called the Federal Commissioner for the Records of the State Security Service of the former German Democratic Republic (), officially abbreviated \"BStU\". There was a debate about what should happen to the files, whether they should be opened to the people or kept sealed.\nSome of those who opposed opening the files cited privacy as a reason. They felt that the information in the files would lead to negative feelings about former Stasi members, and, in turn, cause violence. Pastor Rainer Eppelmann, who became Minister of Defense and Disarmament after March 1990, felt that new political freedoms for former Stasi members would be jeopardized by acts of revenge. Prime Minister Lothar de Maizi\u00e8re even went so far as to predict murder. They also argued against the use of the files to capture former Stasi members and prosecute them, arguing that not all former members were criminals and should not be punished solely for being a member. There were also some who believed that everyone was guilty of something. Peter-Michael Diestel, the Minister of Interior, opined that these files could not be used to determine innocence and guilt, claiming that \"there were only two types of individuals who were truly innocent in this system, the newborn and the alcoholic\". Others, such as West German Interior Minister Wolfgang Sch\u00e4uble, believed in putting the Stasi past behind them and working on German reunification.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBut why did the Stasi collect all this information in its archives? The main purpose was to control the society. In nearly every speech, the Stasi minister gave the order to find out who is who, which meant who thinks what. He didn't want to wait until somebody tried to act against the regime. He wanted to know in advance what people were thinking and planning. The East Germans knew, of course, that they were surrounded by informers, in a totalitarian regime that created mistrust and a state of widespread fear, the most important tools to oppress people in any dictatorship.\n\u2014Hubertus Knabe, German historian\nThose on the other side of the debate argued that everyone should have the right to see their own file, and that the files should be opened to investigate former Stasi members and prosecute them, as well as prevent them from holding office. Opening the files would also help clear up some of the rumors circulating at the time. Some believed that politicians involved with the Stasi should be investigated.\nThe fate of the files was finally decided under the Unification Treaty between the GDR and West Germany. This treaty took the Volkskammer law further and allowed more access and greater use of the files. Along with the decision to keep the files in a central location in the East, they also decided who could see and use the files, allowing people to see their own files.\nIn 1992, following a declassification ruling by the German government, the Stasi files were opened, allowing individuals to gain access to their files. Timothy Garton Ash, an English historian, after reading his file, wrote \"The File: A Personal History\".\nBetween 1991 and 2011, around 2.75 million individuals, mostly GDR citizens, requested to see their own files. The ruling also gave people the ability to make duplicates of their documents. Another significant question was how the media could use and benefit from the documents. It was decided that the media could obtain files as long as they were depersonalized and did not contain information about individuals under the age of 18 or former Stasi members. This ruling not only granted file access to the media, but also to schools.\nTracking down former Stasi informers with recovered files.\nSome groups within the former Stasi community used threats of violence to scare off Stasi hunters, who were actively tracking down ex-members. Though these hunters succeeded in identifying many ex-Stasi, charges could not be brought against anyone merely for being a registered Stasi member. The person in question had to have participated in an illegal act. Among the high-profile individuals arrested and tried were Erich Mielke, Third Minister of State Security of the GDR, and Erich Honecker, GDR head of state. Mielke was sentenced to six years' prison for the 1931 murder of two policemen. Honecker was charged with authorizing the killing of would-be escapees along the east\u2013west border and Berlin Wall. During his trial, he underwent cancer treatment. Nearing death, Honecker was allowed to spend his final years a free man. He died in Chile in May 1994.\nReassembling destroyed files.\nReassembling the destroyed files has been relatively easy due to the number of archives and the failure of shredding machines (in some cases, \"shredding\" meant tearing pages in two by hand, making the documents easily recoverable). In 1995, the BStU began reassembling the shredded documents; 13 years later, the three dozen archivists commissioned to the projects had reassembled only 327 bags. Computer-assisted data recovery is now being used to reassemble the remaining 16,000 bags\u00a0\u2013 representing approximately 45 million pages. It is estimated that the task may require 30 million dollars to complete.\nThe CIA acquired some Stasi records during the looting of the Stasi's archives. Germany asked for their return and received some in April 2000. See also Rosenholz files.\nMuseums.\nThere are a number of memorial sites and museums relating to the Stasi in former Stasi prisons and administration buildings. In addition, offices of the Stasi Records Agency in Berlin, Dresden, Erfurt, Frankfurt-an-der-Oder and Halle (Saale) all have permanent and changing exhibitions relating to the activities of the Stasi in their region.\nErfurt.\nMemorial and Education Centre Andreasstra\u00dfe \u2013 a museum in Erfurt which is housed in a former Stasi remand prison. From 1952 until 1989, over 5000 political prisoners were held on remand and interrogated in the Andreasstrasse prison, which was one of 17 Stasi remand prisons in the GDR. On 4 December 1989, local citizens occupied the prison and the neighbouring Stasi district headquarters to stop the mass destruction of Stasi files. It was the first time East Germans had undertaken such resistance against the Stasi and it instigated the take over of Stasi buildings throughout the country.\nDresden.\nGedenkst\u00e4tte Bautzner Stra\u00dfe Dresden (The Bautzner Strasse Memorial in Dresden) \u2013 A Stasi remand prison and the Stasi's regional head office in Dresden. It was used as a prison by the Soviet occupying forces from 1945 to 1953, and from 1953 to 1989 by the Stasi. The Stasi held and interrogated between 12,000 and 15,000 people during the time they used the prison. The building was originally a 19th-century paper mill. It was converted into a block of flats in 1933 before being confiscated by the Soviet army in 1945. The Stasi prison and offices were occupied by local citizens on 5 December 1989, during a wave of such takeovers across the country. The museum and memorial site was opened to the public in 1994.\nFrankfurt-an-der-Oder.\nRemembrance and Documentation Centre for \"Victims of political tyranny\" \u2013 A memorial and museum at Collegienstra\u00dfe 10 in Frankfurt-an-der-Oder, in a building that was used as a detention centre by the Gestapo, the Soviet occupying forces and the Stasi. The building was the Stasi district offices and a remand prison from 1950 until 1969, after which the Volkspolizei used the prison. From 1950 to 1952 it was an execution site where 12 people sentenced to death were executed. The prison closed in 1990. It has been a cultural centre and a memorial to the victims of political tyranny since June 1994, managed by the Museum Viadrina.\nGera.\nGedenkst\u00e4tte Amthordurchgang, a memorial and 'centre of encounter' in Gera in a former remand prison, originally opened in 1874, that was used by the Gestapo from 1933 to 1945, the Soviet occupying forces from 1945 to 1949, and from 1952 to 1989 by the Stasi. The building was also the district offices of the Stasi administration. Between 1952 and 1989 over 2,800 people were held in the prison on political grounds. The memorial site opened with the official name \"Die Gedenk- und Begegnungsst\u00e4tte im Torhaus der politischen Haftanstalt von 1933 bis 1945 und 1945 bis 1989\" in November 2005.\nHalle (Saale).\nThe Roter Ochse (Red Ox) is a museum and memorial site at the prison at Am Kirchtor 20, Halle (Saale). Part of the prison, built 1842, was used by the Stasi from 1950 until 1989, during which time over 9,000 political prisoners were held in the prison. From 1954 it was mainly used for women prisoners. The name \"Roter Ochse\" is the informal name of the prison, possibly originating in the 19th century from the colour of the external walls. It still operates as a prison for young people. Since 1996, the building which was used as an interrogation centre by the Stasi and an execution site by the Nazis has been a museum and memorial centre for victims of political persecution.\nMagdeburg.\nGedenkst\u00e4tte Moritzplatz Magdeburg \u2013 The memorial site at Moritzplatz in Magdeburg is a museum on the site of a former prison, built from 1873 to 1876, that was used by the Soviet administration from 1945 to 1949 and the Stasi from 1958 until 1989 to hold political prisoners. Between 1950 and 1958 the Stasi shared another prison with the civil police. The prison at Moritzplatz was used by the Volkspolizei from 1952 until 1958. Between 1945 and 1989, more than 10,000 political prisoners were held in the prison. The memorial site and museum was founded in December 1990.\nPotsdam.\nThe Soviet administration took over the prison in 1945, also using it as a prison for holding political prisoners on remand. The Stasi then used it as a remand prison, mainly for political prisoners from 1952 until 1989. Over 6,000 people were held in the prison by the Stasi during that time. On 27 October 1989, the prison freed all political prisoners due to a nationwide amnesty. On 5 December 1989, the Stasi Headquarters in Potsdam and the Lindenstrasse Prison were occupied by protesters. From January 1990 the building was used as offices for various citizens initiatives and new political groups, such as the Neue Forum. The building was opened to the public from 20 January 1990 and people were taken on tours of the site. It officially became a Memorial site in 1995.\nRostock.\nThe prison closed in the early 1990s. The state of Mecklenburg-Vorpommern took ownership of it in 1998, and the memorial site and museum were established in 1999. An extensive restoration of the site began in December 2018.\nStasi officers after the reunification.\nRecruitment by Russian companies.\nFormer Stasi agent Matthias Warnig (codename \"Arthur\") was the head of Nord Stream until 2023. Investigations have revealed that some key Gazprom Germania managers are former Stasi agents.\nLobbying.\nFormer Stasi officers continue to be politically active via the \"Gesellschaft zur Rechtlichen und Humanit\u00e4ren Unterst\u00fctzung\" (GRH, Society for Legal and Humanitarian Support). Former high-ranking officers and employees of the Stasi, including the last Stasi director, Wolfgang Schwanitz, make up the majority of the organization's members, and it receives support from the German Communist Party, among others.\nThe impetus for the establishment of the GRH was provided by the criminal charges filed against the Stasi in the early 1990s. The GRH, decrying the charges as \"victor's justice\", called for them to be dropped. Today the group provides an alternative if a somewhat utopian voice in the public debate on the GDR's legacy. It calls for the closure of the Berlin-Hohensch\u00f6nhausen Memorial and can be a vocal presence at memorial services and public events. In March 2006 in Berlin, GRH members disrupted a museum event; a political scandal ensued when the Berlin Senator (Minister) of Culture refused to confront them.\nBehind the scenes, the GRH also lobbies people and institutions promoting opposing viewpoints. For example, in March 2006, the Berlin Senator for Education received a letter from a GRH member and former Stasi officer attacking the Museum for promoting \"falsehoods, anti-communist agitation and psychological terror against minors\". Similar letters have also been received by schools organizing field trips to the museum.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "29455", "revid": "45093799", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29455", "title": "Sandra Bullock", "text": "American actress and film producer (born 1964)\nSandra Annette Bullock (; born July 26, 1964) is an American actress and film producer. The highest-paid actress of 2010 and 2014, Bullock's filmography spans both comedy and drama, and her accolades include an Academy Award and a Golden Globe Award. She was named one of \"Time\"'s 100 most influential people in the world in 2010.\nAfter making her acting debut with a minor role in the thriller \"Hangmen\" (1987), Bullock received early attention for her supporting role in the action film \"Demolition Man\" (1993). Her breakthrough in the action thriller \"Speed\" (1994) led to leading roles in the romantic comedy \"While You Were Sleeping\" (1995), and the dramas \"A Time to Kill\" (1996) and \"Hope Floats\" (1998). She achieved further success in the following decades with the comedies \"Miss Congeniality\" (2000), \"Two Weeks Notice\" (2002), \"The Proposal\" (2009), \"The Heat\" (2013), \"Ocean's 8\" (2018), and \"The Lost City\" (2022); the dramas \"Crash\" (2004) and \"The Unforgivable\" (2021); and the thrillers \"Premonition\" (2007) and \"Bird Box\" (2018). For her portrayal of Leigh Anne Tuohy in the biographical drama \"The Blind Side\" (2009), Bullock won the Academy Award for Best Actress. She was nominated for the same award for playing an astronaut stranded in space in the science fiction thriller \"Gravity\" (2013), which is her highest-grossing live-action film.\nIn addition to acting, Bullock is the founder of the production company Fortis Films. She has produced some of the films in which she has starred, including \"\" (2005) and \"All About Steve\" (2009), and served as an executive producer on the ABC sitcom \"George Lopez\" (2002\u20132007), on which she made numerous appearances. Dubbed \"America's sweetheart\" by the media, Bullock was also named the Most Beautiful Woman by \"People\" magazine in 2015.\nEarly life and education.\nBullock was born on July 26, 1964, in Arlington County, Virginia, to Helga Mathilde (n\u00e9e Meyer; 1942\u20132000), an opera singer and voice teacher from Germany; and John Wilson Bullock (1925\u20132018), an Army employee and part-time voice coach from Birmingham, Alabama. Her father, who was in charge of the Army's Military Postal Service in Europe, was stationed in Nuremberg when he met her mother. Her parents married in Germany. Bullock's maternal grandfather was a German rocket scientist from Nuremberg. The family returned to Arlington, where her father worked with the Army Materiel Command before becoming a contractor for The Pentagon. Bullock has a younger sister, Gesine Bullock-Prado, who served as president of Bullock's production company Fortis Films.\nFor 12 years, Bullock lived in Nuremberg, West Germany, and Vienna and Salzburg, Austria, and grew up speaking German. She had a Waldorf education in Nuremberg. As a child, while her mother went on European opera tours, Bullock usually stayed with her aunt Christl and cousin Susanne, the latter of whom later married politician Peter Ramsauer. Bullock studied ballet and vocal arts as a child and frequently accompanied her mother, taking small parts in her opera productions. In Nuremberg, she sang in the opera's children's choir. Bullock has a scar above her left eye which was caused by a fall into a creek when she was a child. While she maintains her American citizenship, she applied for German citizenship in 2009.\nBullock attended Washington-Lee High School, where she was a cheerleader and performed in school theater productions. After graduating in 1982, she attended East Carolina University in Greenville, North Carolina, where she received a BFA in Drama in 1987. While at East Carolina, she performed in theater productions, including \"Peter Pan\" and \"Three Sisters\". She then moved to Manhattan, New York, where she supported herself as a bartender, cocktail waitress, and coat checker while auditioning for roles.\nCareer.\nEarly roles and breakthrough (1987\u20131995).\nWhile in New York, Bullock took acting classes with Sanford Meisner. She appeared in several student films and later landed a role in an Off-Broadway play \"No Time Flat\". Director Alan J. Levi was impressed by Bullock's performance and offered her a part in the made-for-television film \"\" (1989). This led to her being cast in a series of small roles in several independent films, and in the lead role of the short-lived NBC television version of the film \"Working Girl\" (1990). She went on to appear in several films, such as \"Love Potion No. 9\" (1992), \"The Thing Called Love\" (1993) and \"Fire on the Amazon\" (1993), before her supporting role in the sci-fi action film \"Demolition Man\" (1993).\nIn 1994, she played Annie Porter, a passenger eventually driving a bus that was rigged by a terrorist, in the smash-hit blockbuster \"Speed\" alongside Keanu Reeves. She was required to read for \"Speed\" to ensure that there was the right chemistry between her and Reeves. She recalls they had to do \"all these really physical scenes together, rolling around on the floor and stuff.\" \"Speed\" received critical acclaim, with Rotten Tomatoes calling it a \"terrific popcorn thriller [with] outstanding performances from Keanu Reeves, Dennis Hopper, and Sandra Bullock\", grossed $350\u00a0million worldwide, and helped establish Bullock as a Hollywood actress. She won Best Actress at the 21st Saturn Awards and Best Female Performance and Most Desirable Female at the 1995 MTV Movie Awards.\nBullock headlined the romantic comedy \"While You Were Sleeping\" (1995) as a lonely Chicago Transit Authority token collector who saves the life of a man. The film had a positive reception from critics, who felt that it was \"assembled with such skill\u2014and with such a charming performance from Sandra Bullock\u2014that it gives formula a good name.\" She received her first nomination for the Golden Globe Award for Best Actress \u2013 Motion Picture Comedy or Musical. The thriller \"The Net\" (also 1995), starred Bullock as a computer programmer who stumbles upon a conspiracy that puts her life and the lives of those around her in great danger. Owen Gleiberman, writing for \"Entertainment Weekly\", complimented her performance, saying, \"Bullock pulls you into the movie. Her overripe smile and clear, imploring eyes are sometimes evocative of Julia Roberts\". \"While You Were Sleeping\" and \"The Net\" made $182\u00a0million and $110.6\u00a0million, respectively.\nWorldwide recognition (1996\u20132007).\nIn \"A Time to Kill\" (1996), a legal drama based on John Grisham's 1989 novel of the same name, Bullock portrayed a member of the defense team in the trial for the murder of two men who raped a young girl, opposite Samuel L. Jackson, Matthew McConaughey and Kevin Spacey. She received an MTV Movie Award nomination for Best Female Performance. She subsequently received $11\u00a0million for \"\" (1997), which she agreed to star in for financial backing for her next project, \"Hope Floats\" (1998). Unlike the original film, \"Speed 2\" was a critical and commercial flop that she later disparaged. In \"Hope Floats\", she starred as an unassuming housewife whose life is disrupted when her husband (played by Michael Par\u00e9) reveals his infidelity to her on a talk show. Critic James Berardinelli remarked that her \"undisputed strength lies in a blend of light drama and comedy\". That film was a commercial success, grossing $81.4\u00a0million worldwide.\nBullock starred in the comedy \"Practical Magic\" (1998) alongside Nicole Kidman as two witch sisters who face a curse which threatens to prevent them ever finding lasting love. While the film opened atop the chart on its North American opening weekend, it flopped at the box office. That year, she voiced Miriam in the DreamWorks Animation film \"The Prince of Egypt\" and wrote, produced, and directed the short film \"Making Sandwiches\". She next played a free-spirited drifter who begins to talk to a writer (Ben Affleck) in the romantic comedy \"Forces of Nature\" (1999), on which \"Boxoffice Magazine\" remarked: \"The combination of Affleck's deadpan by-the-book persona with the spontaneity of Bullock's character sparks with convincing chemistry.\" \"Forces of Nature\" made $93\u00a0million worldwide. Bullock took on the role of an FBI agent who must go undercover as a beauty pageant contestant in the comedy \"Miss Congeniality\" (2000), which became another financial success, with a global gross of $212\u00a0million. It earned her a second nomination for the Golden Globe Award for Best Actress \u2013 Motion Picture Comedy or Musical. In \"28 Days\" (also 2000), a dramedy directed by Betty Thomas, Bullock starred as a newspaper columnist obliged to enter a rehabilitation program for alcoholism.\nBullock starred in the psychological thriller \"Murder by Numbers\" (2002) as a seasoned homicide detective. Roger Ebert awarded the film three stars out of a possible four, stating: \"Bullock does a good job here of working against her natural likability, creating a character you'd like to like, and could like, if she weren't so sad, strange and turned in upon herself.\" She teamed up with Hugh Grant for the romantic comedy \"Two Weeks Notice\" (also 2002), in which she starred as a lawyer who walks out on her boss. Liz Braun, of \"Jam! Movies\", found Bullock and Grant to be \"perfectly paired\", stating: \"The script allows the two actors to be at their comedic best, even though the film as a whole is amateurish in many ways\". \"Two Weeks Notice\" made $199\u00a0million globally. That year, she was presented with the Raul Julia Award for Excellence for helping expand career openings for Hispanic talent in the media and entertainment industry as the executive producer of the sitcom \"George Lopez\" (2002\u20132007). She also made several appearances on the show as Accident Amy, an accident-prone employee at the factory Lopez's character manages.\nAs part of a large ensemble cast, Bullock played the wife of a district attorney in the drama \"Crash\" (2004), which won the Academy Award for Best Picture. She received positive reviews for her performance, with some critics suggesting that it was the best performance of her career to that point. For \"Crash\", she received the Screen Actors Guild Award for Outstanding Performance by a Cast in a Motion Picture along with the rest of the cast. She next received a $17.5\u00a0million salary for \"\", which Roger Ebert called a \"doubly unnecessary\" sequel. She was a co-recipient of the 2005 Women in Film Crystal Award. In 2006, Bullock reunited with Keanu Reeves for the romantic drama \"The Lake House\", although their characters were separated throughout the film and they were only on set together for two weeks during filming, and played Harper Lee in \"Infamous\", a drama based on George Plimpton's 1997 book \"Truman Capote\", alongside Toby Jones and Daniel Craig. \"The Lake House\" was a financial success, while \"Infamous\" received generally positive reviews. Bullock headlined the supernatural thriller \"Premonition\" (2007) as a housewife who experiences the days surrounding her husband's death in non-chronological order. Despite negative reviews, the film grossed $84.1\u00a0million worldwide.\nEstablished career (2008\u20132014).\nIn 2009, Bullock starred as a pushy editor-in-chief in the romantic comedy \"The Proposal\", opposite Ryan Reynolds, which grossed $317\u00a0million at the worldwide box office, making it her fourth-most successful picture to date. She received her third nomination for the Golden Globe Award for Best Actress \u2013 Motion Picture Comedy or Musical. That same year, the drama \"The Blind Side\" opened at number two behind \"\" with $34.2\u00a0million, making it Bullock's second-highest opening weekend ever; it went on to gross over $309\u00a0million, making it her highest-grossing domestic film, her fourth-highest-grossing film worldwide, and the first one in history to pass the $200\u00a0million mark with only one top-billed female star. Bullock portrayed Leigh Anne Tuohy, the adoptive mother of Michael Oher, a role she had initially turned down three times due to discomfort in portraying a devout Christian. She was awarded the Academy Award, Golden Globe Award, Screen Actors Guild Award and Critics' Choice Movie Award for Best Actress. \"The Blind Side\" also received a nomination for the Academy Award for Best Picture. Winning the Oscar also gave Bullock another unique distinction: the prior night, she won the Razzie Award for Worst Actress for her performance as an eccentric crossword puzzle writer in \"All About Steve\" (2009), becoming the only actor in history to win both awards for the same year.\nBy 2010, Bullock was said to be \"courted for virtually every female starring role Hollywood has to offer\", according to \"Entertainment Weekly\". Ben Affleck, her co-star in the romantic comedy \"Forces of Nature\" (1999), stated: \"Every movie you hear about and every script I see, they say, 'We're going after Sandra Bullock for the woman'.\" She decided to eschew \"the torrent of offers\" in favour of \"quietly [putting] acting on hold\" to focus on her personal life. She also became \"more selective\" with the projects that she accepted, on which she said: \"As I've gotten older, I say 'No' a lot more. I've become a better fighter for my work. I didn't have the guts to do that before\". In 2010, she was the world's highest-paid actress. She would next star alongside Tom Hanks as a widow of the September 11 attacks in the drama \"Extremely Loud &amp; Incredibly Close\" (2011), a film adaptation based on the novel of the same name. Despite mixed reviews, the film was nominated for numerous awards, including an Academy Award for Best Picture. Bullock was nominated for Favorite Actress Drama by Teen Choice Awards.\nIn 2013, Bullock starred alongside Melissa McCarthy in the comedy \"The Heat\" as an FBI Special Agent who, along with a city detective, must take down a mobster in Boston. It received positive reviews from critics, and took in $230\u00a0million at the worldwide box office. Bullock subsequently played an astronaut stranded in space in the sci-fi thriller \"Gravity\", opposite George Clooney, which premiered at the 70th Venice Film Festival and was released on October 4, 2013, to coincide with the beginning of World Space Week. \"Gravity\" received universal critical acclaim and a standing ovation in Venice. The film was called \"the most realistic and beautifully choreographed film ever set in space\" and certain critics considered Bullock's performance to be the best of her career. \"Gravity\" grossed $716\u00a0million worldwide to become Bullock's second-most successful film. For her role as Dr. Ryan Stone, Bullock was nominated for the Academy Award, Golden Globe Award, BAFTA Award, Screen Actors Guild Award, and Critics' Choice Movie Award for Best Actress. On her performance, \"Variety\" wrote: Bullock inhabits the role with grave dignity and hints at Stone's past scars with sensitivity and tact, and she holds the screen effortlessly once \"Gravity\" becomes a veritable one-woman show [...] the actress remains fully present emotionally, projecting a very appealing combo of vulnerability, intelligence and determination that not only wins us over immediately, but sustains attention all the way through the cathartic closing reels. In 2014, she was Hollywood's highest-paid actress.\nSuccess with limited work (2015\u2013present).\nBullock provided her voice for Scarlet Overkill, the villainous character, in the animated film \"Minions\" (2015), which became her highest-grossing film to date with a worldwide gross of over $1.1\u00a0billion. In 2015, she served as an executive producer and starred, as a political consultant hired to help win a Bolivian presidential election, in the drama \"Our Brand Is Crisis\", based on the 2005 documentary film of the same name by Rachel Boynton. Peter Debruge of \"Variety\" found Bullock's portrayal to be \"easily one of the best female roles of the last 10 years\", but film had the worst wide release opening of her career. \nIn \"Ocean's 8\" (2018), an all-female spin-off of the \"Ocean's Eleven\" franchise directed by Gary Ross, Bullock played Debbie Ocean, the sister of Danny Ocean, who helps plan a sophisticated heist of the annual Met Gala in New York City. Writing for \"The Hollywood Reporter\", Josh Spieger called the film a \"welcome return to the big screen for Bullock\" and observed: \"She has reached a point in her career where she chooses her roles with care; before \"Gravity\", she'd only co-starred in a handful of films over the previous five years, including her Oscar-winning turn in \"The Blind Side\". \"Ocean's 8\" is Bullock's first true franchise film in decades [...] and it suggests that her decision to be more selective in which projects she picks can pay off in dividends\". \"Ocean's 8\" had the best debut for the franchise, and ultimately made $297\u00a0million globally.\nHer next role was that of Malorie, a woman who must find a way to guide herself and her children to safety despite the potential threat from an unseen adversary, in the Netflix post-apocalyptic horror film \"Bird Box\" (2018), based on the novel of the same name. She received acclaim for her performance, with \"Variety\" and \"The Wrap\" describing it as \"wonderfully self-reliant\", and \"fascinating and terrifying to watch,\" respectively. \"Bird Box\" was the most-watched film on Netflix within 28 days of its release until 2021. In another production for Netflix, Nora Fingscheidt's drama \"The Unforgivable\" (2021), Bullock played a woman who is released from prison after serving a sentence for a violent crime. It became the fifth most-streamed-film on the platform at the time of its release.\nShe took on the role of a successful yet depressed best-selling romance novelist in Paramount Pictures' \"The Lost City\" (2022), a \"Romancing the Stone\"-style romantic comedy\u2013adventure film, directed by Adam and Aaron Nee, opposite Channing Tatum and Daniel Radcliffe. The film was favorably received by critics, who praised the chemistry between Bullock and Tatum, and grossed $190.8 million globally, which made Bullock \"the first actress to have $100 million earners in live-action star vehicles over four different decades\", according to \"Forbes\". She also featured in the Brad Pitt-starring action thriller \"Bullet Train\" (2022), in a mostly vocal performance.\nShe will reprise her role as Sally Owens in \"Practical Magic 2\", set for release on September 18, 2026.\nOther endeavours.\nBusiness ventures.\nBullock owns the production company Fortis Films, through which she has served as a producer for several of her star vehicles, including \"Hope Floats\" (1998), \"Miss Congeniality\" (2000), \"Two Weeks Notice\" (2002) and \"Miss Congeniality 2: Armed and Fabulous\" (2005), as well as for the sitcom \"George Lopez\" (2002\u20132007). Her father, John Bullock, was the company's CEO and her sister, Gesine Bullock-Prado, is the former president. The company is headquartered in Austin, Texas, and West Hollywood, California.\nIn November 2006, Bullock founded an Austin, Texas, restaurant named Bess Bistro which was located on West 6th Street. She later opened another business, Walton's Fancy and Staple, across the street in a building she extensively renovated. Walton's is a bakery, upscale restaurant, and floral shop that also offers services including event planning. After almost nine years in business, Bess Bistro closed on September 20, 2015.\nPhilanthropy.\nBullock has been a public supporter of the American Red Cross and has donated $1\u00a0million to the organization at least five times. Her first public donation of that amount was to the Liberty Disaster Relief Fund. Three years later, she sent money in response to the 2004 Indian Ocean earthquake and tsunamis. In 2010, she donated $1\u00a0million to relief efforts in Haiti following the Haiti earthquake and again donated the same amount following the 2011 T\u014dhoku earthquake and tsunami. She donated $1\u00a0million in 2017 to support relief efforts for Hurricane Harvey in Texas.\nIn 2010, along with other public figures, Bullock made a public service announcement urging people to sign a petition for clean-up efforts of the Deepwater Horizon oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico. Bullock was inducted into the Warren Easton Hall of Fame in 2012, for her donations to charities, and was honored with the Favorite Humanitarian Award at the 39th People's Choice Awards, for her contributions to New Orleans' Warren Easton High School, which was severely damaged by Hurricane Katrina.\nIn 2014, Bullock designed a space-themed Paddington Bear statue, dubbed \"Gravity Bear\" (a reference to her 2013 film \"Gravity\"). The statue, number 43 out of 58 placed around London as part of the Paddington Trail, was located at the Royal Observatory in Greenwich, and was subsequently auctioned off to raise funds for the National Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Children (NSPCC).\nPublic image.\nBullock has been dubbed \"America's sweetheart\" by the media in reference to her \"friendly and direct and so unpretentious\" nature. She was selected as one of \"People\" magazine's 50 Most Beautiful People in the world in 1996, 1999, and 2011. The publication named her as its Woman of the Year in 2010 as well as the Most Beautiful Woman in 2015.\nIn 2010, \"Time\" magazine included Bullock in its annual \"Time\" 100 as one of the most influential people in the world, and \"Entertainment Weekly\" named her The Most Powerful Actress in Hollywood. In she joined other Hollywood legends at the TCL Chinese Theatre on Hollywood Boulevard in making imprints of her hands and feet in cement of the theater's forecourt. That year, she was named among The Most Powerful Women in Entertainment by \"The Hollywood Reporter\", and Entertainer of the Year, due to her success with \"The Heat\" and \"Gravity\", by \"Entertainment Weekly\". Bullock ranked #2 on the 2014 \"Forbes\"' list of most powerful actresses and was honored with the Decade of Hotness Award by Spike Guys' Choice Awards.\nPersonal life.\nBullock owns properties in Los Angeles, Austin and New Orleans.\nOn December 20, 2000, she was in a private jet crash on a runway from which she and the two crew escaped uninjured. Pilot error and blizzard conditions were responsible. The crew were unable to activate the runway lights during a night landing at Jackson Hole Airport.\nBullock won a multimillion-dollar judgment against Benny Daneshjou, the builder of her Lake Austin, Texas, home in October 2004. The jury ruled that the house was uninhabitable. It has since been torn down and rebuilt. Daneshjou and his insurer later settled with Bullock for roughly half the awarded verdict.\nWhile Bullock was in Massachusetts on April 18, 2008, shooting \"The Proposal\", she and her then-husband Jesse James were in a vehicle that was hit head-on by a drunk driver. They were uninjured.\nRelationships and family.\nBullock was once engaged to actor Tate Donovan, whom she met while filming \"Love Potion No. 9\". Their relationship lasted three years. She dated football player Troy Aikman and actors Matthew McConaughey and Ryan Gosling.\nBullock married motorcycle builder and \"Monster Garage \"host Jesse James on July 16, 2005. They first met when Bullock arranged for her ten-year-old godson to meet James as a Christmas present. In November 2009, Bullock and James entered into a custody battle with James' second ex-wife, former adult film actress Janine Lindemulder, with whom James had a child. Bullock and James subsequently won full legal custody of James' five-year-old daughter.\nA scandal arose in March 2010 when several women claimed to have had affairs with James during his marriage to Bullock. Bullock canceled European promotional appearances for \"The Blind Side\" citing \"unforeseen personal reasons\". On March 18, 2010, James responded to the rumors of infidelity by issuing a public apology to Bullock. He stated, \"The vast majority of the allegations reported are untrue and unfounded [...] beyond that, I will not dignify these private matters with any further public comment.\" James declared, \"There is only one person to blame for this whole situation, and that is me.\" He asked that Bullock and their children one day \"find it in their hearts to forgive me\" for their \"pain and embarrassment\". James' publicist subsequently announced on March 30, 2010, that James had checked into a rehabilitation facility to \"deal with personal issues\" and save his relationship to Bullock. On April 23, 2010, Bullock filed for divorce in Austin, Texas. Their divorce was finalized on June 28, 2010, with \"conflict of personalities\" cited as the reason.\nBullock announced in 2010 that she had proceeded with plans to adopt a son born in January 2010 in New Orleans, Louisiana. Bullock and James had begun an initial adoption process four months earlier. Bullock's son began living with them in January 2010 but they chose to keep the news private until after the Oscars ceremony that March. Given the pair's split and subsequent divorce, Bullock continued the adoption of her son as a single parent. Bullock announced in December 2015 that she had adopted a second child and appeared on the cover of \"People\" magazine with her then three-year-old new daughter.\nBullock was in a relationship with photographer Bryan Randall from mid-2015 until Randall's death due to ALS on August 5, 2023. \nStalking incidents.\nBeginning in 2002, Bullock was stalked across several states by a man named Thomas James Weldon. She obtained a restraining order against him in 2003, which was renewed in 2006. After the restraining order expired and Weldon was released from a mental institution, he again traveled through several states to find Bullock; she then obtained another restraining order.\nOn April 22, 2007, a woman named Marcia Diana Valentine was found lying outside James and Bullock's home in Orange County, California. When James confronted the woman, she ran to her car, got behind the wheel and tried to run him over. She was said to be an obsessed fan of Bullock. Valentine was charged with one felony count each of aggravated assault and stalking. Bullock obtained a restraining order to bar Valentine from \"contacting or coming near her home, family or work for three years\". Valentine pleaded not guilty to charges of aggravated assault and stalking. She was subsequently convicted of stalking and sentenced to three years' probation.\nJoshua James Corbett broke into Bullock's Los Angeles home in June 2014. Bullock locked herself in a room and dialed 911. Corbett pleaded no contest in 2017 and was sentenced to five years' probation for stalking Bullock and breaking into her residence. He was then subject to a ten-year protective order that required him to stay away from Bullock. After Corbett missed a court date the previous month, police officers went to his parents' residence on May 2, 2018, where he lived in a guest house, to arrest him. He refused to leave and threatened to shoot officers. A SWAT team was called and, after a five-hour standoff, they deployed gas canisters and entered the house where they found Corbett had committed suicide. Corbett's death was the result of \"multiple incised wounds\" according to the Los Angeles County coroner.\nFilmography and accolades.\nBullock has starred in over 50 films, and has helped produce over 15 works in film and television. Her highest-grossing releases are \"Speed\" (1994), \"A Time to Kill\" (1996), \"The Prince of Egypt\" (1998), \"Miss Congeniality\" (2000), \"The Proposal\" (2009), \"The Blind Side\" (2009), \"The Heat\" (2013), \"Gravity\" (2013), \"Minions\" (2015), and \"Ocean's 8\" (2018).\nOn March 24, 2005, Bullock received a motion picture star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame at 6801 Hollywood Boulevard in Hollywood. Her performance in the biographical drama film \"The Blind Side\" (2009) garnered her the Academy Award for Best Actress, the Golden Globe Award for Best Actress in a Motion Picture \u2013 Drama and the Screen Actors Guild Award for Outstanding Performance by a Female Actor in a Leading Role. Bullock was nominated again in these categories for her performance in the film \"Gravity\" (2013).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "29458", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29458", "title": "Smallfilms", "text": "British television production company\nSmallfilms is a British television production company that made animated TV programmes for children from 1959 until the 1980s. In 2014 the company began operating again, producing a new series of its most famous show, \"The Clangers\", but it became dormant again in 2017, after production of the show was slightly changed. It was originally a partnership between Oliver Postgate (who wrote the scripts, animated the characters, and voiced many of the characters) and Peter Firmin (who made the models of the characters and drew the artwork). Several popular series of short films were made using stop-motion animation, including \"Clangers\", \"Noggin the Nog\" and \"Ivor the Engine\". Another Smallfilms production, \"Bagpuss\", came top of a BBC poll to find the favourite British children's programme of the 20th century.\nBackground.\nIn 1957, Postgate was appointed a stage manager with Associated-Rediffusion, the company that then held the commercial weekday television franchise for London. Attached to the children's programming section, he thought he could do better with the relatively low budgets of the then black and white television productions.\nHe wrote \"Alexander the Mouse\", a story about a mouse born to be king. Using an Irish-produced magnetic system - on which animated characters were magnetically attached to a painted background, then filmed using a 45 degree mirror - he persuaded Peter Firmin, who was then teaching at the Central School of Art, to create the painted backgrounds. Postgate later recalled that they broadcast around 26 of these programmes live-to-air, a task made harder by the production problems encountered by the use and restrictions of using magnets.\nAfter the relative success of \"Alexander the Mouse\", Postgate agreed a deal to make his next series on film, for a budget of \u00a3175 per programme (a minuscule amount even at that time). Making a stop motion animation table in his bedroom, he wrote the Chinese serial \"The Journey of Master Ho\": a formal Chinese epic, about a small boy and a water-buffalo. This was intended for deaf children, a distinct advantage in that the production required no soundtrack, which reduced production costs. He engaged a painter to produce the backgrounds, but as the painter was classically Chinese-trained he produced them in three-quarter view, rather than in the conventional Egyptian full-view manner needed for flat animation under a camera. This resulted in Firmin's characters looking as if they were short in one leg, but the success of the production provided the foundation for Postgate and Firmin to start up their own company, solely producing animated children's television programmes, initially for ITV, but soon afterward with the BBC.\nPostgate's initial BBC career was not solely concerned with Smallfilms. To gain experience, he accepted a contract as a television director in the BBC Children's Department in 1960, on a show entitled \"Little Laura\", another animated series made on film, written and drawn by V. H. Drummond. The series continued in production until 1962, with Postgate credited also as animator on the 1962 series. He also wrote serials for long-running BBC children's programmes \"Blue Peter\" and stories for \"Vision On\".\nHistory of Smallfilms.\nSetting up the business in a disused cowshed at Firmin's home in Blean near Canterbury, Kent, Postgate and Firmin made children's animation programmes, based on concepts that mostly originated from Postgate. Firmin did the artwork and built the models, whilst Postgate wrote the scripts, did the stop motion filming, and voiced many of the characters. \"Smallfilms\" was able to produce two minutes of TV-ready film per day, twelve times as much as a conventional stop motion animation studio, with Postgate moving the (originally cardboard) characters himself, and working his 16mm camera frame-by-frame with a home-made clicker. As Postgate voiced so many of the productions, including the WereBear story tapes, his distinctive voice became familiar to generations of children.\nThey began in 1959 with \"Ivor the Engine\", a series for ITV about a Welsh steam locomotive who wanted to sing in a choir, based on Postgate's wartime encounter with Welshman Denzyl Ellis, who was once a fireman on the Royal Scot. It was remade in colour for the BBC in the 1970s. This was followed, also in 1959, by \"Noggin the Nog\", their first production for the BBC, which established Smallfilms as a safe and reliable pair of hands to produce children's entertainment, in the days when the number of UK television channels was restricted to two.\n\"Noggin the Nog\" was also remade in colour in 1982. However, only six episodes were produced, due to the BBC believing that Smallfilms\u2019 work was \u201cold-fashioned\u201d.\nIn 2000, Postgate and his friend Loaf set up a small publishing company called The Dragons Friendly Society, to look after \"Noggin the Nog\", \"Pogles' Wood\" and \"Pingwings\".\nAfter Postgate's death in December 2008, Smallfilms was inherited by his son Daniel. Universal took the distribution rights to the works of Smallfilms. Any such agreement does not include the materials published through The Dragons Friendly Society.\nIn 2014, Daniel collaborated with Firmin on the production of a new series of \"Clangers\", with Daniel writing many of the episodes.\nSeries development and philosophy.\nPostgate and Firmin recognised that their product was not sold to children, but to commissioning television executives. Postgate described in a later interview the then \"gentlemanly and rather innocent\" business of programme commissioning thus: \"We would go to the BBC once a year, show them the films we'd made, and they would say: 'Yes, lovely, now what are you going to do next?' We would tell them, and they would say: 'That sounds fine, we'll mark it in for eighteen months from now', and we would be given praise and encouragement and some money in advance, and we'd just go away and do it\". The only occasion that this informal arrangement caused any real difficulty emerged in the 1965 series \"The Pogles\", which BBC management felt was too frightening for the intended audience, and led to their asking for a change of direction: resulting in a revised show, and a change of name to \"Pogles' Wood\".\nPostgate had strict views regarding storylines, which perhaps limited the possibilities for series development. When asked if the \"Clangers\" adventures were quite surreal sometimes, Postgate replied: \"They're surreal but logical. I have a strong prejudice against fantasy for its own sake. Once one gets to a point beyond where cause-and-effect mean anything at all, then science fiction becomes science nonsense. Everything that happened was strictly logical, according to the laws of physics which happened to apply in that part of the world\".\nIn June 2015, the BBC's Mark Savage reported: \"Firmin said the \"Clangers\"' surrealism had led to accusations that Postgate was taking hallucinogenic drugs\". Firmin told Savage: \"People used to say, 'Ooh, what's Oliver on, with all of these weird ideas?' And we used to say, 'He's on cups of tea and biscuits'\".\nThe Smallfilms system was reliant on the company's two key employees, Postgate and Firmin, and was devoid of modern considerations and essentials, as Postgate pointed out: \"[We were] excused the interference of educationalists, sociologists and other pseudo-scientists, which produces eventually a confection of formulae which have no integrity. No, the mainspring of what we did was because it was fun\".\nRecognising their commissioning audience, Smallfilms purposefully developed storylines that would engage both adults and children. While the storylines and production were remembered by children, the adult jokes, like those about the Welsh in \"Ivor the Engine\", or the fact that the Clangers swore occasionally, gave the films an instant parental engagement, and a later nostalgic revival amongst former children re-watching their favourite programmes.\nCoolabi.\nFrom October 2008 until 2013, production company Coolabi held the merchandising and distribution rights to a number of the Smallfilms productions. Coolabi hoped to introduce \"Bagpuss\" to a new generation, saying that there was \"significant potential to build on the affection in which this classic brand is held\".\nHowever, in the event it was Smallfilms itself that returned the classic shows to production, agreeing a deal with the BBC in 2014 to produce a new series of \"The Clangers\" for broadcasting in 2015 on CBeebies, which the company also pre-sold in the United States.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "29460", "revid": "48480733", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29460", "title": "List of mayors of Sacramento, California", "text": "This is a list of mayors of Sacramento, California. The Sacramento City Council met for the first time on August 1, 1849, and the citizens approved the city charter on October 13, 1849. The City Charter was recognized by the State of California on February 27, 1850, and Sacramento was incorporated on March 18, 1850.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "29461", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29461", "title": "Shitoki", "text": ""}
{"id": "29462", "revid": "69412", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29462", "title": "Sabotage", "text": "Deliberate action aimed at weakening another entity\nSabotage is a deliberate action aimed at weakening a polity, government, effort, or organization through subversion, obstruction, demoralization, destabilization, division, disruption, or destruction. One who engages in sabotage is a \"saboteur\". Saboteurs typically try to conceal their identities because of the consequences of their actions and to avoid invoking legal and organizational requirements for addressing sabotage.\nEtymology.\nThe English word derives from the French word , meaning to \"bungle, botch, wreck or sabotage\"; it was originally used to refer to labour disputes, in which workers wearing wooden shoes called interrupted production through different means. A popular but incorrect account of the origin of the term's present meaning is the story that poor workers in the Belgian city of Li\u00e8ge would throw a wooden into the machines to disrupt production.\nOne of the first appearances of and in French literature is in the of d'Hautel, edited in 1808. In it the literal definition is to 'make noise with sabots' as well as 'bungle, jostle, hustle, haste'. The word appears only later.\nThe word is found in 1873\u20131874 in the of \u00c9mile Littr\u00e9. Here it is defined mainly as 'making sabots, sabot maker'. It is at the end of the 19th century that it really began to be used with the meaning of 'deliberately and maliciously destroying property' or 'working slower'. In 1897, \u00c9mile Pouget, a famous syndicalist and anarchist wrote \"\" ('action of sabotaging or bungling a work') in and in 1911 he also wrote a book entitled .\nAs industrial action.\nAt the inception of the Industrial Revolution, skilled workers such as the Luddites (1811\u20131812) used sabotage as a means of negotiation in labor disputes.\nLabor unions such as the Industrial Workers of the World (IWW) have advocated sabotage as a means of self-defense and direct action against unfair working conditions.\nThe IWW was shaped in part by the industrial unionism philosophy of Big Bill Haywood, and in 1910 Haywood was exposed to sabotage while touring Europe:\nThe experience that had the most lasting impact on Haywood was witnessing a general strike on the French railroads. Tired of waiting for parliament to act on their demands, railroad workers walked off their jobs all across the country. The French government responded by drafting the strikers into the army and then ordering them back to work. Undaunted, the workers carried their strike to the job. Suddenly, they could not seem to do anything right. Perishables sat for weeks, sidetracked and forgotten. Freight bound for Paris was misdirected to Lyon or Marseille instead. This tactic \u2013 the French called it \"sabotage\" \u2013 won the strikers their demands and impressed Bill Haywood.\nFor the IWW, sabotage's meaning expanded to include the original use of the term: any withdrawal of efficiency, including the slowdown, the strike, working to rule, or creative bungling of job assignments. \nOne of the most severe examples was at the construction site of the Robert-Bourassa Generating Station in 1974, in Qu\u00e9bec, Canada, when workers used bulldozers to topple electric generators, damaged fuel tanks, and set buildings on fire. The project was delayed a year, and the direct cost of the damage estimated at $2 million CAD. The causes were not clear, but three possible factors have been cited: inter-union rivalry, poor working conditions, and the perceived arrogance of American executives of the contractor, Bechtel Corporation.\nAs environmental action.\nCertain groups turn to the destruction of property to stop environmental destruction or to make visible arguments against forms of modern technology they consider detrimental to the environment. The U.S. Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) and other law enforcement agencies use the term eco-terrorist when applied to damage of property. Proponents argue that since property cannot feel terror, damage to property is more accurately described as sabotage. Opponents, by contrast, point out that property owners and operators can indeed feel terror. The image of the monkey wrench thrown into the moving parts of a machine to stop it from working was popularized by Edward Abbey in the novel \"The Monkey Wrench Gang\" and has been adopted by eco-activists to describe the destruction of earth damaging machinery.\nFrom 1992 to late 2007 a radical environmental activist movement known as Earth Liberation Front (ELF) engaged in a near-constant campaign of decentralized sabotage of any construction projects near wildlands and extractive industries such as logging and even an arson attack against a ski resort in Vail, Colorado. ELF used sabotage tactics often in loose coordination with other environmental activist movements to physically delay or destroy threats to wildlands as the political will developed to protect the targeted wild areas that ELF engaged.\nAs war tactic.\nIn war, the word is used to describe the activity of an individual or group not associated with the military of the parties at war, such as a foreign agent or an indigenous supporter, in particular when actions result in the destruction or damaging of a productive or vital facility, such as equipment, factories, dams, public services, storage plants or logistic routes. Prime examples of such sabotage are the events of Black Tom and the Kingsland explosion. Like spies, saboteurs who conduct a military operation in civilian clothes or enemy uniforms behind enemy lines are subject to prosecution and criminal penalties instead of detention as prisoners of war. It is common for a government in power during war or supporters of the war policy to use the term loosely against opponents of the war. Similarly, German nationalists spoke of a stab in the back having cost them the loss of World War I.\nA modern form of sabotage is the distribution of software intended to damage specific industrial systems. For example, the U.S. Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) is alleged to have sabotaged a Siberian pipeline during the Cold War, using information from the Farewell Dossier. A more recent case may be the Stuxnet computer worm, which was designed to subtly infect and damage specific types of industrial equipment. Based on the equipment targeted and the location of infected machines, security experts believe it was an attack on the Iranian nuclear program by the United States or Israel.\nSabotage, done well, is inherently difficult to detect and difficult to trace to its origin. During World War II, the U.S. Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) investigated 19,649 cases of sabotage and concluded the enemy had not caused any of them.\nSabotage in warfare, according to the Office of Strategic Services (OSS) Simple Sabotage Field Manual, varies from highly technical \"coup de main\" acts that require detailed planning and specially trained operatives, to innumerable simple acts that ordinary citizen-saboteurs can perform. Simple sabotage is carried out in such a way as to involve a minimum danger of injury, detection, and reprisal. There are two main methods of sabotage: physical destruction and the \"human element\". While physical destruction as a method is self-explanatory, its targets are nuanced, reflecting objects to which the saboteur has normal and inconspicuous access in everyday life. The \"human element\" is based on universal opportunities to make faulty decisions, to adopt a non-cooperative attitude, and to induce others to follow suit.\nThere are many examples of physical sabotage in wartime. However, one of the most effective uses of sabotage is against organizations. The OSS manual provides numerous techniques under the title \"General Interference with Organizations and Production\":\nFrom the section entitled, \"General Devices for Lowering Morale and Creating Confusion\" comes the following quintessential simple sabotage advice: \"Act stupid.\"\nValue of simple sabotage in wartime.\nThe United States Office of Strategic Services, later renamed the CIA, noted the specific value in committing simple sabotage against the enemy during wartime: \"...\u00a0slashing tires, draining fuel tanks, starting fires, starting arguments, acting stupidly, short-circuiting electric systems, abrading machine parts will waste materials, manpower, and time.\" To underline the importance of simple sabotage on a widespread scale, they wrote, \"Widespread practice of simple sabotage will harass and demoralize enemy administrators and police.\" The OSS was also focused on the battle for hearts and minds during wartime; \"the very practice of simple sabotage by natives in enemy or occupied territory may make these individuals identify themselves actively with the United Nations War effort, and encourage them to assist openly in periods of Allied invasion and occupation.\"2\nIn World War I.\nOn 30 July 1916, the Black Tom explosion occurred when German agents set fire to a complex of warehouses and ships in Jersey City, New Jersey that held munitions, fuel, and explosives bound to aid the Allies in their fight.\nOn 11 January 1917, Fiodore Wozniak, using a rag saturated with phosphorus or an incendiary pencil supplied by German sabotage agents, set fire to his workbench at an ammunition assembly plant near Lyndhurst, New Jersey, causing a four-hour fire that destroyed half a million 3-inch explosive shells and destroyed the plant for an estimated at $17 million in damages. Wozniak's involvement was not discovered until 1927.250\nOn 12 February 1917, Bedouins allied with the British destroyed a Turkish railroad near the port of Wajh, derailing a Turkish locomotive. The Bedouins traveled by camel and used explosives to demolish a portion of track.\nPost World War I.\nIn Ireland, the Irish Republican Army (IRA) used sabotage against the British following the Easter 1916 uprising. The IRA compromised communication lines and lines of transportation and fuel supplies. The IRA also employed passive sabotage, with dock and railroad workers refusing to work on ships and rail cars used by the government. In 1920, agents of the IRA committed arson against at least fifteen British warehouses in Liverpool. The following year, the IRA set fire to numerous British targets again, including the Dublin Customs House, this time sabotaging most of Liverpool's firetrucks in the firehouses before lighting the matches.\nIn World War II.\nLieutenant Colonel George T. Rheam was a British soldier, who ran Brickendonbury Manor from October 1941 to June 1945 during World War II, which was Station XVII of the Special Operations Executive (SOE), which trained specialists for the SOE. Rheam innovated many sabotage techniques and is considered by M. R. D. Foot the \"founder of modern industrial sabotage.\"\nSabotage training for the Allies consisted of teaching would-be saboteurs' key components of working machinery to destroy.\n\"Saboteurs learned hundreds of small tricks to cause the Germans big trouble. The cables in a telephone junction box\u00a0... could be jumbled to make the wrong connections when numbers were dialed. A few ounces of plastique, properly placed, could bring down a bridge, cave in a mine shaft, or collapse the roof of a railroad tunnel.\"\nThe Polish Home Army Armia Krajowa, which commanded the majority of resistance organizations in Poland (even the National Forces, except the Military Organization Lizard Union; the Home Army also included the Polish Socialist Party \u2013 Freedom, Equality, Independence) and coordinated and aided the Jewish Military Union as well as more reluctantly helping the Jewish Combat Organization, was responsible for the greatest number of acts of sabotage in German-occupied Europe. The Home Army's sabotage operations Operation Garland and Operation Ribbon are just two examples. In all, the Home Army damaged 6,930 locomotives, set 443 rail transports on fire, damaged over 19,000 rail cars, and blew up 38 rail bridges, not to mention the attacks against the railroads. The Home Army was also responsible for 4,710 built-in flaws in parts for aircraft engines and 92,000 built-in flaws in artillery projectiles, among other examples of significant sabotage. In addition, over 25,000 acts of more minor sabotage were committed. It continued to fight against both the Germans and the Soviets; however, it did aid the Western Allies by collecting constant and detailed information on the German rail, wheeled, and horse transports. As for Stalin's proxies, their actions led to a great number of the Polish and Jewish hostages, mostly civilians, being murdered in reprisal by the Germans. The Gwardia Ludowa destroyed around 200 German trains during the war, and indiscriminately threw hand grenades into places frequented by Germans.\nThe French Resistance ran an extremely effective sabotage campaign against the Germans during World War II. Receiving their sabotage orders through messages over the BBC radio or by aircraft, the French used both passive and active forms of sabotage. Passive forms included losing German shipments and allowing poor quality material to pass factory inspections. Many active sabotage attempts were against critical rail lines of transportation. German records count 1,429 instances of sabotage from French Resistance forces between January 1942 and February 1943. From January through March 1944, sabotage accounted for three times the number of locomotives damaged by Allied air power. See also Normandy landings for more information about sabotage on D-Day.\nDuring World War II, the Allies committed sabotage against the Peugeot truck factory. After repeated failures in Allied bombing attempts to hit the factory, a team of French Resistance fighters and Special Operations Executive (SOE) agents distracted the German guards with a game of soccer while part of their team entered the plant and destroyed machinery.\nIn December 1944, the Germans ran a false flag sabotage infiltration, Operation Greif, which was commanded by Waffen-SS commando Otto Skorzeny during the Battle of the Bulge. German commandos, wearing US Army uniforms, carrying US Army weapons, and using US Army vehicles, penetrated US lines to spread panic and confusion among US troops and to blow up bridges, ammunition dumps, and fuel stores and to disrupt the lines of communication. Many of the commandos were captured by the Americans. Because they were wearing US uniforms, a number of the Germans were executed as spies, either summarily or after military commissions.\nAfter World War II.\nFrom 1948 to 1960, the Malayan Communists committed numerous effective acts of sabotage against the British Colonial authorities, first targeting railway bridges, then hitting larger targets such as military camps. Most of their efforts were intended to weaken Malaysia's colonial economy and involved sabotage against trains, rubber trees, water pipes, and electric lines. The Communists' sabotage efforts were so successful that they caused backlash among the Malaysian population, who gradually withdrew support for the Communist movement as their livelihoods became threatened.\nIn Mandatory Palestine from 1945 to 1948, Jewish groups opposed British control. Though that control was to end according to the United Nations Partition Plan for Palestine in 1948, the groups used sabotage as an opposition tactic. The Haganah focused their efforts on camps used by the British to hold refugees, and radar installations that could be used to detect illegal immigrant ships. The Stern Gang and the Irgun used terrorism and sabotage against the British government and against lines of communications. In November 1946, the Irgun and Stern Gang attacked a railroad twenty-one times in a three-week period, eventually causing shell-shocked Arab railway workers to strike. The 6th Airborne Division was called in to provide security as a means of ending the strike.\nIn Cyprus.\nSabotage against British Forces was one of the primary methods used by EOKA during the Cyprus liberation campaign in order to weaken the British posture on Cyprus. One of the more famous sabotage operations undertaken by EOKA was at RAF Akrotiri where 3 members of the organisation entered the base and placed multiple bombs undetected, destroying 4 English Electric Canberra aircraft and one de Havilland Venom aircraft.\nIn Vietnam.\nThe Viet Cong used swimmer saboteurs often and effectively during the Vietnam War. Between 1969 and 1970, swimmer saboteurs sunk, destroyed, or damaged 77 assets of the U.S. and its allies. Viet Cong swimmers were poorly equipped but well-trained and resourceful. The swimmers provided a low-cost/low-risk option with high payoff; possible loss to the country for failure compared to the possible gains from a successful mission led to the obvious conclusion the swimmer saboteurs were a good idea.\nDuring the Cold War.\nOn 1 January 1984, the Cuscatl\u00e1n Bridge over the Lempa river in El Salvador, critical to the flow of commercial and military traffic, was destroyed by guerrilla forces using explosives after using mortar fire to \"scatter\" the bridge's guards, causing an estimated $3.7 million in required repairs, and considerably impacting on El Salvadoran business and security.\nIn 1982 in Honduras, a group of nine Salvadorans and Nicaraguans destroyed a main electrical power station, leaving the capital city Tegucigalpa without power for three days.253\nAs crime.\nSome criminals have engaged in acts of sabotage for reasons of extortion. For example, Klaus-Peter Sabotta sabotaged German railway lines in the late 1990s in an attempt to extort DM10 million from the German railway operator Deutsche Bahn. He is now serving a sentence of life imprisonment. In 1989, ex-Scotland Yard detective Rodney Whitchelo was sentenced to 17 years in prison for spiking Heinz baby food products in supermarkets, in an extortion attempt on the food manufacturer.\nOn October 8, 2022, the GSM-R radio communication system of the Deutsche Bahn was sabotaged by the cutting of two cables of crucial importance. In the aftermath, the railway traffic in Northern Germany was completely shut down for several hours. German criminal police took over the investigation.\nAs political action.\nThe term political sabotage is sometimes used to define the acts of one political camp to disrupt, harass or damage the reputation of a political opponent, usually during an electoral campaign, such as during Watergate. Smear campaigns are a commonly used tactic. The term could also describe the actions and expenditures of private entities, corporations, and organizations against democratically approved or enacted laws, policies and programs.\nAfter the Cold War ended, the Mitrokhin Archives were declassified, which included detailed KGB plans of active measures to subvert politics in opposing nations.\nIn a coup d'\u00e9tat.\nSabotage is a crucial tool of the successful coup d'etat, which requires control of communications before, during, and after the coup is staged. Simple sabotage against physical communications platforms using semi-skilled technicians, or even those trained only for this task, could effectively silence the target government of the coup, leaving the information battle space open to the dominance of the coup's leaders. To underscore the effectiveness of sabotage, \"A single cooperative technician will be able temporarily to put out of action a radio station which would otherwise require a full-scale assault.\"\nRailroads, where strategically important to the regime the coup is against, are prime targets for sabotage\u2014if a section of the track is damaged entire portions of the transportation network can be stopped until it is fixed.\nDerivative usages.\nSabotage radio.\nA sabotage radio was a small two-way radio designed for use by resistance movements in World War II, and after the war often used by expeditions and similar parties.\nCybotage.\nArquilla and Rondfeldt, in their work entitled \"Networks and Netwars\", differentiate their definition of \"netwar\" from a list of \"trendy synonyms\", including \"cybotage\", a portmanteau from the words \"sabotage\" and \"cyber\". They dub the practitioners of cybotage \"cyboteurs\" and note while all cybotage is not netwar, some netwar is cybotage.\nCounter-sabotage.\nCounter-sabotage, defined by \"Webster's Dictionary\", is \"counterintelligence designed to detect and counteract sabotage\". The United States Department of Defense definition, found in the \"Dictionary of Military and Associated Terms\", is \"action designed to detect and counteract sabotage. See also counterintelligence\".\nIn World War II.\nDuring World War II, British subject Eddie Chapman, trained by the Germans in sabotage, became a double agent for the British. The German Abwehr entrusted Chapman to destroy the British de Havilland Company's main plant which manufactured the outstanding Mosquito light bomber but required photographic proof from their agent to verify the mission's completion. A special unit of the Royal Engineers known as the Magic Gang covered the de Havilland plant with canvas panels and scattered papier-m\u00e2ch\u00e9 furniture and chunks of masonry around three broken and burnt giant generators. Photos of the plant taken from the air reflected devastation for the factory and a successful sabotage mission, and Chapman, as a British sabotage double-agent, fooled the Germans for the duration of the war.\n21st-century examples.\nSince 2022, Russia has been accused of orchestrating a wide-ranging campaign of sabotage across Europe as part of its hybrid war. Incidents include confirmed arson attacks against factories and warehouses in Germany, Poland, and the UK, plots against military bases, and damage to critical infrastructure, all aimed at disrupting support for Ukraine.\nSelf-sabotage.\nIn psychology, self-sabotage is defined as behaviour that undermines one's own existing or potential achievements.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "29463", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29463", "title": "Scabbard", "text": "Sheath for the blade of a sword or dagger\nA scabbard is a sheath for holding a sword, dagger, knife, or similar edged weapons. Rifles and other long guns may also be stored in scabbards by horse riders for transportation. Military cavalry and cowboys had scabbards for their saddle ring carbines and rifles for transportation and protection. Scabbards have been made of many materials over the millennia, including leather, wood, and metal such as brass or steel.\nMost commonly, sword scabbards were worn suspended from a sword belt or shoulder belt called a baldric.\nAntiquity.\nScabbards have at least been around since the Bronze Age, and are thought to have existed as long as the blade has. Wooden scabbards were typically covered in fabric or leather; the leather versions also usually bore metal or leather fittings for added protection and carrying ease. All-metal scabbards were popular items for a display of wealth among elites in the European Iron Age, and often intricately decorated. Little is known about the scabbards of the early Iron Age, due to their wooden construction. However, during the Middle and late Iron Ages, the scabbard became important especially as a vehicle for decorative elaboration and social status. After 200 BC fully decorated scabbards became rare, but in their lesser extent existed well into the Medieval period. \nA number of ancient scabbards have been recovered from weapons sacrifices, a few of which had a lining of fur on the inside. The fur was probably kept oily, keeping the blade free from rust. The fur would also allow a smoother, quicker draw, and protect the blade. In classical antiquity, Greek scabbards often had ornamental metal fittings, characteristic of the Iron Age. The Roman army used scabbards to a great extent with short baldrics, carrying their swords quite high up.\nJapanese blades typically have their sharp cutting edge protected by a wooden scabbard called a saya. Many Japanese blades such as the Wakizashi or the Katana feature notably curved blades and so the saya was also curved to better fit them. A saya consists of several key parts: the wooden scabbard body or koiguchi, the kurikata (horn for sageo cord), the sageo cord, the kojiri, and an option ornamental shitodome for the kurikata. The saya is typically made of lightweight wood, such as magnolia, and covered with lacquer to protect the blade and prevent scratches.\nModern era.\nEntirely metal scabbards became popular in Europe early in the 19th century and eventually superseded most other types. Metal was more durable than leather and could better withstand the rigors of field use, particularly among troops mounted on horseback. In addition, metal offered the ability to present a more military appearance, as well as the opportunity to display increased ornamentation. Nevertheless, leather scabbards never entirely lost favor among military users and were widely used as late as the American Civil War (1861\u20131865). As late as the outbreak of World War I in August 1914, swords and leather scabbards were still being carried on active service by the military officers of participating nations. Metal scabbards had however been withdrawn as noisy, heavy and likely to blunt the blades of newly sharpened swords. In the event swords and scabbards were quickly discarded except for use by mounted cavalry. \nSome military police forces, naval shore patrols, law enforcement and other groups used leather scabbards as a kind of truncheon.\nOn the other hand, in Japan, except for some cases of the Imperial Japanese Army and Navy, water-resistant lacquered wooden scabbards have been used throughout history.\nScabbards were historically, albeit rarely, worn across the back, but only by a handful of Celtic tribes, and only with very short lengths of sword. This is because drawing a long, sharp blade over one's shoulder and past one's head from a scabbard on the back is relatively awkward, especially in a hurry, and the length of the arm sets a hard upper limit on how long a blade can be drawn at all in this way. Sheathing the sword again is even harder since it has to be done effectively blind unless the scabbard is taken off first. Common depictions of long swords being drawn from the back are a modern invention, born from safety and convenience considerations on a film set and typically enabled by creative editing, and have enjoyed such great popularity in fiction and fantasy that they are widely and incorrectly believed to have been common in Medieval times. Some more well-known examples of this include the back scabbard depicted in the film \"Braveheart\" and the back scabbard seen in the video game series \"The Legend of Zelda\". This has facilitated the modern anachronism colloquially known as a \"shabbard\", developed by YouTuber and novel writer Shad Brooks. It uses a flat plate attached to the sheath which more easily guides even large swords into the scabbard. There is some limited data from woodcuts and textual fragments that Mongol light horse archers, Chinese soldiers, Japanese samurai and European knights wore a slung baldric over the shoulder, allowing longer blades such as greatswords/zweihanders and nodachi/\u014ddachi to be strapped across the back, though these would have to be removed from the back before the sword could be unsheathed.\nIn \"The Ancient Celts\" by Barry Cunliffe, Cunliffe writes, \"All these pieces of equipment [shields, spears, swords, mail] mentioned in the texts, are reflected in the archaeological record and in the surviving iconography, though it is sometimes possible to detect regional variations\" (page 94). Among the Parisii of Yorkshire, for example, the \"...sword was sometimes worn across the back and therefore had to be drawn over the shoulder from behind the head.\"\nModern knife sheaths are frequently made of polymer materials such as Kydex.\nCommon terms.\nThe metal fitting where the blade enters the leather or metal scabbard is called the throat, which is often part of a larger scabbard mount, or locket, that bears a carrying ring or stud to facilitate wearing the sword. The blade's point in leather scabbards is usually protected by a metal tip, or chape, which, on both leather and metal scabbards, is often given further protection from wear by an extension called a drag, or shoe.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Sister-inline/styles.css\"/&gt; Media related to at Wikimedia Commons"}
{"id": "29467", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29467", "title": "Spinel", "text": "Mineral or gemstone\nSpinel () is the magnesium/aluminium member of the larger spinel group of minerals. It has the formula MgAl2O4 in the cubic crystal system. Its name comes from the Latin word , a diminutive form of \"spine,\" in reference to its pointed crystals.\nProperties.\nSpinel crystallizes in the isometric system; common crystal forms are octahedra, usually twinned. It has no true cleavage, but shows an octahedral parting and a conchoidal fracture. Its hardness is 8, its specific gravity is 3.5\u20134.1, and it is transparent to opaque with a vitreous to dull luster. It may be colorless, but is usually various shades of red, lavender, blue, green, brown, black, or yellow. Chromium(III) causes the red color in spinel from Burma. Some spinels are among the most famous gemstones; among them are the Black Prince's Ruby and the \"Timur ruby\" in the British Crown Jewels, and the \"C\u00f4te de Bretagne\", formerly from the French Crown jewels. The Samarian Spinel is the largest known spinel in the world, weighing .\nThe transparent red spinels were called spinel-rubies or balas rubies. In the past, before the arrival of modern science, spinels and rubies were equally known as rubies. After the 18th century, the word ruby was only used for the red gem variety of the mineral corundum, and the word spinel came to be used. \"Balas\" is derived from Balascia, the ancient name for Badakhshan, a region in central Asia situated in the upper valley of the Panj River, one of the principal tributaries of the Oxus River. However, \"Balascia\" itself may be derived from Sanskrit \"b\u0101las\u016bryaka\", which translates as \"crimson-coloured morning sun\". Mines in the Gorno Badakhshan region of Tajikistan constituted for centuries the main source for red and pink spinels.\nOccurrence.\nGeologic occurrence.\nSpinel is found as a metamorphic mineral in metamorphosed limestones and silica-poor mudstones. It also occurs as a primary mineral in rare mafic igneous rocks; in these igneous rocks, the magmas are relatively deficient in alkalis relative to aluminium, and aluminium oxide may form as the mineral corundum or may combine with magnesia to form spinel. This is why spinel and ruby are often found together. The spinel petrogenesis in mafic magmatic rocks is strongly debated, but certainly results from mafic magma interaction with more evolved magma or rock (e.g. gabbro, troctolite).\nSpinel, , is common in peridotite in the uppermost Earth's mantle, between approximately 20\u00a0km to approximately 120\u00a0km, possibly to lower depths depending on the chromium content. At significantly shallower depths, above the Moho, calcic plagioclase is the more stable aluminous mineral in peridotite while garnet is the stable phase deeper in the mantle below the spinel stability region.\nSpinel, , is a common mineral in the Ca-Al-rich inclusions (CAIs) in some chondritic meteorites.\nGeographical occurrence.\nSpinel has long been found in the gemstone-bearing gravel of Sri Lanka and in limestones of the Badakshan Province in modern-day Afghanistan and Tajikistan; and of Mogok in Myanmar. Over the last decades gem quality spinels are found in the marbles of L\u1ee5c Y\u00ean District (Vietnam), Mahenge and Matombo (Tanzania), Tsavo (Kenya) and in the gravels of Tunduru (Tanzania) and Ilakaka (Madagascar).\nSince 2000, in several locations around the world, spinels have been discovered with unusual vivid pink or blue colors. Such \"glowing\" spinels are known from Mogok (Myanmar), Mahenge plateau (Tanzania), L\u1ee5c Y\u00ean District (Vietnam) and some more localities. In 2018 bright blue spinels have been reported also in the southern part of Baffin Island (Canada). The pure blue coloration of spinel is caused by small additions of cobalt.\nSynthetic spinel.\nSynthetic spinel can be produced by similar means to synthetic corundum, including the Verneuil method and the flux method pioneered by Edmond Fr\u00e9my. It is widely used as an inexpensive cut gem in birthstone jewelry for the month of August. Light blue synthetic spinel is a good imitation of aquamarine beryl, and green synthetic spinel is used as an emerald or tourmaline simulant. By 2015, transparent spinel was being made in sheets and other shapes through sintering. Synthetic spinel, which looks like glass but has notably higher strength against pressure, can also have applications in military and commercial use.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "29468", "revid": "13286072", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29468", "title": "Speech recognition", "text": "Automatic conversion of spoken language into text\nSpeech recognition (automatic speech recognition (ASR), computer speech recognition, or speech-to-text (STT)) is a sub-field of computational linguistics concerned with methods and technologies that translate spoken language into text or other interpretable forms.\nSpeech recognition applications include voice user interfaces, where the user speaks to a device, which \"listens\" and processes the audio. Common voice applications include interpreting commands for calling, call routing, home automation, and aircraft control. These applications are called direct voice input. Productivity applications include searching audio recordings, creating transcripts, and dictation. \nSpeech recognition can be used to analyse speaker characteristics, such as identifying native language using pronunciation assessment. \nVoice recognition (speaker identification) refers to identifying the speaker, rather than speech contents. Recognizing the speaker can simplify the task of translating speech in systems trained on a specific person's voice. It can also be used to authenticate the speaker as part of a security process.\nHistory.\nApplications for speech recognition developed over many decades, with progress accelerated due to advances in deep learning and the use of big data. These advances are reflected in an increase in academic papers, and greater system adoption.\nKey areas of growth include vocabulary size, more accurate recognition for unfamiliar speakers (speaker independence), and faster processing speed.\nPre-1970.\nRaj Reddy was the first person to work on continuous speech recognition, as a graduate student at Stanford University in the late 1960s. Previous systems required users to pause after each word. Reddy's system issued spoken commands for playing chess.\nAround this time, Soviet researchers invented the dynamic time warping (DTW) algorithm and used it to create a recognizer capable of operating on a 200-word vocabulary. DTW processed speech by dividing it into short frames (e.g. 10 ms segments) and treating each frame as a unit. Speaker independence, however, remained unsolved.\n1970\u20131990.\nDuring the late 1960s, Leonard Baum developed the mathematics of Markov chains at the Institute for Defense Analysis. A decade later, at CMU, Raj Reddy's students James Baker and Janet M. Baker began using the hidden Markov model (HMM) for speech recognition. James Baker had learned about HMMs while at the Institute for Defense Analysis. HMMs enabled researchers to combine sources of knowledge, such as acoustics, language, and syntax, in a unified probabilistic model.\nBy the mid-1980s, Fred Jelinek's team at IBM created a voice-activated typewriter called Tangora, which could handle a 20,000-word vocabulary. Jelinek's statistical approach placed less emphasis on emulating human brain processes in favor of statistical modelling. (Jelinek's group independently discovered the application of HMMs to speech.) This was controversial among linguists since HMMs are too simplistic to account for many features of human languages. However, the HMM proved to be a highly useful way for modelling speech and replaced dynamic time warping as the dominant speech recognition algorithm in the 1980s.\nPractical speech recognition.\nThe 1980s also saw the introduction of the n-gram language model.\nAt the end of the DARPA program in 1976, the best computer available to researchers was the PDP-10 with 4 MB of RAM. It could take up to 100 minutes to decode 30 seconds of speech.\nPractical products included:\nBy the early 1990s, the vocabulary of the typical commercial speech recognition system had exceeded the average human vocabulary. Reddy's former student, Xuedong Huang, developed the Sphinx-II system at CMU. Sphinx-II was the first to do speaker-independent, large vocabulary, continuous speech recognition, and it won DARPA's 1992 evaluation. Handling continuous speech with a large vocabulary was a major milestone. Huang later founded the speech recognition group at Microsoft in 1993. Reddy's student Kai-Fu Lee joined Apple, where, in 1992, he helped develop the Casper speech interface prototype.\nLernout &amp; Hauspie, a Belgium-based speech recognition company, acquired other companies, including Kurzweil Applied Intelligence in 1997 and Dragon Systems in 2000. L&amp;H was used in Windows XP. L&amp;H was an industry leader until an accounting scandal destroyed it in 2001. L&amp;H speech technology was bought by ScanSoft, which became Nuance in 2005. Apple licensed Nuance software for its digital assistant Siri.\n2000s.\nIn the 2000s, DARPA sponsored two speech recognition programs: Effective Affordable Reusable Speech-to-Text (EARS) in 2002, followed by Global Autonomous Language Exploitation (GALE) in 2005. Four teams participated in EARS: IBM; a team led by BBN with LIMSI and the University of Pittsburgh; Cambridge University; and a team composed of ICSI, SRI, and the University of Washington. EARS funded the collection of the Switchboard telephone speech corpus, which contained 260 hours of recorded conversations from over 500 speakers. The GALE program focused on Arabic and Mandarin broadcast news. Google's first effort at speech recognition came in 2007 after recruiting Nuance researchers. Its first product, GOOG-411, was a telephone-based directory service.\nSince at least 2006, the U.S. National Security Agency has employed keyword spotting, allowing analysts to index large volumes of recorded conversations and identify speech containing \"interesting\" keywords. Other government research programs focused on intelligence applications, such as DARPA's EARS program and IARPA's Babel program.\nIn the early 2000s, speech recognition was dominated by hidden Markov models combined with feed-forward artificial neural networks (ANN). Later, speech recognition was taken over by long short-term memory (LSTM), a recurrent neural network (RNN) published by Sepp Hochreiter &amp; J\u00fcrgen Schmidhuber in 1997. LSTM RNNs avoid the vanishing gradient problem and can learn \"Very Deep Learning\" tasks that require memories of events that happened thousands of discrete time steps earlier, which is important for speech.\nAround 2007, LSTMs trained with Connectionist Temporal Classification (CTC) began to outperform. In 2015, Google reported a 49\u202fpercent error\u2011rate reduction in its speech recognition via CTC\u2011trained LSTM. Transformers, a type of neural network based solely on attention, were adopted in computer vision and language modelling, and then to speech recognition. \nDeep feed-forward (non-recurrent) networks for acoustic modelling were introduced in 2009 by Geoffrey Hinton and his students at the University of Toronto, and by Li Deng and colleagues at Microsoft Research. In contrast to the prioer incremental improvements, deep learning decreased error rates by 30%.\nBoth shallow and deep forms (e.g., recurrent nets) of ANNs had been explored since the 1980s. However, these methods never defeated non-uniform internal-handcrafting Gaussian mixture model/hidden Markov model (GMM-HMM) technology. Difficulties analyzed in the 1990s, included gradient diminishing and weak temporal correlation structure. All these difficulties combined with insufficient training data and computing power. Most speech recognition pursued generative modelling approaches until deep learning won the day. Hinton et al. and Deng et al.\n2010s.\nBy early the 2010s, speech recognition was differentiated from speaker recognition, and speaker independence was considered a major breakthrough. Until then, systems required a \"training\" period for each voice.\nIn 2017, Microsoft researchers reached the human parity milestone of transcribing conversational speech on the widely benchmarked Switchboard task. Multiple deep learning models were used to improve accuracy. The error rate was reported to be as low as 4 professional human transcribers working together on the same benchmark.\nModels, methods, and algorithms.\nBoth acoustic modeling and language modeling are important parts of statistically-based speech recognition algorithms. Hidden Markov models (HMMs) are widely used in many systems. Language modelling is also used in many other natural language processing applications, such as document classification or statistical machine translation.\nHidden Markov models.\nSpeech recognition systems are based on HMMs. These are statistical models that output a sequence of symbols or quantities. HMMs are used in speech recognition because a speech signal can be viewed as a piecewise stationary signal or a short-time stationary signal. In a short time scale (e.g. 10 milliseconds), speech can be approximated as a stationary process. Speech can be thought of as a Markov model for many stochastic purposes.\nHMMs are popular because they can be trained automatically and are simple and computationally feasible. An HMM outputs a sequence of \"n\"-dimensional real-valued vectors (where \"n\" is an integer such as 10), outputting one every 10 milliseconds. The vectors consist of cepstral coefficients, obtained by a Fourier transform of a short window of speech and decorrelating the spectrum using a cosine transform, then taking the first (most significant) coefficients. The HMM tends to have, in each state, a statistical distribution that is a mixture of diagonal covariance Gaussians, which give a likelihood for each observed vector. Each word, or (for more general speech recognition systems), each phoneme, has a different output distribution; an HMM for a sequence of words or phonemes is made by concatenating the individual trained HMMs for the separate words and phonemes.\nSpeech recognition systems use combinations of standard techniques to improve results. A typical large-vocabulary system applies context dependency for the phonemes (so that phonemes with different left and right context have different realizations as HMM states). It uses cepstral normalization to handle speaker and recording conditions. It might use vocal tract length normalization (VTLN) for male-female normalization and maximum likelihood linear regression (MLLR) for more general adaptation. The features use delta and delta-delta coefficients to capture speech dynamics, and in addition might use heteroscedastic linear discriminant analysis (HLDA); or might use splicing and LDA-based projection, followed by HLDA or a global semi-tied covariance transform (also known as maximum likelihood linear transform (MLLT)). Many systems use discriminative training techniques that dispense with a purely statistical approach to HMM parameter estimation and instead optimize some classification-related measure of the training data. Examples are maximum mutual information (MMI), minimum classification error (MCE), and minimum phone error (MPE).\nDynamic time warping (DTW)-based speech recognition.\nDynamic time warping was historically used for speech recognition, but was later displaced by HMM.\nDynamic time warping measures similarity between two sequences that may vary in time or speed. For instance, similarities in walking patterns could be detected, even if in one video a person was walking slowly and in another was walking more quickly, or even if accelerations and decelerations came during one observation. DTW has been applied to video, audio, and graphics \u2013 any data that can be turned into a linear representation can be analyzed with DTW.\nThis could handle speech at different speaking speeds. In general, it allows an optimal match between two sequences (e.g., time series) with certain restrictions. The sequences are \"warped\" non-linearly to match each other. This sequence alignment method is often used in the context of HMMs.\nNeural networks.\nNeural networks became interesting in the late 1980s before beginning to dominate in the 2010s. Neural networks have been used in many aspects of speech recognition, such as phoneme classification, phoneme classification through multi-objective evolutionary algorithms, isolated word recognition, audiovisual speech recognition, audiovisual speaker recognition, and speaker adaptation.\nNeural networks make fewer explicit assumptions about feature statistical properties than HMMs. When used to estimate the probabilities of a speech segment, neural networks allow natural and efficient discriminative training. However, in spite of their effectiveness in classifying short-time units such as individual phonemes and isolated words, early neural networks were rarely successful for continuous recognition because of their limited ability to model temporal dependencies.\nOne approach was to use neural networks for feature transformation, or dimensionality reduction. However, more recently, LSTM and related recurrent neural networks (RNNs), Time Delay Neural Networks (TDNN's), and transformers demonstrated improved performance.\nDeep feedforward and recurrent neural networks.\nResearchers are exploring deep neural networks (DNNs) and denoising autoencoders .A DNN is a type of artificial neural network that includes multiple hidden layers between the input and output. Like simpler neural networks, DNNs can model complex, non-linear relationships. However, their deeper architecture allows them to build more sophisticated representations that combine features from earlier layers. This gives them a powerful ability to learn and recognize complex patterns in speech data.\nA major breakthrough in using DNNs for large vocabulary speech recognition came in 2010. In a collaboration between industry and academia, researchers used DNNs with large output layers based on context-dependent HMM states that were created using decision trees. This approach significantly improved performanc.\nA core idea behind deep learning is to eliminate the need for manually designed features and instead learn directly from input data. This was first demonstrated using deep autoencoders trained on raw spectrograms or linear filter-bank features. These models outperformed traditional Mel-Cepstral features, which rely on fixed transformations. More recently, researchers showed that waveforms can achieve excellent results in large-scale speech recognition.\nEnd-to-end learning.\nSince 2014, much research has considered \"end-to-end\" ASR. Traditional phonetic-based (i.e., all HMM-based model) approaches required separate components and training for pronunciation, acoustic, and language. End-to-end models learn from all the components at once. This simplifies the training and deployment processes. For example, an n-gram language model is required for all HMM-based systems, and a typical 2025-era n-gram language model often takes gigabytes in memory, making them impractical to deploy on mobile devices. Consequently, ASR systems from Google and Apple (as of 2017[ [update]]) deploy on servers and required a network connection to operate.\nThe first attempt at end-to-end ASR was the Connectionist Temporal Classification (CTC)-based system introduced by Alex Graves of Google DeepMind and Navdeep Jaitly of the University of Toronto in 2014. The model consisted of RNNs and a CTC layer. Jointly, the RNN-CTC model learns the pronunciation and acoustic model together, however, it is incapable of learning the language model due to conditional independence assumptions, similar to an HMM. Consequently, CTC models can directly learn to map speech acoustics to English characters, but the models make many common spelling mistakes and must rely on a separate language model to finalize transcripts. Later, Baidu expanded on the work with extremely large datasets and demonstrated some commercial success in Mandarin and English. \nIn 2016, the University of Oxford presented LipNet, the first end-to-end sentence-level lipreading model, using spatiotemporal convolutions coupled with an RNN-CTC architecture, surpassing human-level performance in a restricted dataset. A large-scale convolutional-RNN-CTC architecture was presented in 2018 by Google DeepMind, achieving 6 times better performance than human experts. In 2019, Nvidia launched two CNN-CTC ASR models, Jasper and QuarzNet, with an overall performance word error rate (WER) of 3%. Similar to other deep learning applications, transfer learning and domain adaptation are important strategies for reusing and extending the capabilities of deep learning models, particularly due to the small size of available corpora in many languages and/or specific domains.\nIn 2018, researchers at MIT Media Lab announced preliminary work on AlterEgo, a device that uses electrodes to read the neuromuscular signals users make as they subvocalize. They trained a convolutional neural network to translate the electrode signals into words.\nAttention-based models.\nAttention-based ASR models were introduced by Chan et al. of Carnegie Mellon University and Google Brain, and Bahdanau et al. of the University of Montreal in 2016. The model named \"Listen, Attend and Spell\" (LAS), literally \"listens\" to the acoustic signal, pays \"attention\" to all parts of the signal and \"spells\" out the transcript one character at a time. Unlike CTC-based models, attention-based models require conditional-independence assumptions and can learn all the components of a speech recognizer directly. This means that during deployment, no \"a priori\" language model is required, making it less demanding for applications with limited memory. \nAttention-based models immediately outperformed CTC models (with or without an external language model) and continued improving. Latent Sequence Decomposition (LSD) was proposed by Carnegie Mellon University, MIT, and Google Brain to directly emit sub-word units that are more natural than English characters. The University of Oxford and Google DeepMind extended LAS to \"Watch, Listen, Attend and Spell\" (WLAS) to handle lip reading and surpassed human-level performance.\nApplications.\nIn-car systems.\nVoice commands may be used to initiate phone calls, select radio stations, or play music. Voice recognition capabilities vary across car make and model. Some models offer natural-language speech recognition, allowing the driver to use full sentences and common phrases in a conversational style. With such systems, fixed commands are not required. \nEducation.\nAutomatic pronunciation assessment is the use of speech recognition to verify the correctness of speech, as distinguished from assessment by a person. Also called speech verification, pronunciation evaluation, and pronunciation scoring, the main application of this technology is computer-aided pronunciation teaching (CAPT) when combined with computer-aided instruction for computer-assisted language learning (CALL), speech remediation, or accent reduction. Pronunciation assessment does not determine unknown speech (as in dictation or automatic transcription) but instead, compares speech to a reference model for the words spoken, sometimes with inconsequential prosody such as intonation, pitch, tempo, rhythm, and stress. Pronunciation assessment is also used in reading tutoring, for example in products such as Microsoft Teams and Amira Learning. Pronunciation assessment can also be used to help diagnose and treat speech disorders such as apraxia.\nAssessing intelligibility is essential for avoiding inaccuracies from accent bias, especially in high-stakes assessments, from words with multiple correct pronunciations, and from phoneme coding errors in digital pronunciation dictionaries. In 2022, researchers found that some newer speech to text systems, based on end-to-end reinforcement learning to map audio signals directly into words, produce word and phrase confidence scores closely correlated with listener intelligibility. In the Common European Framework of Reference for Languages (CEFR) assessment criteria for \"overall phonological control\", intelligibility outweighs formally correct pronunciation at all levels.\nHealth care.\nMedical documentation.\nIn the health care sector, speech recognition can be implemented in front-end or back-end medical documentation processes. In front-end speech recognition, the provider dictates into a speech-recognition engine, words are displayed as they are recognized, and the speaker is responsible for editing and signing off on the document. In back-end or deferred speech recognition the provider speaks into a digital dictation system, the voice is routed through a speech-recognition machine, and a draft document is routed along with the voice file to an editor, who edits/finalizes the draft and final report.\nA major issue is that the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (ARRA) provides substantial financial benefits to physicians who utilize an Electronic Health Record (EHR) that complies with \"Meaningful Use\" standards. These standards require that substantial data be maintained by the EHR. The use of speech recognition is more naturally suited to the generation of narrative text, as part of a radiology/pathology interpretation, progress note or discharge summary; the ergonomic gains of using speech recognition to enter structured discrete data (e.g., numeric values or codes from a list or a controlled vocabulary) are relatively minimal for people who are sighted and who can operate a keyboard and mouse.\nA more significant issue is that most EHRs have not been expressly tailored to take advantage of voice-recognition capabilities. A large part of a clinician's interaction with EHR involves navigation through the user interface that is heavily dependent on keyboard and mouse; voice-based navigation provides only modest ergonomic benefits. By contrast, many highly customized systems for radiology or pathology dictation implement voice \"macros\", where the use of certain phrases \u2013 e.g., \"normal report\", will automatically fill in a large number of default values and/or generate boilerplate, which vary with the type of exam \u2013 e.g., a chest X-ray vs. a gastrointestinal contrast series for a radiology system.\nTherapeutic use.\nProlonged use of speech recognition software in conjunction with word processors has shown benefits to short-term-memory restrengthening in brain AVM patients who have been treated with resection. Further research needs to be conducted to determine cognitive benefits for individuals whose AVMs have been treated using radiologic techniques.\nMilitary.\nAircraft.\nSubstantial efforts have been devoted to the test and evaluation of speech recognition in fighter aircraft. Of particular note have been the US programme in speech recognition for the Advanced Fighter Technology Integration (AFTI)/F-16 aircraft (F-16 VISTA), the programme in France for Mirage aircraft, and UK programmes dealing with a variety of aircraft platforms. In these programmes, speech recognizers have been operated successfully, with applications including setting radio frequencies, commanding an autopilot system, setting steer-point coordinates and weapons release parameters, and controlling flight display.\nWorking with Swedish pilots flying the JAS-39 Gripen, Englund (2004) reported that recognition deteriorated with increasing g-loads. The study concluded that adaptation greatly improved the results in all cases and that the introduction of models for breathing was shown to improve recognition scores significantly. Contrary to what might have been expected, no effects of the broken English of the speakers were found. Spontaneous speech caused problems for the recognizer, as might have been expected. A restricted vocabulary, and above all, a proper syntax, could thus be expected to improve recognition accuracy substantially.\nThe Eurofighter Typhoon employs a speaker-dependent system, requiring each pilot to create a template. The system is not used for safety-critical or weapon-critical tasks, such as weapon release or lowering of the undercarriage, but is used for many cockpit functions. Voice commands are confirmed by visual and/or aural feedback. The system is seen as a major benefit in the reduction of pilot workload, and allows the pilot to assign targets with two voice commands or to a wingman with only five commands.\nSpeaker-independent systems are under test for the F-35 Lightning II (JSF) and the Alenia Aermacchi M-346 Master lead-in fighter trainer. These systems have produced word accuracy scores in excess of 98%.\nHelicopters.\nThe problems of achieving high recognition accuracy under stress and noise are particularly relevant in the helicopter environment as well as in the fighter environment. The acoustic noise problem is actually more severe in the helicopter environment, because of the high noise levels, and because helicopter pilots, in general, do not wear a facemask, which would reduce acoustic noise in the microphone. Substantial test and evaluation programmes, notably by the U.S. Army Avionics Research and Development Activity (AVRADA) and by the Royal Aerospace Establishment (RAE) in the UK. Work in France included speech recognition in the Puma helicopter. Voice applications include control of communication radios, navigation systems, and an automated target handover system.\nThe overriding issue for voice is the impact on pilot effectiveness. Encouraging results are reported for the AVRADA tests, although these represent only a feasibility demonstration in a test environment. Much remains to be done both in speech recognition and in overall speech technology in order to consistently achieve performance improvements in operational settings.\nAir traffic control.\nTraining for air traffic controllers (ATC) represents an excellent application for speech recognition systems. Many ATC training systems currently require a trainer to act as a \"pseudo-pilot\", engaging in a voice dialog with the trainee controller, which simulates the dialog that the controller would have with real pilots. Speech recognition and synthesis techniques offer the potential to eliminate the need for a person to act as a pseudo-pilot, thus reducing training and support personnel. \nIn theory, air controller tasks are characterized by highly structured speech as the primary output, reducing the difficulty of the speech recognition task. In practice, this is rarely the case. FAA document 7110.65 details the phrases that should be used by air traffic controllers. While this document gives less than 150 examples of such phrases, the number of phrases supported by one of the simulation vendors speech recognition systems is in excess of 500,000.\nThe USAF, USMC, US Army, US Navy, and FAA as well as international ATC training organizations such as the Royal Australian Air Force and Civil Aviation Authorities in Italy, Brazil, and Canada use ATC simulators with speech recognition.\nPeople with disabilities.\nSpeech recognition programs can provide many benefit to those with disabilities. For individuals who are deaf or hard of hearing, speech recognition software can be used to generate captions of conversations. Additionally, individuals who are blind (see blindness and education) or have poor vision can benefit from listening to textual content, as well as garner more functionality from a computer by issuing commands with their voice.\nThe use of voice recognition software, in conjunction with a digital audio recorder and a personal computer running word-processing software, has proven useful for restoring damaged short-term memory capacity in individuals who have suffered a stroke or have undergone a craniotomy.\nSpeech recognition has proven very useful for those who have difficulty using their hands due to causes ranging from mild repetitive stress injuries to disabilities that preclude the use of conventional computer input devices. Individuals with physical disabilities can use voice commands and transcription to navigate electronics hands-free. In fact, people who developed RSI from keyboard use became an early and urgent market for speech recognition. Speech recognition is used in deaf telephony, such as voicemail to text, relay services, and captioned telephone. Individuals with learning disabilities who struggle with thought-to-paper communication may benefit from the software, but the product's fallibility remains a significant consideration for many. In addition, speech to text technology is only an effective aid for those with intellectual disabilities if the proper training and resources are provided (e.g. in the classroom setting).\nThis type of technology can help those with dyslexia, but the potential benefits regarding other disabilities are still in question. Mistakes made by the software hinder its effectiveness, since misheard words take more time to fix.\nOther domains.\nASR is now commonplace in the field of telephony. In telephony systems, ASR is predominantly used in contact centers by integrating it with IVR systems. \nIt is becoming more widespread in computer gaming and simulation. \nDespite the high level of integration with word processing in general personal computing, in the field of document production, ASR has not seen the expected increases in use.\nThe improvement of mobile processor speeds has made speech recognition practical in smartphones. Speech is used mostly as a part of a user interface, for creating predefined or custom speech commands.\nPerformance.\nThe performance of speech recognition systems is usually evaluated in terms of accuracy and speed. Accuracy is usually rated with word error rate (WER), whereas speed is measured in elapsed time. Other measures of accuracy include Single Word Error Rate (SWER) and Command Success Rate (CSR).\nSpeech recognition is complicated by many properties of speech. Vocalizations vary in terms of accent, pronunciation, articulation, roughness, dialect, nasality, pitch, volume, and speed. Speech is distorted by background noise, echoes, and recording characteristics. Accuracy of speech recognition may vary with the following:\nAccuracy.\nThe accuracy of speech recognition may vary depending on the following factors:\ne.g. the 10 digits \"zero\" to \"nine\" can be recognized essentially perfectly, but vocabulary sizes of 200, 5000, or 100000 may have error rates of 3%, 7%, or 45% respectively.\ne.g. the 26 letters of the English alphabet are difficult to discriminate because they are confusing words (most notoriously, the E-set: \"B, C, D, E, G, P, T, V, Z (when \"Z\" is pronounced \"zee\" rather than \"zed\", depending on region); an 8% error rate is considered good for this vocabulary.\nSpeech recognition is a multi-level pattern recognition task.\nThis hierarchy of constraints improves accuracy. By combining decisions probabilistically at all lower levels, and making ultimate decisions only at the highest level, speech recognition is broken into several phases. Computationally, it is a problem in which a sound pattern has to be recognized or classified into a category that represents a meaning to a human. Every acoustic signal can be broken into smaller sub-signals. As the more complex sound signal is divided, different levels are created, where at the top level are complex sounds made of simpler sounds on the lower level, etc. At the lowest level, simple and more probabilistic rules apply. These sounds are put together into more complex sounds on upper level, a new set of more deterministic rules predicts what the complex sound represents. The upper level of a deterministic rule should figure out the meaning of complex expressions. In order to expand our knowledge about speech recognition, we need to take into consideration neural networks. Neural network approaches use the following steps:\nSound is produced by air (or some other medium) vibration. Sound creates a wave that has two measures: amplitude (strength), and frequency (vibrations per second). Accuracy can be computed with the help of WER, which is calculated by aligning the recognized word and referenced word using dynamic string alignment. The problem may occur while computing the WER due to the difference between the sequence lengths of the recognized word and referenced word.\nThe formula to compute the word error rate (WER) is:\nformula_1\nwhere \"s\" is the number of substitutions, \"d\" is the number of deletions, \"i\" is the number of insertions, and \"n\" is the number of word references.\nWhile computing, the word recognition rate (WRR) is used. The formula is:\n formula_2\nwhere \"h\" is the number of correctly recognized words:\n formula_3\nSecurity.\nSpeech recognition can become a means of attack, theft, or accidental operation. For example, activation words like \"Alexa\" spoken in an audio or video broadcast can cause devices in homes and offices to start listening for input inappropriately, or possibly take an unwanted action. Voice-controlled devices may be accessible to unauthorized users. Attackers may be able to gain access to personal information, like calendars, address book contents, private messages, and documents. They may also be able to impersonate the user to send messages or make online purchases.\nTwo attacks have been demonstrated that use artificial sounds. One transmits ultrasound and attempts to send commands without people noticing. The other adds small, inaudible distortions to other speech or music that are specially crafted to confuse the specific speech recognition system into recognizing music as speech, or to make what sounds like one command to a human sound like a different command to the system.\nFurther information.\nConferences.\nRegular conferences include SpeechTEK and SpeechTEK Europe, ICASSP, Interspeech/Eurospeech, and the IEEE ASRU. Conferences in the field of natural language processing, such as ACL, NAACL, EMNLP, and HLT, include papers on speech processing. \nJournal.\nThe main journal is \"IEEE/ACM Transactions on Audio, Speech and Language Processing\".\nProjects.\nThe largest speech recognition-related project ongoing as of 2007 was the GALE project, which involves both speech recognition and translation components.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
