{"id": "20769", "revid": "50923908", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20769", "title": "Mergers and acquisitions", "text": "Type of corporate transaction\nMergers and acquisitions (M&amp;A) are business transactions in which the ownership of a company, business organization, or one of their operating units is transferred to or consolidated with another entity. They may happen through direct absorption, a merger, a tender offer or a hostile takeover. As an aspect of strategic management, M&amp;A can allow enterprises to grow or downsize, and change the nature of their business or competitive position.\nTechnically, a merger is the legal consolidation of two business entities into one, whereas an acquisition occurs when one entity takes ownership of another entity's share capital, equity interests or assets. From a legal and financial point of view, both mergers and acquisitions generally result in the consolidation of assets and liabilities under one entity, and the distinction between the two is not always clear.\nMost countries require mergers and acquisitions to comply with antitrust or competition law. In the United States, for example, the Clayton Act outlaws any merger or acquisition that may \"substantially lessen competition\" or \"tend to create a monopoly\", and the Hart\u2013Scott\u2013Rodino Act requires notifying the U.S. Department of Justice's Antitrust Division and the Federal Trade Commission about any merger or acquisition over a certain size.\nAcquisition.\nAn acquisition/takeover is the purchase of one business or company by another company or other business entity. Specific acquisition targets can be identified through myriad avenues, including market research, trade expos, sent up from internal business units, or supply chain analysis. Such purchase may be of 100%, or nearly 100%, of the assets or ownership equity of the acquired entity.\nA consolidation/amalgamation occurs when two companies combine to form a new enterprise altogether, and neither of the previous companies remains independently owned. Acquisitions are divided into \"private\" and \"public\" acquisitions, depending on whether the acquiree or merging company (also termed a \"target\") is or is not publicly listed. Some public companies rely on acquisitions as an important value creation strategy. An additional dimension or categorization consists of whether an acquisition is \"friendly\" or \"hostile\".\nAchieving acquisition success has proven to be very difficult, while various studies have shown that 50% of acquisitions were unsuccessful. \"Serial acquirers\" appear to be more successful with M&amp;A than companies who make acquisitions only occasionally (see Douma &amp; Schreuder, 2013, chapter 13). The new forms of buy out created since the crisis are based on serial type acquisitions known as an ECO Buyout which is a co-community ownership buy out and the new generation buy outs of the MIBO (Management Involved or Management &amp; Institution Buy Out) and MEIBO (Management &amp; Employee Involved Buy Out).\nWhether a purchase is perceived as being \"friendly\" or \"hostile\" depends significantly on how the proposed acquisition is communicated to and perceived by the target company's board of directors, employees, and shareholders. It is normal for M&amp;A deal communications to take place in a so-called \"confidentiality bubble\", wherein the flow of information is restricted pursuant to confidentiality agreements. In the case of a friendly transaction, the companies cooperate in negotiations; in the case of a hostile deal, the board and/or management of the target is unwilling to be bought or the target's board has no prior knowledge of the offer. Hostile acquisitions can, and often do, ultimately become \"friendly\" as the acquirer secures endorsement of the transaction from the board of the acquiree company. This usually requires an improvement in the terms of the offer and/or through negotiation.\n\"Acquisition\" usually refers to a purchase of a smaller firm by a larger one. Sometimes, however, a smaller firm will acquire management control of a larger and/or longer-established company and retain the name of the latter for the post-acquisition combined entity. This is known as a reverse takeover. Another type of acquisition is the reverse merger, a form of transaction that enables a private company to be publicly listed in a relatively short time frame. A reverse merger is a type of merger where a privately held company, typically one with promising prospects and a need for financing, acquires a publicly listed shell company that has few assets and no significant business operations.\nThe combined evidence suggests that the shareholders of acquired firms realize significant positive \"abnormal returns,\" while shareholders of the acquiring company are most likely to experience a negative wealth effect. Most studies indicate that M&amp;A transactions have a positive net effect, with investors in both the buyer and target companies seeing positive returns. This suggests that M&amp;A creates economic value, likely by transferring assets to more efficient management teams who can better utilize them. (See Douma &amp; Schreuder, 2013, chapter 13).\nThere are also a variety of structures used in securing control over the assets of a company, which have different tax and regulatory implications:\nThe terms \"demerger\", \"spin-off\" and \"spin-out\" are sometimes used to indicate a situation where one company splits into two, generating a second company which may or may not become separately listed on a stock exchange.\nAs per knowledge-based views, firms can generate greater values through the retention of knowledge-based resources which they generate and integrate. Extracting technological benefits during and after acquisition is an ever-challenging issue because of organizational differences. Based on the content analysis of seven interviews, the authors concluded the following components for their grounded model of acquisition:\nAn increase in acquisitions in the global business environment requires enterprises to evaluate the key stake holders of acquisitions very carefully before implementation. It is imperative for the acquirer to understand this relationship and apply it to its advantage. Employee retention is possible only when resources are exchanged and managed without affecting their independence.\nLegal structures.\nA corporate acquisition can be structured legally as either an \"asset purchase\" in which the seller sells business assets and liabilities to the buyer, an \"equity purchase\" in which the buyer purchases equity interests in a target company from one or more selling shareholders or a \"merger\" in which one legal entity is combined into another entity by operation of the corporate law statute(s) of the jurisdiction of the merging entities. In a transaction structured as a merger or an equity purchase, the buyer acquires all of the assets and liabilities of the acquired entity. In a transaction structured as an asset purchase, the buyer and seller agree on which assets and liabilities the buyer will acquire from the seller.\nAsset purchases are common in technology transactions in which the buyer is most interested in particular intellectual property but does not want to acquire liabilities or other contractual relationships. An asset purchase structure may also be used when the buyer wishes to buy a particular division or unit of a company that is not a separate legal entity. Divestitures present a variety of unique challenges, such as identifying the assets and liabilities that pertain solely to the unit being sold, determining whether the unit relies on services from other parts of the seller's organization, transferring employees, moving permits and licenses, and safeguarding against potential competition from the seller in the same business sector after the transaction is completed.\nTypes of mergers.\nFrom an economic point of view, business combinations can also be classified as horizontal, vertical and conglomerate mergers (or acquisitions). A horizontal merger is between two competitors in the same industry. A\nvertical merger occurs when two firms combine across the value chain, such as when a firm buys a former supplier (backward integration) or a former customer (forward integration). When there is no strategic relatedness between an acquiring firm and its target, this is called a conglomerate merger (Douma &amp; Schreuder, 2013).\nThe form of merger most often employed is a triangular merger, where the target company merges with a shell company wholly owned by the buyer, thus becoming a subsidiary of the buyer. In a \"forward triangular merger\", the target company merges into the subsidiary, with the subsidiary as the surviving company of the merger; a \"reverse triangular merger\" is similar except that the subsidiary merges into the target company, with the target company surviving the merger.\nMergers, asset purchases and equity purchases are each taxed differently, and the most beneficial structure for tax purposes is highly situation-dependent. Under the U.S. Internal Revenue Code, a forward triangular merger is taxed as if the target company sold its assets to the shell company and then liquidated, them whereas a reverse triangular merger is taxed as if the target company's shareholders sold their stock in the target company to the buyer.\nDocumentation.\nThe documentation of an M&amp;A transaction often begins with a letter of intent. The letter of intent generally does not bind the parties to commit to a transaction, but may bind the parties to confidentiality and exclusivity obligations so that the transaction can be considered through a due diligence process involving lawyers, accountants, tax advisors, and other professionals, as well as business people from both sides.\nAfter due diligence is complete, the parties may proceed to draw up a definitive agreement, known as a \"merger agreement\", \"share purchase agreement,\" or \"asset purchase agreement\" depending on the structure of the transaction. Such contracts are typically 80 to 100 pages long and focus on five key types of terms:\nFollowing the closing of a deal, adjustments may be made to some of the provisions outlined in the purchase agreement, such as the purchase price. These adjustments are subject to enforceability issues in certain situations. Alternatively, certain transactions use the 'locked box' approach, where the purchase price is fixed at signing and based on the seller's equity value at a pre-signing date and an interest charge.\nBusiness valuation.\nThe assets of a business are pledged to two categories of stakeholders: equity owners and owners of the business' outstanding debt. The core value of a business, which accrues to both categories of stakeholders, is called the Enterprise Value (EV), whereas the value which accrues just to shareholders is the Equity Value (also called market capitalization for publicly listed companies). Enterprise Value reflects a capital structure neutral valuation and is frequently a preferred way to compare value as it is not affected by a company's, or management's, strategic decision to fund the business either through debt, equity, or a portion of both. Five common ways to \"triangulate\" the enterprise value of a business are:\nProfessionals who value businesses generally do not use just one method, but a combination. Valuations implied using these methodologies can prove different to a company's current trading valuation. For public companies, the market based enterprise value and equity value can be calculated by referring to the company's share price and components on its balance sheet. The valuation methods described above represent ways to determine value of a company independently from how the market currently, or historically, has determined value based on the price of its outstanding securities.\nMost often value is expressed in a Letter of Opinion of Value (LOV) when the business is being valued informally. Formal valuation reports generally get more detailed and expensive as the size of a company increases, but this is not always the case as the nature of the business and the industry it is operating in can influence the complexity of the valuation task.\nObjectively evaluating the historical and prospective performance of a business is a challenge faced by many. Generally, parties rely on independent third parties to conduct due diligence studies or business assessments. To yield the most value from a business assessment, objectives should be clearly defined and the right resources should be chosen to conduct the assessment in the available timeframe.\nAs synergy plays a large role in the valuation of acquisitions, it is paramount to get the value of synergies right, as briefly alluded to regarding DCF valuations. Synergies are different from the \"sales price\" valuation of the firm, as they will accrue to the buyer. Hence, the analysis should be done from the acquiring firm's point of view. Synergy-creating investments are initiated by the choice of the acquirer, and therefore they are not obligatory, making them essentially real options. To include this real options aspect into the analysis of acquisition targets is an issue that has been studied lately. See also contingent value rights.\nValuation can be influenced by a range of factors beyond financial performance, including cross-border and cross-industry considerations, sustainability initiatives, and regulatory environments. Cross-border transactions may involve exchange rate risks, differing accounting standards, and geopolitical factors, which can lead to valuation adjustments. Cross-industry acquisitions can introduce complexities in synergies and market positioning, as firms may face integration challenges and differences in business models. Additionally, sustainability-related factors, such as a company's environmental, social, and governance performance, can impact valuation by influencing investor sentiment, access to capital, and long-term risk exposure.\nFinancing.\nMergers are generally differentiated from acquisitions partly by the way in which they are financed and partly by the relative size of the companies. Various methods of financing an M&amp;A deal exist:\nCash.\nPayment by cash. Such transactions are usually termed acquisitions rather than mergers because the shareholders of the target company are removed from the picture and the target comes under the (indirect) control of the bidder's shareholders.\nStock.\nPayment in the form of the acquiring company's stock, issued to the shareholders of the acquired company at a given ratio proportional to the valuation of the latter. They receive stock in the company that is purchasing the smaller subsidiary.\nFinancing options.\nThere are some elements to think about when choosing the form of payment. When submitting an offer, the acquiring firm should consider other potential bidders and think strategically. The form of payment might be decisive for the seller. With pure cash deals, there is no doubt on the real value of the bid (without considering an eventual earnout). The contingency of the share payment is indeed removed. Thus, a cash offer preempts competitors better than securities. Taxes are a second element to consider and should be evaluated with the counsel of competent tax and accounting advisers. Third, with a share deal the buyer's capital structure might be affected and the control of the buyer modified. If the issuance of shares is necessary, shareholders of the acquiring company might prevent such capital increase at the general meeting of shareholders. The risk is removed with a cash transaction. Then, the balance sheet of the buyer will be modified and the decision maker should take into account the effects on the reported financial results. For example, in a pure cash deal (financed from the company's current account), liquidity ratios might decrease. On the other hand, in a pure stock for stock transaction (financed from the issuance of new shares), the company might show lower profitability ratios (e.g. ROA). However, economic dilution must prevail towards accounting dilution when making the choice. The form of payment and financing options are tightly linked. If the buyer pays cash, there are three main financing options:\nSpecialist advisory firms.\nM&amp;A advice is provided by full-service investment banks- who often advise and handle the biggest deals in the world (called bulge bracket) - and specialist M&amp;A firms, who provide M&amp;A only advisory, generally to mid-market, select industries and SBEs.\nHighly focused and specialized M&amp;A advice investment banks are called boutique investment banks.\nMotivation.\nImproving financial performance or reducing risk.\nThe dominant rationale used to explain M&amp;A activity is that acquiring firms seek improved financial performance or reduce risk. The following motives are considered to improve financial performance or reduce risk:\nMegadeals\u2014deals of at least one $1 billion in size\u2014tend to fall into four discrete categories: consolidation, capabilities extension, technology-driven market transformation, and going private.\nOther types.\nOn average and across the most commonly studied variables, acquiring firms' financial performance does not positively change as a function of their acquisition activity. Therefore, additional motives for merger and acquisition that may not add shareholder value include:\nDifferent types.\nBy functional roles in market.\nThe M&amp;A process itself is a multifaceted which depends upon the type of merging companies.\nBy business outcome.\nThe M&amp;A process results in the restructuring of a business's purpose, corporate governance and brand identity.\nArm's length mergers.\nAn arm's length merger is a merger: \n\u2033The two elements are complementary and not substitutes. The first element is important because the directors have the capability to act as effective and active bargaining agents, which disaggregated stockholders do not. But, because bargaining agents are not always effective or faithful, the second element is critical, because it gives the minority stockholders the opportunity to reject their agents' work. Therefore, when a merger with a controlling stockholder was: 1) negotiated and approved by a special committee of independent directors; and 2) conditioned on an affirmative vote of a majority of the minority stockholders, the business judgment standard of review should presumptively apply, and any plaintiff ought to have to plead particularized facts that, if true, support an inference that, despite the facially fair process, the merger was tainted because of fiduciary wrongdoing.\u2033\nStrategic mergers.\nA Strategic merger usually refers to long-term strategic holding of target (Acquired) firm. This type of M&amp;A process aims at creating synergies in the long run by increased market share, broad customer base, and corporate strength of business. A strategic acquirer may also be willing to pay a premium offer to target firm in the outlook of the synergy value created after M&amp;A process.\nAcqui-hire.\nThe term \"acqui-hire\" is used to refer to acquisitions where the acquiring company seeks to obtain the target company's talent, rather than their products (which are often discontinued as part of the acquisition so the team can focus on projects for their new employer). In recent years, these types of acquisitions have become common in the technology industry, where major web companies such as Facebook, Twitter, and Yahoo! have frequently used talent acquisitions to add expertise in particular areas to their workforces.\nMerger of equals.\nMerger of equals is often a combination of companies of a similar size. Since 1990, there have been more than 625 M&amp;A transactions announced as mergers of equals with a total value of US$2,164.4 bil. Some of the largest mergers of equals took place during the dot-com bubble of the late 1990s and in the year 2000: AOL and Time Warner (US$164 bil.), SmithKline Beecham and Glaxo Wellcome (US$75 bil.), Citicorp and Travelers Group (US$72 bil.). More recent examples this type of combinations are DuPont and Dow Chemical (US$62 bil.) and Praxair and Linde (US$35 bil.).\nResearch and statistics for acquired organizations.\nAn analysis of 1,600 companies across industries revealed the rewards for M&amp;A activity were greater for consumer products companies than the average company. For the period 2000\u20132010, consumer products companies turned in an average annual TSR of 7.4%, while the average for all companies was 4.8%.\nGiven that the cost of replacing an executive can run over 100% of his or her annual salary, any investment of time and energy in re-recruitment will\n likely pay for itself many times over if it helps a business retain just a handful of key players that would have otherwise left.\nOrganizations should move rapidly to re-recruit key managers. It's much easier to succeed with a team of quality players that one selects deliberately rather than try to win a game with those who randomly show up to play.\nBrand considerations.\nMergers and acquisitions often create brand problems, beginning with what to call the company after the transaction and going down into detail about what to do about overlapping and competing product brands. Decisions about what brand equity to write off are not inconsequential. And, given the ability for the right brand choices to drive preference and earn a price premium, the future success of a merger or acquisition depends on making wise brand choices. Brand decision-makers essentially can choose from four different approaches to dealing with naming issues, each with specific pros and cons:\nThe factors influencing brand decisions in a merger or acquisition transaction can range from political to tactical. Ego can drive choice just as well as rational factors such as brand value and costs involved with changing brands.\nBeyond the bigger issue of what to call the company after the transaction comes the ongoing detailed choices about what divisional, product and service brands to keep. The detailed decisions about the brand portfolio are covered under the topic brand architecture.\nHistory.\nMost histories of M&amp;A begin in the late 19th century United States. However, mergers coincide historically with the existence of companies. In 1708, for example, the East India Company merged with an erstwhile competitor to restore its monopoly over the Indian trade. In 1784, the Italian Monte dei Paschi and Monte Pio banks were united as the Monti Reuniti. In 1821, the Hudson's Bay Company merged with the rival North West Company.\nThe Great Merger Movement: 1895\u20131905.\nThe Great Merger Movement was a predominantly U.S. business phenomenon that happened from 1895 to 1905. During this time, small firms with little market share consolidated with similar firms to form large, powerful institutions that dominated their markets, such as the Standard Oil Company, which at its height controlled nearly 90% of the global oil refinery industry. It is estimated that more than 1,800 of these firms disappeared into consolidations, many of which acquired substantial shares of the markets in which they operated. The vehicle used were so-called trusts. In 1900 the value of firms acquired in mergers was 20% of GDP. In 1990 the value was only 3% and from 1998 to 2000 it was around 10\u201311% of GDP. Companies such as DuPont, U.S. Steel, and General Electric that merged during the Great Merger Movement were able to keep their dominance in their respective sectors through 1929, and in some cases today, due to growing technological advances of their products, patents, and brand recognition by their customers. There were also other companies that held the greatest market share in 1905 but at the same time did not have the competitive advantages of the companies like DuPont and General Electric. These companies such as International Paper and American Chicle saw their market share decrease significantly by 1929 as smaller competitors joined forces with each other and provided much more competition. The companies that merged were mass producers of homogeneous goods that could exploit the efficiencies of large volume production. In addition, many of these mergers were capital-intensive. Due to high fixed costs, when demand fell, these newly merged companies had an incentive to maintain output and reduce prices. However more often than not mergers were \"quick mergers\". These \"quick mergers\" involved mergers of companies with unrelated technology and different management. As a result, the efficiency gains associated with mergers were not present. The new and bigger company would actually face higher costs than competitors because of these technological and managerial differences. Thus, the mergers were not done to see large efficiency gains, they were in fact done because that was the trend at the time. Companies which had specific fine products, like fine writing paper, earned their profits on high margin rather than volume and took no part in the Great Merger Movement.\nShort-run factors.\nOne of the major short run factors that sparked the Great Merger Movement was the desire to keep prices high. However, high prices attracted the entry of new firms into the industry.\nA major catalyst behind the Great Merger Movement was the Panic of 1893, which led to a major decline in demand for many homogeneous goods. For producers of homogeneous goods, when demand falls, these producers have more of an incentive to maintain output and cut prices, in order to spread out the high fixed costs these producers faced (i.e. lowering cost per unit) and the desire to exploit efficiencies of maximum volume production. However, during the Panic of 1893, the fall in demand led to a steep fall in prices.\nAnother economic model proposed by Naomi R. Lamoreaux for explaining the steep price falls is to view the involved firms acting as monopolies in their respective markets. As quasi-monopolists, firms set quantity where marginal cost equals marginal revenue and price where this quantity intersects demand. When the Panic of 1893 hit, demand fell and along with demand, the firm's marginal revenue fell as well. Given high fixed costs, the new price was below average total cost, resulting in a loss. However, also being in a high fixed costs industry, these costs can be spread out through greater production (i.e. higher quantity produced). To return to the quasi-monopoly model, in order for a firm to earn profit, firms would steal part of another firm's market share by dropping their price slightly and producing to the point where higher quantity and lower price exceeded their average total cost. As other firms joined this practice, prices began falling everywhere and a price war ensued.\nOne strategy to keep prices high and to maintain profitability was for producers of the same good to collude with each other and form associations, also known as cartels. These cartels were thus able to raise prices right away, sometimes more than doubling prices. However, these prices set by cartels provided only a short-term solution because cartel members would cheat on each other by setting a lower price than the price set by the cartel. Also, the high price set by the cartel would encourage new firms to enter the industry and offer competitive pricing, causing prices to fall once again. As a result, these cartels did not succeed in maintaining high prices for a period of more than a few years. The most viable solution to this problem was for firms to merge, through horizontal integration, with other top firms in the market in order to control a large market share and thus successfully set a higher price.\nLong-run factors.\nIn the long run, due to desire to keep costs low, it was advantageous for firms to merge and reduce their transportation costs thus producing and transporting from one location rather than various sites of different companies as in the past. Low transport costs, coupled with economies of scale also increased firm size by two- to fourfold during the second half of the nineteenth century. In addition, technological changes prior to the merger movement within companies increased the efficient size of plants with capital intensive assembly lines allowing for economies of scale. Thus improved technology and transportation were forerunners to the Great Merger Movement. In part due to competitors as mentioned above, and in part due to the government, however, many of these initially successful mergers were eventually dismantled. The U.S. government passed the Sherman Act in 1890, setting rules against price fixing and monopolies. Starting in the 1890s with such cases as Addyston Pipe and Steel Company v. United States, the courts attacked large companies for strategizing with others or within their own companies to maximize profits. Price fixing with competitors created a greater incentive for companies to unite and merge under one name so that they were not competitors anymore and technically not price fixing.\nThe economic history has been divided into \"Merger Waves\" based on the merger activities in the business world as:\nObjectives in more recent merger waves.\nDuring the third merger wave (1965\u20131989), corporate marriages involved more diverse companies. Acquirers more frequently bought into different industries. Sometimes this was done to smooth out cyclical bumps, to diversify, the hope being that it would hedge an investment portfolio.\nStarting in the fifth merger wave (1992\u20131998) and continuing today, companies are more likely to acquire in the same business, or close to it, firms that complement and strengthen an acquirer's capacity to serve customers.\nIn recent decades however, cross-sector convergence has become more common. For example, retail companies are buying tech or e-commerce firms to acquire new markets and revenue streams. It has been reported that convergence will remain a key trend in M&amp;A activity through 2015 and onward.\nBuyers are not necessarily hungry for the target companies' hard assets. Some are more interested in acquiring thoughts, methodologies, people and relationships. Paul Graham recognized this in his 2005 essay \"Hiring is Obsolete\", in which he theorizes that the free market is better at identifying talent, and that traditional hiring practices do not follow the principles of free market because they depend a lot upon credentials and university degrees. Graham was probably the first to identify the trend in which large companies such as Google, Yahoo! or Microsoft were choosing to acquire startups instead of hiring new recruits, a process known as acqui-hiring.\nMany companies are being bought for their patents, licenses, market share, name brand, research staff, methods, customer base, or culture. Soft capital, like this, is very perishable, fragile, and fluid. Integrating it usually takes more finesse and expertise than integrating machinery, real estate, inventory and other tangibles.\nLargest deals in history.\nThe top ten largest deals in M&amp;A history cumulate to a total value of 1,118,963 mil. USD. (1.118 tril. USD).\nCross-border.\nIntroduction.\nIn a study conducted in 2000 by Lehman Brothers, it was found that, on average, large M&amp;A deals cause the domestic currency of the target corporation to appreciate by 1% relative to the acquirer's local currency. Until 2018, around 280,472 cross-border deals have been conducted, which cumulates to a total value of almost US$24,069 billion.\nThe rise of globalization has exponentially increased the necessity for agencies such as the Mergers and Acquisitions International Clearing (MAIC), trust accounts and securities clearing services for Like-Kind Exchanges for cross-border M&amp;A. On a global basis, the value of cross-border mergers and acquisitions rose seven-fold during the 1990s. In 1997 alone, there were over 2,333 cross-border transactions, worth a total of approximately $298 billion.\nThe vast literature on empirical studies over value creation in cross-border M&amp;A is not conclusive, but points to higher returns in cross-border M&amp;As compared to domestic ones when the acquirer firm has the capability to exploit resources and knowledge of the target's firm and of handling challenges. In China, for example, securing regulatory approval can be complex due to an extensive group of various stakeholders at each level of government. In the United Kingdom, acquirers may face pension regulators with significant powers, in addition to an overall M&amp;A environment that is generally more seller-friendly than the U.S. Nonetheless, the current surge in global cross-border M&amp;A has been called the \"New Era of Global Economic Discovery\".\nIn little more than a decade, M&amp;A deals in China increased by a factor of 20, from 69 in 2000 to more than 1,300 in 2013.\nIn 2014, Europe registered its highest levels of M&amp;A deal activity since the financial crisis. Driven by U.S. and Asian acquirers, inbound M&amp;A, at $320.6 billion, reached record highs by both deal value and deal count since 2001.\nApproximately 23 percent of the 416 M&amp;A deals announced in the U.S. M&amp;A market in 2014 involved non-U.S. acquirers.\nFor 2016, market uncertainties, including Brexit and the potential reform from a U.S. presidential election, contributed to cross-border M&amp;A activity lagging roughly 20% behind 2015 activity.\nIn 2017, the controverse trend which started in 2015, decreasing total value but rising total number of cross border deals, kept going. Compared on a year on year basis (2016\u20132017), the total number of cross border deals decreased by \u22124.2%, while cumulated value increased by 0.6%.\nEven mergers of companies with headquarters in the same country can often be considered international in scale and require MAIC custodial services. For example, when Boeing acquired McDonnell Douglas, the two American companies had to integrate operations in dozens of countries around the world (1997). This is just as true for other apparently \"single-country\" mergers, such as the $29-billion merger of Swiss drug makers Sandoz and Ciba-Geigy (now Novartis).\nIn emerging countries.\nM&amp;A practice in emerging countries differs from more mature economies, although transaction management and valuation tools (e.g. DCF, comparables) share a common basic methodology. In China, India or Brazil for example, differences affect the formation of asset price and on the structuring of deals. Profitability expectations (e.g. shorter time horizon, no terminal value due to low visibility) and risk represented by a discount rate must both be properly adjusted. In a M&amp;A perspective, differences between emerging and more mature economies include: i) a less developed system of property rights, ii) less reliable financial information, iii) cultural differences in negotiations, and iv) a higher degree of competition for the best targets.\nIf not properly dealt with, these factors will likely have adverse consequences on return-on-investment (ROI) and create difficulties in day-to-day business operations. It is advisable that M&amp;A tools designed for mature economies are not directly used in emerging markets without some adjustment. M&amp;A teams need time to adapt and understand the key operating differences between their home environment and their new market.\nFailure.\nDespite the goal of performance improvement, results from mergers and acquisitions (M&amp;A) are often disappointing compared with results predicted or expected. Numerous empirical studies show high failure rates of M&amp;A deals. Studies are mostly focused on individual determinants. A book by Thomas Straub (2007) \"Reasons for frequent failure in Mergers and Acquisitions\" develops a comprehensive research framework that bridges different perspectives and promotes an understanding of factors underlying M&amp;A performance in business research and scholarship. The study should help managers in the decision-making process. The first important step towards this objective is the development of a common frame of reference that spans conflicting theoretical assumptions from different perspectives. On this basis, a comprehensive framework is proposed with which to understand the origins of M&amp;A performance better and address the problem of fragmentation by integrating the most important competing perspectives in respect of studies on M&amp;A. Furthermore, according to the existing literature, relevant determinants of firm performance are derived from each dimension of the model. For the dimension strategic management, the six strategic variables: market similarity, market complementarities, production operation similarity, production operation complementarities, market power, and purchasing power were identified as having an important effect on M&amp;A performance. For the dimension organizational behavior, the variables acquisition experience, relative size, and cultural differences were found to be important. Finally, relevant determinants of M&amp;A performance from the financial field were acquisition premium, bidding process, and due diligence. Three different ways in order to best measure post M&amp;A performance are recognized: synergy realization, absolute performance, and finally relative performance.\nEmployee turnover contributes to M&amp;A failures. The turnover in target companies is double the turnover experienced in non-merged firms for the ten years after the merger.\nM&amp;As involving small businesses are particularly problematic and have been found to take longer and cost more than expected with organisation cultural and effective communication with employees being key determinants of success and failure \nMany M&amp;A fail due to lack of planning or execution of the plan. An empirical research study conducted between 1988 and 2002 found that \"Successful acquisitions, as defined by return on investment and time to market, are more likely to involve complex products but minimal uncertainty about whether the product is functional and whether there is an appetite in the market.\" But failed mergers and acquisitions are caused by \"hasty purchases where information platforms between companies were incompatible and the product was not yet tested for release.\" A recommendation to resolve these failed mergers is to wait for the product to become established in the market and research has been completed.\nDeloitte determines most companies do not do their due diligence in determining whether a M&amp;A is the correct move due to these four reasons:\nTransactions that undergo a due diligence process are more likely to be successful.\nA considerable body of research suggests that many mergers fail due to human factors such as issues with trust between employees of the two organizations or trust between employees and their leaders.\nAny M&amp;A transaction, no matter the size or structure, can have a significant impact on the acquiring company. Developing and implementing a robust due diligence process can lead to a much better assessment of the risks and potential benefits of a transaction, enable the renegotiation of pricing and other key terms, and smooth the way towards a more effective integration.\nM&amp;A can hinder innovation by mismanagement or cultural differences between companies. They can also create bottlenecks when they disrupt the flow of innovation with too many company policies and procedures. Market dominant companies can also be their own demise when presented with an M&amp;A opportunity. Complacency and lack of due diligence may cause the market dominant company to miss the value of an innovative product or service.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20770", "revid": "34623446", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20770", "title": "United States v. Microsoft Corp.", "text": "2001 American antitrust law case\nUnited States of America v. Microsoft Corporation, 253 F.3d 34 (D.C. Cir. 2001), was a landmark American antitrust law case at the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit. The U.S. government accused Microsoft of illegally monopolizing the web browser market for Windows, primarily through the legal and technical restrictions it put on the abilities of PC manufacturers (OEMs) and users to uninstall Internet Explorer and use other programs such as Netscape and Java.\nAt the initial trial which began in 1998, the United States District Court for the District of Columbia ruled that Microsoft's actions constituted unlawful monopolization under Section 2 of the Sherman Antitrust Act of 1890, but the U.S. Court of Appeals for the D.C. Circuit partially overturned that judgment in 2001. The two parties later reached a settlement in which Microsoft agreed to modify some of its business practices.\nHistory.\nBy 1984 Microsoft was one of the most successful software companies, with $55\u00a0million in 1983 sales. \"InfoWorld\" wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;[Microsoft] is widely recognized as the most influential company in the microcomputer-software industry. Claiming more than a million installed MS-DOS machines, founder and chairman Bill Gates has decided to certify Microsoft's jump on the rest of the industry by dominating applications, operating systems, peripherals and, most recently, book publishing. Some insiders say Microsoft is attempting to be the IBM of the software industry.\nAlthough Gates says that he isn't trying to dominate the industry with sheer numbers, his strategy for dominance involves Microsoft's new Windows operating system ... \"Our strategies and energies as a company are totally committed to Windows, in the same way that we're committed to operating-system kernels like MS-DOS and Xenix,\" says Gates. \"We're also saying that only applications that take advantage of Windows will be competitive in the long run.\"\nSoftletter estimated that in 1986 Microsoft had 8% (more than $250 million) of total revenue of the top 100 microcomputer software companies. Of the 15 million Americans who used a personal computer in their job, more than 90% used MS-DOS. By 1987, Richard A. Shaffer of \"Technologic Computer Letter\" compared the company's dominance of operating systems, and consequent benefit to its application software, to a baseball game in which \"Microsoft owns all the bats and the field\". The Federal Trade Commission began an inquiry in 1990 over whether Microsoft was abusing its monopoly in the PC operating system market. The commissioners deadlocked with a 2\u20132 vote in 1993 and closed the investigation, but the Department of Justice (DOJ), led by Janet Reno, opened its own investigation later that year, resulting in a settlement on July 15, 1994, in which Microsoft consented not to tie other Microsoft products to the sale of Windows but remained free to integrate additional features into the operating system. In the years that followed, Microsoft insisted that Internet Explorer (IE) was not a \"product\" but a \"feature\" that it was allowed to add to Windows, although the DOJ did not agree with this definition.\nThe government alleged that Microsoft had abused monopoly power on Intel-based personal computers in its handling of operating system and web browser integration. The central issue was whether Microsoft was allowed to bundle its IE web browser software with its Windows operating system. Bundling the two products was allegedly a key factor in Microsoft's victory in the browser wars of the late 1990s, as every Windows user had a copy of IE. It was further alleged that this restricted the market for competing web browsers (such as Netscape Navigator or Opera), since it typically took extra time to buy and install the competing browsers. Underlying these disputes were questions of whether Microsoft had manipulated its application programming interfaces to favor IE over third-party browsers. The government also questioned Microsoft's conduct in enforcing restrictive licensing agreements with original equipment manufacturers who were required to include that arrangement.\nMicrosoft argued that the merging of Windows and IE was the result of innovation and competition, that the two were now the same product and inextricably linked, and that consumers were receiving the benefits of IE for free. Opponents countered that IE was still a separate product that did not need to be tied to Windows, since a separate version of IE was available for Mac OS. They also asserted that IE was not really free because its development and marketing costs may have inflated the price of Windows.\nBill Gates himself denied that Microsoft was a monopoly, stating \"Microsoft follows the rules. Microsoft is subject to the rules.\" He further compared the situation with IBM thirty years prior: \"People who feared IBM were wrong. Technology is ever-changing.\"\nDistrict Court trial.\nThe case was initially tried before Judge Thomas Penfield Jackson at the United States District Court for the District of Columbia. The suit began on May 18, 1998, with the Department of Justice joined by the Attorneys General of twenty U.S. states and the District of Columbia. The case organized by the Department of Justice was focused less on interoperability, and more on predatory strategies and market barriers to entry; the DOJ built upon the allegation that Microsoft forced computer makers to include its web browser as a part of the installation of Windows software. \nBill Gates was called \"evasive and nonresponsive\" by a source present at his videotaped deposition. He argued over the definitions of words such as \"compete\", \"concerned\", \"ask\", and \"we\"; certain portions of the proceeding would later provoke laughter from the judge when an excerpted version was shown in court. \"Businessweek\" reported that \"early rounds of his deposition show him offering obfuscatory answers and saying 'I don't recall' so many times that even the presiding judge had to chuckle. Many of Gates's denials and pleas of ignorance were directly refuted by prosecutors with snippets of e-mails Gates both sent and received.\" Intel Vice-president Steven McGeady, called as a witness, quoted Paul Maritz, a senior Microsoft vice president, as having stated an intention to \"extinguish\" and \"smother\" rival Netscape Communications Corporation and to \"cut off Netscape's air supply\" by giving away a clone of Netscape's flagship product for free.\nA number of videotapes were submitted as evidence by Microsoft during the trial, including one that demonstrated that removing Internet Explorer from Microsoft Windows caused slowdowns and malfunctions in Windows. In the videotaped demonstration of what then-Microsoft vice president Jim Allchin stated to be a seamless segment filmed on one PC, the government noticed that some icons mysteriously disappeared and reappeared on the PC's desktop, suggesting that the effects might have been falsified. Allchin admitted that the blame for the tape problems lay with some of his staff. \"They ended up filming it\u2014grabbing the wrong screen shot,\" he said of the incident. Later, Allchin re-ran the demonstration and provided a new videotape, but in so doing Microsoft dropped the claim that Windows is slowed down when IE is removed. Mark Murray, a Microsoft spokesperson, complained about the government attorneys \"nitpicking on issues like video production.\"Microsoft later submitted a second inaccurate videotape into evidence. The issue was how easy or difficult it was for America Online users to download and install Netscape Navigator onto a Windows PC. Microsoft's videotape showed the process as being quick and easy, resulting in the Netscape icon appearing on the user's desktop. The government produced its own videotape of the same process, revealing that Microsoft's videotape had conveniently removed a long and complex part of the procedure and that the Netscape icon was not placed on the desktop, requiring a user to search for it. Brad Chase, a Microsoft vice president, verified the government's tape and conceded that Microsoft's own tape was falsified.\nWhen the judge suggested that Microsoft offer a version of Windows that did not include Internet Explorer, Microsoft responded that the company would offer manufacturers a choice: one version of Windows that was obsolete, or another that did not work properly. The judge asked, \"It seemed absolutely clear to you that I entered an order that required that you distribute a product that would not work?\" David Cole, a Microsoft vice president, replied, \"In plain English, yes. We followed that order. It wasn't my place to consider the consequences of that.\"\nGates and his successor as CEO Steve Ballmer were so worried about the outcome of the case that they discussed leaving Microsoft \"if they really screw the company that badly, really just split it up in a totally irrational way,\" Gates recalled. Microsoft defended itself in the public arena, arguing that its attempts to \"innovate\" were under attack by rival companies jealous of its success, and that government prosecutors were merely their pawns. A full-page ad appeared in \"The Washington Post\" and \"The New York Times\" on June 2, 1999, created by a think tank called The Independent Institute. The ad was presented as \"An Open Letter to President Clinton from 240 Economists on Antitrust Protectionism.\" It said in part, \"Consumers did not ask for these antitrust actions \u2013 rival business firms did. Consumers of high technology have enjoyed falling prices, expanding outputs, and a breathtaking array of new products and innovations. ... Increasingly, however, some firms have sought to handicap their rivals by turning to government for protection. Many of these cases are based on speculation about some vaguely specified consumer harm in some unspecified future, and many of the proposed interventions will weaken successful U.S. firms and impede their competitiveness abroad.\"\nJudgment.\nJudge Jackson issued his findings of fact on November 5, 1999, holding that Microsoft's dominance of the x86-based personal computer operating systems market constituted a monopoly, and that Microsoft had taken actions to crush threats to that monopoly, including applications from Apple, Java, Netscape, Lotus Software, RealNetworks, Linux, and others. On April 3, 2000, Jackson issued his conclusions of law, holding that Microsoft had engaged in monopolization, attempted monopolization, and tying in violation of Sections 1 and 2 of the Sherman Antitrust Act. \nOn June 7, 2000, the District Court ordered a breakup of Microsoft as its remedy. According to that judgment, Microsoft would have to be split into two separate units, one to produce the operating system and one to produce other software components. Microsoft immediately appealed the judgment to the D.C. Circuit Court of Appeals.\nAppeals Court decision.\nAfter Microsoft filed its appeal, the U.S. government and the states in the suit filed a petition for certiorari before judgment, a process that would skip the intermediate Circuit Court and send the case directly to the U.S. Supreme Court. Such an action is permitted by a section of the United States Code that gives the Supreme Court jurisdiction to hear direct appeals from the District Court level in certain antitrust cases initiated by the federal government, if \"the district judge who adjudicated the case enters an order stating that immediate consideration of the appeal by the Supreme Court is of general public importance in the administration of justice.\" The states also filed a petition for certiorari before judgment at the Supreme Court, requesting the same direct appeal process without going through the Circuit Court. The Supreme Court rejected these requests and sent the appeal to the D.C. Circuit Court.\nOn June 28, 2001, the Circuit Court overturned Judge Jackson's rulings against Microsoft. This was partly because Jackson had improperly discussed the case with the news media while it was still in progress, violating the code of conduct for American judges. The Circuit Court judges accused Jackson of unethical conduct and determined that he should have recused himself from the case. Thus the Circuit Court adopted a \"drastically altered scope of liability\" due to Jackson's conduct, which was favorable for Microsoft. \nJackson's response was that Microsoft's conduct itself was the cause of any \"perceived bias\"; Microsoft executives had, according to him, \"proved, time and time again, to be inaccurate, misleading, evasive, and transparently false. ... Microsoft is a company with an institutional disdain for both the truth and for rules of law that lesser entities must respect. It is also a company whose senior management is not averse to offering specious testimony to support spurious defenses to claims of its wrongdoing.\" \nUltimately, the Circuit Court overturned Jackson's holding that Microsoft should be broken up as an illegal monopoly. However, the Circuit Court did not overturn Jackson's findings of fact, and held that traditional antitrust analysis was not equipped to consider software-related practices like browser tie-ins. The case was remanded back to the D.C. District Court for further proceedings on this matter, with Judge Colleen Kollar-Kotelly presiding.\nSettlement.\nThe Department of Justice announced on September 6, 2001 that it was no longer seeking to break up Microsoft and would instead seek a lesser antitrust penalty. Microsoft decided to draft a settlement proposal allowing PC manufacturers to adopt non-Microsoft software.\nOn November 1, 2001, the DOJ reached an agreement with Microsoft to settle the case. The proposed settlement required Microsoft to share its application programming interfaces with third-party companies and appoint a panel of three investigators who would have full access to Microsoft's systems, records, and source code for five years in order to ensure compliance. However, the DOJ did not require Microsoft to change any of its code nor did it prevent Microsoft from tying other software with Windows in the future. On August 5, 2002, Microsoft announced that it would make some concessions towards the proposed final settlement ahead of the judge's decision. On November 1, 2002, Judge Kollar-Kotelly released a ruling that accepted most of the proposed DOJ settlement. Nine states and the District of Columbia (which had been pursuing the case together with the DOJ) did not agree with the settlement, arguing that it did not go far enough to curb Microsoft's anti-competitive business practices. On June 30, 2004, the D.C. Circuit Court approved the settlement with the Justice Department, rejecting the states' claims that the sanctions were inadequate.\nIn its 2008 Annual Report, Microsoft stated:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Lawsuits brought by the U.S. Department of Justice, 18 states, and the District of Columbia in two separate actions were resolved through a Consent Decree that took effect in 2001 and a Final Judgment entered in 2002. These proceedings imposed various constraints on our Windows operating system businesses. These constraints include limits on certain contracting practices, mandated disclosure of certain software program interfaces and protocols, and rights for computer manufacturers to limit the visibility of certain Windows features in new PCs. We believe we are in full compliance with these rules. However, if we fail to comply with them, additional restrictions could be imposed on us that would adversely affect our business.Microsoft's obligations under the settlement, as originally drafted, expired on November 12, 2007. However, Microsoft later \"agreed to consent to a two-year extension of part of the Final Judgments\" dealing with communications protocol licensing, and stated that if the government later wished to extend those aspects of the settlement as far as 2012, it would not object. The government made clear that the extension was intended only to give the relevant part of the settlement \"the opportunity to succeed for the period of time it was intended to cover,\" rather than being due to any \"pattern of willful and systematic violations.\"\nImpact and criticism.\nAfter the 2002 settlement, industry pundit Robert X. Cringely believed a breakup was not possible, and that \"now the only way Microsoft can die is by suicide.\" Andrew Chin, an antitrust law professor at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill who assisted Judge Jackson in drafting the findings of fact at the initial District Court trial, wrote that the settlement gave Microsoft \"a special antitrust immunity to license Windows and other 'platform software' under contractual terms that destroy freedom of competition.\" Law professor Eben Moglen noted that the way Microsoft was required to disclose its APIs and protocols was useful only for \u201cinteroperating with a Windows Operating System Product\u201d, not for implementing support of those APIs and protocols in any competing operating system.\nEconomist Milton Friedman wrote in 1999 that the antitrust case against Microsoft set a dangerous precedent that foreshadowed increasing government regulation of an industry that had been relatively free of government intrusion, and that future technological progress in the industry will be impeded as a result. After the resulting settlement, the magazine \"Business &amp; Economic Research\" wrote that, contrary to Friedman's forecasts, the case had to that point had little effect on Microsoft's behavior. The fines, restrictions, and monitoring imposed were not enough to prevent it from \"abusing its monopolistic power and too little to prevent it from dominating the software and operating system industry.\" For that reason, Microsoft remained dominant and monopolistic after the trial, and it continued to stifle competitors and innovative technology.\nRichard Stallman, founder of the Free Software Foundation, advocating for computing freedom, provided suggestions to Ralph Nader's Consumer Project on Technology for dealing with Microsoft's behavior in March 1999. He has suggested, for instance, that Microsoft should be required to publish complete documentation of all interfaces between software components, all communications protocols, and all files. In short, the company should not release any implementations for undocumented interfaces. Stallman also noted that Microsoft should refrain from certifying any hardware as compatible with Microsoft software, unless the hardware's complete specifications have been published, so that an alternative software to support the same hardware can be implemented freely.\nChris Butts, writing in the \"Northwestern Journal of Technology and Intellectual Property\", argued that the U.S. government recognized the benefits of including a web browser with an operating system. At the appellate level, the government dropped the claim of tying given that\u2014as laid out in Section 1 of the Sherman Act\u2014it would have had to prove that more harm than good resulted from the type of tying carried out by Microsoft.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20771", "revid": "47988270", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20771", "title": "Mercator projection", "text": "Cylindrical conformal map projection\nThe Mercator projection () is a conformal cylindrical map projection first presented by Flemish geographer and mapmaker Gerardus Mercator in 1569. In the 18th century, it became the standard map projection for navigation due to its property of representing rhumb lines as straight lines. When applied to world maps, the Mercator projection inflates the size of lands the farther they are from the equator. Therefore, landmasses such as Greenland and Antarctica appear far larger than they actually are relative to landmasses near the equator. Nowadays the Mercator projection is widely used because, aside from marine navigation, it is well suited for internet web maps.\nHistory.\nJoseph Needham, a historian of China, speculated that some star charts of the Chinese Song dynasty may have been drafted on the Mercator projection; however, this claim was presented without evidence, and astronomical historian Kazuhiko Miyajima concluded using cartometric analysis that these charts used an equirectangular projection instead.\nIn the 13th century, the earliest extant portolan charts of the Mediterranean sea, which are generally not believed to be based on any deliberate map projection, included windrose networks of criss-crossing lines which could be used to help set a ship's bearing in sailing between locations on the chart; the region of Earth covered by such charts was small enough that a course of constant bearing would be approximately straight on the chart. The charts have startling accuracy not found in the maps constructed by contemporary European or Arab scholars, and their construction remains enigmatic; based on cartometric analysis which seems to contradict the scholarly consensus, they have been speculated to have originated in some unknown pre-medieval cartographic tradition, possibly evidence of some ancient understanding of the Mercator projection.\nGerman polymath Erhard Etzlaub engraved miniature \"compass maps\" (about 10\u00d78\u00a0cm) of Europe and parts of Africa that spanned latitudes 0\u00b0\u201367\u00b0 to allow adjustment of his portable pocket-size sundials. The projection found on these maps, dating to 1511, was stated by John Snyder in 1987 to be the same projection as Mercator's. However, given the geometry of a sundial, these maps may well have been based on the similar central cylindrical projection, a limiting case of the gnomonic projection, which is the basis for a sundial. Snyder amended his assessment to \"a similar projection\" in 1993.\nPortuguese mathematician and cosmographer Pedro Nunes first described the mathematical principle of the rhumb line or loxodrome, a path with constant bearing as measured relative to true north, which can be used in marine navigation to pick which compass bearing to follow. In 1537, he proposed constructing a nautical atlas composed of several large-scale sheets in the equirectangular projection as a way to minimize distortion of directions. If these sheets were brought to the same scale and assembled, they would approximate the Mercator projection.\nIn 1541, Flemish geographer and mapmaker Gerardus Mercator included a network of rhumb lines on a terrestrial globe he made for Nicolas Perrenot.\nIn 1569, Mercator announced a new projection by publishing a large world map measuring and printed in eighteen separate sheets. Mercator titled the map : \"A new and augmented description of Earth corrected for the use of sailors\". This title, along with an elaborate explanation for using the projection that appears as a section of text on the map, shows that Mercator understood exactly what he had achieved and that he intended the projection to aid navigation. Mercator never explained the method of construction or how he arrived at it. Various hypotheses have been tendered over the years, but in any case Mercator's friendship with Pedro Nunes and his access to the loxodromic tables Nunes created likely aided his efforts.\nEnglish mathematician Edward Wright published the first accurate tables for constructing the projection in 1599 and, in more detail, in 1610, calling his treatise \"Certaine Errors in Navigation\". The first mathematical formulation was publicized around 1645 by a mathematician named Henry Bond (c.\u20091600\u20131678). However, the mathematics involved were developed but never published by mathematician Thomas Harriot starting around 1589.\nThe development of the Mercator projection represented a major breakthrough in the nautical cartography of the 16th century. However, it was much ahead of its time, since the old navigational and surveying techniques were not compatible with its use in navigation. Two main problems prevented its immediate application: the impossibility of determining the longitude at sea with adequate accuracy and the fact that magnetic directions, instead of geographical directions, were used in navigation. Only in the middle of the 18th century, after the marine chronometer was invented and the spatial distribution of magnetic declination was known, could the Mercator projection be fully adopted by navigators.\nDespite those position-finding limitations, the Mercator projection can be found in many world maps in the centuries following Mercator's first publication. However, it did not begin to dominate world maps until the 19th century, when the problem of position determination had been largely solved. Once the Mercator became the usual projection for commercial and educational maps, it came under persistent criticism from cartographers for its unbalanced representation of landmasses and its inability to usefully show the polar regions.\nThe criticisms leveled against inappropriate use of the Mercator projection resulted in a flurry of new inventions in the late 19th and early 20th century, often directly touted as alternatives to the Mercator. Due to these pressures, publishers gradually reduced their use of the projection over the course of the 20th century. However, the advent of Web mapping gave the projection an abrupt resurgence in the form of the Web Mercator projection.\nToday, the Mercator can be found in marine charts, occasional world maps, and Web mapping services, but commercial atlases have largely abandoned it, and wall maps of the world can be found in many alternative projections. Google Maps, which relied on it since 2005, still uses it for local-area maps but dropped the projection from desktop platforms in 2017 for maps that are zoomed out of local areas. Many other online mapping services still exclusively use the Web Mercator.\nProperties.\nThe Mercator projection can be visualized as the result of wrapping a cylinder tightly around a sphere, with the two surfaces \"tangent\" to (touching) each other along a circle halfway between the poles of their common axis, and then conformally unfolding the surface of the sphere outward onto the cylinder, meaning that at each point the projection uniformly scales the image of a small portion of the spherical surface without otherwise distorting it, preserving angles between intersecting curves. Afterward, this cylinder is unrolled onto a flat plane to make a map. In this interpretation, the scale of the surface is preserved exactly along the circle where the cylinder touches the sphere, but increases nonlinearly for points further from the contact circle. However, by uniformly shrinking the resulting flat map, as a final step, any pair of circles parallel to and equidistant from the contact circle can be chosen to have their scale preserved, called the \"standard parallels\"; then the region between chosen circles will have its scale smaller than on the sphere, reaching a minimum at the contact circle. This is sometimes visualized as a projection onto a cylinder which is \"secant\" to (cuts) the sphere, though this picture is misleading insofar as the standard parallels are not spaced the same distance apart on the map as the shortest distance between them through the interior of the sphere.\nThe original and most common aspect of the Mercator projection for maps of Earth is the normal aspect, for which the axis of the cylinder is Earth's axis of rotation which passes through the North and South poles, and the contact circle is Earth's equator. As for all cylindrical projections in normal aspect, circles of latitude and meridians of longitude are straight and perpendicular to each other on the map, forming a grid of rectangles. While circles of latitude on Earth are smaller the closer they are to the poles, they are stretched in an East\u2013West direction to have uniform length on any cylindrical map projection. Among cylindrical projections, the Mercator projection is the unique projection which balances this East\u2013West stretching by a precisely corresponding North\u2013South stretching, so that at every location the scale is locally uniform and angles are preserved.\nThe Mercator projection in normal aspect maps trajectories of constant bearing (called \"rhumb lines\" or \"loxodromes\") on a sphere to straight lines on the map, and is thus uniquely suited to marine navigation: courses and bearings are measured using a compass rose or protractor, and the corresponding directions are easily transferred from point to point, on the map, e.g. with the help of a parallel ruler.\nBecause the linear scale of a Mercator map in normal aspect increases with latitude, it distorts the size of geographical objects far from the equator and conveys a distorted perception of the overall geometry of the planet. At latitudes greater than 70\u00b0 north or south, the Mercator projection is practically unusable, because the linear scale becomes infinitely large at the poles. A Mercator map can therefore never fully show the polar areas (but see Uses below for applications of the oblique and transverse Mercator projections).\nThe Mercator projection is often compared to and confused with the central cylindrical projection, which is the result of projecting points from the sphere onto a tangent cylinder along straight radial lines, as if from a light source placed at Earth's center. Both have extreme distortion far from the equator and cannot show the poles. However, they are different projections and have different properties.\nDistortion of sizes.\nAs with all map projections, the shapes or sizes are distortions of the true layout of Earth's surface. The Mercator projection exaggerates areas far from the equator; the closer to Earth's poles, the greater the distortion.\nCriticism.\nBecause of great land area distortions, critics like George Kellaway and Irving Fisher consider the projection unsuitable for general world maps. It has been conjectured to have influenced people's views of the world: because it shows countries near the Equator as too small when compared to those of Europe and North America, it has been supposed to cause people to consider those countries as less important. Mercator himself used the equal-area sinusoidal projection to show relative areas. However, despite such criticisms, the Mercator projection was, especially in the late 19th and early 20th centuries, perhaps the most common projection used in world maps.\nAtlases largely stopped using the Mercator projection for world maps or for areas distant from the equator in the 1940s, preferring other cylindrical projections, or forms of equal-area projection. The Mercator projection is, however, still commonly used for areas near the equator where distortion is minimal. It is also frequently found in maps of time zones.\nArno Peters stirred controversy beginning in 1972 when he proposed what is now usually called the Gall\u2013Peters projection to remedy the problems of the Mercator, claiming it to be his own original work without referencing prior work by cartographers such as Gall's work from 1855. The projection he promoted is a specific parameterization of the cylindrical equal-area projection. In response, a 1989 resolution by seven North American geographical groups disparaged using cylindrical projections for general-purpose world maps, which would include both the Mercator and the Gall\u2013Peters.\nAs of 2025[ [update]] the African Union supports a campaign favoring the Equal Earth projection over the Mercator projection.\nUses.\nPractically every marine chart in print is based on the Mercator projection due to its uniquely favorable properties for navigation. It is also commonly used by street map services hosted on the Internet, due to its uniquely favorable properties for local-area maps computed on demand. Mercator projections were also important in the mathematical development of plate tectonics in the 1960s.\nMarine navigation.\nThe Mercator projection was designed for use in marine navigation because of its unique property of representing any course of constant bearing as a straight segment. Such a course, known as a rhumb (alternately called a rhumb line or loxodrome) is preferred in marine navigation because ships can sail in a constant compass direction. This reduces the difficult, error-prone course corrections that otherwise would be necessary when sailing a different course.\nFor small distances (compared to the radius of Earth), the difference between the rhumb and the great circle course is negligible. Even for longer distances, the simplicity of the constant bearing makes it attractive. As observed by Mercator, on such a course the ship would not arrive by the shortest route but it will surely arrive. Sailing a rhumb meant that all that the sailors had to do was keep a constant course as long as they knew where they were when they started, where they intended to be when they finished, and had a map in Mercator projection that correctly showed those two coordinates.\nWeb Mercator.\nMany major online street mapping services (Bing Maps, Google Maps, Mapbox, MapQuest, OpenStreetMap, Yahoo! Maps, and others) use a variant of the Mercator projection for their map images called Web Mercator or Google Web Mercator. Despite its obvious scale variation at the world level (small scales), the projection is well-suited as an interactive world map that can be zoomed seamlessly to local (large-scale) maps, where there is relatively little distortion due to the variant projection's near-conformality.\nThe major online street mapping services' tiling systems display most of the world at the lowest zoom level as a single square image, excluding the polar regions by truncation at latitudes of \"\u03c6\"max\u00a0=\u00a0\u00b185.05113\u00b0. (See below.) Latitude values outside this range are mapped using a different relationship that does not diverge at\u00a0\"\u03c6\"\u00a0=\u00a0\u00b190\u00b0.\nTransverse Mercator.\nA transverse Mercator projection tilts the cylinder axis so that it is perpendicular to Earth's axis. The tangent standard line then coincides with a meridian and its opposite meridian, giving a constant scale factor along those meridians and making the projection useful for mapping regions that are predominately north\u2013south in extent. In its more complex ellipsoidal form, most national grid systems around the world use the transverse Mercator, as does the Universal Transverse Mercator coordinate system.\nOblique Mercator.\nAn oblique Mercator projection tilts the cylinder axis away from Earth's axis to an angle of one's choosing, so that its tangent or secant lines of contact are circles that are also tilted relative to Earth's parallels of latitude. Practical uses for the oblique projection, such as national grid systems, use ellipsoidal developments of the oblique Mercator in order to keep scale variation low along the surface projection of the cylinder's axis.\nThe animation below shows a continuous transformation between the normal Mercator projection and the transverse projection, running through the intermediate oblique states. A rhumb line (blue) and great circle (red) from Tokyo, Japan, to Callao, Peru, change according to the projection's aspect. The rhumb between them is straight only on the normal projection. On one of the intermediate oblique projections, the great-circle path between the two cities is straight. In this plot the y-axis is always the projected axis of the cylinder. The sphere is rotated inside the cylinder to change aspect. Initially the axis is normal to the equator (projected as the thick green line) but ends transverse to it, when the projected equator extends to infinity in the vertical direction.\nMathematics.\nA simple expression for the spherical form of the Mercator projection is:\nformula_1\nwhere &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; is an arbitrary scale factor which determines the size of the resulting map, ln is the natural logarithm, and tan is the trigonometric tangent function.\nCylindrical projections.\nAlthough the surface of Earth is best modelled by an oblate ellipsoid of revolution, for small scale maps the ellipsoid is approximated by a sphere of radius \"a\", where \"a\" is approximately 6,371\u00a0km. This spherical approximation of Earth can be modelled by a smaller sphere of radius \"R\", called the \"globe\" in this section. The globe determines the scale of the map. The various cylindrical projections specify how the geographic detail is transferred from the globe to a cylinder tangential to it at the equator. The cylinder is then unrolled to give the planar map. The fraction is called the representative fraction (RF) or the principal scale of the projection. For example, a Mercator map printed in a book might have an equatorial width of 13.4\u00a0cm corresponding to a globe radius of 2.13\u00a0cm and an RF of approximately (M is used as an abbreviation for 1,000,000 in writing an RF) whereas Mercator's original 1569 map has a width of 198\u00a0cm corresponding to a globe radius of 31.5\u00a0cm and an RF of about .\nA cylindrical map projection is specified by formulae linking the geographic coordinates of latitude\u00a0\"\u03c6\" and longitude\u00a0\"\u03bb\" to Cartesian coordinates on the map with origin on the equator and \"x\"-axis along the equator. By construction, all points on the same meridian lie on the same \"generator\" of the cylinder at a constant value of \"x\", but the distance \"y\" along the generator (measured from the equator) is an arbitrary function of latitude, \"y\"(\"\u03c6\"). In general this function does not describe the geometrical projection (as of light rays onto a screen) from the centre of the globe to the cylinder, which is only one of an unlimited number of ways to conceptually project a cylindrical map.\nSince the cylinder is tangential to the globe at the equator, the scale factor between globe and cylinder is unity on the equator but nowhere else. In particular since the radius of a parallel, or circle of latitude, is \"R\"\u00a0cos\u00a0\"\u03c6\", the corresponding parallel on the map must have been stretched by a factor of \n sec \"\u03c6\". This scale factor on the parallel is conventionally denoted by \"k\" and the corresponding scale factor on the meridian is denoted by\u00a0\"h\".\nScale factor.\nThe Mercator projection is conformal. One implication of that is the \"isotropy of scale factors\", which means that the point scale factor is independent of direction, so that small shapes are preserved by the projection. This implies that the vertical scale factor, \"h\", equals the horizontal scale factor, \"k\". Since \"k\" = sec \"\u03c6\", so must \"h\".\nThe graph shows the variation of this scale factor with latitude. Some numerical values are listed below.\nat latitude 30\u00b0 the scale factor is\u00a0\u00a0 \"k\"\u00a0= sec\u00a030\u00b0\u00a0\u2248\u00a01.15,\nat latitude 45\u00b0 the scale factor is\u00a0\u00a0 \"k\"\u00a0= sec\u00a045\u00b0\u00a0\u2248\u00a01.41,\nat latitude 60\u00b0 the scale factor is\u00a0\u00a0 \"k\"\u00a0= sec\u00a060\u00b0\u00a0=\u00a02,\nat latitude 80\u00b0 the scale factor is\u00a0\u00a0 \"k\"\u00a0= sec\u00a080\u00b0\u00a0\u2248\u00a05.76,\nat latitude 85\u00b0 the scale factor is\u00a0\u00a0 \"k\"\u00a0= sec\u00a085\u00b0\u00a0\u2248\u00a011.5\nThe area scale factor is the product of the parallel and meridian scales \"hk\" \n sec2\"\u03c6\". For Greenland, taking 73\u00b0 as a median latitude, \"hk\" = 11.7. For Australia, taking 25\u00b0 as a median latitude, \"hk\" = 1.2. For Great Britain, taking 55\u00b0 as a median latitude, \"hk\" = 3.04.\nThe variation with latitude is sometimes indicated by multiple bar scales as shown below.\nThe classic way of showing the distortion inherent in a projection is to use Tissot's indicatrix. Nicolas Tissot noted that the scale factors at a point on a map projection, specified by the numbers \"h\" and \"k\", define an ellipse at that point. For cylindrical projections, the axes of the ellipse are aligned to the meridians and parallels. For the Mercator projection, \"h\"\u00a0=\u00a0\"k\", so the ellipses degenerate into circles with radius proportional to the value of the scale factor for that latitude. These circles are rendered on the projected map with extreme variation in size, indicative of Mercator's scale variations.\nMercator projection transformations.\nIntegral of the secant.\nAs discussed above, the isotropy condition implies that &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;. Consider a point on the globe of radius &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; with longitude &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; and latitude &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, expressed in radians. If &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; is increased by an infinitesimal amount &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, the point moves &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; along a meridian of the globe of radius &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, so the corresponding change in &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; is &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;. Therefore &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;. Similarly, increasing &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; by &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; moves the point &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; along a parallel of the globe, so &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;. That is, &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;. Integrating these two equations\nformula_2\nwith &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; and &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; gives\nformula_3\nThe value &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; is the longitude of an arbitrary central meridian, often the prime meridian &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;. The definite integral of the secant function up to an angle &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; is an associated hyperbolic angle called the \"anti-gudermannian\" or \"lambertian\" of &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;,\nformula_4\nThe vertical coordinate &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; was historically called the \"meridional part\" of &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;. In the figure, &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; is plotted against &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; for the case &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, such that it equals the anti-gudermannian of &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;; it tends to infinity at the poles. The numerical value of &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; is not usually shown on printed maps; some maps show a non-linear scale of latitudes, but more often than not maps show only a graticule of selected meridians and parallels.\nComplex logarithm.\nAs a conformal map, the Mercator projection can be conveniently expressed using a single complex number to represent each point on the sphere rather than a pair of real-number coordinates. The complex number representing each point on this so-called Riemann sphere is found by conformally mapping the sphere onto the complex plane via the stereographic projection. From there, the Mercator projection is just the complex logarithm, &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, a conformal map of the complex plane (with the exception of the origin, whose logarithm is undefined) onto a two-infinite-ended cylinder. Starting from geographic coordinates &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; in radians, the stereographic projection yields a complex number &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, with the North Pole mapped to the origin. Thus the following function &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; is a complex-valued Mercator projection of geographical coordinates:\nformula_5\nThe imaginary part of the resulting complex number represents the longitude and its real part represents the negative projected latitude. To better match prevailing conventions about the plotting of complex numbers and world maps it can be rotated a quarter turn and scaled arbitrarily by multiplying by a scaling factor &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;.\nInverse transformations.\nFinding the longitude as an inverse of the &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; coordinate is trivial. The latitude can be found as an inverse of &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; as the gudermannian of &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;.\nformula_6\nAlternative expressions.\nThere are many identities relating the circular angle &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; to its anti-gudermannian &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, a hyperbolic angle, which can be used to construct alternate expressions for the functions from one to the other. (See Gudermannian function.) For a real value of &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, a well-behaved expression for computation is:\nformula_7\nwhere sinh is the hyperbolic sine function. An alternative expression, valid throughout the complex plane, is\nformula_8\nwhere tanh is the hyperbolic tangent function.\nThe above formulae are written in terms of the globe radius &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;. It is often convenient to work directly with the map width &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, in terms of which, assuming the map shows the whole globe, &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;.\nTruncation and aspect ratio.\nThe ordinate \"y\" of the Mercator projection becomes infinite at the poles and the map must be truncated at some latitude less than ninety degrees. This need not be done symmetrically. Mercator's original map is truncated at 80\u00b0N and 66\u00b0S with the result that European countries were moved toward the centre of the map. The aspect ratio of his map is = 1.65. Even more extreme truncations have been used: a was truncated at approximately 76\u00b0N and 56\u00b0S, an aspect ratio of 1.97.\nMuch Web-based mapping uses a zoomable version of the Mercator projection with an aspect ratio of one. In this case the maximum latitude attained must correspond to \"y\"\u00a0=\u00a0\u00b1, or equivalently \u00a0=\u00a0\u03c0. Any of the inverse transformation formulae may be used to calculate the corresponding latitudes:\nformula_9\nSmall element geometry.\nThe relations between \"y\"(\"\u03c6\") and properties of the projection, such as the transformation of angles and the variation in scale, follow from the geometry of corresponding \"small\" elements on the globe and map. The figure below shows a point P at latitude\u00a0\"\u03c6\" and longitude\u00a0\"\u03bb\" on the globe and a nearby point Q at latitude \"\u03c6\"\u00a0+\u00a0\"\u03b4\u03c6\" and longitude \"\u03bb\"\u00a0+\u00a0\"\u03b4\u03bb\". The vertical lines PK and MQ are arcs of meridians of length \"R\u03b4\u03c6\". The horizontal lines PM and KQ are arcs of parallels of length \"R\"(cos\u00a0\"\u03c6\")\"\u03b4\u03bb\". The corresponding points on the projection define a rectangle of width\u00a0\"\u03b4x\" and height\u00a0\"\u03b4y\".\nFor small elements, the angle PKQ is approximately a right angle and therefore\nformula_10\nThe previously mentioned scaling factors from globe to cylinder are given by\n\"parallel scale factor\"\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0 formula_11\n\"meridian scale factor\"\u00a0\u00a0 formula_12\nSince the meridians are mapped to lines of constant \"x\", we must have \"x\" \n \"R\"(\"\u03bb\" \u2212 \"\u03bb\"0) and \"\u03b4x\"\u00a0=\u00a0\"R\u03b4\u03bb\", (\"\u03bb\" in radians). Therefore, in the limit of infinitesimally small elements\nformula_13\nIn the case of the Mercator projection, \"y\"'(\"\u03c6\") = \"R\" sec \"\u03c6\", so this gives us \"h\" = \"k\" and \"\u03b1\" = \"\u03b2\". The fact that \"h\" = \"k\" is the isotropy of scale factors discussed above. The fact that \"\u03b1\" = \"\u03b2\" reflects another implication of the mapping being conformal, namely the fact that a sailing course of constant azimuth on the globe is mapped into the same constant grid bearing on the map.\nFormulae for distance.\nConverting ruler distance on the Mercator map into true (great circle) distance on the sphere is straightforward along the equator, but not at other latitudes. One problem is the variation of scale with latitude. Another problem is that straight lines on the map (rhumb lines), other than the meridians or the equator, do not correspond to great circles.\nThe distinction between rhumb (sailing) distance and great circle (true) distance was understood by Mercator. (See Legend 12 on the 1569 map.) He asserted that the rhumb line distance is an acceptable approximation for true great circle distance for courses of short or moderate distance, particularly at lower latitudes. He quantified his statement: \"When the great circle distances which are to be measured in the vicinity of the equator do not exceed 20 degrees of a great circle, or 15 degrees near Spain and France, or 8 and even 10 degrees in northern parts it is convenient to use rhumb line distances\".\nFor a ruler measurement of a \"short\" line, with midpoint at latitude\u00a0\"\u03c6\", where the scale factor is \"k\"\u00a0=\u00a0sec\u00a0\"\u03c6\"\u00a0=\u00a0:\nTrue distance = rhumb distance \u2245 ruler distance \u00d7 cos\u00a0\"\u03c6\" / RF.\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0(short lines)\nWith radius and great circle circumference equal to 6,371\u00a0km and 40,030\u00a0km respectively an RF of , for which \"R\"\u00a0=\u00a02.12\u00a0cm and \"W\"\u00a0=\u00a013.34\u00a0cm, implies that a ruler measurement of 3\u00a0mm. in any direction from a point on the equator corresponds to approximately 900\u00a0km. The corresponding distances for latitudes 20\u00b0, 40\u00b0, 60\u00b0 and 80\u00b0 are 846\u00a0km, 689\u00a0km, 450\u00a0km and 156\u00a0km respectively.\nLonger distances require various approaches.\nOn the equator.\nScale is unity on the equator (for a non-secant projection). Therefore, interpreting ruler measurements on the equator is:\nTrue distance = ruler distance / RF \u00a0\u00a0\u00a0 (equator)\nFor the above model, with RF\u00a0=\u00a0, 1\u00a0cm corresponds to 3,000\u00a0km.\nOn other parallels.\nOn any other parallel the scale factor is sec \"\u03c6\" so that\nParallel distance = ruler distance \u00d7 cos\u00a0\"\u03c6\" / RF \u00a0\u00a0\u00a0 (parallel).\nFor the above model 1\u00a0cm corresponds to 1,500\u00a0km at a latitude of 60\u00b0.\nThis is not the shortest distance between the chosen endpoints on the parallel because a parallel is not a great circle. The difference is small for short distances but increases as \"\u03bb\", the longitudinal separation, increases. For two points, A and B, separated by 10\u00b0 of longitude on the parallel at 60\u00b0 the distance along the parallel is approximately 0.5\u00a0km greater than the great circle distance. (The distance AB along the parallel is (\"a\"\u00a0cos\u00a0\"\u03c6\")\u00a0\"\u03bb\". The length of the chord AB is 2(\"a\"\u00a0cos\u00a0\"\u03c6\")\u00a0sin\u00a0. This chord subtends an angle at the centre equal to 2arcsin(cos\u00a0\"\u03c6\"\u00a0sin\u00a0) and the great circle distance between A and B is 2\"a\"\u00a0arcsin(cos\u00a0\"\u03c6\"\u00a0sin\u00a0).) In the extreme case where the longitudinal separation is 180\u00b0, the distance along the parallel is one half of the circumference of that parallel; i.e., 10,007.5\u00a0km. On the other hand, the geodesic between these points is a great circle arc through the pole subtending an angle of 60\u00b0 at the center: the length of this arc is one sixth of the great circle circumference, about 6,672\u00a0km. The difference is 3,338\u00a0km so the ruler distance measured from the map is quite misleading even after correcting for the latitude variation of the scale factor.\nOn a meridian.\nA meridian of the map is a great circle on the globe but the continuous scale variation means ruler measurement alone cannot yield the true distance between distant points on the meridian. However, if the map is marked with an accurate and finely spaced latitude scale from which the latitude may be read directly\u2014as is the case for the Mercator 1569 world map (sheets 3, 9, 15) and all subsequent nautical charts\u2014the meridian distance between two latitudes \"\u03c6\"1 and \"\u03c6\"2 is simply\nformula_14\nIf the latitudes of the end points cannot be determined with confidence then they can be found instead by calculation on the ruler distance. Calling the ruler distances of the end points on the map meridian as measured from the equator \"y\"1 and \"y\"2, the true distance between these points on the sphere is given by using any one of the inverse Mercator formulae:\nformula_15\nwhere \"R\" may be calculated from the width \"W\" of the map by \"R\"\u00a0=\u00a0. For example, on a map with \"R\"\u00a0=\u00a01 the values of \"y\"\u00a0=\u00a00, 1, 2, 3 correspond to latitudes of \"\u03c6\"\u00a0=\u00a00\u00b0, 50\u00b0, 75\u00b0, 84\u00b0 and therefore the successive intervals of 1\u00a0cm on the map correspond to latitude intervals on the globe of 50\u00b0, 25\u00b0, 9\u00b0 and distances of 5,560\u00a0km, 2,780\u00a0km, and 1,000\u00a0km on Earth.\nOn a rhumb.\nA straight line on the Mercator map at angle \"\u03b1\" to the meridians is a rhumb line. When \"\u03b1\"\u00a0=\u00a0 or the rhumb corresponds to one of the parallels; only one, the equator, is a great circle. When \"\u03b1\"\u00a0=\u00a00 or \u03c0 it corresponds to a meridian great circle (if continued around the globe). For all other values it is a spiral from pole to pole on the globe intersecting all meridians at the same angle, and is thus not a great circle. This section discusses only the last of these cases.\nIf \"\u03b1\" is neither 0 nor \u03c0 then the above figure of the infinitesimal elements shows that the length of an infinitesimal rhumb line on the sphere between latitudes \"\u03c6\"; and \"\u03c6\"\u00a0+\u00a0\"\u03b4\u03c6\" is \"a\"\u00a0sec\u00a0\"\u03b1\"\u00a0\"\u03b4\u03c6\". Since \"\u03b1\" is constant on the rhumb this expression can be integrated to give, for finite rhumb lines on Earth:\nformula_16\nOnce again, if \u0394\"\u03c6\" may be read directly from an accurate latitude scale on the map, then the rhumb distance between map points with latitudes \"\u03c6\"1 and \"\u03c6\"2 is given by the above. If there is no such scale then the ruler distances between the end points and the equator, \"y\"1 and \"y\"2, give the result via an inverse formula:\nformula_17\nThese formulae give rhumb distances on the sphere which may differ greatly from true distances whose determination requires more sophisticated calculations.\nGeneralization to the ellipsoid.\nWhen Earth is modelled by a spheroid (ellipsoid of revolution) the Mercator projection must be modified if it is to remain conformal. The transformation equations and scale factor for the non-secant version are\nformula_18\nThe scale factor \"k\" is unity on the equator, as it must be since the cylinder is tangential to the ellipsoid at the equator. The ellipsoidal correction of the scale factor increases with latitude but it is never greater than \"e\"2, a correction of less than 1%. The value of \"e\"2 is about 0.006 for all reference ellipsoids. This is much smaller than the scale inaccuracy, except very close to the equator. Only accurate Mercator projections of regions near the equator will necessitate the ellipsoidal corrections.\nThe inverse is solved iteratively, as the isometric latitude is involved.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20775", "revid": "47120006", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20775", "title": "Midas", "text": "Mythological Greek king able to turn what he touches to gold\nMidas (; ) was a king of Phrygia with whom many myths became associated, as well as two later members of the Phrygian royal house.\nHis father was Gordias, and his mother was Cybele. The most famous King Midas is popularly remembered in Greek mythology for his ability to turn everything he touched into pure gold and this came to be called the \"golden touch\", or the \"Midas touch\". The legends told about this Midas and his adopted father Gordias, credited with founding the Phrygian capital city Gordium and tying the Gordian Knot, indicate that they were believed to have lived sometime in the 2nd millennium BCE, well before the Trojan War. However, Homer does not mention Midas or Gordias, while instead mentioning two other Phrygian kings, Mygdon and Otreus.\nMidaeium was presumably named after him, and this is probably also the Midas that according to Pausanias founded Ancyra (today known as Ankara).\nAnother King Midas ruled Phrygia in the late 8th century BCE. Most historians believe this Midas is the same person as the \"Mita\", called king of the Mushki in Assyrian texts, who warred with Assyria and its Anatolian provinces during the same period. A third Midas is said by Herodotus to have been a member of the royal house of Phrygia in the 6th century BCE.\nMythological Midas.\nThere are many, and often contradictory, legends about the most ancient King Midas. In one, Midas was king of Pessinus, a city of Phrygia, who as a child was adopted by King Gordias and Cybele, the goddess whose consort he was, and who (by some accounts) was the goddess-mother of Midas himself. Some accounts place the youth of Midas in Macedonian Bermion (see Bryges). In Thracian Mygdonia, Herodotus referred to a wild rose garden at the foot of Mount Bermion as \"the garden of Midas son of Gordias, where roses grow of themselves, each bearing sixty blossoms and of surpassing fragrance\". Herodotus says elsewhere that Phrygians lived in ancient Europe, where they were known as Bryges, and the existence of the garden implies that Herodotus believed that Midas lived prior to a Phrygian migration to Anatolia.\nAccording to some accounts, Midas had a son, Lityerses, the demonic reaper of men. According to other accounts he had a son named Anchurus.\nArrian gives an alternative story of the descent and life of Midas. According to him, Midas was the son of Gordios, a poor peasant, and a Telmissian maiden of the prophetic race. When Midas grew up to be a handsome and valiant man, the Phrygians were harassed by civil discord, and consulting the oracle, they were told that a wagon would bring them a king, who would put an end to their discord. While they were still deliberating, Midas arrived with his father and mother, and stopped near the assembly, wagon and all. They, comparing the oracular response with this occurrence, decided that this was the person whom the god told them the wagon would bring. They therefore appointed Midas king and he, putting an end to their discord, dedicated his father\u2019s wagon in the citadel as a thank-offering to Zeus the king. In addition to this the following saying was current concerning the wagon, that whosoever could loosen the cord of the yoke of this wagon, was destined to gain the rule of Asia. This someone was to be Alexander the Great. In other versions of the legend, it was Midas's father Gordias who arrived humbly in the cart and made the Gordian Knot.\nHerodotus said that a \"Midas son of Gordias\" made an offering to the Oracle of Delphi of a royal throne \"from which he made judgments\" that were \"well worth seeing\", and that this Midas was the only foreigner to make an offering to Delphi before Gyges of Lydia. The historical Midas of the 8th century BCE and Gyges of Lydia are believed to have been contemporaries, so it seems most likely that Herodotus believed that the throne was donated by the earlier, legendary King Midas. However, some historians believe that this throne was donated by the later, historical King Midas, great grandfather of Alyattes of Lydia who was also referred to as Midas after amassing huge wealth from inventing taxable coinage using electrum sourced from Midas's famed river Pactolus.\nGolden Touch.\nOne day, as Ovid relates in \"Metamorphoses\" XI, Dionysus found that his old schoolmaster and foster father, the satyr Silenus, was missing. The old satyr had been drinking wine and wandered away drunk, to be found by some Phrygian peasants who carried him to their king, Midas (alternatively, Silenus passed out in Midas's rose garden). Midas recognized him and treated him hospitably, entertaining him for ten days and nights with politeness, while Silenus delighted Midas and his friends with stories and songs. On the eleventh day, he took Silenus back to Dionysus in Lydia. Dionysus offered Midas his choice of whatever reward he wished for. Midas asked that whatever he might touch should be changed into gold.\nMidas rejoiced in his new power, which he hastened to put to the test. He touches an oak twig and a stone; both turned to gold. Overjoyed, as soon as he got home, he touched every rose in the rose garden, and all became gold. He ordered the servants to set a feast on the table. Upon discovering how even the food and drink turned into gold in his hands, he regretted his wish and cursed it. Claudian states in his \"In Rufinum\": \"So Midas, king of Lydia, swelled at first with pride when he found he could transform everything he touched to gold; but when he beheld his food grow rigid and his drink harden into golden ice then he understood that this gift was a bane and in his loathing for gold, cursed his prayer.\"\nIn a version told by Nathaniel Hawthorne in \"A Wonder-Book for Girls and Boys\" (1852), Midas's daughter came to him, upset about the roses that had lost their fragrance and become hard, and when he reached out to comfort her, he found that when he touched his daughter, she turned to gold as well. Now, Midas hated the gift he had coveted. He prayed to Dionysus, begging to be delivered from starvation. Dionysus heard his prayer, and consented; telling Midas to wash in the river Pactolus. Then, whatever he put into the water would be reversed of the touch.\nMidas did so, and when he touched the waters, the power flowed into the river, and the river sands turned into gold. This explained why the river Pactolus was so rich in gold and electrum, and the wealth of the dynasty of Alyattes of Lydia claiming Midas as its forefather no doubt the impetus for this origin myth. Gold was perhaps not the only metallic source of Midas's riches: \"King Midas, a Phrygian, son of Cybele, first discovered black and white lead\".\nHowever, according to Aristotle, legend held that Midas eventually died of starvation as a result of his \"vain prayer\" for the gold touch, the curse never being lifted.\nEars of a donkey.\nMidas, now hating wealth and splendor, moved to the country and became a worshipper of Pan, the god of the fields and satyrs. Roman mythographers asserted that his tutor in music was Orpheus.\nOnce, Pan had the audacity to compare his music with that of Apollo, and challenged Apollo to a trial of skill (also see Marsyas). Tmolus, the mountain-god, was chosen as umpire. Pan blew on his pipes and, with his rustic melody, gave great satisfaction to himself and his faithful follower, Midas, who happened to be present. Then Apollo struck the strings of his lyre. Tmolus at once awarded the victory to Apollo, and all but one agreed with the judgment. Midas dissented, and questioned the justice of the award. Apollo would not suffer such a depraved pair of ears any longer, and said \"Must have ears of an ass!\", which caused Midas's ears to become those of a donkey. The myth is illustrated by two paintings, \"Apollo and Marsyas\" by Palma il Giovane (1544\u20131628), one depicting the scene before, and one after, the punishment. Midas was mortified at this mishap. He attempted to hide his misfortune under an ample turban or headdress, but his barber of course knew the secret, so was told not to mention it. However, the barber could not keep the secret. He went out into a meadow, dug a hole in the ground, whispered the story into it, then covered the hole up. A thick bed of reeds later sprang up from the covered up hole, and began whispering the story, saying \"King Midas has an ass's ears\". Some sources, such as Plutarch, say that Midas committed suicide by drinking bull's blood, a powdered crystal substance which was used in the ancient world as pigment for red paint, but very toxic due to its high level of arsenic.\nSarah Morris demonstrated (Morris, 2004) that donkeys' ears were a Bronze Age royal attribute, borne by King Tarkasnawa (Greek Tarkondemos) of Mira, on a seal inscribed in both Hittite cuneiform and Luwian hieroglyphs. In this connection, the myth would appear for Greeks to justify the exotic attribute.\nThe stories of the contests with Apollo of Pan and Marsyas were very often confused, so Titian's \"Flaying of Marsyas\" includes a figure of Midas (who may be a self-portrait), though his ears seem normal.\nSimilar myths in other cultures.\nIn pre-Islamic legend of Central Asia, the king of the Ossounes of the Yenisei basin had donkey's ears. He would hide them, and order each of his barbers murdered to hide his secret. The last barber among his people was counselled to whisper the heavy secret into a well after sundown, but he didn't cover the well afterwards. The well water rose and flooded the kingdom, creating the waters of Lake Issyk-Kul.\nAccording to an Irish legend, the king Labraid Loingsech had horse/donkeys's ears, something he was concerned to keep quiet. He had his hair cut once a year, and the barber, who was chosen by lot, was immediately put to death. A widow, hearing that her only son had been chosen to cut the king's hair, begged the king not to kill him, and he agreed, so long as the barber kept his secret. The burden of the secret was so heavy that the barber fell ill. A druid advised him to go to a crossroads and tell his secret to the first tree he came to, and he would be relieved of his burden and be well again. He told the secret to a large willow. Soon after this, however, a harper named Craiftine broke his instrument, and made a new one out of the very willow the barber had told his secret to. Whenever he played it, the harp sang \"Labraid Lorc has horse's ears\". Labraid repented of all the barbers he had put to death and admitted his secret.\nIn Ireland, at Loch Ine, West Cork, there is a similar story told of the inhabitant of its island, who had ass's ears. Anyone engaged to cut this King's hair was then put to death. But the reeds (in the form of a musical flute) spoke of them and the secret was out.\nThe myth is also known in Brittany where the king Mark of Cornwall is believed to have ruled the south-western region of Cornouaille. Chasing a white doe, he loses his best horse \"Morvarc'h\" (\"Seahorse\") when the doe kills it with an arrow thrown by Mark. Trying to kill the doe, he is cursed by Dahut, a magician who lives under the sea. She gives life to Morvarc'h back but switches his ears and mane with Mark's ears and hair. Worried that the word might get out, Mark hides in his castle and kills every barber that comes to cut his hair until his milk brother Yeun is the last barber alive in Cornouaille. He promises to let him live if Yeun keeps the secret and Yeun cuts his hairs with a magical pair of scissors. The secret is too heavy for Yeun though and he goes to a beach to dig a hole and tell his secret in it. When he leaves, three reeds appear. Years later, when Mark's sister marries, the musicians are unable to play for the reeds of their bagpipes and bombards have been stolen by korrigans. They find three reeds on the beach and use them to make new ones, but the music instruments, instead of playing music, only sing \"The King Mark has the ears and the mane of his horse Morvarc'h on his head\" and Mark departs never to be seen again.\nMidas (8th century BCE).\nAnother King Midas ruled Phrygia in the late 8th century BCE, up until the sacking of Gordium by the Cimmerians, when he is said to have committed suicide. Most historians believe this Midas is the same person as the \"Mita\", called king of the Mushki in Assyrian texts, who warred with Assyria and its Anatolian provinces during the same period.\nThe King Midas who ruled Phrygia in the late 8th century BCE is known from Greek and Assyrian sources. According to the former, he married a Greek princess, Damodice, daughter of Agamemnon of Cyme, and traded extensively with the Greeks. Damodice is credited with inventing coined money by Julius Pollux after she married Midas. Some historians believe this Midas donated the throne that Herodotus says was offered to the Oracle of Delphi by \"Midas son of Gordias\" (see above). Assyrian tablets from the reign of Sargon II record attacks by a \"Mita\", king of the Mushki, against Assyria's eastern Anatolian provinces. Some historians believe Assyrian texts called this Midas king of the \"Mushki\" because he had subjected the eastern Anatolian people of that name and incorporated them into his army. Greek sources including Strabo say that Midas committed suicide by drinking bull's blood during an attack by the Cimmerians, which Eusebius dated to around 695 BCE and Julius Africanus to around 676 BCE. Archeology has confirmed that Gordium was destroyed and burned around that time.\nPossible tomb.\nIn 1957, Rodney Young and a team from the University of Pennsylvania opened a chamber tomb at the heart of the Great Tumulus (in Greek, \u039c\u03b5\u03b3\u03ac\u03bb\u03b7 \u03a4\u03bf\u03cd\u03bc\u03c0\u03b1)\u201453\u00a0metres in height, about 300\u00a0metres in diameter\u2014on the site of ancient Gordion (modern Yass\u0131h\u00fcy\u00fck, Turkey), where there are more than 100 tumuli of different sizes and from different periods. They discovered a royal burial, its timbers dated as cut to about 740 BCE complete with remains of the funeral feast and \"the best collection of Iron Age drinking vessels ever uncovered\". This inner chamber was rather large: 5.15\u00a0metres by 6.2\u00a0metres in breadth and 3.25\u00a0metres high. On the remains of a wooden coffin in the northwest corner of the tomb lay a skeleton of a man 1.59\u00a0metres in height and about 60 years old. In the tomb were found an ornate inlaid table, two inlaid serving stands, and eight other tables, as well as bronze and pottery vessels and bronze fibulae. Although no identifying texts were originally associated with the site, it was called Tumulus MM (for \"Midas Mound\") by the excavator. As this funerary monument was erected before the traditional date given for the death of King Midas in the early 7th century BCE, it is now generally thought to have covered the burial of his father.\nMidas (6th century BCE).\nA third Midas is said by Herodotus to have been a member of the royal house of Phrygia and the grandfather of Adrastus, son of Gordias who fled Phrygia after accidentally killing his brother and took asylum in Lydia during the reign of Croesus. Phrygia was by that time a Lydian subject. Herodotus says that Croesus regarded the Phrygian royal house as \"friends\" but does not mention whether the Phrygian royal house still ruled as (vassal) kings of Phrygia.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20778", "revid": "22831189", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20778", "title": "Misandry", "text": "Prejudice against, or hatred of, men\nMisandry () is the hatred of or prejudice against men or boys.\nMen's rights activists (MRAs) and other masculinist groups have characterized modern laws concerning divorce, domestic violence, conscription, circumcision (known as male genital mutilation by opponents), and treatment of male rape victims as examples of institutional misandry. However, in virtually all societies, misandry lacks institutional and systemic support comparable to misogyny, the hatred of women.\nIn the Internet Age, users posting on manosphere internet forums within 4chan and Reddit addressing men's rights activism have claimed that misandry is widespread, established in preferential treatment of women, and shown by discrimination against men.\nMRAs have been criticised for promoting a false equivalence between misandry and misogyny,132 as part of an antifeminist backlash. A 2023 research article, which combined multiple studies conducted by the authors, found that feminists are no more likely to be misandrist than other groups, including non-feminist men and women. The authors coined the term \"The Misandry Myth\" to describe the popular notion that misandry is commonplace among feminists.\nEtymology and usage.\n\"Misandry\" is formed from the Greek ( 'hatred') and , (, gen. 'man'). A \"misandrist\" is a person who hates men. \"Misandrous\" or \"misandrist\" can also be used as adjectives. Use of \"misandrist\" can be found as far back as an 1871 article in \"The Spectator\" magazine.\nTranslation of the French to the German (Hatred of Men) is recorded in 1803.\nHistory.\nThe term \"misandry\" originated in the late 19th century. According to information policy scholars Alice Marwick and Robyn Caplan, the term was used as a synonym for feminism from its inception, drawing an equivalence between misandry ('man-hating') and misogyny ('woman-hating'). Newspapers in the 1890s occasionally referred to feminist \"new women\" as \"man haters\", and a 1928 article in \"Harper's Monthly\" said that misandry \"distorts the more querulous of [modern] feminist arguments.\" The term re-emerged in men's rights literature and academic literature on structural sexism in the 1980s. It was in use on Usenet since at least 1989, and on websites and blogs dedicated to men's rights issues in the late 1990s and early 2000s.\nAnthropologist David D. Gilmore coined the term \"viriphobia\" in 1997, when the term \"misandry\" was little used and there was no commonly accepted term for hatred of men. He writes that such terms as \"misandry\" typically refer not to hatred of men as men, but to hatred of \"machismo\" or men's traditional gender role. He argues that misandry is therefore not equivalent to misogyny, which \"targets women no matter what they believe or do\". Gilmore says that hatred of men as men is extremely rare in historical records, in sharp contrast to misogyny, which he argues is a \"near-universal phenomenon\".\nMarwick and Caplan argue that usage of the term \"misandry\" in the internet age is an outgrowth of misogyny and antifeminism. The term is commonly used in the manosphere, such as on men's rights discussion forums on websites such as 4chan and Reddit, to counter feminist accusations of misogyny. The critique and parody of the concept of misandry by feminist bloggers has been reported on in periodicals such as \"The Guardian\", \"Slate\" and \"Time\".\nUse by the men's rights movement.\nMen's rights activists (MRAs) invoke the idea of misandry in warning against what they see as the advance of a female-dominated society. The idea of feminism as threatening towards men, encapsulated in the term \"misandry\", forms a core part of the vocabulary of the manosphere and is used within the men's rights movement (MRM) to counter feminist accusations of misogyny. The idea of feminism as a misandrist movement has been cited as justification for harassment of people espousing feminist ideas, one example being the Gamergate harassment campaign against women in the video games industry. \nMRAs and other masculinist groups have criticized modern laws concerning divorce, domestic violence, the draft, circumcision (known as \"genital mutilation\" by opponents), and treatment of male rape victims as examples of institutional misandry. Other proposed examples include social problems that lead to men's shorter lifespans, higher suicide rates, requirements to participate in military drafts, and lack of tax benefits afforded to widowers compared to widows.\nMarc A. Ouellette argues in \"International Encyclopedia of Men and Masculinities\" that \"misandry lacks the systemic, transhistoric, institutionalized, and legislated antipathy of misogyny\"; in his view, assuming a parallel between misogyny and misandry overly simplifies relations of gender and power.\nMarwick and Caplan have examined the use of the term \"misandry\" within the manosphere as a weapon against feminist language and ideas. They characterize men's rights activists' use of the term\u2014as a gender-reversed counterpart to \"misogyny\"\u2014as an appropriation of leftist identity politics. Marwick and Caplan also argue that coverage of the discourse of misandry by mainstream journalists serves to reinforce the MRM's framing of feminist activism as oppressive toward men, along with its denial of institutionalized sexism against women.\nRacialization.\nMisandry can be racialized. According to some researchers in Black male studies such as Tommy J. Curry, Black men and boys face anti-Black misandry. E. C. Krell, a gender researcher, uses the term racialized transmisandry describing the experience of Black transmasculine people.\nResearch.\n\"Ambivalence toward Men Inventory\".\nGlick and Fiske developed psychometric constructs to measure the attitudes of individuals towards men in their \"Ambivalence toward Men Inventory, AMI\", which includes a factor \"Hostility toward Men.\" These metrics were based on a small group discussion with women which identified factors, these number of questions were then reduced using statistical methods. \"Hostility toward Men\" was split into three factors: \"Resentment of Paternalism\", the belief men supported male power; \"Compensatory Gender Differentiation\", the belief that men were supported by women; and \"Heterosexual Hostility\", which looked at beliefs that men were likely to engage in hostile actions. The combined construct, Hostility toward Men, was found to be inversely correlated with measures of gender equality when comparing difference countries and in a study with university students, self-describing feminists were found to have a lower score.\nCriminal justice system.\nIn the United States, men tend to receive longer sentences than women for committing the same crimes, although the disparity is more pronounced for minor offenses, and is also dependent on the race of the perpetrator. Criminologist Nathan A. Kruis of Pennsylvania State University and colleagues write that a body of research suggests the presence of \"potential institutional misandry\" in the U.S. criminal justice system.\nIn literature.\nAncient Greek literature.\nClassicist Froma Zeitlin writes:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The most significant point of contact, however, between Eteocles and the suppliant Danaids is, in fact, their extreme positions with regard to the opposite sex: the misogyny of Eteocles' outburst against all women of whatever variety has its counterpart in the seeming misandry of the Danaids, who although opposed to their Egyptian cousins in particular (marriage with them is incestuous, they are violent men) often extend their objections to include the race of males as a whole and view their cause as a passionate contest between the sexes.\nShakespeare.\nLiterary critic Harold Bloom argued that even though the word misandry is relatively unheard of in literature, it is not hard to find implicit, even explicit, misandry. In reference to the works of Shakespeare, Bloom argued: &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I cannot think of one instance of misogyny whereas I would argue that misandry is a strong element. Shakespeare makes perfectly clear that women in general have to marry down and that men are narcissistic and not to be trusted and so forth. On the whole, he gives us a darker vision of human males than human females.\nModern literature.\nSociologist Anthony Synnott argues that there is a tendency in literature to represent men as villains and women as victims and argues that there is a market for \"anti-male\" novels with no corresponding \"anti-female\" market, citing \"The Women's Room\", by Marilyn French, and \"The Color Purple\", by Alice Walker. He gives examples of comparisons of men to Nazi prison guards as a common theme in literature.\nRacialized misandry occurs in both \"high\" and \"low\" culture and literature. For instance, African-American men have often been disparagingly portrayed as either infantile or as eroticized and hyper-masculine, depending on prevailing cultural stereotypes.\nJulie M. Thompson, a feminist author, connects misandry with envy of men, in particular \"penis envy\", a term coined by Sigmund Freud in 1908, in his theory of female sexual development. Nancy Kang has discussed \"the misandric impulse\" in relation to the works of Toni Morrison.\nIn his book, \"Gender and Judaism: The Transformation of Tradition\", Harry Brod, a Professor of Philosophy and Humanities in the Department of Philosophy and Religion at the University of Northern Iowa, writes:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;In the introduction to \"The Great Comic Book Heroes\", Jules Feiffer writes that this is Superman's joke on the rest of us. Clark is Superman's vision of what other men are really like. We are scared, incompetent, and powerless, particularly around women. Though Feiffer took the joke good-naturedly, a more cynical response would see here the Kryptonian's misanthropy, his misandry embodied in Clark and his misogyny in his wish that Lois be enamored of Clark (much like Oberon takes out hostility toward Titania by having her fall in love with an ass in Shakespeare's \"Midsummer-Night's Dream\").\nIn 2020, the explicitly misandric essay \"Moi les hommes, je les d\u00e9teste\" (\"I Hate Men\") by the French writer Pauline Harmange caused controversy in France after a government official threatened its publisher with criminal prosecution.\nIn feminism.\nOpponents of feminism often argue that feminism is misandrist; citing examples such as opposition to shared parenting by NOW, or opposition to equal rape and domestic violence laws. The validity of these perceptions and of the concept has been claimed as promoting a false equivalence between misandry and misogyny. Radical feminism has often been associated with misandry in the public consciousness. However, radical feminist arguments have also been misinterpreted, and individual radical feminists such as Valerie Solanas, best known for her attempted assassination of artist Andy Warhol in 1968, have historically had a higher profile in popular culture than within feminist scholarship.\nHistorian Alice Echols argues that the misandry displayed by Solanas in her tract the \"SCUM Manifesto\" was not typical for radical feminists of the time: \"Solanas's unabashed misandry\u2014especially her belief in men's biological inferiority\u2014her endorsement of relationships between 'independent women,' and her dismissal of sex as 'the refuge of the mindless' contravened the sort of radical feminism which prevailed in most women's groups across the country.\"\nRadical feminist Andrea Dworkin criticized what she called a biological determinist strand that she found \"with increasing frequency in feminist circles\"; according to Dworkin, this included the view that males are biologically inferior to women and violent by nature, requiring a gendercide to allow for the emergence of a \"new \"\u00dcbermensch\" Womon\".\nMelinda Kanner and Kristin J. Anderson argue that \"man-hater feminist\" represents the popular antifeminist myth which has no any scientific evidences, and it's rather the antifeminists who perhaps hate men.\nFeminist author bell hooks writes that the contemporary feminist movement was from its beginnings portrayed in the mass media as man-hating, even though anti-male factions were a small minority of women's liberation advocates. Hooks argues that liberal feminists' demonization of men as all-powerful misogynist oppressors was a product of bourgeois white women's envy of the privileges held by upper-class white men, and that such anti-male sentiments \"alienated many poor and working class women, particularly non-white women\" from the movement. She writes that anti-male factions received outsized attention from the mass media, leading the men's movement to take an anti-female stance which \"mirrored the most negative aspects\" of the women's movement.\nSociologist Anthony Synnott argues that certain forms of feminism present misandristic view of gender. He argues that men are presented as having power over others regardless of the actual power they possess and that some feminists define the experience of being male inaccurately through writing on masculinity. He further argues that some forms of feminism create an in-group of women, simplifies the nuances of gender issues, demonizes those who are not feminists and legitimizes victimization by way of retributive justice.\nReviewing Synnott, Roman Kuhar argues that Synnott might not accurately represent the views of feminism, commenting that \"whether it re-thinks men in a manner in which men have not been thought of in feminist theory, is another question.\"\nSociologist Allan G. Johnson argues in \"\" that accusations of man-hating have been used to put down feminists and to shift attention onto men, reinforcing a male-centered culture. Johnson posits that culture offers no comparable anti-male ideology to misogyny and that \"people often confuse men as individuals with men as a dominant and privileged category of people. Given the reality of women's oppression, male privilege, and men's enforcement of both, it's hardly surprising that every woman should have moments where she resents or even hates 'men.'\" [emphasis in original]\nA meta-analysis in 2023 published in the journal Psychology of Women Quarterly investigated the stereotype of feminists' attitudes to men and concluded that feminist views of men were no different than that of non-feminists or men towards men, and termed the phenomenon the misandry myth: \"We term the focal stereotype the misandry myth in light of the evidence that it is false and widespread, and discuss its implications for the movement.\"\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20781", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20781", "title": "Monoid ring", "text": "Algebraic structure\nIn abstract algebra, a monoid ring is a ring constructed from a ring and a monoid, just as a group ring is constructed from a ring and a group.\nDefinition.\nLet \"R\" be a ring and let \"G\" be a monoid. The monoid ring or monoid algebra of \"G\" over \"R\", denoted \"R\"[\"G\"] or \"RG\", is the set of formal sums formula_1,\nwhere formula_2 for each formula_3 and \"r\"\"g\" = 0 for all but finitely many \"g\", equipped with coefficient-wise addition, and the multiplication in which the elements of \"R\" commute with the elements of \"G\". More formally, \"R\"[\"G\"] is the free \"R\"-module on the set \"G\", endowed with \"R\"-linear multiplication defined on the base elements by \"g\u00b7h\" := \"gh\", where the left-hand side is understood as the multiplication in \"R\"[\"G\"] and the right-hand side is understood in \"G\".\nAlternatively, one can identify the element formula_4 with the function \"eg\" that maps \"g\" to 1 and every other element of \"G\" to 0. This way, \"R\"[\"G\"] is identified with the set of functions \u03c6: \"G\" \u2192 \"R\" such that {\"g\" : \u03c6(\"g\") \u2260 0} is finite. equipped with addition of functions, and with multiplication defined by\nformula_5.\nIf \"G\" is a group, then \"R\"[\"G\"] is also called the group ring of \"G\" over \"R\".\nUniversal property.\nGiven \"R\" and \"G\", there is a ring homomorphism \u03b1: \"R\" \u2192 \"R\"[\"G\"] sending each \"r\" to \"r\"1 (where 1 is the identity element of \"G\"),\nand a monoid homomorphism \u03b2: \"G\" \u2192 \"R\"[\"G\"] (where the latter is viewed as a monoid under multiplication) sending each \"g\" to 1\"g\" (where 1 is the multiplicative identity of \"R\").\nWe have that \u03b1(\"r\") commutes with \u03b2(\"g\") for all \"r\" in \"R\" and \"g\" in \"G\".\nThe universal property of the monoid ring states that given a ring \"S\", a ring homomorphism \u03b1': \"R\" \u2192 \"S\", and a monoid homomorphism \u03b2': \"G\" \u2192 \"S\" to the multiplicative monoid of \"S\",\nsuch that \u03b1'(\"r\") commutes with \u03b2'(\"g\") for all \"r\" in \"R\" and \"g\" in \"G\", there is a unique ring homomorphism \u03b3: \"R\"[\"G\"] \u2192 \"S\" such that composing \u03b1 and \u03b2 with \u03b3 produces \u03b1' and \u03b2\nAugmentation.\nThe augmentation is the ring homomorphism \"\u03b7\": \"R\"[\"G\"] \u2192 \"R\" defined by \n formula_6\nThe kernel of \"\u03b7\" is called the augmentation ideal. It is a free \"R\"-module with basis consisting of 1\u00a0\u2013\u00a0\"g\" for all \"g\" in \"G\" not equal to 1.\nExamples.\nGiven a ring \"R\" and the (additive) monoid of natural numbers N (or {\"x\"\"n\"} viewed multiplicatively), we obtain the ring \"R\"[{\"x\"\"n\"}] =: \"R\"[\"x\"] of polynomials over \"R\".\nThe monoid N\"n\" (with the addition) gives the polynomial ring with \"n\" variables: \"R\"[N\"n\"] =: \"R\"[\"X\"1, ..., \"X\"\"n\"].\nGeneralization.\nIf \"G\" is a semigroup, the same construction yields a semigroup ring \"R\"[\"G\"]."}
{"id": "20783", "revid": "50548440", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20783", "title": "Magic lantern", "text": "Type of image projector\nThe magic lantern, also known by its Latin name , is an early type of image projector that uses pictures\u2014paintings, prints, or photographs\u2014on transparent plates (usually made of glass), one or more lenses, and a light source. Because a single lens inverts an image projected through it (as in the phenomenon which inverts the image of a camera obscura), slides are inserted upside down in the magic lantern, rendering the projected image correctly oriented.\nIt was mostly developed in the 17th century and commonly used for entertainment purposes. It was increasingly used for education during the 19th century. Since the late 19th century, smaller versions were also mass-produced as toys. The magic lantern was in wide use from the 18th century until the mid-20th century when it was superseded by a compact version that could hold many 35\u00a0mm photographic slides: the slide projector.\nTechnology.\nApparatus.\nThe magic lantern used a concave mirror behind a light source to direct the light through a small rectangular sheet of glass\u2014a \"lantern slide\" that bears the image\u2014and onward into a lens at the front of the apparatus. The lens is adjusted to focus the plane of the slide at the distance of the projection screen, which can be simply a white wall, and it forms an enlarged image of the slide on the screen. Some lanterns, including those of Christiaan Huygens and Jan van Musschenbroek, used three lenses for the objective.\nBiunial lanterns, with two objectives, became common during the 19th century and enabled a smooth and easy change of pictures. Stereopticons added more powerful light sources to optimize the projection of photographic slides.\nSlides.\nOriginally the pictures were hand painted on glass slides. Initially, figures were rendered with black paint but soon transparent colors were also used. Sometimes the painting was done on oiled paper. Usually black paint was used as a background to block superfluous light, so the figures could be projected without distracting borders or frames. Many slides were finished with a layer of transparent lacquer, but in a later period cover glasses were also used to protect the painted layer. Most handmade slides were mounted in wood frames with a round or square opening for the picture.\nAfter 1820 the manufacturing of hand colored printed slides started, often making use of decalcomania transfers. Many manufactured slides were produced on strips of glass with several pictures on them and rimmed with a strip of glued paper.\nThe first photographic lantern slides, called \"hyalotypes\", were invented by the German-born brothers Ernst Wilhelm (William) and Friedrich (Frederick) Langenheim in 1848 in Philadelphia and patented in 1850.\nLight sources.\nApart from sunlight, the only light sources available at the time of invention in the 17th century were candles and oil lamps, which were very inefficient and produced very dim projected images. The invention of the Argand lamp in the 1790s helped to make the images brighter. The invention of limelight in the 1820s made them even brighter, emitting about 6000-8000 lumens. The invention of the intensely bright electric arc lamp in the 1860s eliminated the need for combustible gases or hazardous chemicals, and eventually the incandescent electric lamp further improved safety and convenience, although not brightness.\nPrecursors.\nSeveral types of projection systems existed before the invention of the magic lantern. Giovanni Fontana, Leonardo da Vinci and Cornelis Drebbel described or drew image projectors that had similarities to the magic lantern. In the 17th century, there was an immense interest in optics. The telescope and microscope were invented and apart from being useful to some scientists, such instruments were especially popular as entertaining curiosities to people who could afford them. The magic lantern would prove a natural successor.\nCamera obscura.\nThe magic lantern can be seen as a further development of camera obscura. This is a natural phenomenon that occurs when an image of a scene at the other side of a screen (for instance a wall) is projected through a small hole in that screen as an inverted image (left to right and upside down) on a surface opposite to the opening. It was known at least since the 5th century BC and experimented with in darkened rooms at least since c.\u20091000\u00a0AD. The use of a lens in the hole has been traced back to c.\u20091550. The portable camera obscura box with a lens was developed in the 17th century. Dutch inventor Cornelis Drebbel is thought to have sold one to Dutch poet, composer and diplomat Constantijn Huygens in 1622, while the oldest known clear description of a box-type camera is in German Jesuit scientist Gaspar Schott's 1657 book \"Magia universalis natur\u00e6 et artis\".\nSteganographic mirror.\nThe 1645 first edition of German Jesuit scholar Athanasius Kircher's book \"Ars Magna Lucis et Umbrae\" included a description of his invention, the \"Steganographic Mirror\": a primitive projection system with a focusing lens and text or pictures painted on a concave mirror reflecting sunlight, mostly intended for long-distance communication. Kircher saw limitations in the increase of size and diminished clarity over a long distance and expressed his hope that someone would find a method to improve on this.\nIn \"Magia universalis\", Schott also relates how many were using Kircher's technique to exhibit wondrous things to enthousiastic audiences. For instance, the Belgian Jesuit mathematician Andr\u00e9 Tacquet had shown missionary Martino Martini's complete journey from China to Belgium (when Martini was in Leuven in 1654). Some reports say that Martini lectured throughout Europe with a magic lantern, which he might have imported from China, but there's no evidence that it used anything other than Kircher's technique. However, Tacquet was a correspondent and friend of Christiaan Huygens and may thus have been a very early adapter of the magic lantern technique that Huygens developed around this period.\nInvention.\nChristiaan Huygens.\nDutch scientist Christiaan Huygens is considered as one of the possible inventors of the magic lantern. He knew Athanasius Kircher's 1645 edition of \"Ars Magna Lucis et Umbrae\" which described a primitive projection system with a focusing lens and text or pictures painted on a concave mirror reflecting sunlight. Christiaan's father Constantijn had been acquainted with Cornelis Drebbel who used some unidentified optical techniques to transform himself and to summon appearances in magical performances. Constantijn Huygens wrote about a camera obscura device that he got from Drebbel in 1622.\nThe oldest known document concerning the magic lantern is a page on which Christiaan Huygens made ten small sketches of a skeleton taking off its skull, above which he wrote \"for representations by means of convex glasses with the lamp\" (translated from French). As this page was found between documents dated in 1659, it is believed to have been made in the same year. Huygens soon seemed to regret this invention, as he thought it was too frivolous. In a 1662 letter to his brother Lodewijk he claimed he thought of it as some old \"bagatelle\" and seemed convinced that it would harm the family's reputation if people found out the lantern came from him. Christiaan had reluctantly sent a lantern to their father, but when he realized that Constantijn intended to show the lantern to the court of King Louis XIV at the Louvre, Christiaan asked Lodewijk to sabotage the lantern.\nChristiaan initially referred to the magic lantern as \"la lampe\" and \"la lanterne\", but in the last years of his life he used the then common term \"laterna magica\" in some notes. In 1694, he drew the principle of a \"laterna magica\" with two lenses.\nWalgensten, the Dane.\nThomas Rasmussen Walgensten (c.\u20091627\u20131681), a mathematician from Gotland, studied at the university of Leiden in 1657\u201358. He possibly met Christiaan Huygens during this time (and/or on several other occasions) and may have learned about the magic lantern from him. Correspondence between them is known from 1667. At least from 1664 until 1670, Walgensten demonstrated the magic lantern in Paris (1664), Lyon (1665), Rome (1665\u20131666), and Copenhagen (1670). He \"sold such lanterns to different Italian princes in such an amount that they now are almost everyday items in Rome\", according to Athanasius Kircher in 1671. In 1670, Walgensten projected an image of Death at the court of King Frederick III of Denmark. This scared some courtiers, but the king dismissed their cowardice and requested to repeat the figure three times. The king died a few days later. After Walgensten died, his widow sold his lanterns to the Royal Danish Collection, but they have not been preserved. Walgensten is credited with coining the term \"Laterna Magica\", assuming he communicated this name to Claude Dechales who, in 1674, published about seeing the machine of the \"erudite Dane\" in 1665 in Lyon.\nPossible German origins: Wiesel and Griendel.\nThere are many gaps and uncertainties in the magic lantern's recorded history. A separate early magic lantern tradition seems to have been developed in southern Germany and includes lanterns with horizontal cylindrical bodies, while Walgensten's lantern and probably Huygens' both had vertical bodies. This tradition dates at least to 1671, with the arrival of instrument maker Johann Franz Griendel in the city of N\u00fcrnberg, which Johann Zahn identified as one of the centers of magic lantern production in 1686. Griendel was indicated as the inventor of the magic lantern by Johann Christoph Kohlhans in a 1677 publication. It has been suggested that this tradition is older and that instrument maker Johann Wiesel (1583\u20131662) from Augsburg may have been making magic lanterns earlier on and possibly inspired Griendel and even Huygens. Huygens is known to have studied samples of Wiesel's lens-making and instruments since 1653. Wiesel did make a ship's lantern around 1640 that has much in common with the magic lantern design that Griendel would later apply: a horizontal cylindrical body with a rosette chimney on top, a concave mirror behind a fixture for a candle or lamp inside and a biconvex lens at the front. There is no evidence that Wiesel actually ever made a magic lantern, but in 1674, his successor offered a variety of magic lanterns from the same workshop. This successor is thought to have only continued producing Wiesel's designs after his death in 1662, without adding anything new.\nFurther history.\nEarly adopters.\nBefore 1671, only a small circle of people seemed to have knowledge of the magic lantern, and almost every known report of the device from this period had to do with people that were more or less directly connected to Christiaan Huygens. Despite the rejection expressed in his letters to his brother, Huygens must have familiarized several people with the lantern.\nIn 1664 Parisian engineer Pierre Petit wrote to Huygens to ask for some specifications of the lantern, because he was trying to construct one after seeing the lantern of \"the dane\" (probably Walgensten). The lantern that Petit was constructing had a concave mirror behind the lamp. This directed more light through the lens, resulting in a brighter projection, and it would become a standard part of most of the lanterns that were made later. Petit may have copied it from Walgensten, but he expressed that he made a lamp stronger than any he had ever seen.\nStarting in 1661, Huygens corresponded with London optical instrument-maker Richard Reeve. Reeve was soon selling magic lanterns, demonstrated one in his shop on 17 May 1663 to Balthasar de Monconys, and sold one to Samuel Pepys in August 1666.\nOne of Christiaan Huygens' contacts imagined how Athanasius Kircher would use the magic lantern: \"If he would know about the invention of the Lantern he would surely frighten the cardinals with specters.\" Kircher would eventually learn about the existence of the magic lantern via Thomas Walgensten and introduced it as \"Lucerna Magica\" in the widespread 1671 second edition of his book \"Ars Magna Lucis et Umbrae\". Kircher claimed that Thomas Walgensten reworked his ideas from the previous edition of this book into a better lantern. Kircher described this improved lantern, but it was illustrated in a confusing manner: the pictures seem technically incorrect\u2014with both the projected image and the transparencies (H) shown upright (while the text states that they should be inverted), the hollow mirror is too high in one picture and absent in the other, and the lens (I) is at the wrong side of the slide. However, experiments with a construction as illustrated in Kircher's book proved that it could work as a point light-source projection system.\nThe projected image in one of the illustrations shows a person in purgatory or hellfire and the other depicts Death with a scythe and an hourglass. According to legend Kircher secretly used the lantern at night to project the image of Death on windows of apostates to scare them back into church. Kircher did suggest in his book that an audience would be more astonished by the sudden appearance of images if the lantern would be hidden in a separate room, so the audience would be ignorant of the cause of their appearance.\nEducational use and other subjects.\nThe earliest reports and illustrations of lantern projections suggest that they were all intended to scare the audience. Pierre Petit called the apparatus \"lanterne de peur\" (lantern of fear) in his 1664 letter to Huygens. Surviving lantern plates and descriptions from the next decades prove that the new medium was not just used for horror shows, but that many kinds of subjects were projected. Griendel did not mention scary pictures when he described the magic lantern to Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz in December 1671: \"An optical lantern which presents everything that one desires, figures, paintings, portraits, faces, hunts, even an entire comedy with all its lively colours.\" In 1675, Leibniz saw an important role for the magic lantern in his plan for a kind of world exhibition with projections of \"attempts at flight, artistic meteors, optical effects, representations of the sky with the star and comets, and a model of the earth (...), fireworks, water fountains, and ships in rare forms; then mandrakes and other rare plants and exotic animals.\" In 1685\u20131686, Johannes Zahn was an early advocate for use of the device for educational purposes: detailed anatomical illustrations were difficult to draw on a chalkboard, but could easily be copied onto glass or mica.\nBy the 1730s the use of magic lanterns started to become more widespread when travelling showmen, conjurers and storytellers added them to their repertoire. The travelling lanternists were often called Savoyards (they supposedly came from the Savoy region in France) and became a common sight in many European cities.\nIn France in the 1770s Fran\u00e7ois Dominique S\u00e9raphin used magic lanterns to perform his \"Ombres Chinoises\" (Chinese shadows), a form of shadow play.\nMagic lanterns had also become a staple of science lecturing and museum events since Scottish lecturer Henry Moyes's tour of America in 1785\u201386, when he recommended that all college laboratories procure one. French writer and educator St\u00e9phanie F\u00e9licit\u00e9, comtesse de Genlis popularized the use of magic lanterns as an educational tool in the late 18th century when using projected images of plants to teach botany. Her educational methods were published in America in English translation during the early 1820s.\nA type of lantern was constructed by Moses Holden between 1814 and 1815 for illustrating his astronomical lectures.\nMass slide production.\nIn 1821, Philip Carpenter's London company, which became Carpenter and Westley after his death, started manufacturing a sturdy but lightweight and transportable \"Phantasmagoria lantern\" with an Argand style lamp. It produced high quality projections and was suitable for classrooms. Carpenter also developed a \"secret\" copper plate printing/burning process to mass-produce glass lantern slides with printed outlines, which were then easily and quickly hand painted ready for sale. These \"copper-plate sliders\" contained three or four very detailed 4\" circular images mounted in thin hardwood frames. The first known set \"The Elements of Zoology\" became available in 1823, with over 200 images in 56 frames of zoological figures, classified according to the system of the Swedish scientist Carl Linnaeus. The same year many other slides appeared in the company's catalogue: \"The Kings and Queens of England\" (9 sliders taken from David Hume's History of England), \"Astronomical Diagrams and Constellations\" (9 sliders taken from Friedrich Wilhelm Herschel's textbooks), \"Views and Buildings\", Ancient and Modern Costume (62 sliders from various sources). Fifteen sliders of the category \"Humorous\" provided some entertainment, but the focus on education was obvious and very successful.\nThrough the mid-19th century, the market for magic lanterns was concentrated in Europe with production focused primarily on Italy, France, and England. In 1848, a New York optician began advertising imported slides and locally produced magic lanterns. By 1860, however, mass production began to make magic lanterns more widely available and affordable, with much of the production in the latter half of the 19th century concentrated in Germany. These smaller lanterns had smaller glass sliders, which instead of wooden frames usually had colorful strips of paper glued around their edges with the images printed directly on the glass.\nWaning popularity.\nThe popularity of magic lanterns waned after the introduction of movies in the 1890s, but they remained a common medium until slide projectors became widespread during the 1950s.\nMoving images.\nThe magic lantern was not only a direct ancestor of the motion picture projector as a means for visual storytelling, but it could itself be used to project moving images. Some suggestion of movement could be achieved by alternating between pictures of different phases of a motion, but most magic lantern \"animations\" used two glass slides projected together \u2014 one with the stationary part of the picture and the other with the part that could be set in motion by hand or by a simple mechanism.\nMotion in animated slides was mostly limited to either two phases of a movement or transformation, or a more gradual singular movement (e.g., a train passing through a landscape). These limitations made subjects with repetitive movements popular, like the sails on a windmill turning around or children on a seesaw. Movements could be repeated over and over and could be performed at different speeds. A common technique that is comparable to the effect of a panning camera makes use of a long slide that is simply pulled slowly through the lantern and usually shows a landscape, sometimes with several phases of a story within the continuous backdrop.\nMovement of projected images was also possible by moving the magic lantern itself. This became a staple technique in phantasmagoria shows in the late 18th century, often with the lantern sliding on rails or riding on small wheels and hidden from the view of the audience behind the projection screen.\nHistory.\nIn 1645, Kircher had already suggested projecting live insects and shadow puppets from the surface of the mirror in his Steganographic system to perform dramatic scenes.\nChristiaan Huygens' 1659 sketches (see above) suggest he intended to animate the skeleton to have it take off its head and place it back on its neck. This can be seen as an indication that the very first magic lantern demonstrations may already have included projections of simple animations.\nIn 1668, Robert Hooke wrote about the effects of a type of magic lantern installation: \"Spectators not well versed in optics, that should see the various apparitions and disappearances, the motions, changes and actions that may this way be represented, would readily believe them to be supernatural and miraculous.\" In the same year, Francesco Eschinardi published \"Centuriae opticae pars altera seu dialogi optici pars tertia\", which included a detailed description of the construction of the magic lantern.\nIn 1675, German polymath and philosopher Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz proposed a kind of world exhibition that would show all types of new inventions and spectacles. In a handwritten document he supposed it should open and close with magic lantern shows, including subjects \"which can be dismembered, to represent quite extraordinary and grotesque movements, which men would not be capable of making\" (translated from French).\nSeveral reports of early magic lantern screenings possibly described moving pictures, but are not clear enough to conclude whether the viewers saw animated slides or motion depicted in still images.\nIn 1698, German engraver and publisher Johann Christoph Weigel described several lantern slides with mechanisms that made glass parts move over one fixed glass slide, for instance by the means of a silk thread, or grooves in which the mobile part slides.\nBy 1709 a German optician and glass grinder named Themme (or Temme) made moving lantern slides, including a carriage with rotating wheels, a cupid with a spinning wheel, a shooting gun, and falling bombs. Wheels were cut from the glass plate with a diamond and rotated by a thread that was spun around small brass wheels attached to the glass wheels. A paper slip mask would be quickly pulled away to reveal the red fiery discharge and the bullet from a shooting gun. Zacharias Conrad von Uffenbach visited Themme's shop and liked the effects, but was disappointed about the very simple mechanisms. Nonetheless, he bought seven moving slides, as well as twelve slides with four pictures each, which he thought were delicately painted.\nSeveral types of mechanical slides were described and illustrated in Dutch professor of mathematics, physics, philosophy, medicine, and astronomy Pieter van Musschenbroek's second edition (1739) of \"Beginsels Der Natuurkunde\" (see illustration below). Pieter was the brother of Jan van Musschenbroek, the maker of an outstanding magic lantern with excellent lenses and a diaphragm (see illustration above).\nIn 1770, Edm\u00e9-Gilles Guyot described a method of using two slides for the depiction of a storm at sea, with waves on one slide and ships and a few clouds on another. Lanternists could project the illusion of mild waves turning into a wild sea tossing the ships around by increasing the movement of the separate slides. Guyot also detailed how projection on smoke could be used to create the illusion of ghosts hovering in the air, which would become a technique commonly used in phantasmagoria.\nAn especially intricate multiple rackwork mechanism was developed to show the movements of the planets (sometimes accompanied by revolving satellites) revolving around the Sun. In 1795, one M. Dicas offered an early magic lantern system, the Lucernal or Portable Eidouranian, that showed the orbiting planets. From around the 1820s mechanical astronomical slides became quite common.\nVarious types of mechanical slides.\nVarious types of mechanisms were commonly used to add movement to the projected image:\nMechanical slides with abstract special effects include:\nDissolving views.\nThe effect of a gradual transition from one image to another, known as a dissolve in modern filmmaking, became the basis of a popular type of magic lantern show in England in the 19th century. Typical dissolving views showed landscapes dissolving from day to night or from summer to winter. This was achieved by aligning the projection of two matching images and slowly diminishing the first image while introducing the second image. The subject and the effect of magic lantern dissolving views is similar to the popular Diorama theatre paintings that originated in Paris in 1822. 19th century magic lantern broadsides often used the terms \"dissolving view\", \"dioramic view\", or simply \"diorama\" interchangeably.\nThe effect was reportedly invented by phantasmagoria pioneer Paul de Philipsthal while in Ireland in 1803 or 1804. He thought of using two lanterns to make the spirit of Samuel appear out of a mist in his representation of the Witch of Endor. While working out the desired effect, he got the idea of using the technique with landscapes. An 1812 newspaper about a London performance indicates that De Philipsthal presented what was possibly a relatively early incarnation of a dissolving views show, describing it as \"a series of landscapes (in imitation of moonlight), which insensibly change to various scenes producing a very magical effect.\"\nAnother possible inventor is Henry Langdon Childe, who purportedly once worked for De Philipsthal. He is said to have invented the dissolving views in 1807, and to have improved and completed the technique in 1818. The oldest known use of the term \"dissolving views\" occurs on playbills for Childe's shows at the Adelphi Theatre in London in 1837. Childe further popularized the dissolving views at the Royal Polytechnic Institution in the early 1840s.\nDespite later reports about the early invention, and apart from De Philipsthal's 1812 performance, no reports of dissolving view shows before the 1820s are known. Some cases may involve confusion with the Diorama or similar media. In 1826, Scottish magician and ventriloquist M. Henry introduced what he described as \"beautiful dissolvent scenes\", \"imperceptibly changing views\", \"dissolvent views\", and \"Magic Views\"\u2014created \"by Machinery invented by M. Henry.\" In 1827, Henry Langdon Childe presented \"Scenic Views, showing the various effects of light and shade,\" with a series of subjects that became classics for the dissolving views. In December 1827, De Philipsthal returned with a show that included \"various splendid views (...) transforming themselves imperceptibly (as if it were by Magic) from one form into another.\"\nBiunial lanterns, with two projecting optical sets in one apparatus, were produced to more easily project dissolving views. Possibly the first horizontal biunial lantern, dubbed the \"Biscenascope\" was made by the optician Mr. Clarke and presented at the Royal Adelaide Gallery in London on 5 December 1840. The earliest known illustration of a vertical biunial lantern, probably provided by E.G. Wood, appeared in the Horne &amp; Thornthwaite catalogue in 1857. Later on triple lanterns enabled additional effects, for instance the effect of snow falling while a green landscape dissolves into a snowy winter version.\nA mechanical device could be fitted on the magic lantern, which locked up a diaphragm on the first slide slowly whilst a diaphragm on a second slide opened simultaneously.\nPhilip Carpenter's copper-plate printing process, introduced in 1823, may have made it much easier to create duplicate slides with printed outlines that could then be colored differently to create dissolving view slides. However, all early dissolving view slides seem to have been hand-painted.\nExperiments.\nThere have been many different experiments involving sorts of movement with the magic lantern. These include:\nSeveral of these experiments were publicly demonstrated at the .\nChoreutoscope and phenakistiscope-type systems.\nVersions of the magic lantern were used to project transparent variations of the ph\u00e9nakisticope. These were adapted with a mechanism that spins the disc and a shutter system. Duboscq produced some in the 1850s and Thomas Ross patented a version called \"Wheel of life\" in 1869 and 1870.\nThe Choreutoscope was purportedly invented around 1866 by the Greenwich engineer John Beale, and demonstrated at the Royal Polytechnic. It projected six pictures and used a hand-cranked mechanism for intermittent movement and synchronized shutter action. The mechanism became a key to the development of the movie camera and projector. The Choreutoscope was used at the first professional public demonstration of the Kinetoscope to explain its principles.\nAn \"Optical Instrument\" was patented in the U.S. in 1869 by O.B. Brown, using a phenakistiscope-like disc with a technique very close to the later cinematograph; with Maltese Cross motion; a star-wheel and pin being used for intermittent motion, and a two-sector shutter.\nLife in the lantern - Bio-Phantoscope.\nJohn Arthur Roebuck Rudge built a lantern for William Friese-Greene with a mechanism to project a sequence of seven photographic slides. Reports say it was made in 1872, but also 1875 and (most likely) 1882. The surviving slides show a man removing his head with his hands and raising the loose head. The photographed body belonged to Rudge and Friese-Greene posed for the head. The slides probably provided the very first trick photography sequence projection. Friese-Greene demonstrated the machine in his shop, until the police ordered him to remove it when it attracted too large a crowd.\nPhantasmagoria.\nPhantasmagoria was a form of horror theater that used one or more magic lanterns to project frightening images, especially of ghosts. Showmen used rear projection, mobile or portable projectors and a variety of effects to produce convincing necromantic experiences. It was very popular in Europe from the late 18th century to well into the 19th century.\nIt is thought that optical devices like concave mirrors and the camera obscura have been used since antiquity to fool spectators into believing they saw real gods and spirits, but it was the magician \"physicist\" Phylidor who created what must have been the first true phantasmagoria show. He probably used mobile magic lanterns with the recently invented Argand lamp to create his successful (Schr\u00f6pfer-esque and Cagiostro-esque Ghost Apparitions) in Vienna from 1790 to 1792. Phylidor stated that his show of perfected apparitions revealed how charlatans like Johann Georg Schr\u00f6pfer and Cagliostro had fooled their audiences. As \"Paul Filidort,\" he presented his \"Phantasmagorie\" in Paris From December 1792 to July 1793, probably using that term for the first time. As \"Paul de Philipsthal,\" he performed \"Phantasmagoria\" shows in Britain beginning in 1801 with great success.\nOne of many showmen who were inspired by Phylidor, Etienne-Gaspard Robert became very famous with his own \"Fantasmagorie\" show in Paris from 1798 to 1803 (later performing throughout Europe and returning to Paris for a triumphant comeback in Paris in 1814). He patented a mobile \"Fantascope\" lantern in 1798.\nRoyal Polytechnic Institution shows.\nWhen it opened in 1838, The Royal Polytechnic Institution in London became a very popular and influential venue with many kinds of magic lantern shows as an important part of its program. At the main theatre, with 500 seats, lanternists would make good use of a battery of six large lanterns running on tracked tables to project the finely detailed images of extra large slides on the 648 square feet screen. The magic lantern was used to illustrate lectures, concerts, pantomimes and other forms of theatre. Popular magic lantern presentations included Henry Langdon Childe's dissolving views, his chromatrope, phantasmagoria, and mechanical slides.\nUtsushi-e.\nUtsushi-e is a type of magic lantern show that became popular in Japan in the 19th century. The Dutch probably introduced the magic lantern in Japan before the 1760s. A new style for magic lantern shows was introduced by Kameya Toraku I, who first performed in 1803 in Edo. Possibly the phantasmagoria shows (popular in the west at that moment) inspired the rear projection technique, moving images and ghost stories. Japanese showmen developed lightweight wooden projectors (furo) that were handheld so that several performers could make the projections of different colourful figures move around the screen at the same time. The Western techniques of mechanical slides were combined with traditional Japanese skills\u2014especially from Karakuri puppets\u2014to further animate the figures and for special effects.\nToday.\nSome enthusiasts claim that the brilliant quality of color in lantern slides is unsurpassed by successive projection media. The magic lantern and lantern slides are still popular with collectors and can be found in many museums like, for example, in the Museum of Precinema in Padua where 60 magic lanterns and more than 10000 original slides are preserved. However, of the original lanterns from the first 150 years after its invention only 28 are known to still exist (as of 2009). Because the original slides are fragile, rather than display or project them, museums often digitize the slides for exhibition.\nA collaborative research project of several European universities called \"A Million Pictures\" started in June 2015 and lasted until May 2018. It addresses the sustainable preservation of the massive, untapped heritage resource of the tens of thousands of lantern slides in the collections of libraries and museums across Europe.Genuine public lantern shows are relatively rare. Several regular performers claim they are the only one of their kind in their part of the world. These include Pierre Albanese and glass harmonica player Thomas Bloch live Magic Lantern/Phantasmagoria shows since 2008 in Europe and The American Magic-Lantern Theater. The Magic Lantern Society maintains a list of active lanternists, which contains more than 20 performers in the U.K. and around eight performers in other parts of the world (Europe, U.S., Canada, Australia and New Zealand).\nDutch theatre group Lichtbende produces contemporary magical light spectacles and workshops with magic lanterns.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20786", "revid": "48039514", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20786", "title": "Mulholland Drive (film)", "text": "2001 film by David Lynch\nMulholland Drive is a 2001 surrealist neo-noir mystery art film written and directed by David Lynch. Its plot follows an aspiring actress (Naomi Watts) who arrives in Los Angeles, where she befriends a woman (Laura Harring) who is suffering from amnesia after a car accident. The film follows several other vignettes and characters, including a Hollywood director (Justin Theroux) who must deal with mob interference while casting for his latest film.\nThe film was originally conceived as a television pilot for ABC, with footage shot and edited in 1999 as an open-ended mystery. After viewing Lynch's cut, however, television executives cancelled the proposed television series. Lynch then secured funding from French production company StudioCanal to make the material into a feature film, writing an ending to the project and filming new material. The resulting surrealist narrative has left the film's events open to interpretation. Lynch declined to offer an explanation, leaving audiences, critics, and even the film's own cast to speculate on its meaning.\n\"Mulholland Drive\" earned Lynch the 2001 Cannes Film Festival Award for Best Director, as well as a nomination for the Academy Award for Best Director for the film. The film boosted Watts' Hollywood profile considerably, and was the last feature film to star veteran Hollywood actress Ann Miller.\nThe film has received enduring critical acclaim and has been listed as one of the greatest films of all time. The 2022 \"Sight and Sound\" Greatest Films of All Time critics' poll ranked it at No. 8, while the director's poll ranked it at No. 22. The BBC and IndieWire ranked it the best film of the 21st century, and the LA Film Critics Association ranked it the best film of the 2000s. In 2025, \"The New York Times\" ranked it at number 2 in their list of the 100 Best Movies of the 21st Century, while media outlet \"The Ringer\" ranked Watts's performance as the greatest of the 21st century.\nPlot.\nThe film opens with brightly lit images of couples dancing the jitterbug, over which a young blonde woman appears smiling and being applauded. This is followed by a point-of-view shot descending toward a pillow as someone lies down.\nAt night on Mulholland Drive, a brunette woman in an elegant evening dress narrowly escapes being shot by her chauffeur when another car crashes into them. Left with amnesia, she wanders into Los Angeles and hides in a vacant apartment. The next morning, she is discovered by Betty Elms, an aspiring actress newly arrived from Ontario to stay at her aunt's place. The brunette adopts the name \"Rita\" after seeing a poster of Rita Hayworth and recalls only that she is in danger. The two women become friends and discover a blue key and a large sum of cash in Rita's purse.\nA man at Winkie's diner recounts a nightmare about a monstrous figure in the alley behind the restaurant. When he investigates with a companion, the figure appears and he collapses in shock.\nFilm director Adam Kesher is pressured by mob-connected businessmen to cast an unknown blonde, Camilla Rhodes, in his new project, \"The Sylvia North Story\". When Adam refuses, the mob shuts down production and freezes his accounts. He returns home to find his wife cheating on him, is beaten and thrown out of his house, and rejects a sexual advance from his assistant. A mysterious cowboy warns him to cast Camilla. Elsewhere, incompetent hitman Joe Messing bungles a job, killing bystanders.\nRita remembers the name \"Diane Selwyn\" and Betty locates her address in a phone book. A seemingly psychic neighbor knocks on the apartment door, warning that \"someone is in trouble\", and building manager Coco later cautions Betty about letting Rita stay. Betty leaves for an audition and performs marvelously. A casting agent is impressed and immediately brings her to Adam's audition for \"The Sylvia North Story\". While Camilla Rhodes auditions with a dull performance of \"I've Told Every Little Star\", Betty and Adam share a brief, charged glance, but she slips away to keep her promise to meet Rita. Adam agrees to cast Camilla to please the mob, following the cowboy's advice.\nBetty and Rita visit Diane Selwyn's apartment complex. A neighbor who recently exchanged units with Diane mentions she has not been seen in some time and directs them to her apartment. Inside, the two discover a woman's decomposing corpse on the bed. Shaken, they hurry back. Rita panics and tries to cut off her hair, but Betty disguises her with a blonde wig. That night, they share an intimate sexual encounter and Betty twice confesses she is in love, though Rita does not respond. They fall asleep together, but Rita wakes them both up by chanting \"Silencio, no hay banda\" (Spanish for \"Silence, there is no band\") in her sleep.\nRita insists on visiting Club Silencio, where the emcee explains that all of the performances are pre-recorded. Betty and Rita cry to Rebekah Del Rio's Spanish rendition of \"Crying\". Betty discovers a blue box in her purse that matches Rita's key. They return to the apartment; Rita is about to unlock the box, but finds that Betty has vanished. After unlocking the box, Rita also vanishes.\nThe narrative shifts to Diane Selwyn, a depressed and struggling actress who resembles Betty. She awakens in the bedroom where the corpse was found. The neighbor who previously switched apartments visits to pick up her belongings and warns that two detectives have been looking for her.\nAs Diane moves through her morning in a daze, she recalls a series of memories of her former lover, Camilla Rhodes\u2014a femme-fatale actress who looks exactly like Rita. These memories include: a volatile sexual encounter and breakup; being forced to witness Adam and Camilla display intimacy in front of her during a film rehearsal; a dinner party at Adam's house where Diane explains that she moved to Los Angeles with money inherited from her late aunt and that she lost the leading role in \"The Sylvia North Story\" to Camilla, and watches Adam announce his engagement to her; and hiring Joe Messing at Winkie's to carry out a hit on Camilla with Joe indicating Diane will receive the blue key as confirmation that the hit is successful.\nThe monstrous figure previously seen behind Winkie's opens the blue box, releasing a tiny hysterical-laughing elderly couple (the same couple who accompanied Betty Elms upon her arrival in Los Angeles). \nIn the present, a traumatized Diane stares at the blue key on her coffee table. As Diane tries to ignore the repeated knockings at her apartment door, she is terrorized by the elderly couple who had entered from beneath the door and grown into their full size. She runs into her bedroom and shoots herself, dying in the same position as the corpse discovered earlier. \nAt Club Silencio, a blue-haired woman whispers, \"Silencio\".\nThemes and interpretations.\nGiving the film only the tagline \"A love story in the city of dreams\", David Lynch refused to comment on \"Mulholland Drive\"'s meaning or symbolism, leading to much discussion and multiple interpretations. The \"Christian Science Monitor\" film critic David Sterritt spoke with Lynch after the film screened at Cannes and wrote that the director \"insisted that \"Mulholland Drive\" does tell a coherent, comprehensible story\", unlike some of Lynch's earlier films like \"Lost Highway\". On the other hand, Justin Theroux said of Lynch's feelings on the multiple meanings people perceive in the film, \"I think he's genuinely happy for it to mean anything you want. He loves it when people come up with really bizarre interpretations. David works from his subconscious.\" The film was described as a neo-noir.\nDreams and alternative realities.\nAn early interpretation of the film uses dream analysis to argue that the first part is a dream of the real Diane Selwyn, who has cast her dream-self as the innocent and hopeful \"Betty Elms\", reconstructing her history and persona into something like an old Hollywood film. In the dream, Betty is successful, charming, and lives the fantasy life of a soon-to-be-famous actress. The remainder of the film presents Diane's real life, in which she has failed both personally and professionally. She arranges for Camilla, an ex-lover, to be killed, and unable to cope with the guilt, re-imagines her as the dependent, pliable amnesiac Rita. Clues to her inevitable demise, however, continue to appear throughout her dream.\nThis interpretation was similar to what Naomi Watts construed, when she said in an interview, \"I thought Diane was the real character and that Betty was the person she wanted to be and had dreamed up. Rita is the damsel in distress and she's in absolute need of Betty, and Betty controls her as if she were a doll. Rita is Betty's fantasy of who she wants Camilla to be.\" Watts' own early experiences in Hollywood parallel those of Diane's. She endured some professional frustration before she became successful, auditioned for parts in which she did not believe, and encountered people who did not follow through with opportunities. She recalled, \"There were a lot of promises, but nothing actually came off. I ran out of money and became quite lonely.\" Michael Wilmington of the \"Chicago Tribune\" found that \"everything in \"Mulholland Drive\" is a nightmare. It's a portrayal of the Hollywood golden dream turning rancid, curdling into a poisonous stew of hatred, envy, sleazy compromise and soul-killing failure. This is the underbelly of our glamorous fantasies, and the area Lynch shows here is realistically portrayed.\"\n\"The Guardian\" asked six well-known film critics for their own perceptions of the overall meaning in \"Mulholland Drive\". Neil Roberts of \"The Sun\" and Tom Charity of \"Time Out\" subscribe to the theory that Betty is Diane's projection of a happier life. Roger Ebert and Jonathan Ross seem to accept this interpretation, but both hesitate to overanalyze the film. Ebert states, \"There is no explanation. There may not even be a mystery.\" Ross observes that there are storylines that go nowhere: \"Perhaps these were leftovers from the pilot it was originally intended to be, or perhaps these things are the non-sequiturs and subconscious of dreams.\" Philip French from \"The Observer\" sees it as an allusion to Hollywood tragedy, while Jane Douglas from the BBC rejects the theory of Betty's life as Diane's dream, but also warns against too much analysis.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nContained within the original DVD release is a card titled \"David Lynch's 10 Clues to Unlocking This Thriller\". The clues are:\n2002 DVD edition insert\nMedia theorist Siobhan Lyons similarly disagrees with the dream theory, arguing that it is a \"superficial interpretation [which] undermines the strength of the absurdity of reality that often takes place in Lynch's universe.\" Instead, Lyons posits that Betty and Diane are in fact two different people who happen to look similar, a common motif among Hollywood starlets. In a similar interpretation, Betty and Rita and Diane and Camilla may exist in parallel universes that sometimes interconnect. Another theory offered is that the narrative is a M\u00f6bius strip. It was also suggested that the entire film takes place in a dream, yet the identity of the dreamer is unknown. Repeated references to beds, bedrooms and sleeping represent the influence of dreams. Rita falls asleep several times; in between these episodes, disconnected scenes such as the men having a conversation at Winkie's, Betty's arrival in Los Angeles and the bungled hit take place, suggesting that Rita may be dreaming them. The opening shot of the film zooms into a bed containing an unknown sleeper, instilling, according to film scholar Ruth Perlmutter, the necessity to question the reality of following events. Professor of dream studies Kelly Bulkeley argues that the early scene at the diner, being the only scene in which dreams or dreaming are explicitly mentioned, illustrates \"revelatory truth and epistemological uncertainty in Lynch's film.\" The monstrous being from the dream, who is the subject of conversation of the men in Winkie's, reappears at the end of the film right before and after Diane commits suicide. Bulkeley asserts that the lone discussion of dreams in that scene presents an opening to \"a new way of understanding everything that happens in the movie.\"\nPhilosopher and film theorist Robert Sinnerbrink similarly notes that the images following Diane's apparent suicide undermine the \"dream and reality\" interpretation. After Diane shoots herself, the bed is consumed with smoke, and Betty and Rita are shown beaming at each other, after which a woman in the Club Silencio balcony whispers \"Silencio\" as the screen fades to black. Sinnerbrink writes that the \"concluding images float in an indeterminate zone between fantasy and reality, which is perhaps the genuinely metaphysical dimension of the cinematic image,\" also noting that it might be that the \"last sequence comprises the fantasy images of Diane's dying consciousness, concluding with the real moment of her death: the final \"Silencio\".\" Referring to the same sequence, film theorist Andrew Hageman notes that \"the ninety-second coda that follows Betty/Diane's suicide is a cinematic space that persists after the curtain has dropped on her living consciousness, and this persistent space is the very theatre where the illusion of illusion is continually unmasked.\"\nFilm theorist David Roche writes that Lynch films do not simply tell detective stories, but rather force the audience into the role of becoming detectives themselves to make sense of the narratives, and that \"Mulholland Drive\", like other Lynch films, frustrates \"the spectator's need for a rational diegesis by playing on the spectator's mistake that narration is synonymous with diegesis.\" In Lynch's films, the spectator is always \"one step behind narration\" and thus \"narration prevails over diegesis.\" Roche also notes that there are multiple mysteries in the film that ultimately go unanswered by the characters who meet dead ends, like Betty and Rita, or give in to pressures as Adam does. Although the audience still struggles to make sense of the stories, the characters are no longer trying to solve their mysteries. Roche concludes that \"Mulholland Drive\" is a mystery film not because it allows the audience to view the solution to a question, but the film itself is a mystery that is held together \"by the spectator-detective's desire to make sense\" of it.\nA \"poisonous valentine to Hollywood\".\nDespite the proliferation of theories, critics note that no explanation satisfies all of the loose ends and questions that arise from the film. Stephen Holden of the \"New York Times\" writes, \"\"Mulholland Drive\" has little to do with any single character's love life or professional ambition. The movie is an ever-deepening reflection on the allure of Hollywood and on the multiple role-playing and self-invention that the movie-going experience promises. ... What greater power is there than the power to enter and to program the dream life of the culture?\" J. Hoberman from the \"Village Voice\" echoes this sentiment by calling it a \"poisonous valentine to Hollywood.\"\n\"Mulholland Drive\" has been compared with Billy Wilder's film noir \"Sunset Boulevard\" (1950), another tale about broken dreams in Hollywood, and early in the film Rita is shown crossing Sunset Boulevard at night. Apart from both titles being named after iconic Los Angeles streets, \"Mulholland Drive\" is \"Lynch's unique account of what held Wilder's attention too: human putrefaction (a term Lynch used several times during his press conference at the New York Film Festival 2001) in a city of lethal illusions.\" Lynch lived near Mulholland Drive, and stated in an interview, \"At night, you ride on the top of the world. In the daytime you ride on top of the world, too, but it's mysterious, and there's a hair of fear because it goes into remote areas. You feel the history of Hollywood in that road.\" Watts also had experience with the road before her career was established: \"I remember driving along the street many times sobbing my heart out in my car, going, 'What am I doing here?'\"\nCritic Gregory Weight cautions viewers against the cynicism of believing that Lynch presents only \"the fa\u00e7ade and that he believes only evil and deceit lie beneath it.\" As much as Lynch makes a statement about the deceit, manipulation and false pretenses in Hollywood culture, he also infuses nostalgia throughout the film and recognizes that real art comes from classic filmmaking, as Lynch cast and thereby paid tribute to veteran actors Ann Miller, Lee Grant and Chad Everett. He also portrays Betty as extraordinarily talented and shows that her abilities are noticed by powerful people in the entertainment industry. Commenting on the contrasting positions between film nostalgia and the putrefaction of Hollywood, Steven Dillon writes that \"Mulholland Drive\" is critical of the culture of Hollywood as much as it is a condemnation of cinephilia.\nHarring described her interpretation after seeing the film: \"When I saw it the first time, I thought it was the story of Hollywood dreams, illusion and obsession. It touches on the idea that nothing is quite as it seems, especially the idea of being a Hollywood movie star. The second and third times I saw it, I thought it dealt with identity. Do we know who we are? And then I kept seeing different things in it. ... There's no right or wrong to what someone takes away from it or what they think the film is really about. It's a movie that makes you continuously ponder, makes you ask questions. I've heard over and over, 'This is a movie that I'll see again' or 'This is a movie you've got to see again.' It intrigues you. You want to get it, but I don't think it's a movie to be gotten. It's achieved its goal if it makes you ask questions.\"\nRomantic content.\nThe relationships between Betty and Rita, and Diane and Camilla have been variously described as \"touching,\" \"moving,\" as well as \"titillating.\" The French critic Thierry Jousse, in his review for \"Cahiers du Cin\u00e9ma\", said that the love between the women depicted is \"of lyricism practically without equal in contemporary cinema.\" In the pages of \"Film Comment\", Phillip Lopate states that the pivotal romantic interlude between Betty and Rita was made poignant and tender by Betty's \"understanding for the first time, with self-surprise, that all her helpfulness and curiosity about the other woman had a point: desire\u00a0... It is a beautiful moment, made all the more miraculous by its earned tenderness, and its distances from anything lurid.\" Stephanie Zacharek of \"Salon\" magazine stated that the scene's \"eroticism [was] so potent it blankets the whole movie, coloring every scene that came before and every one that follows.\" Betty and Rita were chosen by the Independent Film Channel as the emblematic romantic couple of the 2000s. Writer Charles Taylor said, \"Betty and Rita are often framed against darkness so soft and velvety it's like a hovering nimbus, ready to swallow them if they awake from the film's dream. And when they are swallowed, when smoke fills the frame as if the sulfur of hell itself were obscuring our vision, we feel as if not just a romance has been broken, but the beauty of the world has been cursed.\"\nSome film theorists have argued that Lynch inserts queerness in the aesthetic and thematic content of the film. The non-linear film is \"incapable of sustaining narrative coherence,\" as Lee Wallace argues, and \"lesbianism dissolves the ideological conventions of narrative realism, operating as the switch point for the contesting storyworlds within Lynch's elaborately plotted film.\" The presence of mirrors and doppelgangers throughout the film \"are common representations of lesbian desire.\" The co-dependency in the relationship between Betty and Rita\u2014which borders on outright obsession\u2014has been compared to the female relationships in two similar films, Ingmar Bergman's \"Persona\" (1966) and Robert Altman's \"3 Women\" (1977), which also depict identities of vulnerable women that become tangled, interchanging and ultimately merged: \"The female couples also mirror each other, with their mutual interactions conflating hero(ine) worship with same-sex desire.\" Lynch pays direct homage to \"Persona\" in the scene where Rita dons the blonde wig, styled exactly like Betty's own hair. Rita and Betty then gaze at each other in the mirror \"drawing attention to their physical similarity, linking the sequence to theme of embrace, physical coupling and the idea of merging or doubling.\" Mirroring and doubles, which are prominent themes throughout the film, serve to further queer the form and content of the film.\nSeveral theorists have accused Lynch of perpetuating stereotypes and clich\u00e9s of lesbians, bisexuals and lesbian relationships. Rita (the \"femme fatale\") and Betty (the school girl) represent two classic stock lesbian characters; Heather Love identifies two key clich\u00e9s used in the film: \"Lynch presents lesbianism in its innocent and expansive form: lesbian desire appears as one big adventure, an entr\u00e9e into a glamorous and unknown territory.\" Simultaneously, he presents the tragic lesbian triangle, \"in which an attractive but unavailable woman dumps a less attractive woman who is figured as exclusively lesbian,\" perpetuating the stereotype of the bisexual \"ending up with a man.\" Maria San Filippo recognizes that Lynch relies on classic film noir archetypes to develop Camilla's eventual betrayal: these archetypes \"become ingrained to such a degree that viewers are immediately cued that 'Rita' is not what she seems and that it is only a matter of time before she reveals her duplicitous nature.\" For Love, Diane's exclusively lesbian desire is \"between success and failure, between sexiness and abjection, even between life and death\" if she is rejected. In this context the character of Diane may be interpreted as the \"tragic lesbian\" clich\u00e9 pining after the bisexual in the heterosexual relationship. Love's analysis of the film notes the media's peculiar response to the film's lesbian content: \"reviewers rhapsodized in particular and at length about the film's sex scenes, as if there were a contest to see who could enjoy this representation of female same-sex desire the most.\" She points out that the film used a classic theme in literature and film depicting lesbian relationships: Camilla as achingly beautiful and available, rejecting Diane for Adam. Popular reaction to the film suggests the contrasting relationships between Betty and Rita and Diane and Camilla are \"understood as both the hottest thing on earth and, at the same time, as something fundamentally sad and not at all erotic\" as \"the heterosexual order asserts itself with crushing effects for the abandoned woman.\"\nHeterosexuality as primary is important in the latter half of the film, as the ultimate demise of Diane and Camilla's relationship springs from the matrimony of the heterosexual couple. At Adam's party, they begin to announce that Camilla and Adam are getting married; through laughs and kisses, the declaration is delayed because it is obvious and expected. The heterosexual closure of the scene is interrupted by a scene change. As Lee Wallace suggests, by planning a hit against Camilla, \"Diane circumvents the heterosexual closure of the industry story but only by going over to its storyworld, an act that proves fatal for both women, the cause and effect relations of the thriller being fundamentally incompatible with the plot of lesbianism as the film presents it.\"\nMedia portrayals of Naomi Watts's and Laura Elena Harring's views of their onscreen relationships were varied and conflicting. Watts said of the filming of the scene, \"I don't see it as erotic, though maybe it plays that way. The last time I saw it, I actually had tears in my eyes because I knew where the story was going. It broke my heart a little bit.\" However, in another interview Watts stated, \"I was amazed how honest and real all this looks on screen. These girls look really in love and it was curiously erotic.\" While Harring was quoted saying, \"The love scene just happened in my eyes. Rita's very grateful for the help Betty's given [her] so I'm saying goodbye and goodnight to her, thank you, from the bottom of my heart. I kiss her and then there's just an energy that takes us [over]. Of course, I have amnesia so I don't know if I've done it before, but I don't think we're really lesbians.\" Heather Love agreed somewhat with Harring's perception when she stated that identity in \"Mulholland Drive\" is not as important as desire: \"who we are does not count for much\u2014what matters instead is what we are about to do, what we want to do.\"\nCharacters.\nBetty Elms (Naomi Watts) is the bright and talented newcomer to Los Angeles, described as \"wholesome, optimistic, determined to take the town by storm,\" and \"absurdly na\u00efve.\" Her perkiness and intrepid approach to helping Rita because it is the right thing to do is reminiscent of Nancy Drew for reviewers. Her entire persona at first is an apparent clich\u00e9 of small-town na\u00efvet\u00e9. But it is Betty's identity, or loss of it, that appears to be the focus of the film. For one critic, Betty performed the role of the film's consciousness and unconscious. Watts, who modeled Betty on Doris Day, Tippi Hedren and Kim Novak, observed that Betty is a thrill-seeker, someone \"who finds herself in a world she doesn't belong in and is ready to take on a new identity, even if it's somebody else's.\" This has also led one theorist to conclude that since Betty had na\u00efvely, yet eagerly entered the Hollywood system, she had become a \"complicit actor\" who had \"embraced the very structure that\" destroyed her. In an explanation of her development of the Betty character, Watts stated:\nI had to therefore come up with my own decisions about what this meant and what this character was going through, what was dream and what was reality. My interpretation could end up being completely different, from both David and the audience. But I \"did\" have to reconcile all of that, and people seem to think it works.\nBetty, however difficult to believe as her character is established, shows an astonishing depth in her audition. Previously rehearsed with Rita in the apartment, where Rita feeds her lines woodenly, the scene is \"dreck\" and \"hollow; every line unworthy of a genuine actress's commitment,\" and Betty plays it in rehearsal as poorly as it is written. However, though nervous but plucky as ever at the audition, Betty enters the cramped room, and when pitted inches from her audition partner (Chad Everett), she turns it into a scene of powerful sexual tension that she fully controls and draws in every person in the room. The sexuality erodes immediately as the scene ends and she stands before them shyly waiting for their approval. One film analyst asserts that Betty's previously unknown ability steals the show, specifically, taking the dark mystery away from Rita and assigning it to herself, and by Lynch's use of this scene, he illustrates his use of deception in his characters. Betty's acting ability prompts Ruth Perlmutter to speculate that if Betty is acting the role of Diane in either a dream or a parody of a film, ultimately her acting turns against her.\nRita (Laura Elena Harring) is the mysterious and helpless apparent victim, a classic \"femme fatale\" with her dark, strikingly beautiful appearance. Roger Ebert was so impressed with Harring that he said of her \"all she has to do is stand there and she is the first good argument in 55\u00a0years for a \"Gilda\" remake.\" She serves as the object of desire, directly oppositional to Betty's bright self-assuredness. She is also the first character with whom the audience identifies, and as viewers know her as confused and frightened, not knowing who she is and where she is going, she represents their desire to make sense of the film through her identity. Instead of threatening, she inspires Betty to nurture, console and help her. Her amnesia makes her a blank persona, which one reviewer notes is \"the vacancy that comes with extraordinary beauty and the onlooker's willingness to project any combination of angelic and devilish onto her.\" A character analysis of Rita asserts that her actions are the most genuine of the first portion of the film, since she has no memory and nothing to use as a frame of reference for how to behave. Todd McGowan, however, author of a book on themes in Lynch's films, states that the first portion of \"Mulholland Drive\" can be construed as Rita's fantasy, until Diane Selwyn is revealed; Betty is the object that overcomes Rita's anxiety about her loss of identity. According to film historian Steven Dillon, Diane transitions a former roommate into Rita: following a tense scene where the roommate collects her remaining belongings, Rita appears in the apartment, smiling at Diane.\nAfter Betty and Rita find the decomposing body, they flee the apartment and their images are split apart and reintegrated. David Roche notes that Rita's lack of identity causes a breakdown that \"occurs not only at the level of the character but also at the level of the image; the shot is subjected to special effects that fragment their image and their voices are drowned out in reverb, the camera seemingly writing out the mental state of the characters\". Immediately they return to Betty's aunt's apartment where Rita dons a blonde wig\u2014ostensibly to disguise herself\u2014but making her look remarkably like Betty. It is this transformation that one film analyst suggests is the melding of both identities. This is supported by visual clues, like particular camera angles making their faces appear to be merging into one. This is further illustrated soon after by their sexual intimacy, followed by Rita's personality becoming more dominant as she insists they go to Club Silencio at 2 a.m., that eventually leads to the total domination by Camilla.\nDiane Selwyn (Watts) is the palpably frustrated and depressed woman, who seems to have ridden the coattails of Camilla, whom she idolizes and adores, but who does not return her affection. She is considered to be the reality of the too-good-to-be-true Betty, or a later version of Betty after living too long in Hollywood. For Steven Dillon, the plot of the film \"makes Rita the perfect empty vessel for Diane's fantasies\", but because Rita is only a \"blank cover girl\" Diane has \"invested herself in emptiness\", which leads her to depression and apparently to suicide. Hence, Diane is the personification of dissatisfaction, painfully illustrated when she is unable to climax while masturbating, in a scene that indicates \"through blurred, jerky, point of view shots of the stony wall\u2014not only her tears and humiliation but the disintegration of her fantasy and her growing desire for revenge\". One analysis of Diane suggests her devotion to Camilla is based on a manifestation of narcissism, as Camilla embodies everything Diane wants and wants to be. Although she is portrayed as weak and the ultimate loser, for Jeff Johnson, author of a book about morality in Lynch films, Diane is the only character in the second portion of the film whose moral code remains intact. She is \"a decent person corrupted by the miscellaneous miscreants who populate the film industry\". Her guilt and regret are evident in her suicide, and in the clues that surface in the first portion of the film. Rita's fear, the dead body and the illusion at Club Silencio indicate that something is dark and wrong in Betty and Rita's world. In becoming free from Camilla, her moral conditioning kills her.\nCamilla Rhodes (Melissa George, Laura Elena Harring) is little more than a face in a photo and a name that has inspired many representatives of some vaguely threatening power to place her in a film against the wishes of Adam. Referred to as a \"vapid moll\" by one reviewer, she barely makes an impression in the first portion of the film, but after the blue box is opened and she is portrayed by Harring, she becomes a full person who symbolizes \"betrayal, humiliation and abandonment\", and is the object of Diane's sexual obsession and frustration. Diane is a sharp contrast to Camilla, who is more voluptuous than ever, and who appears to have \"sucked the life out of Diane\". Immediately after telling Diane that \"she drives her wild\", Camilla tells her they must end their affair. On a film set where Adam is directing Camilla, he orders the set cleared, except for Diane\u2014at Camilla's request\u2014where Adam shows another actor just how to kiss Camilla correctly. Instead of punishing Camilla for such public humiliation, as is suggested by Diane's conversation with the bungling hit man, one critic views Rita as the vulnerable representation of Diane's desire for Camilla.\nAdam Kesher (Justin Theroux) is established in the first portion of the film as a \"vaguely arrogant\", but apparently successful, director who endures one humiliation after another. Theroux said of his role, \"He's sort of the one character in the film who doesn't know what the [hell's] going on. I think he's the one guy the audience says, 'I'm kind of like you right now. I don't know why you're being subjected to all this pain.'\" After being stripped of creative control of his film, he is cuckolded by the pool cleaner (played by Billy Ray Cyrus), and thrown out of his own opulent house above Hollywood. After he checks into a seedy motel and pays with cash, the manager arrives to tell him that his credit is no good. Witnessed by Diane, Adam is pompous and self-important. He is the only character whose personality does not seem to change completely from the first part of the film to the second. One analysis of Adam's character contends that because he capitulated and chose Camilla Rhodes for his film, that is the end of Betty's cheerfulness and ability to help Rita, placing the blame for her tragedy on the representatives of studio power. Another analysis suggests that \"Adam Kesher does not have the control, he wants and is willing to step over who or what is necessary to consolidate his career. Hungry for power, he uses the appearance of love or seduction only as one more tool. Love for power justifies that everything else is forgotten, be it pride, love or any other consideration. There are no regrets, it is Mulholland Drive in Los Angeles.\"\nMinor characters include The Cowboy (Monty Montgomery), the Castigliani Brothers (Dan Hedaya and Angelo Badalamenti) and Mr. Roque (Michael J. Anderson), all of whom are somehow involved in pressuring Adam to cast Camilla Rhodes in his film. These characters represent the death of creativity for film scholars, and they portray a \"vision of the industry as a closed hierarchical system in which the ultimate source of power remains hidden behind a series of representatives\". Ann Miller portrays Coco, the landlady who welcomes Betty to her wonderful new apartment. Coco, in the first part of the film, represents the old guard in Hollywood, who welcomes and protects Betty. In the second part of the film, however, she appears as Adam's mother, who impatiently chastises Diane for being late to the party and barely pays attention to Diane's embarrassed tale of how she got into acting.\nStyle.\nThe filmmaking style of David Lynch has been written about extensively using descriptions like \"ultraweird\", \"dark\" and \"oddball\". Todd McGowan writes, \"One cannot watch a Lynch film the way one watches a standard Hollywood film noir nor in the way that one watches most radical films.\" Through Lynch's juxtaposition of clich\u00e9 and surreal, nightmares and fantasies, nonlinear story lines, camera work, sound and lighting, he presents a film that challenges viewers to suspend belief of what they are experiencing. Many of the characters in \"Mulholland Drive\" are archetypes that can only be perceived as clich\u00e9: the new Hollywood hopeful, the \"femme fatale\", the maverick director and shady powerbrokers that Lynch never seems to explore fully. Lynch places these often hackneyed characters in dire situations, creating dream-like qualities. By using these characters in scenarios that have components and references to dreams, fantasies and nightmares, viewers are left to decide, between the extremes, what is reality. One film analyst, Jennifer Hudson, writes of him, \"Like most surrealists, Lynch's language of the unexplained is the fluid language of dreams.\"\nDavid Lynch uses various methods of deception in \"Mulholland Drive\". A shadowy figure named Mr. Roque, who seems to control film studios, is portrayed by dwarf actor Michael J. Anderson. Anderson, who has only two lines and is seated in an enormous wooden wheelchair, was fitted with oversized foam prosthetic arms and legs in order to portray his head as abnormally small. During Adam and Camilla's party, Diane watches Camilla (played by Harring) with Adam on one arm, lean over and deeply kiss the same woman who appeared as Camilla (Melissa George) before the blue box was opened. Both then turn and smile pointedly at Diane. Film critic Franklin Ridgway writes that the depiction of such a deliberate \"cruel and manipulative\" act makes it unclear if Camilla is as capricious as she seems, or if Diane's paranoia is allowing the audience only to see what she senses. In a scene immediately after Betty's audition, the film cuts to a woman singing without apparent accompaniment, but as the camera pulls backwards, the audience sees that it is a recording studio. In actuality, it is a sound stage where Betty has just arrived to meet Adam Kesher, that the audience realizes as the camera pulls back further. Ridgway insists that such deception through artful camera work sets the viewer full of doubt about what is being presented: \"It is as if the camera, in its graceful fluidity of motion, reassures us that it (thinks it) sees everything, has everything under control, even if we (and Betty) do not.\"\nAccording to Stephen Dillon, Lynch's use of different camera positions throughout the film, such as hand-held points of view, makes the viewer \"identify with the suspense of the character in his or her particular space\", but that Lynch at moments also \"disconnects the camera from any particular point of view, thereby ungrounding a single or even a human perspective\" so that the multiple perspectives keep contexts from merging, significantly troubling \"our sense of the individual and the human\". Andrew Hageman similarly notes that the camera work in the film \"renders a very disturbing sense of place and presence\", such as the scene in Winkie's where the \"camera floats irregularly during the shot-reverse shot dialogue\" by which the \"spectator becomes aware that a set of normally objective shots have become disturbingly subjective\". Scholar Curt Hersey recognizes several avant-garde techniques used in the film including lack of transitions, abrupt transitions, motion speed, nontraditional camera movement, computer-generated imagery, nondiegetic images, nonlinear narration and intertextuality.\nThe first portion of the film that establishes the characters of Betty, Rita and Adam presents some of the most logical filmmaking of Lynch's career. The later part of the film that represents reality to many viewers, however, exhibits a marked change in cinematic effect that gives it a quality just as surreal as the first part. Diane's scenes feature choppier editing and dirtier lighting that symbolize her physical and spiritual impoverishment, which contrasts with the first portion of the film where \"even the plainest decor seems to sparkle\", Betty and Rita glow with light and transitions between scenes are smooth. Lynch moves between scenes in the first portion of the film by using panoramic shots of the mountains, palm trees and buildings in Los Angeles. In the darker part of the film, sound transitions to the next scene without a visual reference where it is taking place. At Camilla's party, when Diane is most humiliated, the sound of crashing dishes is heard that carries immediately to the scene where dishes have been dropped in the diner, and Diane is speaking with the hit man. Sinnerbrink also notes that several scenes in the film, such as the one featuring Diane's hallucination of Camilla after Diane wakes up, the image of the being from behind Winkie's after Diane's suicide, or the \"repetition, reversal and displacement of elements that were differently configured\" in the early portion of the film, creates the uncanny effect where viewers are presented with familiar characters or situations in altered times or locations. Similarly, Hageman has identified the early scene at Winkie's as \"extremely uncanny\", because it is a scene where the \"boundaries separating physical reality from the imaginary realities of the unconscious disintegrate\". Author Valtteri Kokko has identified three groups of \"uncanny metaphors\"; the doppelg\u00e4nger of multiple characters played by the same actors, dreams and an everyday object\u2014primarily the blue box\u2014that initiates Rita's disappearance and Diane's real life.\nAnother recurring element in Lynch's films is his experimentation with sound. He stated in an interview, \"you look at the image and the scene silent, it's doing the job it's supposed to do, but the work isn't done. When you start working on the sound, keep working until it feels correct. There's so many wrong sounds and instantly you know it. Sometimes it's really magical.\" In the opening scene of the film, as the dark-haired woman stumbles off Mulholland Drive, silently it suggests she is clumsy. After Lynch added \"a hint of the steam [from the wreck] and the screaming kids\", however, it transformed Laura Elena Harring from clumsy to terrified. Lynch also infused subtle rumblings throughout portions of the film that reviewers noted added unsettling and creepy effects. Hageman also identifies \"perpetual and uncanny ambient sound\", and places a particular emphasis on the scene where the man collapses behind Winkie's as normal sound is drowned out by a buzzing roar, noting that the noise \"creates a dissonance and suspense that draws in the spectator as detective to place the sound and reestablish order\". \"Mulholland Drive\"'s ending with the woman at Club Silencio whispering is an example of Lynch's aural deception and surreality, according to Ruth Perlmutter, who writes, \"The acting, the dreams, the search for identity, the fears and terrors of the undefined self are over when the film is over, and therefore, there is only silence and enigma.\"\nProduction.\nDevelopment.\nOriginally conceived as a television series, \"Mulholland Drive\" began as a 90-minute pilot produced for Touchstone Television and intended for the ABC television network. Tony Krantz, the agent who was responsible for the development of \"Twin Peaks\", was \"fired up\" about doing another television series. Lynch sold the idea to ABC executives based only on the story of Rita emerging from the car accident with her purse containing $125,000 in cash and the blue key, and Betty trying to help her figure out who she is. An ABC executive recalled, \"I remember the creepiness of this woman in this horrible, horrible crash, and David teasing us with the notion that people are chasing her. She's not just 'in' trouble\u2014she \"is\" trouble. Obviously, we asked, 'What happens next?' And David said, 'You have to buy the pitch for me to tell you.'\"\nLynch had hesitations about returning to television, after his experience making \"Twin Peaks\" and the rapid cancellation of another series he and Mark Frost made for ABC, \"On the Air\". \"With all the commercials and its terrible sound and picture...TV is a hair of a joke really\". Nevertheless, Lynch described the attractiveness of the longer format: \"I'm a sucker for a continuing story\u00a0... Theoretically, you can get a very deep story and you can go so deep and open the world so beautifully, but it takes time to do that.\" The story included surreal elements, much like Lynch's earlier series \"Twin Peaks\". Groundwork was laid for story arcs, such as the mystery of Rita's identity, Betty's career and Adam Kesher's film project. The planned series would also have featured a romance between Betty and Adam.\nThe pilot's budget was $7 million, on the proviso that Lynch shot a closed ending in case the network didn't order a series. While initially enthusiastic, ABC's expectations soon clashed with Lynch's vision. They found his pacing too slow and objected to his casting of Naomi Watts and Laura Harring. According to Krantz the two were \"a little old...and ABC thinks Betty is too aw-shucks and Okie-from-Muskogee, and that at the beginning, after the accident, Rita looks kind of \"goofy\".\" Even Lynch's penchant for cigarettes clashed with ABC's standards-and-practices department, which didn't want the network to appear as if it condoned smoking. Lynch made script changes to accommodate ABC, but in a later scene whispered to Justin Theroux, \"Take a really fucking big drag\u2014fucking \"love\" that cigarette\".\nWhen Lynch showed ABC a rough cut of the pilot, the person who saw it, according to Lynch, was watching it at six in the morning and was having coffee and standing up. He hated the pilot, and ABC immediately cancelled it. Pierre Edelman, Lynch's friend from Paris, came to visit and started talking to him about the film being a feature. Edelman went back to Paris. Canal+ wanted to give Lynch money to make it into a feature and it took a year to negotiate.\nActress Sherilyn Fenn stated in a 2014 interview that the original idea came during the filming of \"Twin Peaks\", as a spin-off film for her character of Audrey Horne.\nCasting.\nLynch cast Naomi Watts and Laura Harring by their photographs. He called them in separately for half-hour interviews and told them that he had not seen any of their previous works in film or television. Harring considered it fateful that she was involved in a minor car accident on the way to the first interview, only to learn her character would also be involved in a car accident in the film. Watts arrived wearing jeans for the first interview, direct from the airplane from New York City. Lynch asked her to return the next day \"more glammed up\". She was offered the part two weeks later. Lynch explained his selection of Watts, \"I saw someone that I felt had a tremendous talent, and I saw someone who had a beautiful soul, an intelligence\u2014possibilities for a lot of different roles, so it was a beautiful full package.\" Justin Theroux also met Lynch directly after his airplane flight. After a long flight with little sleep, Theroux arrived dressed all in black, with untidy hair. Lynch liked the look and decided to cast Adam wearing similar clothes and the same hairstyle.\nFilming.\nFilming for the television pilot began on location in Los Angeles in February 1999 and took six weeks. Ultimately, the network was unhappy with the pilot and decided not to place it on its schedule. Objections included the nonlinear storyline, the ages of Harring and Watts (whom they considered too old), cigarette smoking by Ann Miller's character and a close-frame shot of dog feces in one scene. Lynch remembered, \"All I know is, I loved making it, ABC hated it, and I don't like the cut I turned in. I agreed with ABC that the longer cut was too slow, but I was forced to butcher it because we had a deadline, and there wasn't time to finesse anything. It lost texture, big scenes and storylines, and there are 300 tape copies of the bad version circulating around. Lots of people have seen it, which is embarrassing, because they're bad-quality tapes, too. I don't want to think about it.\"\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nOne night, I sat down, the ideas came in, and it was a most beautiful experience. Everything was seen from a different angle\u00a0... Now, looking back, I see that [the film] always wanted to be this way. It just took this strange beginning to cause it to be what it is.\nDavid Lynch, 2001\nThe script was later rewritten and expanded when Lynch decided to transform it into a feature film. Lynch explained the process of developing an ending for the unfinished story: \"The day came when I got the greenlight to turn it into a feature, and I had zero ideas. I just hadn\u2019t been thinking about it. Then came the day I needed to get those ideas, and that night, I sat down during my meditation and in there, I say like a string of pearls, all the ideas came, all at once, and there it was.\" He added that, \"Now, looking back, I see that [the film] always wanted to be this way. It just took this strange beginning to cause it to be what it is.\" The result was an extra eighteen pages of material that included the romantic relationship between Rita and Betty and the events that occurred after the blue box was opened. Watts was relieved that the pilot was dropped by ABC. She found Betty too one-dimensional without the darker portion of the film that was put together afterward. Most of the new scenes were filmed in October 2000, funded with $7\u00a0million from French production company StudioCanal.\nTheroux described approaching filming without entirely understanding the plot: \"You get the whole script, but he might as well withhold the scenes you're not in, because the whole turns out to be more mystifying than the parts. David welcomes questions, but he won't answer any of them\u00a0... You work kind of half-blindfolded. If he were a first-time director and hadn't demonstrated any command of this method, I'd probably have reservations. But it obviously works for him.\" Theroux noted that the only answer Lynch did provide was that he was certain that Theroux's character, a Hollywood director, was not meant to be Lynch. Watts stated that she tried to bluff Lynch by pretending she had the plot figured out, and that he delighted in the cast's frustration. Ben Stiller visited the set one day, Lynch thought he was an extra so he offered him a background role, but he declined as he wasn't looking for work.\n\"I'm not going to lie: I felt very vulnerable,\" Laura Harring said of filming the sex scene between Harring and Watts' characters. \"I was in my dressing room and was on the verge of tears. It's hard. There are a lot of people there ... Naomi and I were friends. It was pretty awkward.\"\nSoundtrack.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe album progresses much like a typical Lynch film, opening with a quick, pleasant Jitterbug and then slowly delving into darker string passages, the twangy guitar sounds of '50s diner music and, finally, the layered, disturbing, often confusing underbelly of the score.\nNeil Shurley, 2002\nThe soundtrack of \"Mulholland Drive\" was supervised by Angelo Badalamenti, who collaborated on previous Lynch projects \"Blue Velvet\" and \"Twin Peaks\". Badalamenti, who was nominated for awards from the American Film Institute (AFI) and the British Academy of Film and Television Arts (BAFTA) for his work on the film, also has a cameo as an espresso aficionado and mobster.\nReviewers noted that Badalamenti's ominous score, described as his \"darkest yet\", contributes to the sense of mystery as the film opens on the dark-haired woman's limousine, that contrasts with the bright, hopeful tones of Betty's first arrival in Los Angeles, with the score \"acting as an emotional guide for the viewer\". Film music journalist Daniel Schweiger remarks that Badalamenti's contribution to the score alternates from the \"nearly motionless string dread to noir jazz and audio feedback\", with \"the rhythms building to an explosion of infinite darkness.\" Badalamenti described a particular technique of sound design applied to the film, by which he would provide Lynch with multiple ten- to twelve-minute tracks at slow tempo, that they called \"firewood\", from which Lynch \"would take fragments and experiment with them resulting in a lot of film's eerie soundscapes.\"\nLynch uses two pop songs from the 1960s directly after one another, playing as two actresses are auditioning by lip synching them. According to an analyst of music used in Lynch films, Lynch's female characters are often unable to communicate through normal channels and are reduced to lip-synching or being otherwise stifled. Connie Stevens's \"Sixteen Reasons\" is the song being sung while the camera pans backwards to reveal several illusions, and Linda Scott's version of \"I've Told Ev'ry Little Star\" is the audition for the first Camilla Rhodes, that film scholar Eric Gans considers a song of empowerment for Betty. Originally written by Jerome Kern as a duet, sung by Linda Scott in this rendition by herself, Gans suggests it takes on a homosexual overtone in \"Mulholland Drive\". Unlike \"Sixteen Reasons\", however, portions of \"I've Told Ev'ry Little Star\" are distorted to suggest \"a sonic split-identity\" for Camilla. When the song plays, Betty has just entered the sound stage where Adam is auditioning actresses for his film, and she sees Adam, locks eyes with him and abruptly flees after Adam has declared \"This is the girl\" about Camilla, thereby avoiding his inevitable rejection.\nAt the hinge of the film is a scene in an unusual late night theater called Club Silencio where a performer announces \"\"No hay banda\" (there is no band)\u00a0... but yet we hear a band\", variated between English, Spanish and French. Described as \"the most original and stunning sequence in an original and stunning film\", Rebekah Del Rio's Spanish a cappella rendition of \"Crying\", named \"Llorando\", is praised as \"show-stopping\u00a0... except that there's no show to stop\" in the sparsely attended Club Silencio. Lynch wanted to use Roy Orbison's version of \"Crying\" in \"Blue Velvet\", but changed his mind when he heard Orbison's \"In Dreams\". Del Rio, who popularized the Spanish version and who received her first recording contract on the basis of the song, stated that Lynch flew to Nashville where she was living, and she sang the song for him once and did not know he was recording her. Lynch wrote a part for her in the film and used the version she sang for him in Nashville. The song tragically serenades the lovers Betty and Rita, who sit spellbound and weeping, moments before their relationship disappears and is replaced by Diane and Camilla's dysfunction. According to one film scholar, the song and the entire theater scene marks the disintegration of Betty's and Rita's personalities, as well as their relationship. With the use of multiple languages and a song to portray such primal emotions, one film analyst states that Lynch exhibits his distrust of intellectual discourse and chooses to make sense through images and sounds. The disorienting effect of the music playing although del Rio is no longer there is described as \"the musical version of Magritte's painting \"Ceci n'est pas une pipe\"\".\nRelease and reception.\n\"Mulholland Drive\" premiered at the 2001 Cannes Film Festival in May to major critical acclaim. Lynch was awarded the Best Director prize at the festival, sharing it with co-winner Joel Coen for \"The Man Who Wasn't There\". It drew positive reviews from many critics and some of the strongest audience reactions of Lynch's career.\nThe film was publicized with cryptic posters bearing the abbreviation \"Mulholland Dr.\"\nBox office.\nUniversal Pictures released \"Mulholland Drive\" theatrically in 66 theaters in the United States on October 12, 2001, grossing $587,591 over its opening weekend. It eventually expanded to its widest release of 247 theaters, ultimately grossing $7,220,243 at the U.S. box office. TVA Films released the film theatrically in Canada on October 26, 2001. In other territories outside the United States, the film grossed $12,897,096, for a worldwide total of $20,117,339 on the film's original release, plus much smaller sums on later re-releases.\nReception and legacy.\nSince its release, \"Mulholland Drive\" has received \"both some of the harshest epithets and some of the most lavish praise in recent cinematic history\". On review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes, the film has an approval rating of 84% based on 264 reviews. The website's critical consensus reads, \"David Lynch's dreamlike and mysterious \"Mulholland Drive\" is a twisty neo-noir with an unconventional structure that features a mesmerizing performance from Naomi Watts as a woman on the dark fringes of Hollywood.\" On Metacritic, which assigns a normalized rating to reviews, the film has a weighted average score of 87 out of 100 based on 37 critics, indicating \"universal acclaim\".\nRoger Ebert of the \"Chicago Sun-Times\", who had often been dismissive of Lynch's work, awarded the film four stars out of four, writing, \"David Lynch has been working toward \"Mulholland Drive\" all of his career, and now that he's arrived there I forgive him for \"Wild at Heart\" and even \"Lost Highway\". At last his experiment doesn't shatter the test tubes. The movie is a surrealist dreamscape in the form of a Hollywood film noir, and the less sense it makes, the more we can't stop watching it\". In \"The New York Times\", Stephen Holden wrote that the film \"ranks alongside Fellini's \"8\u00bd\" and other auteurist fantasias as a monumental self-reflection\" and added: \"Looked at lightly, it is the grandest and silliest cinematic carnival to come along in quite some time\u00a0... on a more serious level, its investigation into the power of movies pierces a void from which you can hear the screams of a ravenous demon whose appetites can never be slaked.\" Edward Guthmann of the \"San Francisco Chronicle\" called it \"exhilarating\u00a0... for its dreamlike images and fierce, frequently reckless imagination\" and added, \"there's a mesmerizing quality to its languid pace, its sense of foreboding and its lost-in-time atmosphere\u00a0... it holds us, spellbound and amused, for all of its loony and luscious, exasperating 146\u00a0minutes [and] proves that Lynch is in solid form\u2014and still an expert at pricking our nerves\".\nIn \"Rolling Stone\", Peter Travers observed, \"\"Mulholland Drive\" makes movies feel alive again. This sinful pleasure is a fresh triumph for Lynch, and one of the best films of a sorry-ass year. For visionary daring, swooning eroticism and colors that pop like a whore's lip gloss, there's nothing like this baby anywhere.\" J. Hoberman of \"The Village Voice\" stated, \"This voluptuous phantasmagoria\u00a0... is certainly Lynch's strongest movie since \"Blue Velvet\" and maybe \"Eraserhead\". The very things that failed him in the bad-boy rockabilly debacle of \"Lost Highway\"\u2014the atmosphere of free-floating menace, pointless transmigration of souls, provocatively dropped plot stitches, gimcrack alternate universes\u2014are here brilliantly rehabilitated.\" A. O. Scott of \"The New York Times\" wrote that, while some might consider the plot an \"offense against narrative order\", the film is \"an intoxicating liberation from sense, with moments of feeling all the more powerful for seeming to emerge from the murky night world of the unconscious\".\nAmong detractors, Rex Reed of \"The New York Observer\" said that it was the worst film he had seen in 2001, calling it \"a load of moronic and incoherent garbage\". In \"New York\", Peter Rainer observed, \"Although I like it more than some of his other dreamtime freakfests, it's still a pretty moribund ride\u00a0... Lynch needs to renew himself with an influx of the deep feeling he has for people, for outcasts, and lay off the cretins and hobgoblins and zombies for a while.\" In \"The Washington Post\", Desson Howe called it \"an extended mood opera, if you want to put an arty label on incoherence\". Todd McCarthy of \"Variety\" found much to praise\u2014\"Lynch cranks up the levels of bizarre humor, dramatic incident and genuine mystery with a succession of memorable scenes, some of which rank with his best\"\u2014but also noted, \"the film jumps off the solid ground of relative narrative coherence into Lynchian fantasyland\u00a0... for the final 45\u00a0minutes, Lynch is in mind-twisting mode that presents a form of alternate reality with no apparent meaning or logical connection to what came before. Although such tactics are familiar from \"Twin Peaks\" and elsewhere, the sudden switcheroo to head games is disappointing because, up to this point, Lynch had so wonderfully succeeded in creating genuine involvement.\" James Berardinelli also criticized it, saying: \"Lynch cheats his audience, pulling the rug out from under us. He throws everything into the mix with the lone goal of confusing us. Nothing makes any sense because it's not supposed to make any sense. There's no purpose or logic to events. Lynch is playing a big practical joke on us.\" Film theorist Ray Carney notes, \"You wouldn't need all the emotional back-flips and narrative trap doors if you had anything to say. You wouldn't need doppelgangers and shadow-figures if your characters had souls.\"\nLater, \"Mulholland Drive\" was named the best film of the decade by the Los Angeles Film Critics Association, \"Cahiers du cin\u00e9ma\", IndieWire, \"Slant Magazine\", \"Reverse Shot\", \"The Village Voice\" and \"Time Out New York\", who asked rhetorically in a reference to the September 11 attacks, \"Can there be another movie that speaks as resonantly\u2014if unwittingly\u2014to the awful moment that marked our decade?\u00a0... \"Mulholland Drive\" is the monster behind the diner; it's the self-delusional dream turned into nightmare.\" It was also voted best of the decade in a \"Film Comment\" poll of international \"critics, programmers, academics, filmmakers and others\", and by the magazine's readers. It appeared on lists among the ten best films of the decade, coming in third according to \"The Guardian\", \"Rolling Stone\" critic Peter Travers, the Canadian Press, \"Access Hollywood\" critic Scott Mantz, and eighth on critic Michael Phillips's list. In 2010 it was named the second best arthouse film ever by \"The Guardian\". The film was voted as the 11th best film set in Los Angeles in the last 25 years by a group of \"Los Angeles Times\" writers and editors with the primary criterion of communicating an inherent truth about the L.A. experience. \"Empire\" magazine placed \"Mulholland Drive\" at number 391 on their list of the five hundred greatest films ever. It has also been ranked number 38 on the Channel 4 program \"50 Films to See Before You Die\". In 2011, online magazine \"Slate\" named \"Mulholland Drive\" in its piece on \"New Classics\" as the most enduring film since 2000. Ebert added \"Mulholland Drive\" to his canon of \"Great Movies\": \"David Lynch loves movies, genres, archetypes and obligatory shots. \"Mulholland Drive\" employs the conventions of film noir in a pure form. One useful definition of noirs is that they're about characters who have committed a crime or a sin, are immersed with guilt, and fear they're getting what they deserve. Another is that they've done nothing wrong, but it nevertheless certainly appears as if they have. The second describes Hitchcock's favorite plot, the Innocent Man Wrongly Accused. The first describes the central dilemma of \"Mulholland Dr.\" Yet it floats in an uneasy psychic space, never defining who sinned. The film evokes the feeling of noir guilt while never attaching to anything specific. A neat trick. Pure cinema.\"\nIn the British Film Institute's 2012 \"Sight &amp; Sound\" poll, \"Mulholland Drive\" was ranked the 28th greatest film ever made, and in the 2022 poll, its ranking rose to 8th. Having received 40 critics' votes, it is one of only two films from the 21st century to be included in the top 50, along with 2000's \"In the Mood for Love\". In a 2015 BBC poll, it was ranked 21st among all American films. The following year, \"Mulholland Drive\" was named as the greatest film of the 21st century in a poll conducted by BBC Culture. In July 2021, the 4K restoration version of \"Mulholland Drive\" was shown in the Cannes Classics section at the 2021 Cannes Film Festival. In June 2025, the film ranked number 2 on \"The New York Times\"' list of \"The 100 Best Movies of the 21st Century.\" It was also ranked as such on a \"Readers' Choice\" edition of the poll. In July 2025, it ranked number 9 on \"Rolling Stone\"'s list of \"The 100 Best Movies of the 21st Century.\"\nHome media.\nThe film was released on VHS and DVD by Universal Studios Home Video on April 9, 2002, in the United States and Canada, with few special features. It was released without chapter stops, a feature that Lynch objects to on the grounds that it \"demystifies\" the film.\nNick Coccellato of Eccentric Cinema gave the film a rating of nine out of ten and the DVD release an eight out of ten, saying that the lack of special features \"only adds to the mystery the film itself possesses, in abundance\". Special features in later versions and overseas versions of the DVD include a Lynch interview at the Cannes Film Festival and highlights of the debut of the film at Cannes.\nOptimum Home Entertainment released \"Mulholland Drive\" to the European market on Blu-ray as part of its StudioCanal Collection on September 13, 2010. New special features exclusive to this release include: an introduction by Thierry Jousse; \"In the Blue Box\", a retrospective documentary featuring directors and critics; two making-of documentaries: \"On the Road to Mulholland Drive\" and \"Back to Mulholland Drive\", and several interviews with people involved in making the film. It is the second David Lynch film in this line of Blu-rays after \"The Elephant Man\".\nThe Criterion Collection has released several versions of \"Mulholland Drive\". In October 2015, it released a 2K digital transfer of a restoration of the film on Blu-Ray and DVD, along with interviews, portions of the 2005 edition of Chris Rodley's book \"Lynch on Lynch\", and other special features. It was Lynch's second film to receive a Criterion Collection release on DVD and Blu-ray, following \"Eraserhead\" in 2014. \"Mulholland Drive\" was part of Criterion's first batch of 4K Ultra HD releases in 2021. Although the Blu-ray release was under license from Focus Features and Universal Studios Home Entertainment, Criterion's parent company Janus Films subsequently acquired the distribution rights.\nAwards and honors.\nAt the 74th Academy Awards, Lynch was nominated for Best Director. At the 59th Golden Globe Awards, it was nominated in four categories: Best Picture (Drama), Best Director, Best Screenplay and Best Original Score. It was named Best Picture by the New York Film Critics Circle at the 2001 New York Film Critics Circle Awards and Online Film Critics Society. Mary Sweeney also won the BAFTA Award for Best Editing for her work on the film.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20787", "revid": "51046176", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20787", "title": "Mary Magdalene", "text": "Saint and follower of Jesus\nMary Magdalene (sometimes called Mary of Magdala, or simply the Magdalene or the Madeleine) was a woman who, according to the four canonical gospels, travelled with Jesus as one of his followers and was a witness to his crucifixion and resurrection. In Gnostic writings, Mary Magdalene is depicted as Jesus's closest disciple who uniquely understood his teachings, causing tension with Peter, and is honoured as the \"apostle to the apostles\".\nMary Magdalene is regarded by believers as an historical figure, possibly from Magdala. She is seen as a prominent follower of Jesus who was believed to have been healed by him, supported his ministry financially, and was present at his crucifixion and burial. She played a key role among his female disciples. Overall, there is limited information about her life.\nApocryphal early Christian writings often portray Mary Magdalene as a prominent, spiritually insightful figure favoured by Jesus, challenging traditional patriarchal norms. These texts have inspired modern reinterpretations of her role. During the Patristic era, Mary Magdalene was mentioned only briefly by early Church Fathers, with her image evolving from a minor gospel figure to being conflated with other women in the Bible. Eventually she became viewed in Western Christianity, largely due to Pope Gregory I's influential 591 sermon, as a repentant prostitute, despite there being no biblical basis for this portrayal.\nThe Eastern Orthodox Church has always viewed Mary Magdalene as a virtuous Myrrhbearer and \"Equal to the Apostles\", distinct from other biblical women. The Roman Catholic Church historically conflated her with the repentant sinner in Luke 7 but later emphasized her role as the first witness to the resurrection and honoured her as the \"Apostle to the Apostles\". Many alleged relics of Mary Magdalene, including her skull, a piece of forehead flesh, a tibia, and her left hand, are preserved in Catholic sites in France and Mount Athos, with notable displays and annual processions honouring them.\nLife.\nSome secular historians agree that, like Jesus, Mary Magdalene was a real historical figure. But this is based only on the early accounts of the bible, with no other contemporary accounts. Nonetheless, very little is known about her life. Unlike Paul the Apostle, who was not a contemporary of Jesus, Mary Magdalene left behind no known writings of her own. She was never mentioned in any of the Pauline epistles or in any of the general epistles. The earliest and most reliable sources about her life are the three Synoptic Gospels of Mark, Matthew, and Luke, which were all written during the first century AD.\nDuring Jesus' ministry.\nMary Magdalene's epithet \"Magdalene\" (; lit.\u2009'the Magdalene') probably means that she came from Magdala, a village on the western shore of the Sea of Galilee which was primarily known in antiquity as a fishing town. \"Mary\" was, by far, the most common Jewish given name for girls and women during the first century, so it was necessary for the authors of the gospels to call her \"Magdalene\" in order to distinguish her from the other women named Mary who followed Jesus. Although the Gospel of Mark, reputed by scholars to be the earliest surviving gospel, does not mention Mary Magdalene until Jesus' crucifixion, the Gospel of Luke 8:2\u20133 provides a brief summary of her role during his ministry:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Soon afterwards he went on through cities and villages, proclaiming and bringing the good news of the kingdom of God. The twelve were with him, as well as some women who had been cured of evil spirits and infirmities: Mary, called Magdalene, from whom seven demons had gone out, and Joanna, the wife of Herod's steward Chuza, and Susanna, and many others, who provided for them out of their resources.\u2014\u200a\nAccording to the Gospel of Luke, Jesus exorcised \"seven demons\" from Mary Magdalene. That seven demons had possessed Mary is repeated in Mark 16:9, part of the \"longer ending\" of that gospel \u2013 this is not found in the earliest manuscripts and is possibly a second-century addition to the original text, possibly based on the Gospel of Luke. In the first century, demons were believed widely to cause physical and psychological illness. Bruce Chilton, a scholar of early Christianity, states that the reference to the number of demons being \"seven\" may mean that Mary had to undergo seven exorcisms, probably over a long period of time, due to the first six being partially or wholly unsuccessful.\nBart D. Ehrman, a New Testament scholar and historian of early Christianity, contends that the number seven may be merely symbolic, since, in Jewish tradition, seven was the number of completion, so that Mary was possessed by seven demons may simply mean she was completely overwhelmed by their power. In either case, Mary must have suffered from severe emotional or psychological trauma for an exorcism of this kind to have been perceived as necessary. Consequently, her devotion to Jesus resulting from this healing must have been very strong. The Gospels' writers normally relish giving dramatic descriptions of Jesus's public exorcisms, with the possessed person wailing, thrashing, and tearing his or her clothes in front of a crowd. By contrast, that Mary's exorcism receives little attention may indicate that either Jesus performed it privately or that the recorders did not perceive it as particularly dramatic.\nBecause Mary is listed as one of the women who supported Jesus' ministry financially, she must have been relatively wealthy. The places where she and the other women are mentioned throughout the gospels indicate strongly that they were vital to Jesus' ministry and that Mary Magdalene always appears first, whenever she is listed in the Synoptic Gospels as a member of a group of women, indicates that she was seen as the most important out of all of them. Carla Ricci notes that, in lists of the disciples, Mary Magdalene occupies a similar position among Jesus' female followers as Simon Peter does among the male apostles.\nThat women played such an active and important role in Jesus' ministry was not entirely radical or even unique; inscriptions from a synagogue in Aphrodisias in Asia Minor from around the same time period reveal that many of the major donors to the synagogue were women. Jesus' ministry did bring women greater liberation than they would typically have held in mainstream Jewish society.\nWitness to Jesus's crucifixion and burial.\nAll four canonical gospels agree that several women watched Jesus's crucifixion from a distance, with three explicitly naming Mary Magdalene as present. lists the names of these women as Mary Magdalene; Mary, mother of James; and Salome. lists Mary Magdalene, Mary mother of James and Joseph, and the unnamed mother of the sons of Zebedee (who may be the same person Mark calls Salome). mentioned a group of women watching the crucifixion, but did not give any of their names. lists Mary, mother of Jesus, her sister, Mary, wife of Clopas, and Mary Magdalene as witnesses to the crucifixion.\nVirtually all reputable historians agree that Jesus was crucified by the Romans under the orders of Pontius Pilate. James Dunn states of baptism and crucifixion that these \"two facts in the life of Jesus command almost universal assent\". Nonetheless, the gospels' accounts of Jesus's crucifixion differ. Ehrman states that the presence of Mary Magdalene and the other women at the cross is probably historical because Christians would have been unlikely to make up that the main witnesses to the crucifixion were women and also because their presence is attested in both the Synoptic Gospels and in the Gospel of John independently. Maurice Casey concurs that the presence of Mary Magdalene and the other women at the crucifixion of Jesus may be recorded as a historical fact. According to E. P. Sanders, the reason why the women watched the crucifixion even after the male disciples had fled may have been because they were less likely to be arrested, they were braver than the men, or some combination thereof.\nAll four canonical gospels, as well as the apocryphal Gospel of Peter, agree that Jesus's body was taken down from the cross and buried by a man named Joseph of Arimathea. lists Mary Magdalene and Mary, mother of Jesus as witnesses to the burial of Jesus. lists Mary Magdalene and \"the other Mary\" as witnesses. mentions \"the women who had followed him from Galilee\", but does not list any of their names. does not mention any women present during Joseph's burial of Jesus, but does mention the presence of Nicodemus, a Pharisee with whom Jesus had a conversation near the beginning of the gospel. Ehrman, who previously accepted the story of Jesus's burial as historical, now rejects it as a later invention on the basis that Roman governors almost never allowed for executed criminals to be given any kind of burial and Pontius Pilate in particular was not \"the sort of ruler who would break with tradition and policy when kindly asked by a member of the Jewish council to provide a decent burial for a crucified victim\". Casey argues that Jesus was given a proper burial by Joseph of Arimathea, noting that, on some very rare occasions, Roman governors did release the bodies of executed prisoners for burial. Nonetheless, he rejects that Jesus could have been interred in an expensive tomb with a stone rolled in front of it like the one described in the gospels, leading him to conclude that Mary and the other women must not have seen the tomb. Sanders affirms Jesus's burial by Joseph of Arimathea in the presence of Mary Magdalene and the other female followers as completely historical.\nResurrection of Jesus.\nThe earliest description of Jesus's post-resurrection appearances is a quotation of a pre-Pauline creed preserved by Paul the Apostle in , which was written roughly 20 years before any of the gospels. This passage made no mention of Mary Magdalene, the other women, or the story of the empty tomb, but rather credits Simon Peter with having been the first to see the risen Jesus. Despite this, all four canonical gospels, as well as the apocryphal Gospel of Peter, agreed that Mary Magdalene, either alone or as a member of a group, was the first person to discover that Jesus's tomb was empty. Nonetheless, the details of the accounts differ drastically.\nAccording to , the earliest account of the discovery of the empty tomb, Mary Magdalene, Mary the mother of James, and Salome went to the tomb just after sunrise, a day and half after Jesus's burial and found that the stone had already been rolled away. They went inside and saw a young man dressed in white, who told them that Jesus had risen from the dead and instructed them to tell the disciples that he would meet them in Galilee. Instead, the women ran away and told no one, because they were too afraid. The original text of the gospel ends here, without the resurrected Jesus making an appearance to anyone. Casey argues that the reason for this abrupt ending may be because the Gospel of Mark is an unfinished first draft.\nAccording to , Mary Magdalene and \"the other Mary\" went to the tomb. An earthquake occurred and an angel dressed in white descended from Heaven and rolled aside the stone as the women were watching. The angel told them that Jesus had risen from the dead. Then the risen Jesus himself appeared to the women as they were leaving the tomb and told them to tell the other disciples that he would meet them in Galilee.\nAccording to Mary Magdalene, Joanna, and Mary the mother of James went to the tomb and found the stone already rolled away, as in Mark. They went inside and saw two young men dressed in white who told them that Jesus had risen from the dead. Then they went and told the eleven remaining apostles, who dismissed their story as nonsense. In Luke's account, Jesus never appears to the women, but instead makes his first appearance to Cleopas and an unnamed \"disciple\" on the road to Emmaus. Luke's narrative also removes the injunction for the women to tell the disciples to return to Galilee and instead has Jesus tell the disciples \"not\" to return to Galilee, but rather to stay in the precincts of Jerusalem.\nMary Magdalene's role in the resurrection narrative is greatly increased in the account from the Gospel of John. According to , Mary Magdalene went to the tomb when it was still dark and saw that the stone had already been rolled away. She did not see anyone, but immediately ran to tell Peter and the \"beloved disciple\", who came with her to the tomb and confirmed that it was empty, but returned home without seeing the risen Jesus. According to , Mary, now alone in the garden outside the tomb, saw two angels sitting where Jesus's body had been. Then the risen Jesus approached her. She at first mistook him for the gardener, but, after she heard him say her name, she recognized him and cried out \"Rabbouni!\" (which is Aramaic for 'teacher'). His next words may be translated as \"Don't touch me, for I have not yet ascended to my Father\" or \"Stop clinging to me, [etc.]\", the latter more probable in view of the grammar (negated present imperative: stop doing something already in progress) as well as Jesus's challenge to Thomas a week later (see ). Jesus then sent her to tell the other apostles the good news of his resurrection. The Gospel of John therefore portrays Mary Magdalene as the first apostle, the apostle sent \"to\" the apostles. Because she was the first to witness Jesus's resurrection, Mary Magdalene is known in some Christian traditions as the \"apostle to the apostles\".\nBecause scribes were unsatisfied with the abrupt ending of the Gospel of Mark, they wrote several different alternative endings for it. In the \"shorter ending\", which is found in very few manuscripts, the women go to \"those around Peter\" and tell them what they had seen at the tomb, followed by a brief declaration of the gospel being preached from east to west. This \"very forced\" ending contradicts the last verse of the original gospel, stating that the women \"told no one\". The \"longer ending\", which is found in most surviving manuscripts, is an \"amalgam of traditions\" containing episodes derived from the other gospels. First, it describes an appearance by Jesus to Mary Magdalene alone (as in the Gospel of John), followed by brief descriptions of him appearing to the two disciples on the road to Emmaus (as in the Gospel of Luke) and to the eleven remaining disciples (as in the Gospel of Matthew).\nIn his book published in 2006, Ehrman states that \"it appears virtually certain\" that the stories of the empty tomb, regardless of whether or not they are accurate, can definitely be traced back to the historical Mary Magdalene, saying that, in Jewish society, women were regarded as unreliable witnesses and were forbidden from giving testimony in court, so early Christians would have had no motive to make up a story about a woman being the first to discover the empty tomb. In fact, if they had made the story up, they would have had strong motivation to make Peter, Jesus's closest disciple while he was alive, the discoverer of the tomb instead. He also says that the story of Mary Magdalene discovering the empty tomb is independently attested in the Synoptics, the Gospel of John, and in the Gospel of Peter. N. T. Wright states that, \"it is, frankly, impossible to imagine that [the women at the tomb] were inserted into the tradition after Paul's day.\"\nCasey challenges this argument, contending that the women at the tomb are not legal witnesses, but rather heroines in line with a long Jewish tradition. He contends that the story of the empty tomb was invented by either the author of the Gospel of Mark or by one of his sources, based on the historically genuine fact that the women really had been present at Jesus's crucifixion and burial. In his book published in 2014, Ehrman rejects his own previous argument, stating that the story of the empty tomb can only be a later invention because there is virtually no possibility that Jesus's body could have been placed in any kind of tomb and, if Jesus was never buried, then no one alive at the time could have said that his non-existent tomb had been found empty. He concludes that the idea that early Christians would have had \"no motive\" to make up the story simply \"suffers from a poverty of imagination\" and that they would have had all kinds of possible motives, especially since women were overrepresented in early Christian communities and women themselves would have had strong motivation to make up a story about other women being the first to find the tomb. He does conclude later, however, that Mary Magdalene must have been one of the people who had an experience in which she thought she saw the risen Jesus, citing her prominence in the gospel resurrection narratives and her absence everywhere else in the gospels as evidence.\nPortrayal in Gnostic writings.\nMary is a central figure in Gnostic Christian writings, including the Dialogue of the Savior, the \"Pistis Sophia\", the Gospel of Thomas, the Gospel of Philip, and the Gospel of Mary. These texts portray her as an apostle, as Jesus's closest and most beloved disciple and the only one who truly understood his teachings. In the Gnostic texts, or Gnostic gospels, Mary's closeness to Jesus results in tension with another disciple, Peter, due to her gender and Peter's envy of the special teachings given to her. In the Gospel of Philip's text, Marvin Meyer's translation says (missing text bracketed): \"The companion of the [...] is Mary of Magdala. The [...] her more than [...] the disciples, [...] kissed her often on her [...].\"\nApocryphal early Christian writings.\nNew Testament apocrypha writings mention Mary Magdalene. Some of these writings were cited as scripture by early Christians. However, they were never admitted to the canon of the New Testament. Roman Catholic, Eastern Orthodox and Protestant churches generally do not view these writings as part of the Bible. In these apocryphal texts, Mary Magdalene is portrayed as a visionary and leader of the early movement whom Jesus loved more than he loved the other disciples. These texts were written long after the death of the historical Mary Magdalene. They are not regarded by bible scholars as reliable sources of information about her life. Sanders summarizes the scholarly consensus that:\n... very, very little in the apocryphal gospels could conceivably go back to the time of Jesus. They are legendary and mythological. Of all the apocryphal material, only some of the sayings in the Gospel of Thomas are worth consideration.\nNonetheless, the texts have been frequently promoted in modern works as though they were reliable. Such works often support sensationalist statements about Jesus and Mary Magdalene's relationship.\nDialogue of the Saviour.\nThe earliest dialogue between Jesus and Mary Magdalene is probably the Dialogue of the Saviour, a badly damaged Gnostic text discovered in the Nag Hammadi library in 1945. The dialogue consists of a conversation between Jesus, Mary and two apostles \u2013 Thomas the Apostle and Matthew the Apostle. In saying 53, the \"Dialogue\" attributes to Mary three aphorisms that are attributed to Jesus in the New Testament: \"The wickedness of each day [is sufficient]. Workers deserve their food. Disciples resemble their teachers.\" The narrator commends Mary stating, \"she spoke this utterance as a woman who understood everything.\"\n\"Pistis Sophia\".\nThe \"Pistis Sophia\", possibly dating as early as the second century, is the best surviving of the Gnostic writings. It was discovered in the 18th century in a large volume containing numerous early Gnostic treatises. The document takes the form of a long dialogue in which Jesus answers his followers' questions. Of the 64 questions, 39 are presented by a woman who is referred to as Mary or Mary Magdalene. At one point, Jesus says, \"Mary, thou blessed one, whom I will perfect in all mysteries of those of the height, discourse in openness, thou, whose heart is raised to the kingdom of heaven more than all thy brethren.\" At another point, he tells her, \"Well done, Mary. You are more blessed than all women on earth, because you will be the fullness of fullness and the completion of completion.\" Simon Peter, annoyed at Mary's dominance of the conversation, tells Jesus, \"My master, we cannot endure this woman who gets in our way and does not let any of us speak, though she talks all the time.\" Mary defends herself, saying, \"My master, I understand in my mind that I can come forward at any time to interpret what Pistis Sophia [a female deity] has said, but I am afraid of Peter, because he threatens me and hates our gender.\" Jesus assures her, \"Any of those filled with the spirit of light will come forward to interpret what I say: no one will be able to oppose them.\"\nGospel of Thomas.\nThe Gospel of Thomas, usually dated to the late first or early second century, was among the ancient texts discovered in the Nag Hammadi library in 1945. The Gospel of Thomas consists entirely of 114 sayings attributed to Jesus. Many of these sayings are similar to ones in the canonical gospels, but others are completely unlike anything found in the New Testament. Some scholars believe that at least a few of these sayings may authentically be traced back to the historical Jesus. Two of the sayings reference a woman named \"Mary\", who is generally regarded as Mary Magdalene. In saying 21, Mary herself asks Jesus, \"Whom are your disciples like?\" Jesus responds, \"They are like children who have settled in a field which is not theirs. When the owners of the field come, they will say, 'Let us have back our field.' They (will) undress in their presence in order to let them have back their field and to give it back to them.\" Following this, Jesus continues his explanation with a parable about the owner of a house and a thief, ending with the common rhetoric, \"Whoever has ears to hear let him hear.\"\nMary's mention in saying 114, however, has generated considerable controversy:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Simon Peter said to them: Let Mary go forth from among us, for women are not worthy of the life. Jesus said: Behold, I shall lead her, that I may make her male, in order that she also may become a living spirit like you males. For every woman who makes herself male shall enter into the kingdom of heaven.\nIn the ancient world, many patriarchal cultures believed that women were inferior to men and that they were, in essence, \"imperfect men\" who had not fully developed. When Peter challenges Mary's authority in this saying, he does so on the widely accepted premise that she is a woman and therefore an inferior human being. When Jesus rebukes him for this, he bases his response on the same premise, stating that Mary and all faithful women like her will \"become\" men and that salvation is therefore open to all, even those who are presently women.\nGospel of Philip.\nThe Gospel of Philip, dating from the second or third century, survives in part among the texts found in Nag Hammadi in 1945. In a manner very similar to , the Gospel of Philip presents Mary Magdalene among Jesus's female entourage, adding that she was his \"koin\u00f4nos\", a Greek word variously translated in contemporary versions as 'partner, associate, comrade, companion':\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;There were three who always walked with the Lord: Mary, his mother, and her sister, and Magdalene, who was called his companion. His sister, his mother and his companion were each a Mary. \nThe Gospel of Philip uses cognates of \"koin\u00f4nos\" and Coptic equivalents to refer to the literal pairing of men and women in marriage and sexual intercourse, but also metaphorically, referring to a spiritual partnership, and the reunification of the Gnostic Christian with the divine realm. The Gospel of Philip also contains another passage relating to Jesus's relationship with Mary Magdalene. The text is badly fragmented, and speculated but unreliable additions are shown in brackets:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFor early Christians, kissing did not have a romantic connotation and it was common for Christians to kiss their fellow believers as a way of greeting. This tradition is still practiced in many Christian congregations today and is known as the \"kiss of peace\". Ehrman explains that, in the context of the Gospel of Philip, the kiss of peace is used as a symbol for the passage of truth from one person to another and that it is not in any way an act of \"divine foreplay\".\nGospel of Mary.\nThe Gospel of Mary is the only surviving apocryphal text named after a woman. It contains information about the role of women in the early church. The text was probably written over a century after the historical Mary Magdalene's death. The text is not attributed to her and its author is anonymous. Instead, it received its title because it is \"about\" her. The main surviving text comes from a Coptic translation preserved in a fifth-century manuscript (\"Berolinensis Gnosticus\" 8052,1) discovered in Cairo in 1896. As a result of numerous intervening conflicts, the manuscript was not published until 1955. Roughly half the text of the gospel in this manuscript has been lost; the first six pages and four from the middle are missing. In addition to this Coptic translation, two brief third-century fragments of the gospel in the original Greek (P. Rylands 463 and P. Oxyrhynchus 3525) have also been discovered, which were published in 1938 and 1983 respectively.\nThe first part of the gospel deals with Jesus's parting words to his followers after a post-resurrection appearance. Mary first appears in the second part, in which she tells the other disciples, who are all in fright for their own lives: \"Do not weep or grieve or be in doubt, for his grace will be with you all and will protect you. Rather, let us praise his greatness, for he has prepared us and made us truly human.\" Unlike in the Gospel of Thomas, where women can only be saved by becoming men, in the Gospel of Mary, they can be saved just as they are. Peter approaches Mary and asks her:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"Sister we know that the Saviour loved you more than the rest of woman. Tell us the words of the Saviour which you remember which you know, but we do not, nor have we heard them\". Mary answered and said, \"What is hidden from you I will proclaim to you\". And she began to speak to them these words: \"I\", she said, \"I saw the Lord in a vision and I said to Him, Lord I saw you today in a vision\".\nMary then proceeds to describe the Gnostic cosmology in depth, revealing that she is the only one who has understood Jesus's true teachings. Andrew the Apostle challenges Mary, insisting, \"Say what you think about what she said, but I do not believe the savior said this. These teachings are strange ideas.\" Peter responds, saying, \"Did he really speak with a woman in private, without our knowledge? Should we all listen to her? Did he prefer her to us?\" Andrew and Peter's responses are intended to demonstrate that they do not understand Jesus's teachings and that it is really only Mary who truly understands. Matthew the Apostle comes to Mary's defense, giving a sharp rebuke to Peter: \"Peter, you are always angry. Now I see you arguing against this woman like an adversary. If the savior made her worthy, who are you to reject her? Surely the savior knows her well. That is why he loved her more than us.\"\nBorborite scriptures.\nThe Borborites, also known as the Phibionites, were an early Christian Gnostic sect during the late fourth century who had numerous scriptures involving Mary Magdalene, including \"The Questions of Mary\", \"The Greater Questions of Mary\", \"The Lesser Questions of Mary\", and \"The Birth of Mary\". None of these texts have survived to the present, but they are mentioned by the early Christian heretic-hunter Epiphanius of Salamis in his \"Panarion\". Epiphanius says that the \"Greater Questions of Mary\" contained an episode in which, during a post-resurrection appearance, Jesus took Mary to the top of a mountain, where he pulled a woman out of his side and engaged in sexual intercourse with her. Then, upon ejaculating, Jesus drank his own semen and told Mary, \"Thus we must do, that we may live.\" Upon hearing this, Mary instantly fainted, to which Jesus responded by helping her up and telling her, \"O thou of little faith, wherefore didst thou doubt?\" This story was supposedly the basis for the Borborite Eucharist ritual in which they allegedly engaged in orgies and drank semen and menstrual blood as the \"body and blood of Christ\" respectively. Ehrman casts doubt on the accuracy of Epiphanius's summary, commenting that \"the details of Epiphanius's description sound very much like what you can find in the ancient rumor mill about secret societies in the ancient world\".\nLegacy.\nPatristic era.\nMost of the earliest Church Fathers do not mention Mary Magdalene, and those who do mention her usually only discuss her very briefly. In his anti-Christian polemic \"The True Word\", written between 170 and 180, the pagan philosopher Celsus declared that Mary Magdalene was nothing more than \"a hysterical female... who either dreamt in a certain state of mind and through wishful thinking had a hallucination due to some mistaken notion (an experience which has happened to thousands), or, which is more likely, wanted to impress others by telling this fantastic tale, and so by this cock-and-bull story to provide a chance for other beggars\". The Church Father Origen (c. 184 \u2013 c. 253) defended Christianity against this accusation in his apologetic treatise \"Against Celsus\", mentioning , which lists Mary Magdalene and \"the other Mary\" both seeing the resurrected Jesus, thus providing a second witness. Origen also preserves a statement from Celsus that some Christians in his day followed the teachings of a woman named \"Mariamme\", who is almost certainly Mary Magdalene. Origen merely dismisses this, remarking that Celsus \"pours on us a heap of names\".\nA sermon attributed to Hippolytus of Rome (c. 170 \u2013 235) refers to Mary of Bethany and her sister Martha seeking Jesus in the garden like Mary Magdalene in , indicating a conflation between Mary of Bethany and Mary Magdalene. The sermon describes the conflated woman as a \"second Eve\" who compensates for the disobedience of the first Eve through her obedience. The sermon also explicitly identifies Mary Magdalene and the other women as \"apostles\". The first clear identification of Mary Magdalene as a redeemed sinner comes from Ephrem the Syrian (c. 306 \u2013 373). Part of the reason for the identification of Mary Magdalene as a sinner may derive from the reputation of her birthplace, Magdala, which, by the late first century, was infamous for its inhabitants' alleged vice and licentiousness.\nIn one of his preserved sayings, Gregory of Nyssa (c. 330 \u2013 395) identifies Mary Magdalene as \"the first witness to the resurrection, that she might set straight again by her faith in the resurrection, what was turned over in her transgression\". Ambrose (c. 340 \u2013 397), by contrast, not only rejected the conflation of Mary Magdalene, Mary of Bethany, and the anointing sinner, but even proposed that the authentic Mary Magdalene was, in fact, two separate people: one woman named Mary Magdalene who discovered the empty tomb and a different Mary Magdalene who saw the risen Christ. Augustine of Hippo (354\u2013430) entertained the possibility that Mary of Bethany and the unnamed sinner from Luke might be the same person, but did not associate Mary Magdalene with either of them. Instead, Augustine praised Mary Magdalene as \"unquestionably... surpassingly more ardent in her love than these other women who had administered to the Lord\".\nPortrayal as a prostitute.\nThe portrayal of Mary Magdalene as a prostitute began in 591, when Pope Gregory I identified Mary Magdalene, who was introduced in Luke 8:2, with Mary of Bethany (Luke 10:39) and the unnamed \"sinful woman\" who anointed Jesus's feet in Luke 7:36\u201350. Pope Gregory's Easter sermon resulted in a widespread belief that Mary Magdalene was a repentant prostitute or promiscuous woman.\nHer reputation in Western Christianity as being a repentant prostitute or loose woman are not supported by the canonical gospels, which at no point imply that she had ever been a prostitute or in any way notable for a sinful way of life. The misconception probably arose due to a conflation between Mary Magdalene, Mary of Bethany (who anoints Jesus's feet in ), and the unnamed \"sinful woman\" who anoints Jesus's feet in . As early as the third century, the Church Father Tertullian (c. 160 \u2013 225) references the touch of \"the woman which was a sinner\" in effort to prove that Jesus \"was not a phantom, but really a solid body\". This may indicate that Mary Magdalene was already being conflated with the \"sinful woman\" in , though Tertullian never clearly identifies the woman of whom he speaks as Mary Magdalene.\nElaborate medieval legends from Western Europe then emerged, which told exaggerated tales of Mary Magdalene's wealth and beauty, as well as of her alleged journey to southern Gaul (modern-day France). The identification of Mary Magdalene with Mary of Bethany and the unnamed \"sinful woman\" was still a major controversy in the years leading up to the Reformation, and some Protestant leaders rejected it. During the Counter-Reformation, the Catholic Church emphasized Mary Magdalene as a symbol of penance. In 1969, Pope Paul VI removed the identification of Mary Magdalene with Mary of Bethany and the \"sinful woman\" from the General Roman Calendar, but the view of her as a former prostitute has persisted in popular culture.\nEarly Middle Ages.\nThe unnamed \"sinful woman\" in is never identified as a prostitute and, in Jewish society at the time the gospel was written, \"sinful\" could have simply meant that she \"did not assiduously observe the law of Moses\". The notion of Mary Magdalene specifically being a former prostitute or loose woman dates to a narrative in an influential homily by Pope Gregory I (\"Gregory the Great\") in around 591, in which he not only identifies Magdalene with the anonymous sinner with the perfume in Luke's gospel and with Mary of Bethany, the sister of Martha and Lazarus, but also, for the first time, explicitly identifies her sins as ones of a sexual nature:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;She whom Luke calls the sinful woman, whom John calls Mary, we believe to be the Mary from whom seven devils were ejected according to Mark. What did these seven devils signify, if not all the vices? It is clear, that the woman previously used the unguent to perfume her flesh in forbidden acts. What she therefore displayed more scandalously, she was now offering to God in a more praiseworthy manner. She had coveted with earthly eyes, but now through penitence these are consumed with tears. She displayed her hair to set off her face, but now her hair dries her tears. She had spoken proud things with her mouth, but in kissing the Lord's feet, she now planted her mouth on the Redeemer's feet. For every delight, therefore, she had had in herself, she now immolated herself. She turned the mass of her crimes to virtues, in order to serve God entirely in penance.\u2014\u200a\nIn Pope Gregory's interpretation, the seven demons expelled from Mary Magdalene by Jesus are transformed into the seven deadly sins of medieval Catholicism, leading Mary \"to be condemned not only for lust, but for pride and covetousness as well\". The aspect of the repentant sinner became almost equally significant as the disciple in her \"persona\" as depicted in Western art and religious literature, fitting well with the great importance of penitence in medieval theology. In subsequent religious legend, Mary's story became conflated with that of Mary of Egypt, a repentant prostitute who then lived as a hermit. With that, Mary's image was, according to Susan Haskins, author of \"Mary Magdalene: Myth and Metaphor\", \"finally settled...for nearly fourteen hundred years\", although in fact the most important late medieval popular accounts of her life describe her as a rich woman whose life of sexual freedom is purely for pleasure. This composite depiction of Mary Magdalene was carried into the Mass texts for her feast day: in the Tridentine Mass, the collect explicitly identifies her as Mary of Bethany by describing Lazarus as her brother, and the Gospel is the story of the penitent woman anointing Jesus's feet.\nThe \"composite Magdalene\" was never accepted by the Eastern Orthodox churches, who saw only Mary the disciple, and believed that after the Resurrection she lived as a companion to Mary the mother of Jesus, and not even in the West was it universally accepted. The Benedictine Order always celebrated Mary of Bethany together with Martha and Lazarus of Bethany on July 29, while Mary Magdalene was celebrated on July 22. Not only John Chrysostom in the East (\"Matthew, Homily 88\"), but also Ambrose (\"De virginitate\" 3,14; 4,15) in the West, when speaking of Mary Magdalene after the resurrection of Jesus Christ, far from calling her a harlot, suggest she was a virgin. Starting in around the eighth century, Christian sources record mention of a church in Magdala purported to have been built on the site of Mary Magdalene's house, where Jesus exorcized her of the seven demons.\nIn an eastern tradition supported by the western bishop and historian Gregory of Tours (c. 538 \u2013 594), Mary Magdalene is said to have retired to Ephesus in Asia Minor with Mary the mother of Jesus, where they both lived out the rest of their lives. Gregory states that Mary Magdalene was buried in the city of Ephesus. Modestus, the Patriarch of Jerusalem from 630 until 634, describes a slightly different tradition that Mary Magdalene had come to Ephesus to live with the apostle John following the death of Mary the mother of Jesus.\nHigh Middle Ages.\nFictional biographies.\nStarting in early High Middle Ages, writers in western Europe began developing elaborate fictional biographies of Mary Magdalene's life, in which they heavily embellished upon the vague details given in the gospels. Stories about noble saints were popular during this time period; accordingly, tales of Mary Magdalene's wealth and social status became heavily exaggerated. In the tenth century, Odo of Cluny (c. 880 \u2013 942) wrote a sermon in which he described Mary as an extraordinarily wealthy noblewoman of royal descent. Some manuscripts of the sermon record that Mary's parents were named Syrus and Eucharia and one manuscript goes into great detail describing her family's purported land holdings in Bethany, Jerusalem, and Magdala.\nThe theologian Honorius Augustodunensis (c. 1080 \u2013 c. 1151) embellished this tale even further, reporting that Mary was a wealthy noblewoman who was married in \"Magdalum\", but that she committed adultery, so she fled to Jerusalem and became a \"public sinner\" (\"vulgaris meretrix\"). Honorius mentions that, out of love for Jesus, Mary repented and withdrew into a life of quiet isolation. Under the influence of stories about other female saints, such as Mary of Egypt and Pelagia, painters in Italy during the ninth and tenth centuries gradually began to develop the image of Mary Magdalene living alone in the desert as a penitent ascetic. This portrayal became so popular that it quickly spread to Germany and England. From the twelfth century, Abbot Hugh of Semur (died 1109), Peter Abelard (died 1142), and Geoffrey of Vend\u00f4me (died 1132) all referred to Mary Magdalene as the sinner who merited the title \"apostolorum apostola\" (Apostle to the Apostles), with the title becoming commonplace during the twelfth and thirteenth centuries.\nAlleged burial in France.\nIn western Europe, elaborate and conflicting legends began to develop, which said that Mary Magdalene had travelled to southern France and died there. Starting in around 1050, the monks of the V\u00e9zelay Abbey of la Madaleine in Burgundy said they discovered Mary Magdalene's actual skeleton. At first, the existence of the skeleton was merely asserted, but, in 1265, the monks made a spectacular, public show of \"discovering\" it and, in 1267, the bones were brought before the king of France, who venerated them. On December 9, 1279, an excavation ordered by Charles II, King of Naples at Saint-Maximin-la-Sainte-Baume, Provence, led to the discovery of another purported burial of Mary Magdalene. The shrine was purportedly found intact, with an explanatory inscription stating why the relics had been hidden. Charles II commissioned the building of a new gothic basilica on the site and, in return for providing accommodation for pilgrims, the town's residents were exempt from taxes. Saint-Maximin-la-Sainte-Baume gradually displaced V\u00e9zelay in popularity and acceptance.\n\"The Golden Legend\".\nThe most famous account of Mary Magdalene's legendary life comes from \"The Golden Legend\", a collection of medieval saints' stories compiled circa 1260 by the Italian writer and Dominican friar Jacobus de Voragine (c. 1230 \u2013 1298). In this account, Mary Magdalene is, in Ehrman's words, \"fabulously rich, insanely beautiful, and outrageously sensual\", but she gives up her life of wealth and sin to become a devoted follower of Jesus. Fourteen years after Jesus's crucifixion, some pagans throw Mary, Martha, Lazarus (who, in this account, is their brother due to a conflation with Mary of Bethany), and two other Christians named Maximin and Cedonius onto a rudderless boat in the Mediterranean to die. Miraculously, however, the boat washes ashore at Marseille in southern France. Mary persuades the governor of the city not to offer sacrifices to a pagan god and later persuades him to convert to Christianity after she proves the Christian God's power by successfully praying to Him to make the governor's wife pregnant. The governor and his wife sail for Rome to meet the apostle Peter in person, but their ship is struck by a storm, which causes the wife to go into labor. The wife dies in childbirth and the governor leaves her on an island with the still-living infant at her breast. The governor spends two years with Peter in Rome and, on his way home, he stops at the same island to discover that, due to Mary Magdalene's miraculous long-distance intercession, his child has survived for two years on his dead mother's breast milk. Then the governor's wife rises from the dead and tells him that Mary Magdalene has brought her back. The whole family returns to Marseille, where they meet Mary again in person. Mary herself spends the last thirty years of her life alone as a penitent ascetic in a cave in a desert in the French region of Provence. At every canonical hour, the angels come and lift her up to hear their songs in Heaven. On the last day of her life, Maximin, now the bishop of Aix, comes to her and gives her the Eucharist. Mary cries tears of joy and, after taking it, she lies down and dies. De Voragine gives the common account of the transfer of Mary Magdalene's relics from her sepulchre in the oratory of Saint Maximin at Aix-en-Provence to the newly founded V\u00e9zelay; the transportation of the relics is entered as undertaken in 771 by the founder of the abbey, identified as Gerard, Duke of Burgundy.\nSpouse of John the Evangelist.\nThe monk and historian Domenico Cavalca (c. 1270 \u2013 1342), citing Jerome, suggested that Mary Magdalene was betrothed to John the Evangelist: \"I like to think that the Magdalene was the spouse of John, not affirming it... I am glad and blythe that St Jerome should say so.\" They were sometimes thought to be the couple at the Wedding at Cana, though the Gospel accounts say nothing of the ceremony being abandoned. In the \"Golden Legend\", De Voragine dismisses talk of John and Mary being betrothed and John leaving his bride at the altar to follow Jesus as nonsense.\nLate Middle Ages and Renaissance.\nThe thirteenth-century Cistercian monk and chronicler Peter of Vaux de Cernay said it was part of Catharist belief that the earthly Jesus Christ had a relationship with Mary Magdalene, described as his concubine: \"Further, in their secret meetings they said that the Christ who was born in the earthly and visible Bethlehem and crucified at Jerusalem was \"evil\", and that Mary Magdalene was his concubine \u2013 and that she was the woman taken in adultery who is referred to in the Scriptures.\" A document, possibly written by Ermengaud of B\u00e9ziers, undated and anonymous and attached to his \"Treatise against Heretics\", makes a similar statement:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Also they [the Cathars] teach in their secret meetings that Mary Magdalene was the wife of Christ. She was the Samaritan woman to whom He said, \"Call thy husband\". She was the woman taken into adultery, whom Christ set free lest the Jews stone her, and she was with Him in three places, in the temple, at the well, and in the garden. After the Resurrection, He appeared first to her.\nIn the middle of the fourteenth century, a Dominican friar wrote a biography of Mary Magdalene in which he described her brutally mutilating herself after giving up prostitution, clawing at her legs until they bled, tearing out clumps of her hair, and beating her face with her fists and her breasts with stones. This portrayal of her inspired the sculptor Donatello (c. 1386 \u2013 1466) to portray her as a gaunt and beaten ascetic in his wooden sculpture \"Penitent Magdalene\" (c. 1454) for the Florence Baptistery. In 1449, King Ren\u00e9 d'Anjou gave to Angers Cathedral the amphora from Cana in which Jesus changed water to wine, acquiring it from the nuns of Marseilles, who told him that Mary Magdalene had brought it with her from Judea, relating to the legend where she was the jilted bride at the wedding after which John the Evangelist received his calling from Jesus.\nReformation and Counter-Reformation.\nIn 1517, on the brink of the Protestant Reformation, the leading French Renaissance humanist Jacques Lef\u00e8vre d'\u00c9taples published his book \"De Maria Magdalena et triduo Christi disceptatio\" (\"Disputation on Mary Magdalene and the Three Days of Christ\"), in which he argued against the conflation of Mary Magdalene, Mary of Bethany, and the unnamed sinner in Luke. Various authors published a flurry of books and pamphlets in response, the vast majority of which opposed Lef\u00e8vre d'\u00c9taples. In 1521, the theology faculty of the Sorbonne formally condemned the idea that the three women were separate people as heretical, and debate died down, overtaken by the larger issues raised by Martin Luther. Luther and Huldrych Zwingli (1484\u20131531) both supported the composite Magdalene. Luther, whose views on sexuality were much more liberal than those of his fellow reformers, reportedly once joked to a group of friends that \"even pious Christ himself\" had committed adultery three times: once with Mary Magdalene, once with the Samaritan woman at the well, and once with the adulteress he had let off so easily. Because the cult of Mary Magdalene was inextricably associated with the Catholic teaching of the intercession of saints, it came under particularly harsh criticism by Protestant leaders. Zwingli demanded for the cult of Mary Magdalene to be abolished and all images of her to be destroyed. John Calvin (1509\u20131564) not only rejected the composite Magdalene, but criticized Catholics as ignorant for having ever believed in it.\nDuring the Counter-Reformation, Roman Catholicism began to strongly emphasize Mary Magdalene's role as a penitent sinner. Her medieval role as a patron and advocate became minimized and her penitence became regarded as her most important aspect, especially in France and in the Catholic portions of southern Germany. A massive number of Baroque paintings and sculptures depict the penitent Magdalene, often showing her naked or partially naked, with a strong emphasis on her erotic beauty. Poems about Mary Magdalene's repentance were also popular. Anton Giulio Brignole-Sale's \"Maria Maddalena peccatrice convertita\" (1636) is considered one of the masterpieces of the 17th-century religious novel, depicting the Magdalen's tormented journey to repentance convincingly and with psychological subtlety. Estates of nobles and royalty in southern Germany were equipped with so-called \"Magdalene cells\", small, modest hermitages that functioned as both chapels and dwellings, where the nobility could retreat to find religious solace. They were usually located in wild areas away from the rest of the property and their exteriors were designed to suggest vulnerability.\nModern era.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Rquote/styles.css\"/&gt;{ class=\"rquote pullquote floatright\" role=\"presentation\" style=\"display:table; border-collapse:collapse; border-style:none; float:right; margin:0.5em 0.75em; width:33%; \"\nBecause of the legends saying that Mary Magdalene had been a prostitute, she became the patroness of \"wayward women\", and, in the eighteenth century, moral reformers established Magdalene asylums to help save women from prostitution. Edgar Saltus's historical fiction novel \"Mary Magdalene: A Chronicle\" (1891) depicts her as a heroine living in a castle at Magdala, who moves to Rome becoming the \"toast of the tetrarchy\", telling John the Baptist she will \"drink pearls... sup on peacock's tongues\". St Peter Julian Eymard calls her \"the patroness and model of a life spent in the adoration and service of Jesus in the sacrament of His Love\".\nThe common identification of Mary Magdalene with other New Testament figures was omitted in the 1969 revision of the General Roman Calendar, with the comment regarding her liturgical celebration on July 22: \"No change has been made in the title of today's memorial, but it concerns only Saint Mary Magdalene, to whom Christ appeared after his resurrection. It is not about the sister of Saint Martha, nor about the sinful woman whose sins the Lord forgave.\" Elsewhere it said of the Roman liturgy of July 22 that \"it will make mention neither of Mary of Bethany nor of the sinful woman of Luke 7:36\u201350, but only of Mary Magdalene, the first person to whom Christ appeared after his resurrection\". According to historian Michael Haag, these changes were a quiet admission from the Vatican that the Church's previous teaching of Mary Magdalene as a repentant whore had been wrong. Mary of Bethany's feast day and that of her brother Lazarus is now on July 29, the memorial of their sister Martha.\nNonetheless, despite the Vatican's rejection of it, the view of Mary as a repentant prostitute only grew more prevalent in popular culture. She is portrayed as one in Nikos Kazantzakis's 1955 novel \"The Last Temptation of Christ\" and Martin Scorsese's 1988 film adaptation of it, in which Jesus, as he is dying on the cross, has a vision from Satan of what it would be like if he married Mary Magdalene and raised a family with her instead of dying for humanity's sins. Mary is likewise portrayed as a reformed prostitute in Andrew Lloyd Webber and Tim Rice's 1971 rock opera \"Jesus Christ Superstar\". In \"Superstar\", Mary describes her sexual attraction to Jesus in the song \"I Don't Know How to Love Him\", which shocked many of the play's original viewers. Ki Longfellow's novel \"The Secret Magdalene\" (2005) draws on the Gnostic gospels and other sources to portray Mary as a brilliant and dynamic woman who studies at the fabled library of Alexandria, and shares her knowledge with Jesus. Lady Gaga's song \"Judas\" (2011) is sung from Mary's perspective, portraying her as a prostitute who is \"beyond repentance\".\nThe 2018 film \"Mary Magdalene\", starring Rooney Mara as the eponymous character, sought to reverse the centuries-old portrayal of Mary Magdalene as a repentant prostitute, while also combating the conspiracy statements of her being Jesus's wife or sexual partner. Instead, the film portrays her as Jesus's closest disciple and the only one who truly understands his teachings. This portrayal is partially based on the Gnostic \"Gospel of Mary Magdalene\". The film, which has been described as having a \"strongly feminist bent\", was praised for its music score and cinematography, its surprising faithfulness to the Biblical narrative, and its acting, but was criticized as slow-moving, overwritten, and too solemn to be believable. It was also criticized by many Christians, who were offended by the film's use of extracanonical source material.\nIn Western art.\nThe early notion of Mary Magdalene as a sinner and adulteress was reflected in Western medieval Christian art, where she was the most commonly depicted female figure after the Virgin Mary. She may be shown either as very extravagantly and fashionably dressed, unlike other female figures wearing contemporary styles of clothes, or alternatively as completely naked but covered by very long blonde or reddish-blonde hair. The latter depictions represent the \"Penitent Magdalene\", according to the medieval legend that she had spent a period of repentance as a desert hermit after leaving her life as a follower of Jesus. Her story became conflated in the West with that of Mary of Egypt, a fourth-century prostitute turned hermit, whose clothes wore out and fell off in the desert. The widespread artistic representations of Mary Magdalene in tears are the source of the modern English word \"maudlin\", meaning 'sickeningly sentimental or emotional'.\nIn medieval depictions Mary's long hair entirely covers her body and preserves her modesty (supplemented in some German versions such as one by Tilman Riemenschneider by thick body hair), but, from the sixteenth century, some depictions, like those by Titian, show part of her naked body, the amount of nudity tending to increase in successive periods. Even if covered, she often wears only a drape pulled around her, or an undergarment. In particular, Mary is often shown naked in the legendary scene of her \"Elevation\", where she is sustained in the desert by angels who raise her up and feed her heavenly manna, as recounted in the \"Golden Legend\".\nMary Magdalene at the foot of the cross during the Crucifixion appears in an eleventh-century English manuscript \"as an expressional device rather than a historical motif\", intended as \"the expression of an emotional assimilation of the event, that leads the spectator to identify himself with the mourners\". Other isolated depictions occur, but, from the thirteenth century, additions to the Virgin Mary and John as the spectators at the Crucifixion become more common, with Mary Magdalene as the most frequently found, either kneeling at the foot of the cross clutching the shaft, sometimes kissing Christ's feet, or standing, usually at the left and behind Mary and John, with her arms stretched upwards towards Christ in a gesture of grief, as in a damaged painting by Cimabue in the upper church at Assisi of c. 1290. A kneeling Magdalene by Giotto in the Scrovegni Chapel (c. 1305) was especially influential. As Gothic painted crucifixions became crowded compositions, the Magdalene became a prominent figure, with a halo and identifiable by her long unbound blonde hair, and usually a bright red dress. As the swooning Virgin Mary became more common, generally occupying the attention of John, the unrestrained gestures of Magdalene increasingly represented the main display of the grief of the spectators.\nAccording to Robert Kiely, \"No figure in the Christian Pantheon except Jesus, the Virgin Mary, and John the Baptist has inspired, provoked, or confounded the imagination of painters more than the Magdalene.\" Apart from the Crucifixion, Mary was often shown in scenes of the Passion of Jesus, when mentioned in the Gospels, such as the Crucifixion, Christ Carrying the Cross and Noli me Tangere, but usually omitted in other scenes showing the Twelve Apostles, such as the Last Supper. As Mary of Bethany, she is shown as present at the Resurrection of Lazarus, her brother, and in the scene with Jesus and her sister Martha, which began to be depicted often in the seventeenth century, as in \"Christ in the House of Martha and Mary\" by Vel\u00e1zquez.\nGallery\nReligious views.\nEastern Orthodox.\nThe Eastern Orthodox Church has never identified Mary Magdalene with Mary of Bethany or the \"sinful woman\" who anoints Jesus in Luke 7:36\u201350 and has always taught that Mary was a virtuous woman her entire life, even before her conversion. They have never celebrated her as a penitent. Mary Magdalene's image did not become conflated with other women mentioned in Biblical texts until Pope Gregory the Great's sermon in the sixth century, and even then this only occurred in Western traditions. Instead, she has traditionally been honored as a \"Myrrhbearer\" (\u039c\u03c5\u03c1\u03bf\u03c6\u03cc\u03c1\u03bf\u03c2; the equivalent of the western Three Marys) and \"Equal to the Apostles\" (\u1f30\u03c3\u03b1\u03c0\u03cc\u03c3\u03c4\u03bf\u03bb\u03bf\u03c2). For centuries, it has been the custom of many Eastern Orthodox Christians to share dyed and painted eggs, particularly on Easter Sunday. The eggs represent new life, and Christ bursting forth from the tomb. Among Eastern Orthodox Christians this sharing is accompanied by the proclamation \"Christ is risen!\" One folk tradition concerning Mary Magdalene says that following the death and resurrection of Jesus, she used her position to gain an invitation to a banquet given by the Roman emperor Tiberius in Rome. When she met him, she held a plain egg in her hand and exclaimed, \"Christ is risen!\". The emperor laughed, and said that Christ rising from the dead was as likely as the egg in her hand turning red while she held it. Before he finished speaking, the egg in her hand turned a bright red and she continued proclaiming the Gospel to the entire imperial house.\nRoman Catholicism.\nDuring the Counter-Reformation and Baroque periods (late 16th and 17th centuries), the description \"penitent\" was added to the indication of her name on her feast day, July 22. It had not yet been added at the time of the Tridentine calendar of 1569 and is no longer found in the present General Roman Calendar but, once added, it remained until the General Roman Calendar of 1960. The Gospel reading in the Tridentine Mass was Luke 7:36\u201350 (the sinful woman anointing the feet of Jesus), while in the present version of the Roman Rite of Mass it is John 20:1\u20132, 11\u201318 (meeting of Mary Magdalene with Jesus after his resurrection).\nAccording to Darrell Bock, the title of \"apostola apostolorum\" first appears in the 10th century, but Katherine Ludwig Jansen says she found no reference to it earlier than the 12th century, by which time it was already commonplace. She mentions in particular Hugh of Cluny (1024\u20131109), Peter Abelard (1079\u20131142), and Bernard of Clairvaux (1090\u20131153) among those who gave Mary Magdalene the title of \"apostolorum apostola\" (apostle of the apostles). Jane Schaberg adds Geoffrey of Vend\u00f4me (c.\u20091065/70 \u2013 1132).\nThe equivalent of the phrase \"apostolorum apostola\" may have appeared already in the 9th century. Chapter XXVII of the \"Life of Mary Magdalene\" attributed to Hrabanus Maurus (c. 780 \u2013 784 February 856) is headed: \"Ubi Magdalenam Christus ad apostolos mittit apostolam\" (Wherein Christ sends Magdalene as an apostle to the apostles). The same chapter says she did not delay in exercising the office of apostolate with which he had been honored (\"apostolatus officio quo honorata fuerat fungi non distulit\"). Raymond E. Brown, commenting on this fact, remarks that Hrabanus Maurus frequently applies the word \"apostle\" to Mary Magdalene in this work. However the work is actually no earlier than the 12th century. Because of Mary Magdalene's position as an apostle, though not one of those who became official witnesses to the resurrection, the Catholic Church honored her by reciting the Gloria on her feast day \u2013 the only female saint so honored apart from Mary, the mother of Jesus. In his apostolic letter \"Mulieris Dignitatem\" (\"On the dignity and vocation of women\", parts 67\u201369) dated August 15, 1988, Pope John Paul II dealt with the Easter events in relation to the women being present at the tomb after the Resurrection, in a section entitled 'First Witnesses of the Resurrection':\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The women \"are the first at the tomb\". They are the first to find it empty. They are the first to hear 'He is not here. \"He has risen\", as he said.' They are the first to embrace his feet. The women are also the first to be called to announce this truth to the Apostles. The Gospel of John emphasizes \"the special role of Mary Magdalene\". She is the first to meet the Risen Christ. [...] Hence she came to be called \"the apostle of the Apostles\". Mary Magdalene was the first eyewitness of the Risen Christ, and for this reason she was also \"the first to bear witness to him before the Apostles.\" This event, in a sense, crowns all that has been said previously about Christ entrusting divine truths to women as well as men.\u2014\u200a On June 10, 2016, the Congregation for Divine Worship and the Discipline of the Sacraments issued a decree which elevated Mary's liturgical commemoration from an obligatory memorial to a feast day, like that of most of the Apostles (Peter and Paul are jointly commemorated with a solemnity). The Mass and Liturgy of the Hours (Divine Office) remain the same as they were, except that a specific preface was added to the Mass to refer to her explicitly as the \"Apostle to the Apostles\".\nProtestantism.\nThe 1549 \"Book of Common Prayer\" had on July 22 a feast of Saint Mary Magdalene, with the same Scripture readings as in the Tridentine Mass and with a newly composed collect: \"Merciful father geue us grace, that we neuer presume to synne through the example of anye creature, but if it shall chaunce vs at any tyme to offende thy dyuine maiestie: that then we maye truly repent, and lament the same, after the example of Mary Magdalene, and by lyuelye faythe obtayne remission of all oure sinnes: throughe the onely merites of thy sonne oure sauiour Christ.\" The 1552 edition omitted the feast of Saint Mary Magdalene, which was restored to the Book of Common Prayer only after some 400 years.\nModern Protestants honor her as a disciple and friend of Jesus. Anglican Christians refer to her as a saint and may follow her example of repentance; While some interpret the Thirty-Nine Articles as forbidding them to call upon her for intercession, other Anglicans, citing the Episcopal burial service, say they can ask the saint to pray for them.\nThe Evangelical Lutheran Church in America honors Mary Magdalene on July 22 as an apostle. Her feast day is marked as a lesser festival, which are defined as \"days when we celebrate the life of Christ, the witness of those who accompanied and testified to him, and the gifts of God in the church\".\nPresbyterians honor her as the \"apostle to the apostles\" and, in the book \"Methodist Theology\", Kenneth Wilson describes her as, \"in effect\", one of the \"first missionaries\".\nMary Magdalene is remembered in the Church of England with a Festival and in the Episcopal Church with a Major Feast on July 22.\nBah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed Faith.\nThere are many references to Mary Magdalene in the writings of the Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed Faith, where she enjoys an exalted status as a heroine of faith and the \"archetypal woman of all cycles\". `Abdu'l-Bah\u00e1, the son of the founder of the religion, said that she was \"the channel of confirmation\" to Jesus's disciples, a \"heroine\" who \"re-established the faith of the apostles\" and was \"a light of nearness in his kingdom\". `Abdu'l-Bah\u00e1 also wrote that \"her reality is ever shining from the horizon of Christ\", \"her face is shining and beaming forth on the horizon of the universe forevermore\" and that \"her candle is, in the assemblage of the world, lighted till eternity\". `Abdu'l-Bah\u00e1 considered her to be the supreme example of how women are completely equal with men in the sight of God and can at times even exceed men in holiness and greatness. Indeed he said that she surpassed all the men of her time, and that \"crowns studded with the brilliant jewels of guidance\" were upon her head.\nThe Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed writings also expand upon the scarce references to her life in the canonical Gospels, with a wide array of extra-canonical stories about her and sayings which are not recorded in any other extant historical sources. `Abdu'l-Bah\u00e1 said that Mary traveled to Rome and spoke before the emperor Tiberius, which is presumably why Pilate was later recalled to Rome for his cruel treatment of the Jews (a tradition also attested to in the Eastern Orthodox Church). Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00eds have noted parallels between Mary Magdalene and the Bab\u00ed heroine-poet T\u00e1hirih. The two are similar in many respects, with Mary Magdalene often being viewed as a Christian antecedent of the latter, while T\u00e1hirih in her own right could be described as the spiritual return of the Magdalene; especially given their common, shared attributes of \"knowledge, steadfastness, courage, virtue and will power\", in addition to their importance within the religious movements of Christianity and the Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed Faith as female leaders.\nRelics.\nMany of the alleged relics of the saint are held in Catholic churches in France, especially at Saint-Maximin-la-Sainte-Baume, where her skull (see above) and the \"noli me tangere\" are on display; the latter being a piece of forehead flesh and skin said to be from the spot touched by Jesus at the post-resurrection encounter in the garden. A tibia also kept at Saint-Maximin-la-Sainte-Baume is the object of an annual procession.\nHer left hand relic is kept in the Simonopetra Monastery on Mount Athos.\nThe left foot, contained in a reliquary made by Benvenuto Cellini is kept in the church of San Giovanni dei Fiorentini in Rome. It is considered the first foot that entered the Holy Sepulcher after Christ's Resurrection. For this reason it was previously kept in a chapel at the entrance to Ponte Sant'Angelo, as the last of the major relics before reaching Saint Peter's tomb.\nSpeculations.\nIn 1998, Ramon K. Jusino proposed an unprecedented argument that the \"Beloved Disciple\" of the Gospel of John is Mary Magdalene. Jusino based his argument largely on the Nag Hammadi Gnostic books, rejecting the view of Raymond E. Brown that these books were later developments, and maintaining instead that the extant Gospel of John is the result of modification of an earlier text that presented Mary Magdalene as the Beloved Disciple. The gospel, at least in its current form, clearly and consistently identifies the disciple as having masculine gender, only ever referring to him using words inflected in the masculine. There are no textual variants in extant New Testament manuscripts to contradict this, and thus no physical evidence of this hypothetical earlier document. Richard J. Hooper does not make the Jusino thesis his own, but says: \"Perhaps we should not altogether reject the possibility that some Johannine Christians considered Mary Magdalene to be 'the disciple whom Jesus loved'.\" Esther A. de Boer likewise presents the idea as \"one possibility among others\", not as a definitive solution to the problem of the identity of the anonymous disciple. There is a theological interpretation of Mary as the Magdala, \"The Elegant Tower\", and certain churches honor her as a heroine of the faith in their teachings.\nDan Brown's 2003 bestselling mystery thriller novel \"The Da Vinci Code\" popularized a number of erroneous ideas about Mary Magdalene, including that she was a member of the tribe of Benjamin, that she was Jesus's wife, that she was pregnant at the crucifixion, and that she gave birth to Jesus's child, who became the founder of a bloodline which survives to this very day. There is no historical evidence (from the canonical or apocryphal gospels, other early Christian writings, or any other ancient sources) to support these statements. \"The Da Vinci Code\" also purports that the figure of the \"beloved disciple\" to Jesus's right in Leonardo da Vinci's \"Last Supper\" is Mary Magdalene, disguised as one of the male disciples; art historians maintain that the figure is, in reality, the apostle John, who only appears feminine due to Leonardo's characteristic fascination with blurring the lines between the sexes, a quality which is found in his other paintings, such as \"Saint John the Baptist\" (painted c. 1513 \u2013 1516). Furthermore, according to Ross King, an expert on Italian art, Mary Magdalene's appearance at the last supper would not have been controversial and Leonardo would have had no motive to disguise her as one of the other disciples, since she was widely venerated in her role as the \"apostle to the apostles\" and patron of the Dominican Order, for whom \"The Last Supper\" was painted. There would have even been precedent for it, since the earlier Italian Renaissance painter Fra Angelico had included her in his painting of the Last Supper. Numerous works were written in response to the historical inaccuracies in \"The Da Vinci Code\", but the novel still exerted massive influence on how members of the general public viewed Mary Magdalene.\nIn 2012, scholar Karen L. King published the Gospel of Jesus's Wife, a purported Coptic papyrus fragment in which Jesus says: \"My wife ... she will be able to be my disciple.\" The overwhelming consensus of scholars is that the fragment is a modern forgery, and in 2016, King herself said that the alleged Gospel was probably a forgery.\nEhrman states that the historical sources reveal absolutely nothing about Jesus's sexuality and that there is no evidence whatsoever to support the idea that Jesus and Mary Magdalene were married or that they had any kind of sexual or romantic relationship. None of the canonical gospels imply such a thing and, even in the late Gnostic gospels, where Mary is shown as Jesus's closest disciple, the relationship between them is not sexual. The extremely late \"Greater Questions of Mary\", which has not survived, allegedly portrayed Mary not as Jesus's wife or partner, but rather as an unwilling voyeur. Ehrman says that the Essenes, a contemporary Jewish sect who shared many views with Jesus, and the apostle Paul, Jesus's later follower, both lived in unmarried celibacy, so it is not unreasonable to conclude that Jesus did as well.\nFurthermore, according to , Jesus taught that marriage would not exist at all in the coming kingdom of God. Since Jesus taught that people should live as though the kingdom had already arrived, this teaching implied a life of unmarried celibacy. Ehrman says that, if Jesus had been married to Mary Magdalene, the authors of the gospels would definitely have mentioned it, since they mention all his other family members, including his mother Mary, his father Joseph, his four brothers, and his at least two sisters.\nMaurice Casey rejects the idea of Mary Magdalene as Jesus's wife as nothing more than wild popular sensationalism. Jeffrey J. Kripal writes that \"the historical sources are simply too contradictory and simultaneously too silent\" to make absolute declarations regarding Jesus's sexuality.\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAlmond, Philip C., 'Mary Magdalene: A Cultural History.' Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2023)."}
{"id": "20788", "revid": "4553984", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20788", "title": "Mary of Bethany", "text": "Disciple of Jesus\nMary of Bethany is a biblical figure mentioned by name in the Gospel of John and probably the Gospel of Luke in the Christian New Testament. Together with her siblings Lazarus and Martha, she is described as living in the village of Bethany, a small village in Judaea to the south of the Mount of Olives near Jerusalem.\nWestern Christianity initially identified Mary of Bethany with Mary Magdalene and the sinful woman of Luke 7 (). This influenced the Roman Rite liturgy of the feast of Mary Magdalene, with a Gospel reading about the sinful woman and a collect referring to Mary of Bethany. After the liturgical revision in 1969 and 2021, the feast of Mary Magdalene continues to be on 22 July, while Mary of Bethany is celebrated as a separate saint, along with her siblings Lazarus and Martha on 29 July. In Eastern Christianity and some Protestant traditions, Mary of Bethany and Mary Magdalene are also considered separate persons. The Eastern Orthodox Church has its own traditions regarding Mary of Bethany's life beyond the gospel accounts.\nBiblical references.\nGospel of John.\nIn the Gospel of John, a Mary appears in connection to two incidents: the raising from the dead of her brother Lazarus and the anointing of Jesus. The identification of this being the same Mary in both incidents is given explicitly by the author: \"Now a man named Lazarus was sick. He was from Bethany, the village of Mary and her sister Martha. This Mary, whose brother Lazarus now lay sick, was the same one who poured perfume on the Lord and wiped his feet with her hair.\" The mention of her sister Martha suggests a connection with the woman named Mary in Luke 10:38-42.\nIn the account of the raising of Lazarus, Jesus meets with the sisters in turn: Martha followed by Mary. Martha goes immediately to meet Jesus as he arrives, while Mary waits until she is called. As one commentator notes, \"Martha, the more aggressive sister, went to meet Jesus, while quiet and contemplative Mary stayed home. This portrayal of the sisters agrees with that found in Luke 10:38\u201342.\" When Mary meets Jesus, she falls at his feet. In speaking with Jesus, both sisters lament that he did not arrive in time to prevent their brother's death: \"Lord, if you had been here, my brother would not have died.\" But where Jesus' response to Martha is one of teaching, calling her to hope and faith, his response to Mary is more emotional: \"When Jesus saw her weeping, and the Jews who had come along with her also weeping, he was deeply moved in spirit and troubled. As the 17th century Welsh commentator Matthew Henry notes, \"Mary added no more, as Martha did; but it appears, by what follows, that what she fell short in words she made up in tears; she said less than Martha, but wept more.\" The Greek word used for Jesus' 'love' towards the two sisters in the Gospel of John account of the raising of Lazarus, is \"agapa\u014d\" meaning divine or self-sacrificial love.\nAnointing of Jesus.\nA narrative in which Mary of Bethany plays a central role is the anointing of Jesus, an event reported in the Gospel of John in which a woman pours the entire contents of an alabastron of very expensive perfume over the feet of Jesus. Only in this account is the woman identified as Mary, with the earlier reference in establishing her as the sister of Martha and Lazarus.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Six days before the Passover, Jesus arrived at Bethany, where Lazarus lived, whom Jesus had raised from the dead. Here a dinner was given in Jesus' honor. Martha served, while Lazarus was among those reclining at the table with him. Then Mary took about a pint of pure nard, an expensive perfume; she poured it on Jesus' feet and wiped his feet with her hair. And the house was filled with the fragrance of the perfume.\nBut one of his disciples, Judas Iscariot, who was later to betray him, objected, \"Why wasn't this perfume sold and the money given to the poor? It was worth a year's wages.\" He did not say this because he cared about the poor but because he was a thief; as keeper of the money bag, he used to help himself to what was put into it.\n\"Leave her alone\", Jesus replied. \"It was intended that she should save this perfume for the day of my burial. You will always have the poor among you, but you will not always have me.\"\u2014\u200a\nThe woman's name is not given in the Gospels of Matthew and Mark, but the event is likewise placed in Bethany, specifically at the home of one Simon the Leper, a man whose significance is not explained elsewhere in the gospels.\nAccording to the Markan account, the perfume was the purest of spikenard. Some of the onlookers were angered because this expensive perfume could have been sold for a year's wages, which Mark enumerates as 300 denarii, and the money given to the poor. The Gospel of Matthew states that the \"disciples were indignant\" and John's gospel states that it was Judas Iscariot who was most offended (which is explained by the narrator as being because Judas was a thief and desired the money for himself). In the accounts, Jesus justifies Mary's action by stating that they would always have the poor among them and would be able to help them whenever they desired, but that he would not always be with them and says that her anointing was done to prepare him for his burial. As one commentator notes, \"Mary seems to have been the only one who was sensitive to the impending death of Jesus and who was willing to give a material expression of her esteem for him. Jesus' reply shows his appreciation of her act of devotion.\" The accounts in Matthew and Mark adds these words of Jesus, \"I tell you the truth, wherever this gospel is preached throughout the world, what she has done will also be told, in memory of her\".\nEaston (1897) noted that it would appear from the circumstances that the family of Lazarus possessed a family vault and that a large number of Jews from Jerusalem came to console them on the death of Lazarus, that this family at Bethany belonged to the wealthier class of the people. This would help explain how Mary of Bethany could afford to possess quantities of expensive perfume.\nA similar anointing is described in the Gospel of Luke as occurring at the home of one Simon the Pharisee in which a woman who had been sinful all her life, and who was crying, anointed Jesus' feet and, when her tears started to fall on his feet, she wiped them with her hair. Luke's account (as well as John's) differs from that of Matthew and Mark by relating that the anointing is to the feet rather than the head. Although it is a subject of considerable debate, many scholars hold that these actually describe two separate events.\nJesus' response to the anointing in Luke is completely different from that recorded in the other gospels to the anointing in their accounts. Rather than Jesus' above-mentioned comments on the \"poor you will always have with you\", in Luke he tells his host the Parable of the Two Debtors. As one commentator notes, \"Luke is the only one to record the parable of the two debtors, and he chooses to preserve it in this setting. ...If one considers the other gospel accounts as a variation of the same event, it is likely that the parable is not authentically set. Otherwise, the powerful message from the parable located in this setting would likely be preserved elsewhere, too. However, if one considers the story historically accurate, happening in Jesus' life apart from the similar incidents recorded in the other gospels, the question of the authenticity of the parable receives a different answer. ...John Nolland, following Wilckens' ideas, writes: 'There can hardly be a prior form of the episode not containing the present parable, since this would leave the Pharisee's concerns of v 39 with no adequate response'.\"\nLuke 10.\nIn chapter 10 of the Gospel of Luke, Jesus visits the home of two sisters named Mary and Martha, living in an unnamed village. Mary is contrasted with her sister Martha, who was \"cumbered about many things\" while Jesus was their guest, while Mary had chosen \"the better part\", that of listening to the master's discourse.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;As Jesus and his disciples were on their way, He came to a village where a woman named Martha opened her home to him. She had a sister called Mary, who sat at the Lord's feet listening to what he said. But Martha was distracted by all the preparations that had to be made. She came to him and asked, \"Lord, don't you care that my sister has left me to do the work by myself? Tell her to help me!\"\n\"Martha, Martha,\" the Lord answered, \"you are worried and upset about many things, but only one thing is needed. Mary has chosen what is better, and it will not be taken away from her.\"\u2014\u200a\nFor Mary to sit at Jesus' feet, and for him to allow her to do so, was itself controversial. In doing so, as one commentator notes, Mary took \"the place of a disciple by sitting at the feet of the teacher. It was unusual for a woman in first-century Judaism to be accepted by a teacher as a disciple.\"\nMost Christian commentators have been ready to assume that the two occurrences of sisters named as Mary and Martha refer the same pair of sisters.\nMedieval Western identification with Mary Magdalene.\nIn medieval Western Christian tradition, Mary of Bethany was identified as Mary Magdalene perhaps in large part because of a homily given by Pope Gregory the Great in which he taught about several women in the New Testament as though they were the same person. This led to a conflation of Mary of Bethany with Mary Magdalene as well as with another woman (beside Mary of Bethany who anointed Jesus), and the woman caught in adultery. Eastern Christianity never adopted this identification. In his article in the 1910 \"Catholic Encyclopedia\", Hugh Pope stated, \"The Greek Fathers, as a whole, distinguish the three persons: the 'sinner' of ; the sister of Martha and Lazarus, and ; and Mary Magdalen.\"\nFather Hugh Pope enumerated the accounts of each of these three persons (the unnamed \"sinner\", Mary Magdalene, and Mary of Bethany) in the Gospel of Luke and concluded that, based on these accounts, \"there is no suggestion of an identification of the three persons, and if we had only Luke to guide us we should certainly have no grounds for so identifying them [as the same person].\" He then explains first the position, at that time general among Catholics, equating Mary of Bethany with the sinful woman of Luke by referring to , where Mary is identified as the woman who anointed Jesus, and noting that this reference is given before John's account of the anointing in Bethany:\nJohn, however, clearly identifies Mary of Bethany with the woman who anointed Christ's feet (12; cf. and ). It is remarkable that already in , John has spoken of Mary as \"she that anointed the Lord's feet\", \"he aleipsasa\". It is commonly said that he refers to the subsequent anointing which he himself describes in ; but it may be questioned whether he would have used \"he aleipsasa\" if another woman, and she a \"sinner\" in the city, had done the same. It is conceivable that John, just because he is writing so long after the event and at a time when Mary was dead, wishes to point out to us that she was really the same as the \"sinner\". In the same way Luke may have veiled her identity precisely because he did not wish to defame one who was yet living; he certainly does something similar in the case of St. Matthew whose identity with Levi the publican (5:27) he conceals. If the foregoing argument holds good, Mary of Bethany and the \"sinner\" are one and the same.\nHugh Pope then explained the identification of Mary of Bethany with Mary Magdalene by the presumption that, because of Jesus' high praise of her deed of anointing him, it would be incredible that she should also not have been at his crucifixion and resurrection. Since Mary Magdalene is reported to have been present on those occasions, by this reasoning, she must therefore be the same person as Mary of Bethany:\nAn examination of John's Gospel makes it almost impossible to deny the identity of Mary of Bethany with Mary Magdalen. From John we learn the name of the \"woman\" who anointed Christ's feet previous to the last supper. We may remark here that it seems unnecessary to hold that because Matthew and Mark say \"two days before the Passover\", while John says \"six days\" there were, therefore, two distinct anointings following one another. John does not necessarily mean that the supper and the anointing took place six days before, but only that Christ came to Bethany six days before the Passover. At that supper, then, Mary received the glorious encomium, \"she hath wrought a good work upon Me. ...In pouring this ointment upon My body she hath done it for My burial. ...Wheresoever this Gospel shall be preached ... that also which she hath done shall be told for a memory of her.\" Is it credible, in view of all this, that this Mary should have no place at the foot of the cross, nor at the tomb of Christ? Yet it is Mary Magdalen who, according to all the Evangelists, stood at the foot of the cross and assisted at the entombment and was the first recorded witness of the Resurrection. And while John calls her \"Mary Magdalen\" in 19:25, 20:1, and 20:18, he calls her simply \"Mary\" in 20:11 and 20:16.\nFrench scholar Victor Saxer dates the identification of Mary Magdalene as a prostitute, and as Mary of Bethany, to a sermon by Pope Gregory the Great on 21 September 591 A.D., where he seemed to combine the actions of three women mentioned in the New Testament and also identified an unnamed woman as Mary Magdalene. In another sermon, Gregory specifically identified Mary Magdalene as the sister of Martha mentioned in Luke 10. But according to a view expressed more recently by theologian Jane Schaberg, Gregory only put the final touch to a legend that already existed before him.\nWestern Christianity's identification of Mary Magdalene and Mary of Bethany was reflected in the arrangement of the General Roman Calendar, until this was altered in 1969, reflecting the fact that by then the common interpretation in the Catholic Church was that Mary of Bethany, Mary Magdalene and the sinful woman who anointed the feet of Jesus were three distinct women.\nEastern Orthodox tradition.\nIn Orthodox Church tradition, Mary of Bethany is honored as a separate individual from Mary Magdalene. Though they are not specifically named as such in the gospels, the Orthodox Church counts Mary and Martha among the Myrrh-bearing Women. These faithful followers of Jesus stood at Golgotha during the Crucifixion of Jesus and later came to his tomb early on the morning following the Sabbath with myrrh (expensive oil), according to the Jewish tradition, to anoint their Lord's body. The Myrrhbearers became the first witnesses to the Resurrection of Jesus, finding the empty tomb and hearing the joyful news from an angel.\nOrthodox tradition also relates that Mary's brother Lazarus was cast out of Jerusalem in the persecution against the Jerusalem Church following the martyrdom of St. Stephen. His sisters Mary and Martha fled Judea with him, assisting him in the proclaiming of the Gospel in various lands. According to Cyprian tradition, the three later moved to Cyprus, where Lazarus became the first Bishop of Kition (modern Larnaca).\nLater life.\nThere are several traditions surrounding the later life of Mary of Bethany. One tradition holds that she traveled to Ephesus with the Apostle John and lived there until her death. Another tradition suggests that she went to France with Lazarus and Martha, and may have settled in the town of Tarascon, where she is still venerated as a saint.\nCommemoration as a saint.\nIn the Roman Rite of the Catholic Church, Mary of Bethany is celebrated, together with her brother Lazarus, on 29 July, the memorial of their sister Martha. In 2021, the Congregation for Divine Worship and the Discipline of the Sacraments added their names to the memorial, making it a liturgical celebration of all three family members.\nAlso in the Calendar of Saints of the Lutheran Church, 29 July is the date of the commemoration of Mary (together with Martha and Lazarus), as is the case in the Calendar of saints of the Episcopal Church and the Church of England (together with Martha).\nShe is commemorated in the Eastern Orthodox and Byzantine Rite Eastern Catholic Churches with her sister Martha on 4 June, as well as on the Sunday of the Myrrhbearers (the Third Sunday of Pascha). She also figures prominently in the commemorations on Lazarus Saturday (the day before Palm Sunday).\nMary is remembered (with Martha and Lazarus) in the Church of England with a Lesser Festival on 29 July.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20789", "revid": "49117425", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20789", "title": "Mary of Rome", "text": "Woman mentioned in the New Testament\nMary of Rome was a 1st century Christian woman mentioned in Paul the Apostle's Epistle to the Romans (16:6). She is said to have treated Paul with special kindness, and to have \"laboured much among\" the early Christian community.\nAlthough it has been conjectured that she is the same person as the Mary, mother of John Mark, this is generally considered to be unproven. Most traditions hold that there is nothing more known about her.\nThere is also a suggestion from the Russian Orthodox tradition that Mary of Rome, is actually Mary Magdalene. Paul is not so formal as to use \"of Magdalene\".\nLouis de Montfort - writing in his book https:// - suggests that this Mary can be interpreted with Mary, mother of Jesus, when he writes:\nRomans 16:6 KJV\n[6] Greet Mary, who bestowed much labour on us. \nKJV Romans 16:6.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20790", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20790", "title": "Mary, mother of John Mark", "text": "Biblical character\nMary, mother of John Mark \u2013 commonly associated with Mark the Evangelist \u2013 is mentioned in the New Testament of the Christian Bible, in Acts 12:12, where it is said that, after his escape from prison, Peter went to her house: \"When he realized this, he went to the house of Mary, the mother of John whose other name was Mark, where many were gathered together and were praying.\" This seems to be the only mention of her in the Bible. From this it would appear that Mary's house was a place of gathering for the Apostles and other Christians. \nThe Monastery of Saint Mark, in the Old City of Jerusalem, contains a 6th-century inscription claiming the place is the site of \"the house of Mary, mother of John Mark\". \nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20793", "revid": "1532071", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20793", "title": "Microsoft Intermediate Language", "text": ""}
{"id": "20794", "revid": "1043267840", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20794", "title": "MSIL", "text": "MSIL can mean:\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "20795", "revid": "34725219", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20795", "title": "M. A.", "text": ""}
{"id": "20796", "revid": "50157484", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20796", "title": "Malcolm X", "text": "American civil rights activist (1925\u20131965)\nMalcolm\u00a0X (born Malcolm Little, later el-Hajj Malik el-Shabazz; May 19, 1925 \u2013 February 21, 1965) was an African American revolutionary and human rights activist who founded Muslim Mosque, Inc. (MMI) and the Organization of Afro-American Unity (OAAU). He was also a prominent figure during the civil rights movement until his assassination by members of the Nation of Islam (NOI) in 1965. A spokesman and minister for the Nation of Islam from 1952 until 1964, after which he left, he was a vocal advocate for Black empowerment and the promotion of Islam within the African American community. A controversial figure accused of preaching violence, Malcolm X is also a celebrated figure with Black people and Muslims worldwide for his pursuit of racial justice.\nMalcolm spent his adolescence living in a series of foster homes and with various relatives, after his father's death and his mother's hospitalization. He committed various crimes, being sentenced to eight to ten years in prison in 1946 for larceny and burglary. In prison, he joined the Nation of Islam, adopting the name Malcolm\u00a0X to symbolize his unknown African ancestral surname while discarding \"the white slavemaster name of 'Little'\", and after his parole in 1952, he quickly became one of the organization's most influential leaders. He was the public face of the organization for 12 years, advocating Black empowerment and separation of Black and White Americans, as well as criticizing Martin Luther King Jr. and the mainstream civil rights movement for its emphasis on non-violence and racial integration. Malcolm\u00a0X also expressed pride in some of the Nation's social welfare achievements, such as its free drug rehabilitation program. From the 1950s onward, Malcolm\u00a0X was subjected to surveillance by the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI).\nIn the 1960s, Malcolm\u00a0X began to grow disillusioned with the Nation of Islam, as well as with its leader, Elijah Muhammad. He subsequently embraced Sunni Islam and the civil rights movement after completing the Hajj to Mecca and became known as \"el-Hajj Malik el-Shabazz\", which roughly translates to \"The Pilgrim Malcolm the Patriarch\". After a brief period of travel across Africa, he publicly renounced the Nation of Islam and founded the Islamic Muslim Mosque, Inc. (MMI) and the Pan-African Organization of Afro-American Unity (OAAU). Throughout 1964, his conflict with the Nation of Islam intensified, and he was repeatedly sent death threats. On February21, 1965, he was assassinated in New York City. Three Nation members were charged with the murder and given indeterminate life sentences. In 2021, two of the convictions were vacated. Speculation about the assassination and whether it was conceived or aided by leading or additional members of the Nation, or with law enforcement agencies, has persisted for decades.\nHe was posthumously honored with Malcolm\u00a0X Day, on which he is commemorated in various cities across the United States. Hundreds of streets and schools in the US have been renamed in his honor, while the Audubon Ballroom, the site of his assassination, was partly redeveloped in 2005 to accommodate the Malcolm\u00a0X and Dr. Betty Shabazz Memorial and Educational Center. A posthumous autobiography, on which he collaborated with Alex Haley, was published in 1965.\nEarly years.\nChildhood.\nMalcolm Little was born May 19, 1925, in Omaha, Nebraska, the fourth of seven children of Grenada-born Louise Little (n\u00e9e Langdon) and Georgia-born Earl Little. Earl was an outspoken Baptist lay speaker, and he and Louise were admirers of Pan-African activist Marcus Garvey. Earl was a local leader of the Universal Negro Improvement Association (UNIA) and Louise served as secretary and \"branch reporter\", sending news of local UNIA activities to \"Negro World\"; they inculcated self-reliance and black pride in their children. Malcolm\u00a0X later said that White violence killed four of his father's brothers.\nBecause of Ku Klux Klan threats, Earl's UNIA activities were said to be \"spreading trouble\" and the family relocated in 1926 to Milwaukee, and shortly thereafter to Lansing, Michigan. There, the family was frequently harassed by the Black Legion, a White racist group Earl accused of burning their family home in 1929.\nWhen Malcolm was six, his father died in what has been officially ruled a streetcar accident, though his mother Louise believed Earl had been murdered by the Black Legion. Rumors that White racists were responsible for his father's death were widely circulated and were very disturbing to Malcolm\u00a0X as a child. As an adult, he expressed conflicting beliefs on the question. After a dispute with creditors, Louise received a life insurance benefit (nominally $1,000 \u200d\u2014\u200cabout $,000 in 2024) in payments of $18 per month; the issuer of another, larger policy refused to pay, claiming her husband Earl had killed himself. To make ends meet, Louise rented out part of her garden, and her sons hunted game.\nDuring the 1930s, white Seventh-day Adventists witnessed to the Little family; later on, Louise Little and her son Wilfred were baptized into the Seventh-day Adventist Church. Malcolm said the Adventists were \"the friendliest white people I had ever seen.\"\nIn 1937, a man Louise had been dating\u200d\u2014\u200cmarriage had seemed a possibility\u200d\u2014\u200cvanished from her life when she became pregnant with his child. In late 1938, she had a nervous breakdown and was committed to Kalamazoo State Hospital. The children were separated and sent to foster homes. Malcolm and his siblings secured her release 24 years later.\nMalcolm attended West Junior High School in Lansing and then Mason High School in Mason, Michigan, but left high school in 1941, before graduating. He excelled in junior high school but dropped out of high school after a White teacher told him that practicing law, his aspiration at the time, was \"no realistic goal for a nigger.\" Later, Malcolm\u00a0X recalled feeling that the White world offered no place for a career-oriented Black man, regardless of talent.\nCriminal career.\nFrom age 14 to 21, Malcolm held a variety of jobs while living with his half-sister Ella Little-Collins in Roxbury, a largely African American neighborhood of Boston.\nAfter a short time in Flint, Michigan, he moved to New York City's Harlem neighborhood in 1943, where he found employment on the New Haven Railroad and engaged in drug dealing, gambling, racketeering, robbery, and pimping. According to biographer Bruce Perry, Malcolm also occasionally had sex with other men, usually for money, though this conjecture has been disputed by those who knew him. He befriended John Elroy Sanford, a fellow dishwasher at Jimmy's Chicken Shack in Harlem who aspired to be a professional comedian. Both men had reddish hair, so Sanford was called \"Chicago Red\" after his hometown, and Malcolm was known as \"Detroit Red\". Years later, Sanford became famous as comedian and actor Redd Foxx.\nSummoned by the local draft board for military service in World War II in late 1943, he feigned mental disturbance by rambling and declaring: \"I want to be sent down South. Organize them nigger soldiers... steal us some guns, and kill us [some] crackers\". He was declared \"mentally disqualified for military service\".\nIn late 1945, Malcolm returned to Boston, where he and four accomplices committed a series of burglaries targeting wealthy White families. In 1946, he was arrested while picking up a stolen watch he had left at a shop for repairs, and in February began serving a sentence of eight to ten years at Charlestown State Prison for larceny and breaking and entering. In 1947, he was transferred to Concord Reformatory, where he served 15 months before transferring again to Norfolk Prison Colony.\nNation of Islam period.\nPrison.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\u2014Malcolm\u00a0X\nWhen Malcolm was in prison, he met fellow convict John Bembry, a self-educated man he would later describe as \"the first man I had ever seen command total respect... with words\". Under Bembry's influence, Malcolm developed a voracious appetite for reading.\nAt this time, several of his siblings wrote to him about the Nation of Islam, a relatively new religious movement preaching Black self-reliance and, ultimately, the return of the African diaspora to Africa (which was then undergoing the process of independence), where they would be free from White American and European domination. He showed scant interest at first, but after his brother Reginald wrote in 1948, \"Malcolm, don't eat any more pork and don't smoke any more cigarettes. I'll show you how to get out of prison\", he almost instantly quit smoking and began to refuse pork.\nFollowing a visit during which Reginald detailed the group's teachings, including the notion that White people are considered devils, Malcolm initially struggled to accept this belief. Over time, however, Malcolm reflected on his past relationships with White individuals and concluded that they had all been marked by dishonesty, injustice, greed, and hatred. Malcolm, whose hostility to Christianity had earned him the prison nickname \"Satan\", became receptive to the message of the Nation of Islam.\nIn late 1948, Malcolm wrote to Elijah Muhammad, the leader of the Nation of Islam. Muhammad advised him to renounce his past, humbly bow in prayer to God and promise never to engage in destructive behavior again. Though he later recalled the inner struggle he had before bending his knees to pray, Malcolm soon became a member of the Nation of Islam,\nmaintaining a regular correspondence with Muhammad.\nIn 1950, the FBI opened a file on Malcolm after he wrote a letter from prison to President Harry S. Truman expressing opposition to the Korean War and declaring himself a communist. That year, he also began signing his name \"Malcolm\u00a0X\". Muhammad instructed his followers to leave their family names behind when they joined the Nation of Islam and use \"X\" instead. When the time was right, after they had proven their sincerity, he said, he would reveal the Muslim's \"original name\". In his autobiography, Malcolm\u00a0X explained that the \"X\" symbolized the true African family name that he could never know. \"For me, my 'X' replaced the white slavemaster name of 'Little' which some blue-eyed devil named Little had imposed upon my paternal forebears.\"\nEarly ministry.\nAfter his parole in August 1952, Malcolm\u00a0X visited Elijah Muhammad in Chicago. In June 1953, he was named assistant minister of the Nation's Temple Number One in Detroit. Later that year he established Boston's Temple Number11; in March 1954, he expanded Temple Number12 in Philadelphia; and two months later he was selected to lead Temple Number7 in Harlem, where he rapidly expanded its membership.\nIn 1953, the FBI began surveillance of him, turning its attention from Malcolm\u00a0X's possible communist associations to his rapid ascent in the Nation of Islam.\nDuring 1955, Malcolm\u00a0X continued his successful recruitment of members on behalf of the Nation of Islam. He established temples in Springfield, Massachusetts (Number13); Hartford, Connecticut (Number14); and Atlanta (Number15). Hundreds of African Americans were joining the Nation of Islam every month.\nBesides his skill as a speaker, Malcolm\u00a0X had an impressive physical presence. He stood tall and weighed about . One writer described him as \"powerfully built\", and another as \"mesmerizingly handsome... and always spotlessly well-groomed\".\nMarriage and family.\nIn 1955, Betty Sanders met Malcolm\u00a0X after one of his lectures, then again at a dinner party; soon she was regularly attending his lectures. In 1956, she joined the Nation of Islam, changing her name to BettyX. One-on-one dates were contrary to the Nation's teachings, so the couple courted at social events with dozens or hundreds of others, and Malcolm\u00a0X made a point of inviting her on the frequent group visits he led to New York City's museums and libraries.\nMalcolm\u00a0X proposed during a telephone call from Detroit in January 1958, and they married two days later. They had six daughters:\nAttallah (born 1958; Arabic for 'gift of God'); Qubilah (born 1960, named after Kublai Khan); Ilyasah (born 1962, named after Elijah Muhammad); Gamilah Lumumba (born 1964, named after Gamal Abdel Nasser and Patrice Lumumba); and twins Malikah (1965\u20132021) and Malaak (born 1965, both born after their father's death and named in his honor).\nHinton Johnson incident.\nThe American public first became aware of Malcolm\u00a0X in 1957, after Hinton Johnson, a Nation of Islam member, was beaten by two New York City police officers. On April26, Johnson and two other passersby\u200d\u2014\u200calso Nation of Islam members\u200d\u2014\u200csaw the officers beating an African American man with nightsticks. When they attempted to intervene, shouting, \"You're not in Alabama... this is New York!\" one of the officers turned on Johnson, beating him so severely that he suffered brain contusions and subdural hemorrhaging. All four African American men were arrested.\nAlerted by a witness, Malcolm\u00a0X and a small group of Muslims went to the police station and demanded to see Johnson. Police initially denied that any Muslims were being held, but when the crowd grew to about five hundred, they allowed Malcolm\u00a0X to speak with Johnson. Afterward, Malcolm\u00a0X insisted on arranging for an ambulance to take Johnson to Harlem Hospital.\nJohnson's injuries were treated and by the time he was returned to the police station, some four thousand people had gathered outside. Inside the station, Malcolm\u00a0X and an attorney were making bail arrangements for two of the Muslims. Johnson was not bailed, and police said he could not go back to the hospital until his arraignment the following day. Considering the situation to be at an impasse, Malcolm\u00a0X stepped outside the station house and gave a hand signal to the crowd. Nation members silently left, after which time the rest of the crowd also dispersed.\nOne police officer told the \"New York Amsterdam News\": \"No one man should have that much power.\" Within a month the New York City Police Department arranged to keep Malcolm\u00a0X under surveillance; it also made inquiries with authorities in other cities in which he had lived, and prisons in which he had served time. A grand jury declined to indict the officers who beat Johnson. In October, Malcolm\u00a0X sent an angry telegram to the police commissioner. Soon the police department assigned undercover officers to infiltrate the Nation of Islam.\nIncreasing prominence.\nBy the late 1950s, Malcolm\u00a0X was using a new name, Malcolm Shabazz or el-Hajj Malik el-Shabazz (\"The Pilgrim Malcolm the Patriarch\"), although he was still widely referred to as Malcolm\u00a0X. His comments on issues and events were being widely reported, in print and on radio and television. He was featured in a 1959 New York City television broadcast about the Nation of Islam, \"The Hate That Hate Produced\".\nIn September 1960, at the United Nations General Assembly in New York City, Malcolm\u00a0X was invited to the official functions of several African nations. He met Gamal Abdel Nasser of Egypt, Ahmed S\u00e9kou Tour\u00e9 of Guinea, and Kenneth Kaunda of the Zambian African National Congress. Fidel Castro also attended the Assembly, and Malcolm\u00a0X met publicly with him as part of a welcoming committee of Harlem community leaders. Castro was sufficiently impressed with Malcolm\u00a0X to suggest a private meeting, and after two hours of talking, Castro invited Malcolm\u00a0X to visit Cuba. After the meeting, X publicly praised Castro, stating that he was \"the only white person I ever liked\". While X admired Castro, he told the FBI during an interrogation after the meeting, that he could never be a communist, because according to X, communists do not believe in God.\nAdvocacy and teachings while with the Nation.\nFrom his adoption of the Nation of Islam in 1952 until he broke with it in 1964, Malcolm\u00a0X promoted the Nation's teachings. These included beliefs:\nLouis E. Lomax said that \"those who don't understand biblical prophecy wrongly label him as a racist and as a hate teacher, or as being anti-White or as teaching Black Supremacy\". One of the goals of the civil rights movement was to end disenfranchisement of African Americans, but the Nation of Islam forbade its members from participating in voting and other aspects of the political process. The NAACP and other civil rights organizations denounced him and the Nation of Islam as irresponsible extremists whose views did not represent the common interests of African Americans.\nMalcolm\u00a0X had been equally critical of the civil rights movement. During this period, he denounced Martin Luther King Jr. as a \"chump\", and referred to other civil rights leaders as being \"stooges\" of the White establishment and was strongly against any kind of racial integration. He called the 1963 March on Washington \"the farce on Washington\", and said he did not know why so many Black people were excited about a demonstration \"run by whites in front of a statue of a president who has been dead for a hundred years and who didn't like us when he was alive.\" \nIn 1961, Malcolm\u00a0X spoke at an NOI rally alongside George Lincoln Rockwell, the head of the American Nazi Party. Rockwell saw overlap between black nationalism and white supremacy. While the civil rights movement fought against racial segregation, Malcolm\u00a0X advocated the complete separation of African Americans from Whites. He proposed that African Americans should return to Africa and that, in the interim, a separate country for Black people in America should be created. He rejected the civil rights movement's strategy of nonviolence, arguing that Black people should defend and advance themselves \"by any means necessary\". His speeches had a powerful effect on his audiences, who were generally African Americans in northern and western cities. Many of them\u200d\u2014\u200ctired of being told to wait for freedom, justice, equality and respect\u200d\u2014\u200cfelt that he articulated their complaints better than did the civil rights movement.\nEffect on Nation membership.\nMalcolm\u00a0X is widely regarded as the second most influential leader of the Nation of Islam after Elijah Muhammad. He is largely credited with helping the group's dramatic increase in membership between the early 1950s and early 1960s\u2014from around 1,200 to between 50,000 and 100,000 members, with up to 25,000 actively attending, according to estimates.\nHe inspired the boxer Muhammad Ali to join the Nation, and the two became close.\nIn January 1964, Ali brought Malcolm\u00a0X and his family to Miami to watch him train for his fight against Sonny Liston.\nWhen Malcolm\u00a0X left the Nation of Islam, he tried to convince Ali (who had just been renamed by Elijah Muhammad) to join him in converting to Sunni Islam, but Ali instead broke ties with him, later describing the break as one of his greatest regrets.\nMalcolm\u00a0X mentored and guided LouisX (later known as Louis Farrakhan), who eventually became the leader of the Nation of Islam. Malcolm\u00a0X also served as a mentor and confidant to Elijah Muhammad's son, Wallace D. Muhammad; the son told Malcolm\u00a0X about his skepticism toward his father's \"unorthodox approach\" to Islam. Wallace Muhammad was excommunicated from the Nation of Islam several times, although he was eventually re-admitted.\nDisillusionment and departure.\nDuring 1962 and 1963, events caused Malcolm\u00a0X to reassess his relationship with the Nation of Islam, and particularly its leader, Elijah Muhammad.\nLack of Nation of Islam response to LAPD violence.\nIn late 1961, there were violent confrontations between the Nation of Islam members and police in South Central Los Angeles, and numerous Muslims were arrested. They were acquitted, but tensions had been raised. Just after midnight on April27, 1962, two LAPD officers, unprovoked, shoved and beat several Muslims outside Temple Number 27. A large crowd of angry Muslims emerged from the mosque and the officers attempted to intimidate them.\nOne officer was disarmed; his partner was shot in the elbow by a third officer. More than 70 backup officers arrived who then raided the mosque and randomly beat Nation of Islam members. Police officers shot seven Muslims, including William X Rogers, who was hit in the back and paralyzed for life, and Ronald Stokes, a Korean War veteran, who was shot from behind while raising his hands over his head to surrender, killing him.\nA number of Muslims were indicted after the event, but no charges were laid against the police. The coroner ruled that Stokes's killing was justified. To Malcolm\u00a0X, the desecration of the mosque and the associated violence demanded action, and he used what LouisX (later Louis Farrakhan) later called his \"gangsterlike past\" to rally the more hardened of the Nation of Islam members to take violent revenge against the police.\nMalcolm\u00a0X sought Elijah Muhammad's approval which was denied, stunning Malcolm\u00a0X. Malcolm\u00a0X was again blocked by Elijah Muhammad when he spoke of the Nation of Islam starting to work with civil rights organizations, local Black politicians, and religious groups. LouisX saw this as an important turning point in the deteriorating relationship between Malcolm\u00a0X and Muhammad.\nSexual misbehavior by Elijah Muhammad.\nRumors were circulating that Muhammad was conducting extramarital affairs with young Nation secretaries\u200d\u2014\u200cwhich would constitute a serious violation of Nation teachings. After first discounting the rumors, Malcolm\u00a0X came to believe them after he spoke with Muhammad's son Wallace and the girls making the accusations in April 1963. Muhammad confirmed the rumors that same year, attempting to justify his behavior by referring to precedents set by Biblical prophets.\nOver a series of national TV interviews between 1964 and 1965, Malcolm\u00a0X provided testimony of his investigation, corroboration, and confirmation by Elijah Muhammed himself of multiple counts of child rape. During this investigation, he learned that seven of the eight girls had become pregnant as a result of this. He also revealed an assassination attempt made on his life, through a discovered explosive device in his car, as well as the death threats he was receiving, in response to his exposure of Elijah Muhammad.\nRemarks on Kennedy assassination.\nOn December1, 1963, when asked to comment on the assassination of John F. Kennedy, Malcolm\u00a0X said that it was a case of \".\" He added that \"chickens coming home to roost never did make me sad; they've always made me glad.\" Likewise, according to \"The New York Times\":\n[I]n further criticism of Mr. Kennedy, the Muslim leader cited the murders of Patrice Lumumba, Congo leader, of Medgar Evers, civil rights leader, and of the Negro girls bombed earlier this year in a Birmingham church. These, he said, were instances of other \"chickens coming home to roost\".\nThe remarks prompted widespread public outcry. The Nation of Islam, which had sent a message of condolence to the Kennedy family and ordered its ministers not to comment on the assassination, publicly censured their former shining star. Malcolm\u00a0X retained his post and rank as minister but was prohibited from public speaking for 90 days.\nMedia attention to Malcolm\u00a0X over Elijah Muhammad.\nMalcolm\u00a0X had by now become a media favorite, and some Nation members believed he was a threat to Elijah Muhammad's leadership. Publishers had shown interest in Malcolm\u00a0X's autobiography, and when Louis Lomax wrote his 1963 book about the Nation, \"When the Word Is Given\", he used a photograph of Malcolm\u00a0X on the cover. He also reproduced five of his speeches but featured only one of Muhammad's, which greatly upset Muhammad and made him envious.\nDeparture from Nation of Islam.\nOn March8, 1964, Malcolm\u00a0X publicly announced his break from the Nation of Islam. Though still a Muslim, he felt that the Nation had \"gone as far as it can\" because of its rigid teachings. He said he was planning to organize a Black nationalist organization to \"heighten the political consciousness\" of African Americans. He also expressed a desire to work with other civil rights leaders, saying that Elijah Muhammad had prevented him from doing so in the past.\nActivity after leaving Nation of Islam.\nAfter leaving the Nation of Islam, Malcolm\u00a0X founded Muslim Mosque, Inc. (MMI), a religious organization, and the Organization of Afro-American Unity (OAAU), a secular group that advocated Pan-Africanism. On March26, 1964, he briefly met Martin Luther King Jr. for the first and only time\u200d\u2014\u200cand only long enough for photographs to be taken\u200d\u2014\u200cin Washington, D.C., as both men attended the Senate's debate on the Civil Rights bill at the US Capitol building.\nIn April, Malcolm\u00a0X gave a speech titled \"The Ballot or the Bullet\", in which he advised African Americans to exercise their right to vote wisely but cautioned that if the government continued to prevent African Americans from attaining full equality, it might be necessary for them to take up arms.\nIn the weeks after he left the Nation of Islam, several Sunni Muslims encouraged Malcolm\u00a0X to learn about their faith. He soon converted to the Sunni faith.\nPilgrimage to Mecca.\nIn April 1964, with financial help from his half-sister Ella Little-Collins, Malcolm\u00a0X flew to Jeddah, Saudi Arabia, as the start of his Hajj, the pilgrimage to Mecca obligatory for every Muslim who is able to do so. He was delayed in Jeddah when his US citizenship and inability to speak Arabic caused his status as a Muslim to be questioned.\nHe had received Abdul Rahman Hassan Azzam's book \"The Eternal Message of Muhammad\" with his visa approval, and he contacted the author. Azzam's son arranged for his release and lent him his personal hotel suite. The next morning Malcolm\u00a0X learned that Prince Faisal had designated him as a state guest. Several days later, after completing the Hajj rituals, Malcolm\u00a0X had an audience with the prince.\nMalcolm\u00a0X later said that seeing Muslims of \"all colors, from blue-eyed blonds to Black-skinned Africans,\" interacting as equals led him to see Islam as a means by which racial problems could be overcome.\nSlavery in Saudi Arabia had been abolished only two years before his visit to Saudi Arabia, and his portrayal of racial harmony in the Arab world was a reply to the widespread criticism of African chattel slavery in Saudi Arabia from the African-American press in the US.\nVisit to Cairo.\nMalcolm\u00a0X had already visited the United Arab Republic (a short-lived political union between Egypt and Syria), Sudan, Nigeria, and Ghana in 1959 to make arrangements for a tour of Africa by Elijah Muhammad. After his pilgrimage to Mecca in April 1964, he visited Africa a second time. He returned to the United States in late May and flew to Africa again in July. During these visits he met officials, gave interviews, and spoke on radio and television in Egypt, Ethiopia, Tanganyika, Nigeria, Ghana, Guinea, Sudan, Senegal, Liberia, Algeria and Morocco.\nIn Cairo, he attended the second meeting of the Organization of African Unity as a representative of the OAAU. By the end of this third visit, he had met with essentially all of Africa's prominent leaders; Kwame Nkrumah of Ghana, Gamal Abdel Nasser of Egypt, and Ahmed Ben Bella of Algeria had all invited Malcolm\u00a0X to serve in their governments. After he spoke at the University of Ibadan, the Nigerian Muslim Students Association bestowed on him the honorary Yoruba name ('the son who has come home'). He later called this his most treasured honor.\nMalcolm especially hated Mo\u00efse Tshombe of the Congo as an \"Uncle Tom\" figure. In a 1964 speech in New York, he called Tshombe \"the worst African ever born\" and \"the man who in cold blood, cold blood, committed an international crime; murdered Patrice Lumumba\". Tshombe's decision in 1964 to hire White mercenaries to put down the Simba rebellion greatly offended Malcolm, who accused the mercenaries of committing war crimes against the Congolese.\nFrance and United Kingdom.\nOn November23, 1964, on his way home from Africa, Malcolm\u00a0X stopped in Paris, where he spoke in the Salle de la Mutualit\u00e9. After his return to the United States, he accused the United States of imperialism in the Congo by supporting Tshombe and \"his hired killers\" as he called the White mercenaries. X accused Tshombe and the American president Lyndon B. Johnson of \"...sleeping together. When I say sleeping together, I don't mean that literally. But beyond that, they're in the same bed. Johnson is paying the salaries, paying the government, propping up Tshombe's government, this murderer\".\nX expressed much anger about Operation Dragon Rouge, where the United States Air Force dropped Belgian paratroopers into the city of Stanleyville, modern Kisangani, to rescue the White Belgian hostages from the Simbas. Malcolm\u00a0X maintained that there was a double standard when it came to White and Black lives, noting it was an international emergency when the lives of Whites were in danger, making Dragon Rouge necessary, but that nothing was done to stop the abuses of the Congolese at the hands of \"Tshombe's hired killers\". X charged that the \"Congolese have been massacred by White people for years and years\" and that \"chickens come home to roost.\"\nA week later, on November30, Malcolm\u00a0X flew to the United Kingdom. On December3 he took part in a debate at the Oxford Union Society. The motion was taken from a statement made earlier that year by US presidential candidate Barry Goldwater: \"Extremism in the Defense of Liberty is No Vice; Moderation in the Pursuit of Justice is No Virtue\". Malcolm\u00a0X argued for the affirmative, and interest in the debate was so high that it was televised nationally by the BBC.\nIn his address at Oxford, Malcolm rejected the label of \"Black Muslim\" and instead focused on being a Muslim who happened to be Black, which reflected his conversion to Sunni Islam. Malcolm only mentioned his religion twice during his Oxford speech, which was part of his effort to defuse his image as an \"angry Black Muslim extremist\", which he had long hated. During the debate at Oxford, he criticized the way the Anglo-American press portrayed the Congo crisis, noting the Simbas were portrayed as primitive cannibalistic \"savages\" who engaged in every form of depravity imaginable while Tshombe and the White mercenaries were portrayed in a very favorable light with almost no mention of any atrocities on their part.\nMalcolm X charged that the Cuban \u00e9migr\u00e9 pilots hired by the CIA to serve as Tshombe's air force indiscriminately bombed Congolese villages and towns, killing women and children, but this was almost never mentioned in the media while the newspapers featured long accounts of the Simbas \"raping White women, molesting nuns\". Likewise, he felt the term mercenary was inappropriate, preferring the term \"hired killer\" and that Tshombe should not be described as a premier as he preferred the term \"cold-blooded murderer\" to describe him. Malcolm\u00a0X stated that what he regarded as the extremism of the Tshombe government was \"never referred to as extremism because it is endorsed by the West, it is financed by America, it's made respectable by America, and that kind of extremism is never labelled as extremism\".\nMalcolm X argued this extremism was not morally acceptable \"since it's not extremism in defense of liberty\". Many in the audience at Oxford were angered by Malcolm\u00a0X's thesis and his support for the Simbas who had committed atrocities with one asking, \"What sort of extremism would you consider the killing of missionaries?\". In response, Malcolm\u00a0X answered \"It is an act of war. I'd call it the same kind of extremism that happened when England dropped bombs on German cities and Germans dropped bombs on English cities\".\nOn February5, 1965, Malcolm\u00a0X flew to the UK again, and on February8 he addressed the first meeting of the Council of African Organizations in London. The next day he tried to return to France, but was refused entry. On February12, he visited Smethwick, near Birmingham, where the Conservative Party had won the parliamentary seat in the 1964 general election. The town had become a byword for racial division after the successful candidate, Peter Griffiths, was accused of using the slogan, \"If you want a nigger for a neighbour, vote Liberal or Labour.\" In Smethwick, Malcolm\u00a0X compared the treatment of ethnic minority residents with the treatment of Jews under Hitler, saying: \"I would not wait for the fascist element in Smethwick to erect gas ovens.\"\nReturn to United States.\nAfter returning to the US, Malcolm\u00a0X addressed a wide variety of audiences. He spoke regularly at meetings held by MMI and the OAAU, and was one of the most sought-after speakers on college campuses. One of his top aides later wrote that he \"welcomed every opportunity to speak to college students\". He also addressed public meetings of the Socialist Workers Party, speaking at their Militant Labor Forum. He was interviewed on the subjects of segregation and the Nation of Islam by Robert Penn Warren for Warren's 1965 book \"Who Speaks for the Negro?\"\nDeath threats and intimidation from Nation of Islam.\nThroughout 1964, as his conflict with the Nation of Islam intensified, Malcolm\u00a0X was repeatedly threatened.\nIn February, a leader of Temple Number Seven ordered the bombing of Malcolm\u00a0X's car. In March, Muhammad told Boston minister LouisX (later known as Louis Farrakhan) that \"hypocrites like Malcolm should have their heads cut off\"; the April10 edition of \"Muhammad Speaks\" featured a cartoon depicting Malcolm\u00a0X's bouncing, severed head.\nOn June8, FBI surveillance recorded a telephone call in which Betty Shabazz was told that her husband was \"as good as dead.\" Four days later, an FBI informant received a tip that \"Malcolm\u00a0X is going to be bumped off.\" That same month, the Nation sued to reclaim Malcolm\u00a0X's residence in East Elmhurst, Queens, New York. His family was ordered to vacate but on February14, 1965\u200d\u2014\u200cthe night before a hearing on postponing the eviction\u200d\u2014\u200cthe house was destroyed by fire.\nOn July9, Muhammad aide John Ali (suspected of being an undercover FBI agent) referred to Malcolm\u00a0X by saying, \"Anyone who opposes the Honorable Elijah Muhammad puts their life in jeopardy.\" In the December4 issue of \"Muhammad Speaks\", LouisX wrote that \"such a man as Malcolm is worthy of death.\"\nThe September 1964 issue of \"Ebony\" dramatized Malcolm\u00a0X's defiance of these threats by publishing a photograph of him holding an M1 carbine while peering out of a window.\nAssassination.\nOn February19, 1965, Malcolm\u00a0X told interviewer Gordon Parks that the Nation of Islam was actively trying to kill him. On February21, 1965, he was preparing to address the OAAU in Manhattan's Audubon Ballroom when someone in the 400-person audience yelled,\n\"Nigger! Get your hand outta my pocket!\"\nAs Malcolm\u00a0X and his bodyguards tried to quell the disturbance, a man rushed forward and shot him once in the chest with a sawed-off shotgun and two other men charged the stage firing semi-automatic handguns. Malcolm\u00a0X was pronounced dead at 3:30pm, shortly after arriving at Columbia Presbyterian Hospital. The autopsy identified 21 gunshot wounds to the chest, left shoulder, arms and legs, including ten buckshot wounds from the initial shotgun blast.\nOne gunman, Nation of Islam member Talmadge Hayer (also known as Thomas Hagan), was beaten by the crowd before police arrived. Witnesses identified the other gunmen as Nation members Norman 3X Butler and Thomas 15X Johnson. All three were convicted of murder in March 1966 and sentenced to life in prison.\nAt trial, Hayer confessed, but refused to identify the other assailants except to assert that they were not Butler and Johnson.\nIn 1977 and 1978, he signed affidavits reasserting Butler's and Johnson's innocence, naming four other Nation members of Newark's Mosque No.\u00a025 as participants in the murder or its planning. These affidavits did not result in the case being reopened.\nButler, today known as Muhammad Abdul Aziz, was paroled in 1985 and became the head of the Nation's Harlem mosque in 1998; he maintains his innocence. In prison Johnson, who changed his name to Khalil Islam, rejected the Nation's teachings and converted to Sunni Islam. Released in 1987, he maintained his innocence until his death in August 2009. Hayer, who also rejected the Nation's teachings while in prison and converted also to Sunni Islam, is known today as Mujahid Halim. He was paroled in 2010.\nIn 2021, Muhammad Abdul Aziz and Khalil Islam (formerly Norman 3X Butler and Thomas 15X Johnson) were exonerated from their murder convictions, following a review that found the FBI and the New York Police Department withheld key evidence during the trial. On July 14, 2022, Aziz filed suit in the US District Court in Brooklyn against the City of New York, seeking $40\u00a0million in damages related to his wrongful imprisonment.\nLes Payne and Tamara Payne, in their Pulitzer Prize-winning biography \"\", claim that the assassins were members of the Nation of Islam's Newark, New Jersey mosque: William 25X (also known as William Bradley), who fired the shotgun; Leon Davis; and Thomas Hayer.\nFuneral.\nThe public viewing, February23\u201326 at Unity Funeral Home in Harlem, was attended by some 14,000 to 30,000 mourners.\nFor the funeral on February27, loudspeakers were set up for the overflow crowd outside Harlem's thousand-seat Faith Temple of the Church of God in Christ, and a local television station carried the service live.\nAmong the civil rights leaders attending were John Lewis, Bayard Rustin, James Forman, James Farmer, Jesse Gray, and Andrew Young. Actor and activist Ossie Davis delivered the eulogy, describing Malcolm\u00a0X as \"our shining Black prince... who didn't hesitate to die because he loved us so\":\nThere are those who will consider it their duty, as friends of the Negro people, to tell us to revile him, to flee, even from the presence of his memory, to save ourselves by writing him out of the history of our turbulent times. Many will ask what Harlem finds to honor in this stormy, controversial and bold young captain\u200d\u2014\u200cand we will smile. Many will say turn away\u200d\u2014\u200caway from this man, for he is not a man but a demon, a monster, a subverter and an enemy of the Black man\u200d\u2014\u200cand we will smile. They will say that he is of hate\u200d\u2014\u200ca fanatic, a racist\u200d\u2014\u200cwho can only bring evil to the cause for which you struggle! And we will answer and say to them: Did you ever talk to Brother Malcolm? Did you ever touch him, or have him smile at you? Did you ever really listen to him? Did he ever do a mean thing? Was he ever himself associated with violence or any public disturbance? For if you did you would know him. And if you knew him you would know why we must honor him... And, in honoring him, we honor the best in ourselves.\nMalcolm\u00a0X was buried at Ferncliff Cemetery in Hartsdale, New York. Friends took up the gravediggers' shovels to complete the burial on their own.\nActor and activist Ruby Dee and Juanita Poitier (wife of Sidney Poitier) established the Committee of Concerned Mothers to raise money for a home for his family and for his children's educations.\nReactions.\nReactions to Malcolm\u00a0X's assassination were varied. In a telegram to Betty Shabazz, Martin Luther King Jr. expressed his sadness at \"the shocking and tragic assassination of your husband.\" He said:\nWhile we did not always see eye to eye on methods to solve the race problem, I always had a deep affection for Malcolm and felt that he had a great ability to put his finger on the existence and root of the problem. He was an eloquent spokesman for his point of view and no one can honestly doubt that Malcolm had a great concern for the problems that we face as a race.\nElijah Muhammad told the annual Savior's Day convention on February26 that \"Malcolm\u00a0X got just what he preached,\" but denied any involvement with the murder. \"We didn't want to kill Malcolm and didn't try to kill him,\" Muhammad said, adding \"We know such ignorant, foolish teachings would bring him to his own end.\"\nWriter James Baldwin, who had been a friend of Malcolm\u00a0X's, was in London when he heard the news of the assassination. He responded with indignation towards the reporters interviewing him, shouting, \"You did it! It is because of you\u2014the men that created this White supremacy\u2014that this man is dead. You are not guilty, but you did it... Your mills, your cities, your rape of a continent started all this.\"\nThe \"New York Post\" wrote that \"even his sharpest critics recognized his brilliance\u200d\u2014\u200coften wild, unpredictable and eccentric, but nevertheless possessing promise that must now remain unrealized.\" \"The New York Times\" wrote that Malcolm\u00a0X was \"an extraordinary and twisted man\" who \"turn[ed] many true gifts to evil purpose\" and that his life was \"strangely and pitifully wasted.\" \"Time\" called him \"an unashamed demagogue\" whose \"creed was violence.\"\nOutside the US, particularly in Africa, the press was sympathetic. The \"Daily Times of Nigeria\" wrote that Malcolm\u00a0X would \"have a place in the palace of martyrs.\" The \"Ghanaian Times\" likened him to John Brown, Medgar Evers, and Patrice Lumumba, and counted him among \"a host of Africans and Americans who were martyred in freedom's cause.\"\nIn China the \"People's Daily\" described Malcolm\u00a0X as a martyr killed by \"ruling circles and racists\" in the United States; his assassination, the paper wrote, demonstrated that \"in dealing with imperialist oppressors, violence must be met with violence.\" The \"Guangming Daily\", also published in Beijing, stated that \"Malcolm was murdered because he fought for freedom and equal rights.\" In Cuba, \"El Mundo\" described the assassination as \"another racist crime to eradicate by violence the struggle against discrimination.\"\nIn a weekly column he wrote for the \"New York Amsterdam News\", King reflected on Malcolm\u00a0X and his assassination:\n Malcolm\u00a0X came to the fore as a public figure partially as a result of a TV documentary entitled, \"The Hate that Hate Produced\". That title points to the nature of Malcolm's life and death.\nMalcolm\u00a0X was clearly a product of the hate and violence invested in the Negro's blighted existence in this nation...\nIn his youth there was no hope, no preaching, teaching or movements of non-violence...\nIt is a testimony to Malcolm's personal depth and integrity that he could not become an underworld Czar, but turned again and again to religion for meaning and destiny. Malcolm was still turning and growing at the time of his brutal and meaningless assassination.\u2026\nLike the murder of Lumumba, the murder of Malcolm\u00a0X deprives the world of a potentially great leader. I could not agree with either of these men, but I could see in them a capacity for leadership which I could respect, and which was just beginning to mature in judgment and statesmanship.\nAllegations of conspiracy.\nWithin days the question of who bore responsibility for the assassination was being publicly debated. On February23, James Farmer, leader of the Congress of Racial Equality, announced at a news conference that local drug dealers, and not the Nation of Islam, were to blame. Others accused the NYPD, the FBI, or the CIA, citing the lack of police protection, the ease with which the assassins entered the Audubon Ballroom, and the failure of the police to preserve the crime scene. Earl Grant, one of Malcolm\u00a0X's associates who was present at the assassination, later wrote:\n&lt;poem&gt;[A]bout five minutes later, a most incredible scene took place. Into the hall sauntered about a dozen policemen. They were strolling at about the pace one would expect of them if they were patrolling a quiet park. They did not seem to be at all excited or concerned about the circumstances.\nI could hardly believe my eyes. Here were New York City policemen, entering a room from which at least a dozen shots had been heard, and yet not one of them had his gun out! As a matter of absolute fact, some of them even had their hands in their pockets.&lt;/poem&gt;\nIn the 1970s, the public learned about COINTELPRO and other secret FBI programs established to infiltrate and disrupt civil rights organizations during the 1950s and 1960s. Louis Lomax wrote that John Ali, national secretary of the Nation of Islam, was a former FBI agent. Malcolm\u00a0X had confided to a reporter that Ali exacerbated tensions between him and Elijah Muhammad and that he considered Ali his \"archenemy\" within the Nation of Islam leadership. Ali had a meeting with Talmadge Hayer, one of the men convicted of killing Malcolm\u00a0X, the night before the assassination.\nThe Shabazz family are among those who have accused Louis Farrakhan of involvement in Malcolm\u00a0X's assassination. In a 1993 speech Farrakhan seemed to acknowledge the possibility that the Nation of Islam was responsible:\nWas Malcolm your traitor or ours? And if we dealt with him like a nation deals with a traitor, what the \"hell\" business is it of yours? A nation has to be able to deal with traitors and cutthroats and turncoats.\nIn a \"60 Minutes\" interview that aired during May 2000, Farrakhan stated that some things he said may have led to the assassination of Malcolm\u00a0X. \"I may have been complicit in words that I spoke,\" he said, adding \"I acknowledge that and regret that any word that I have said caused the loss of life of a human being.\" A few days later Farrakhan denied that he \"ordered the assassination\" of Malcolm\u00a0X, although he again acknowledged that he \"created the atmosphere that ultimately led to Malcolm\u00a0X's assassination.\"\nNo consensus has been reached on who was responsible for the assassination. In August 2014, an online petition was started using the White House online petition mechanism to call on the government to release, without alteration, any files they still held relating to the murder of Malcolm\u00a0X. In January 2019, members of the families of Malcolm\u00a0X, John F. Kennedy, Martin Luther King Jr., and Robert F. Kennedy were among dozens of Americans who signed a public statement calling for a truth and reconciliation commission to persuade Congress or the Justice Department to review the assassinations of all four leaders during the 1960s.\nA February 21, 2021, press conference attended by three of Malcolm\u00a0X's daughters and members of deceased NYPD undercover officer Raymond Wood's family released his authorized posthumous letter that stated in part: \"I was told to encourage leaders and members of the civil rights groups to commit felonious acts.\" \"The Guardian\" reports that \"The arrests kept the two men from managing door security at the Audubon Ballroom in Washington Heights on the day of the shooting, according to the letter.\" On February 26, 2021, the daughter of Raymond Wood, Kelly Wood, stated that the letter presented at the February 21 press conference is fake. Kelly Wood stated that the letter was created by her cousin Reggie Wood for attention and book sales.\nIn early 2023, members of Malcolm\u00a0X's family said they would file a $100\u00a0million wrongful death lawsuit against the CIA, the FBI, the NYPD and others for allegedly concealing evidence related to the assassination and for alleged involvement to it. The attorney representing the family is Benjamin Crump. In November 2024, three daughters of Malcolm X filed the lawsuit in Manhattan Federal Court.\nPhilosophy.\nExcept for his autobiography, Malcolm\u00a0X left no published writings. His philosophy is known almost entirely from the many speeches and interviews he gave from 1952 until his death. Many of those speeches, especially from the last year of his life, were recorded and have been published.\nBeliefs in the Nation of Islam.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe white liberal differs from the white only in one way: the liberal is more ful than the conservative.\n\u2014Malcolm\u00a0X\nWhile he was a member of the Nation of Islam, Malcolm\u00a0X taught its beliefs, and his statements often began with the phrase \"The Honorable Elijah Muhammad teaches us that...\" It is virtually impossible now to discern whether Malcolm\u00a0X's personal beliefs at the time diverged from the teachings of the Nation of Islam. After he left the Nation in 1964, he compared himself to a ventriloquist's dummy who could only say what Elijah Muhammad told him to say.\nMalcolm\u00a0X taught that Black people were the original people of the world, and that Whites were a race of devils who were created by an evil scientist named Yakub. The Nation of Islam believed that Black people were superior to White people and that the demise of the White race was imminent. When questioned concerning his statements that White people were devils, Malcolm\u00a0X said: \"history proves the White man is a devil.\" \"Anybody who rapes, and plunders, and enslaves, and steals, and drops hell bombs on people\u00a0... anybody who does these things is nothing but a devil,\" he said.\nMalcolm\u00a0X said that Islam was the \"true religion of Black mankind\" and that Christianity was \"the White man's religion\" that had been imposed upon African Americans by their slave-masters. He said that the Nation of Islam followed Islam as it was practiced around the world, but the Nation's teachings varied from those of other Muslims because they were adapted to the \"uniquely pitiful\" condition of Black people in the United States. He taught that Wallace Fard Muhammad, the founder of the Nation, was God incarnate, and that Elijah Muhammad was his Messenger, or Prophet.\nWhile the civil rights movement fought against racial segregation, Malcolm\u00a0X advocated the complete separation of Blacks from Whites. The Nation of Islam proposed the establishment of a separate country for African Americans in the southern or southwestern United States as an interim measure until African Americans could return to Africa. Malcolm\u00a0X suggested the United States government owed reparations to Black people for the unpaid labor of their ancestors. He also rejected the civil rights movement's strategy of nonviolence, advocating instead that Black people should defend themselves.\nLater independent views.\nPalestine.\nEarlier in 1959, Malcolm X visited and met with religious leaders at Al-Aqsa mosque as a representative of Elijah Muhammad. Later in 1964, X visited the Khan Younis refugee camp in Gaza where he visited a local hospital and dined with religious leaders in Gaza. He also met Palestinian poet, Harun Hashem Rashid, who recounted to him how he narrowly escaped the Khan Younis massacre of 1956. A few weeks later, Malcolm X headed to Cairo where he met with members of the Palestinian Liberation Organization. These meetings and experiences inspired Malcolm X to write an essay entitled \"Zionist Logic\" that was published in the Egyptian Gazette. In this essay Malcolm X explained how the \"present occupation of Arab Palestine has no intelligent or legal basis in history\" and described how Zionism was essentially a colonial and imperialist project:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The ever-scheming European imperialists wisely placed Israel where she could geographically divide the Arab world, infiltrate and sow the seed of dissension among African leaders and also divide the Africans against the Asians.\nFollowing his return to the United States, Malcolm X continued to speak about the issue of Palestine describing in 1965 in one of his speeches in Detroit how \"We need a free Palestine... We don't need a divided Palestine. We need a whole Palestine.\"\nCivil rights movement.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe common goal of 22 million Afro-Americans is respect as \"human beings\"... We can never get civil rights in America until our \"human rights\" are first restored. We will never be recognized as citizens there until we are first recognized as \"humans\"...\nJust as the violation of \"human rights\" of our brothers and sisters in South Africa and Angola is an international issue and has brought the racists of South Africa and Portugal under attack from all other independent governments at the United Nations, once the miserable plight of the 22\u00a0million Afro-Americans is also lifted to the level of \"human rights\" our struggle then becomes an international issue and the direct concern of all other civilized governments. We can then take the racist American Government before the World Court and have the racists in it exposed and condemned as the criminals that they are.\n\u2014Malcolm\u00a0X \nAfter leaving the Nation of Islam, Malcolm\u00a0X announced his willingness to work with leaders of the civil rights movement, though he advocated some changes to their policies. He felt that calling the movement a struggle for \"civil rights\" would keep the issue within the United States while changing the focus to \"human rights\" would make it an international concern. The movement could then bring its complaints before the United Nations, where Malcolm\u00a0X said the emerging nations of the world would add their support.\nMalcolm\u00a0X argued that if the US government was unwilling or unable to protect Black people, Black people should protect themselves. He said that he and the other members of the OAAU were determined to defend themselves from aggressors, and to secure freedom, justice and equality \"by whatever means necessary\".\nMalcolm\u00a0X stressed the global perspective he gained from his international travels. He emphasized the \"direct connection\" between the domestic struggle of African Americans for equal rights with the independence struggles of Third World nations. He said that African Americans were wrong when they thought of themselves as a minority; globally, Black people were the majority.\nIntegration.\nAlthough he no longer called for the separation of Black people from White people, Malcolm\u00a0X continued to advocate Black nationalism, which he defined as self-determination for the African American community. In the last months of his life, however, Malcolm\u00a0X began to reconsider his support for Black nationalism after meeting northern African revolutionaries who, to all appearances, were White.\nAfter his Hajj, Malcolm\u00a0X articulated a view of White people and racism that represented a deep change from the philosophy he had supported as a minister of the Nation of Islam. In a famous letter from Mecca, he wrote that his experiences with White people during his pilgrimage convinced him to \"rearrange\" his thinking about race and \"toss aside some of [his] previous conclusions\". In a conversation with Gordon Parks, two days before his assassination, Malcolm said:\n[L]istening to leaders like Nasser, Ben Bella, and Nkrumah awakened me to the dangers of racism. I realized racism isn't just a Black and White problem. It's brought bloodbaths to about every nation on earth at one time or another.\nBrother, remember the time that White college girl came into the restaurant\u200d\u2014\u200cthe one who wanted to help the [Black] Muslims and the Whites get together\u200d\u2014\u200cand I told her there wasn't a ghost of a chance and she went away crying? Well, I've lived to regret that incident. In many parts of the African continent, I saw White students helping Black people. Something like this kills a lot of argument. I did many things as a [Black] Muslim that I'm sorry for now. I was a zombie then\u200d\u2014\u200clike all [Black] Muslims\u200d\u2014\u200cI was hypnotized, pointed in a certain direction and told to march. Well, I guess a man's entitled to make a fool of himself if he's ready to pay the cost. It cost me 12 years.\nThat was a bad scene, brother. The sickness and madness of those days\u200d\u2014\u200cI'm glad to be free of them.\nSocialism.\nIn his speeches at the Militant Labor Forum, which was sponsored by the Socialist Workers Party, Malcolm\u00a0X criticized capitalism. After one such speech, when he was asked what political and economic system he wanted, he said he did not know, but that it was no coincidence the newly independent countries in the Third World were turning toward socialism. When a reporter asked him what he thought about socialism, Malcolm\u00a0X asked whether it was good for Black people. When the reporter told him it seemed to be, Malcolm\u00a0X told him: \"Then I'm for it.\"\nAfter X's death, a book published in 1968, titled \"The Last Year of Malcolm X\" argued that X was becoming more socialistic in thinking towards the end of his life, and becoming increasingly friendly with the Socialist Workers Party. The release of the book inspired X's then widow Betty Shabazz to comment to biographer Peter Louis Goldman: \"Malcolm was not a socialist\".\nClaims of bisexuality.\nDating back to 2009, some experts have claimed that Malcolm X was bisexual. These claims are primarily founded upon the work of late Columbia University historian Manning Marable, and his controversial 2011 book \"Malcolm\u00a0X: A Life of Reinvention\". In the book, Marable asserted that \"Malcolm\u00a0X had exaggerated his early criminal career and had engaged in an early homosexual relationship with a White businessman.\"\nScholar Christopher Phelps agreed with Marable in the \"Journal of American Studies\": \"Malcolm Little did take part in sex acts with male counterparts. If set in the context of the 1930s and 1940s, these acts position him not as a 'homosexual lover,' as has been asserted, but in the pattern of 'straight trade'\u2014heterosexual men open to sex with homosexuals\u2014an understanding that in turn affords insights into the Black revolutionary's mature masculinity.\"\nMalcolm X's family has rejected these allegations about his personal life. His daughter Ilyasah Shabazz said she would have known about these encounters before abruptly walking out on an interview on NPR. Shabazz said: \"I think the things that I take issue with are the fact that he said my father engaged in a bisexual relationship, a homo\u2014you know, he had a gay lover who was an elder White businessman, I think, in his late 50s when my father was in his teens. And, you know, my father was an open book. And we actually have four of the missing chapters from the autobiography. And, you know, he is very clear in his activities, which nothing included being gay. And certainly he didn't have anything against gay\u2014he was for human rights, human justice, you know. So if he had a gay encounter, he likely would've talked about it. And what he did talk about was someone else's encounter.\"\nLegacy.\nMalcolm X has been described as one of the most influential African Americans in history. He is credited with raising the self-esteem of Black Americans and reconnecting them with their African heritage. He is largely responsible for the spread of Islam in the Black community in the United States. Many African Americans, especially those who lived in cities in the Northern and Western United States, felt that Malcolm\u00a0X articulated their complaints concerning inequality better than did the mainstream civil rights movement. One biographer says that by giving expression to their frustration, Malcolm\u00a0X \"made clear the price that White America would have to pay if it did not accede to Black America's legitimate demands.\"\nIn the late 1960s, increasingly radical Black activists based their movements largely on Malcolm\u00a0X and his teachings. The Black Power movement, the Black Arts Movement, and the widespread adoption of the slogan \"Black is beautiful\" can all trace their roots to Malcolm\u00a0X. In 1963, Malcolm\u00a0X began a collaboration with Alex Haley on his life story, \"The Autobiography of Malcolm\u00a0X\". He told Haley, \"If I'm alive when this book comes out, it will be a miracle.\" Haley completed and published it some months after the assassination.\nDuring the late 1980s and early 1990s, there was a resurgence of interest in his life among young people. Hip-hop groups such as Public Enemy adopted Malcolm\u00a0X as an icon, and his image was displayed in hundreds of thousands of homes, offices, and schools, as well as on T-shirts and jackets. In 1986 Ella Little-Collins merged the Organization of Afro-American Unity with the African American Defense League.\nIn 1992 the film \"Malcolm\u00a0X\", an adaptation of \"The Autobiography of Malcolm\u00a0X\", was released. In 1998, \"Time\" named \"The Autobiography of Malcolm\u00a0X\" one of the ten most influential nonfiction books of the 20th century. \nMalcolm X was an inspiration for several fictional characters. He was fictionalized as the character Minister Q in the 1967 novel \"The Man Who Cried I Am\" by John A. Williams. The Marvel Comics writer Chris Claremont confirmed that Malcolm\u00a0X was an inspiration for the X-Men character Magneto, while Martin Luther King was an inspiration for Professor X. Malcolm\u00a0X also inspired the character Erik Killmonger in the film \"Black Panther\".\nMemorials and tributes.\nThe house that once stood at 3448 Pinkney Street in North Omaha, Nebraska, was the first home of Malcolm Little with his birth family. The house was torn down in 1965 by new owners who did not know of its connection with Malcolm\u00a0X. The site was listed on the National Register of Historic Places in 1984. A Nebraska Historical Marker now marks the site. The Malcolm\u00a0X\u2014Ella Little-Collins House in the Roxbury section of Boston, Massachusetts, where Malcolm\u00a0X lived with his half-sister Ella Little-Collins and began getting involved in the Nation of Islam, was added to the National Register of Historic Places in 2021. Several archaeological surveys have been performed on the house's grounds, and there are ongoing efforts to preserve the site.\nIn 1968, twelve Black students who occupied North Hall at University of California, Santa Barbara temporarily renamed it Malcolm X Hall to force the administration to acknowledge the needs of Black students. As a result, UCSB created the Department of Black Studies.\nIn Lansing, Michigan, a Michigan Historical Marker was erected in 1975 on Malcolm Little's childhood home. The city is also home to El-Hajj Malik El-Shabazz Academy, a public charter school with an Afrocentric focus. The school is located in the building where Little attended elementary school.\nIn cities across the United States, Malcolm\u00a0X's birthday (May19) is commemorated as Malcolm\u00a0X Day. The first known celebration of Malcolm\u00a0X Day took place in Washington, D.C., in 1971. The city of Berkeley, California, has recognized Malcolm\u00a0X's birthday as a citywide holiday since 1979.\nMany cities have renamed streets after Malcolm\u00a0X. In 1987, New York mayor Ed Koch proclaimed Lenox Avenue in Harlem to be Malcolm\u00a0X Boulevard. The name of Reid Avenue in Brooklyn, New York, was changed to Malcolm\u00a0X Boulevard in 1985. Brooklyn also has El Shabazz Playground that was named after him. New Dudley Street, in the Roxbury neighborhood of Boston, was renamed Malcolm\u00a0X Boulevard in the 1990s. In 1997, Oakland Avenue in Dallas, Texas, was renamed Malcolm\u00a0X Boulevard. Main Street in Lansing, Michigan, was renamed Malcolm\u00a0X Street in 2010. In 2016, Ankara, Turkey, renamed the street on which the U.S. is building its new embassy after Malcolm\u00a0X.\nDozens of schools have been named after Malcolm\u00a0X, including Malcolm\u00a0X Shabazz High School in Newark, New Jersey, Malcolm Shabazz City High School in Madison, Wisconsin, Malcolm\u00a0X College in Chicago, Illinois, and El-Hajj Malik El-Shabazz Academy in Lansing, Michigan. Malcolm\u00a0X Liberation University, based on the Pan-Africanist ideas of Malcolm\u00a0X, was founded in 1969 in North Carolina.\nIn 1996, the first library named after Malcolm\u00a0X was opened, the Malcolm\u00a0X Branch Library and Performing Arts Center of the San Diego Public Library system.\nThe U.S. Postal Service issued a Malcolm\u00a0X postage stamp in 1999. In 2005, Columbia University announced the opening of the Malcolm\u00a0X and Dr. Betty Shabazz Memorial and Educational Center. The memorial is located in the Audubon Ballroom, where Malcolm\u00a0X was assassinated. Collections of Malcolm\u00a0X's papers are held by the Schomburg Center for Research in Black Culture and the Robert W. Woodruff Library.\nAfter a community-led initiative, Conrad Grebel University College in Canada (affiliated with the University of Waterloo) launched the \"Malcolm\u00a0X Peace and Conflict Studies Scholarship\" in 2021 to support Black and Indigenous students enrolled in their Master of Peace and Conflict Studies program.\nIn 2024, Malcolm X was inducted into the Nebraska Hall of Fame, with a bust of him being placed in the Nebraska State Capitol.\nPortrayal in film, in television, and on stage.\nIn 1986, composer Anthony Davis's opera \"X, The Life and Times of Malcolm X\" premiered at the New York City Opera. It was the first work by Davis, who would go on to win the Pulitzer Prize for Music for his opera \"The Central Park Five\" (2019). In 2023, it was performed at the Metropolitan Opera in a production by Robert O'Hara, with Will Liverman playing the title role. It received positive reviews.\nArnold Perl and Marvin Worth attempted to create a drama film based on \"The Autobiography of Malcolm\u00a0X\", but when people close to the subject declined to talk to them they decided to make a documentary instead. The result was the 1972 documentary film \"Malcolm\u00a0X\".\nDenzel Washington played the title role in Spike Lee's film \"Malcolm\u00a0X\" (1992). Roger Ebert and Martin Scorsese included it on their lists of the ten best films of the 1990s. Washington had previously played the part of Malcolm\u00a0X in the 1981 Off-Broadway play \"When the Chickens Came Home to Roost\".\nOther portrayals include:\nPublished works.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExplanatory notes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWorks cited.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20797", "revid": "42820343", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20797", "title": "MusicBrainz", "text": "Online music metadata database\nMusicBrainz is a project by the MetaBrainz Foundation that aims to create a collaborative music database that is similar to the freedb project. MusicBrainz was founded due to the restrictions placed on the Compact Disc Database (CDDB), a database for software applications to look up audio CD information on the Internet. MusicBrainz has expanded its goals beyond serving as a CD metadata repository, evolving into a structured online database for music information, including details about artists, performers, and songwriters.\nMusicBrainz captures information about artists, their recorded works, and the relationships between them. Recorded works entries capture the album title, track titles, and the length of each track at a minimum. These entries are maintained by volunteer editors who follow community written style guidelines. Recorded works can also store information about release date and country, the CD ID, cover art, acoustic fingerprint, free-form annotation text and other metadata. As of \u00a02025[ [update]], MusicBrainz contains information on over 2.6 million artists, 4.7 million releases, and 35.2 million recordings. End-users can use software that communicates with MusicBrainz to add metadata tags to their digital media files, such as ALAC, FLAC, MP3, Ogg Vorbis or AAC.\nImage archives.\nCover Art Archive.\nMusicBrainz allows contributors to upload cover art images of releases to the database; these images are hosted by Cover Art Archive (CAA), a joint project between Internet Archive and MusicBrainz started in 2012. Internet Archive provides the bandwidth, storage, and legal protection for hosting the images, while MusicBrainz stores metadata and provides public access through the Web and via an API for third parties to use. As with other contributions, the MusicBrainz community is in charge of maintaining and reviewing the data. Until May 16, 2022, cover art was also provided for items on sale at Amazon and some other online resources, but CAA is now preferred, because it gives the community more control and flexibility for managing the images. As of \u00a02025[ [update]], over six million images are stored in the archive.\nEvent Art Archive.\nIn June 2024, MusicBrainz launched the Event Art Archive, another joint venture with the Internet Archive. The project is labeled as \"the internet's greatest repository for event art\", and as of \u00a02025[ [update]], contains over 8,000 images.\nFingerprinting.\nIn addition to collecting metadata about music, MusicBrainz also allows users to match recordings by their acoustic fingerprint. A separate application, such as MusicBrainz Picard, is used to do this.\nProprietary services.\nIn 2000, MusicBrainz started using \"Relatable's\" patented TRM (a recursive acronym for TRM Recognizes Music) for acoustic fingerprint matching. The popularity of this feature drew in a large user base to the platform, enabling the database to expand rapidly. By 2005, TRM was experiencing difficulties in handling the sheer volume of data, as the number of tracks stored in the database had surpassed one million. This issue was resolved in May 2006, when MusicBrainz partnered with MusicIP (now AmpliFIND), replacing TRM with MusicDNS. TRMs were phased out and replaced by MusicDNS in November 2008.\nIn October 2009, MusicIP was acquired by AmpliFIND.\nAcoustID and Chromaprint.\nSince the future of the free identification service was uncertain, a replacement for it was sought. The Chromaprint acoustic fingerprinting algorithm, which serves as the basis for the AcoustID identification service, was started in February 2010 by long-time MusicBrainz contributor, Luk\u00e1\u0161 Lalinsk\u00fd. While AcoustID and Chromaprint are not officially MusicBrainz projects, they are closely tied with each other and are both open source. Chromaprint works by analyzing the first two minutes of a track, detecting the strength for each of 12 pitch classes, storing these eight times per second. Additional post-processing is then applied to compress the fingerprint while retaining patterns. The AcoustID search server then searches from the database of fingerprints by similarity and returns the AcoustID identifier along with MusicBrainz recording identifiers, if known.\nLicensing.\nSince 2003, MusicBrainz's core data (artists, recordings, releases, ect) is dedicated to the worldwide public domain, according to the terms of the Creative Commons Zero 1.0 Universal legal tool. Additional content, including moderation data (essentially all original content contributed by users and its elaborations) and the live data feed, are published under the copyleft terms of the Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 3.0 Unported License as of \u00a012, 2012[ [update]]. The relational database management system is PostgreSQL. The server software is covered by the GNU General Public License v2.0, while the MusicBrainz client software library, \"libmusicbrainz\", is licensed under the GNU Lesser General Public License, version 2.1, which allows use of the code by proprietary software products.\nIn December 2004, the MusicBrainz project was turned over to the MetaBrainz Foundation \u2013 a non-profit group based in San Luis Obispo, California \u2013 by its creator Robert Kaye. On January 20, 2006, the first commercial venture to use MusicBrainz data was the Barcelona, Spain-based \"Linkara\" in their \"Linkara M\u00fasica\" service.\nOn June 28, 2007, the BBC announced that it had licensed MusicBrainz's live data feed to augment their music web pages. BBC online music editors would also join the MusicBrainz community to contribute their knowledge to the database.\nOn July 28, 2008, the beta of the new BBC Music site was launched, which publishes a page for each MusicBrainz artist.\nMusicBrainz Picard.\nMusicBrainz Picard is a free and open-source software application for identifying, tagging and organizing digital audio recordings.\nPicard identifies audio files and compact discs by comparing either their metadata or their acoustic fingerprints with records in the database. Audio file metadata (or \"tags\") are a means of storing information about a recording in the file. When Picard identifies an audio file, it can add new information to it, such as the recording artist, the album title, the record label, and the date of release.\nListenBrainz.\nListenBrainz is a free and open source project that aims to crowdsource listening data related to digital music and release it under an open license. It is a MetaBrainz Foundation project tied to MusicBrainz. It aims to re-implement Last.fm features that were lost following that platform's acquisition by CBS.\nListenBrainz takes submissions in the form of \"listens\" representing the playback of songs or videos from various media players and services such as Clementine/Strawberry, Music Player Daemon and Spotify or other scrobbling mechanisms such as browser extensions. ListenBrainz can also import Last.fm and Libre.fm scrobbles in order to build listening history. As listens are released under an open license, ListenBrainz is useful for music research in industry and development research.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20798", "revid": "25046916", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20798", "title": "Mennonites", "text": "Anabaptist groups originating in Western Europe\nMennonites are a group of Anabaptist Christian communities tracing their roots to the epoch of the Radical Reformation. The name \"Mennonites\" is derived from the cleric Menno Simons (1496\u20131561) of Friesland, part of the Habsburg Netherlands within the Holy Roman Empire, present day Netherlands. Menno Simons became a prominent leader within the wider Anabaptist movement and was a contemporary of Martin Luther (1483\u20131546) and Philip Melanchthon (1497\u20131560). Through his writings about the Reformation Simons articulated and formalized the teachings of earlier Swiss Anabaptist founders as well as early teachings of the Mennonites founded on the belief in both the mission and ministry of Jesus. Formal Mennonite beliefs were codified in the Dordrecht Confession of Faith (1632), which affirmed \"the baptism of believers only, the washing of the feet as a symbol of servanthood, church discipline, the shunning of the excommunicated, the non-swearing of oaths, marriage within the same church\", nonresistance, and in general, more emphasis on \"true Christianity\" involving \"being Christian and obeying Christ\" as they interpret it from the Holy Bible.\nThe majority of the early Mennonite followers, rather than fighting, survived by fleeing to neighboring states where ruling families were tolerant of their belief in believer's baptism. Over the years, Mennonites have become known as one of the historic peace churches, due to their commitment to pacifism. Mennonites seek to emphasize the teachings of early Christianity in their beliefs, worship and lifestyle.\nCongregations worldwide embody various approaches to Mennonite practice, ranging from Old Order Mennonites (who practice a lifestyle without certain elements of modern technology) to Conservative Mennonites (who hold to traditional theological distinctives, wear plain dress and use modern conveniences) to mainline Mennonites (those who are indistinguishable in dress and appearance from the general population). Mennonites can be found in communities in 87 countries on six continents. Seven ordinances have been taught in many traditional Mennonite churches, which include \"baptism, communion, footwashing, marriage, anointing with oil, the holy kiss, and the prayer covering.\" The largest populations of Mennonites are found in Canada, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Ethiopia, India, and the United States. There are Mennonite settlements in Argentina, Belize, Bolivia, Brazil, Mexico, Peru, Uruguay, Paraguay, and Colombia. The Mennonite Church in the Netherlands still continues where Simons was born.\nThough Mennonites are a global denomination with church membership from Europe, Asia, Africa and the Americas, certain Mennonite communities with ethno-cultural origins in Switzerland and the Netherlands bear the designation of ethnic Mennonites. Across Latin America, Mennonite colonization has been seen as a driver of environmental damage, notably deforestation of the Amazon rainforest through land clearance for agriculture.\nHistory.\nThe early history of the Mennonites starts with the Anabaptists in the German and Dutch-speaking regions of central Europe. The German term is \"T\u00e4ufer\" (Baptist) or \"Wiedert\u00e4ufer\" (\"re-Baptizers\" or \"Anabaptists\" using the Greek \"ana\" [\"again\"]), as their persecutors called them. These forerunners of modern Mennonites were part of the Protestant Reformation, a broad reaction against the practices and theology of the Roman Catholic Church. Its most distinguishing feature is the rejection of infant baptism, an act that had both religious and political meaning since almost every infant born in western Europe was baptized in the Roman Catholic Church. Other significant theological views of the Mennonites developed in opposition to Roman Catholic views or to the views of Protestant reformers such as Martin Luther and Huldrych Zwingli.\nSome of the followers of Zwingli's Reformed church thought that requiring church membership beginning at birth was inconsistent with the New Testament example. They believed that the church should be completely removed from government (the proto\u2013free church tradition), and that individuals should join only when willing to publicly acknowledge belief in Jesus and the desire to live in accordance with his teachings. At a small meeting in Zurich on 21 January 1525, Conrad Grebel, Felix Manz, and George Blaurock, along with twelve others, baptized each other. This meeting marks the beginning of the Anabaptist movement. In the spirit of the times, other groups came to preach about reducing hierarchy, relations with the state, eschatology, and sexual license, running from utter abandon to extreme chastity. These movements are together referred to as the \"Radical Reformation\".\nMany government and religious leaders, both Protestant and Roman Catholic, considered voluntary church membership to be dangerous\u2014the concern of some deepened by reports of the M\u00fcnster Rebellion, led by a violent sect of Anabaptists. They joined forces to fight the movement, using methods such as banishment, torture, burning, drowning or beheading.\nDespite strong repressive efforts of the state churches, the movement spread slowly around western Europe, primarily along the Rhine. Officials killed many of the earliest Anabaptist leaders in an attempt to purge Europe of the new sect. By 1530, most of the founding leaders had been killed for refusing to renounce their beliefs. Many believed that God did not condone killing or the use of force for any reason and were, therefore, unwilling to fight for their lives. The non-resistant branches often survived by seeking refuge in neutral cities or nations, such as Strasbourg. Their safety was often tenuous, as a shift in alliances or an invasion could mean resumed persecution. Other groups of Anabaptists, such as the Batenburgers, were eventually destroyed by their unwillingness to fight. This played a large part in the evolution of Anabaptist theology. They believed that Jesus taught that any use of force to get back at anyone was wrong, and taught to forgive.\nIn the early days of the Anabaptist movement, Menno Simons, a Catholic priest in the Low Countries, heard of the movement and started to rethink his Catholic faith. He questioned the doctrine of transubstantiation but was reluctant to leave the Roman Catholic Church. His brother, a member of an Anabaptist group, was killed when he and his companions were attacked and refused to defend themselves. In 1536, at the age of 40, Simons left the Roman Catholic Church. He soon became a leader within the Anabaptist movement and was wanted by authorities for the rest of his life. His name became associated with scattered groups of nonviolent Anabaptists whom he helped to organize and consolidate.\nFragmentation and variation.\nDuring the 16th century, the Mennonites and other Anabaptists were relentlessly persecuted. This period of persecution has had a significant impact on Mennonite identity. \"Martyrs Mirror\", published in 1660, documents much of the persecution of Anabaptists and their predecessors, including accounts of over 4,000 burnings of individuals, and numerous stonings, imprisonments, and live burials. Today, the book is still the most important book besides the Bible for many Mennonites and Amish, in particular for the Swiss-South German branch of the Mennonites. Persecution was still going on until 1710 in various parts of Switzerland.\nIn 1693, Jakob Ammann led an effort to reform the Mennonite church in Switzerland and South Germany to include shunning, to hold communion more often, and other differences. When the discussions fell through, Ammann and his followers split from the other Mennonite congregations. Ammann's followers became known as the Amish Mennonites or just Amish. In later years, other schisms among Amish resulted in such groups as the Old Order Amish, New Order Amish, Kauffman Amish Mennonite, Swartzentruber Amish, Conservative Mennonite Conference and Biblical Mennonite Alliance. For instance, near the beginning of the 20th century, some members in the Amish church wanted to begin having Sunday schools and participate in progressive Protestant-style para-church evangelism. Unable to persuade the rest of the Amish, they separated and formed a number of separate groups including the Conservative Mennonite Conference. Mennonites in Canada and other countries typically have independent denominations because of the practical considerations of distance and, in some cases, language. Many times these divisions took place along family lines, with each extended family supporting its own branch.\nPolitical rulers often admitted the Menists or Mennonites into their states because they were honest, hardworking and peaceful. When their practices upset the powerful state churches, princes would renege on exemptions for military service, or a new monarch would take power, and the Mennonites would be forced to flee again, usually leaving everything but their families behind. Often, another monarch in another state would grant them welcome, at least for a while.\nWhile Mennonites in Colonial America were enjoying considerable religious freedom, their counterparts in Europe continued to struggle with persecution and temporary refuge under certain ruling monarchs. They were sometimes invited to settle in areas of poor soil that no one else could farm. By contrast, in the Netherlands, the Mennonites enjoyed a relatively high degree of tolerance. Because the land still needed to be tended, the ruler would not drive out the Mennonites but would pass laws to force them to stay, while at the same time severely limiting their freedom. Mennonites had to build their churches facing onto back streets or alleys, and they were forbidden from announcing the beginning of services with the sound of a bell.\nA strong emphasis on \"community\" was developed under these circumstances. It continues to be typical of Mennonite churches. As a result of frequently being required to give up possessions in order to retain individual freedoms, Mennonites learned to live very simply. This was reflected both in the home and at church, where their dress and their buildings were plain. The music at church, usually simple German chorales, was performed \"a cappella\". This style of music serves as a reminder to many Mennonites of their simple lives, as well as their history as a persecuted people. Some branches of Mennonites have retained this \"plain\" lifestyle into modern times.\nStatistics.\nThe Mennonite World Conference was founded at the first conference in Basel, Switzerland, in 1925 to celebrate the 400th anniversary of Anabaptism. In 2022, the organization had 109 member denominations in 59 countries, and 1.47 million baptized members in 10,300 churches.\nBeliefs and practices.\nThe beliefs of the movement are those of the Believers' Church.\nOne of the earliest expressions of Mennonite Anabaptist faith was the Schleitheim Confession, adopted on 24 February 1527. Its seven articles covered:\nThe Dordrecht Confession of Faith was adopted on 21 April 1632, by Dutch Mennonites, by Alsatian Mennonites in 1660, and by North American Mennonites in 1725. It has been followed by many Mennonite groups over the centuries. With regard to salvation, Mennonites believe:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;When we hear the good news of the love of God, the Holy Spirit moves us to accept the gift of salvation. God brings us into right relationship without coercion. Our response includes yielding to God's grace, placing full trust in God alone, repenting of sin, turning from evil, joining the fellowship of the redeemed, and showing forth the obedience of faith in word and deed. When we who once were God's enemies are reconciled with God through Christ, we also experience reconciliation with others, especially within the church. In baptism we publicly testify to our salvation and pledge allegiance to the one true God and to the people of God, the church. As we experience grace and the new birth, we are adopted into the family of God and become more and more transformed into the image of Christ. We thus respond in faith to Christ and seek to walk faithfully in the way of Christ.\nTraditionally, Mennonites sought to continue the beliefs of early Christianity and thus practice the lovefeast (which includes footwashing, the holy kiss and communion), headcovering, nonresistance, the sharing of possessions and nonconformity to the world; these things are heavily emphasized in Old Order Mennonite and Conservative Mennonite denominations.\nSeven ordinances have been taught in many traditional Mennonite churches, which include \"baptism, communion, footwashing, marriage, anointing with oil, the holy kiss, and the prayer covering.\"\nIn 1911, the Mennonite church in the Netherlands () was the first Dutch church to have a female pastor authorized; she was Anne Zernike.\nThere is a wide scope of worship, doctrine and traditions among Mennonites today. This section shows the \"main\" types of Mennonites as seen from North America. It is far from a specific study of all Mennonite classifications worldwide but it does show a somewhat representative sample of the complicated classifications within the Mennonite faith worldwide.\nModerate Mennonites include the largest denominations, the Mennonite Brethren and the Mennonite Church. In most forms of worship and practice, they differ very little from many Protestant congregations. There is no special form of dress and no restrictions on use of technology. Worship styles vary greatly between different congregations. There is no formal liturgy; services typically consist of singing, scripture reading, prayer and a sermon. Some churches prefer hymns and choirs; others make use of contemporary Christian music with electronic instruments. Mennonite congregations are self-supporting and appoint their own ministers. There is no requirement for ministers to be approved by the denomination, and sometimes ministers from other denominations will be appointed. A small sum, based on membership numbers, is paid to the denomination, which is used to support central functions such as the publication of newsletters and interactions with other denominations and other countries.\nThe distinguishing characteristics of moderate Mennonite churches tend to be ones of emphasis rather than rule. There is an emphasis on peace, community and service. However, members do not live in a separate community\u2014they participate in the general community as \"salt and light\" to the world (Matthew 5:13,14). The main elements of Menno Simons's doctrine are retained but in a moderated form. Banning is rarely practiced and would, in any event, have much less effect than in those denominations where the community is more tightly knit. Excommunication can occur and was notably applied by the Mennonite Brethren to members who joined the military during the Second World War. Service in the military is generally not permitted, but service in the legal profession or law enforcement is acceptable. Outreach and help to the wider community at home and abroad is encouraged. The Mennonite Central Committee (MCC) is a leader in foreign aid provision.\nTraditionally, very modest dress was expected, particularly in Conservative Mennonite circles. As the Mennonite population has become urbanized and more integrated into the wider culture, this visible difference has disappeared outside of Conservative Mennonite groups.\nThe Reformed Mennonite Church, with members in the United States and Canada, represents the first division in the original North American Mennonite body. Called the \"First Keepers of the Old Way\" by author Stephen Scott, the Reformed Mennonite Church formed in the very early 19th century. Reformed Mennonites see themselves as true followers of Menno Simons's teachings and of the teachings of the New Testament. They have no church rules, but they rely solely on the Bible as their guide. They insist on strict separation from all other forms of worship and dress in conservative plain garb that preserves 18th century Mennonite details. However, they refrain from forcing their Mennonite faith on their children, allow their children to attend public schools, and have permitted the use of automobiles. They are notable for being the church of Milton S. Hershey's mother and famous for the long and bitter ban of Robert Bear, a Pennsylvania farmer who rebelled against what he saw as dishonesty and disunity in the leadership.\nThe Church of God in Christ, Mennonite, a group often called Holdeman Mennonites after their founder John Holdeman, was founded from a schism in 1859. They emphasize Evangelical conversion and strict church discipline. They stay separate from other Mennonite groups because of their emphasis on the one-true-church doctrine and their use of avoidance toward their own excommunicated members. The Holdeman Mennonites do not believe that the use of modern technology is a sin in itself, but they discourage too intensive a use of the Internet and avoid television, cameras and radio. The group had 24,400 baptized members in 2013.\nOld Order Mennonites cover several distinct groups. Some groups use horse and buggy for transportation and speak German while others drive cars and speak English. What most Old Orders share in common is conservative doctrine, dress, and traditions, common roots in 19th-century and early 20th-century schisms, and a refusal to participate in politics and other so-called \"sins of the world\". Most Old Order groups also school their children in Mennonite-operated schools.\nStauffer Mennonites, or Pike Mennonites, represent one of the first and most conservative forms of North American Horse and Buggy Mennonites. They were founded in 1845, following conflicts about how to discipline children and spousal abuse by a few Mennonite Church members. They almost immediately began to split into separate churches themselves. Today these groups are among the most conservative of all Swiss Mennonites outside the Amish. They stress strict separation from \"the world\", adhere to \"strict withdrawal from and shunning of apostate and separated members\", forbid and limit cars and technology and wear plain clothing.\nConservative Mennonites are generally considered those Mennonites who maintain somewhat conservative dress, although carefully accepting other technology. They are not a unified group and are divided into various independent conferences and fellowships such as the Eastern Pennsylvania Mennonite Church Conference. Despite the rapid changes that precipitated the Old Order schisms in the last quarter of the 19th century, most Mennonites in the United States and Canada retained a core of traditional beliefs based on a literal interpretation of the New Testament scriptures as well as more external \"plain\" practices into the beginning of the 20th century. However, disagreements in the United States and Canada between conservative and progressive (i.e. less emphasis on literal interpretation of scriptures) leaders began in the first half of the 20th century and continue to some extent today.\nFollowing World War II, a conservative movement emerged from scattered separatist groups as a reaction to the Mennonite churches drifting away from their historical traditions. \"Plain\" became pass\u00e9 as open criticisms of traditional beliefs and practices broke out in the 1950s and 1960s. The first conservative withdrawals from the progressive group began in the 1950s. These withdrawals continue to the present day in what is now the growing Conservative Movement formed from Mennonite schisms and from combinations with progressive Amish groups. While moderate and progressive Mennonite congregations have dwindled in size, the Conservative Movement congregations continue to exhibit considerable growth. Other conservative Mennonite groups descended from the former Amish-Mennonite churches which split, like the Wisler Mennonites, from the Old Order Amish in the latter part of the 19th century. (The Wisler Mennonites are a grouping descended from the Old Mennonite Church.) Other Conservative Mennonite churches descended from more recent groups that have left the Amish, like the Beachy Amish or the Tennessee Brotherhood Churches.\nIn North America, there are structures and traditions taught as in the Confession of Faith in a Mennonite Perspective of Mennonite Church Canada and Mennonite Church USA.\nMany Progressive Mennonite churches allow LGBTQ+ members to worship as church members. In some more conservative congregations and conferences, people who identify as LGBTQ+ have been banned from membership, and leading worship. The Germantown Mennonite Church in Germantown, Pennsylvania is one example of such a progressive Mennonite church.\nMost progressive Mennonite Churches place a great emphasis on the Mennonite tradition's teachings on pacifism and non-violence. Some progressive Mennonite Churches are part of moderate Mennonite denominations (such as the Mennonite Church USA) while others are independent congregations.\nSexuality, marriage, and family mores.\nMost Mennonite denominations hold a conservative position on homosexuality.\nThe Brethren Mennonite Council for LGBT Interests was founded in 1976 in the United States and has member churches of different denominations in the United States and Canada.\nThe Mennonite Church Canada leaves the choice to each church for same-sex marriage.\nThe Mennonite Church in the Netherlands and the Mennonite Church USA which had 62,000 members in 2021, about 12% of American Mennonites, permit same-sex marriage.\nRussian Mennonites.\nThe \"Russian Mennonites\" (German: \"Russlandmennoniten\") today are descended from Dutch Anabaptists, who came from the Netherlands and started around 1530 to settle around Danzig and in West Prussia, where they lived for about 250 years. Starting in 1791 they established colonies in the south-west of the Russian Empire and beginning in 1854 also in Volga region and Orenburg Governorate. Their ethno-language is Plautdietsch, a Germanic dialect of the East Low German group, with some Dutch admixture. Today, many traditional Russian Mennonites use Standard German in church and for reading and writing.\nIn the 1770s Catherine the Great of the Russian Empire acquired a great deal of land north of the Black Sea (in present-day Ukraine) following the Russo-Turkish War and the takeover of the Ottoman vassal, the Crimean Khanate. Russian government officials invited Mennonites living in the Kingdom of Prussia to farm the Ukrainian steppes depopulated by Tatar raids in exchange for religious freedom and military exemption. Over the years Mennonite farmers and businesses were very successful.\nIn 1854, according to the new Russian government official invitation, Mennonites from Prussia established colonies in Russia's Volga region (Am Trakt Colony), and later in Orenburg Governorate (Neu Samara Colony).\nBetween 1874 and 1880 some 16,000 Mennonites of approximately 45,000 left Russia. About nine thousand departed for the United States (mainly Kansas and Nebraska) and seven thousand for Canada (mainly Manitoba). In the 1920s, Russian Mennonites from Canada started to migrate to Latin America (Mexico and Paraguay), soon followed by Mennonite refugees from the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics. Further migrations of these Mennonites led to settlements in Peru, Brazil, Uruguay, Belize, Bolivia and Argentina.\nBy the beginning of the 20th century, the Mennonites in Russia owned large agricultural estates and some had become successful as industrial entrepreneurs in the cities, employing wage labor. After the Russian Revolution of 1917 and the Russian Civil War (1917\u20131921), all of these farms (whose owners were called Kulaks) and enterprises were expropriated by local peasants or the Soviet government. Beyond expropriation, Mennonites suffered severe persecution during the course of the Civil War, at the hands of workers, the Bolsheviks and, particularly, the Anarcho-Communists of Nestor Makhno, who considered the Mennonites to be privileged foreigners of the upper class and targeted them. During expropriation, hundreds of Mennonite men, women and children were murdered in these attacks. After the Ukrainian\u2013Soviet War and the takeover of Ukraine by the Soviet Bolsheviks, people who openly practiced religion were in many cases imprisoned by the Soviet government. This led to a wave of Mennonite emigration to the Americas (U.S., Canada and Paraguay).\nWhen the German army invaded the Soviet Union in the summer of 1941 during World War II, many in the Mennonite community perceived them as liberators from the communist regime under which they had suffered. Many Russian Mennonites actively collaborated with the Nazis, including in the rounding up and extermination of their Jewish neighbors, although some also resisted them. When the tide of war turned, many of the Mennonites fled with the German army back to Germany where they were accepted as \"Volksdeutsche\". The Soviet government believed that the Mennonites had \"collectively collaborated\" with the Germans. After the war, many Mennonites in the Soviet Union were forcibly relocated to Siberia and Kazakhstan. Many were sent to gulags as part of the Soviet program of mass internal deportations of various ethnic groups whose loyalty was seen as questionable. Many German-Russian Mennonites who lived to the east (not in Ukraine) were deported to Siberia before the German army's invasion and were also often placed in labor camps. In the decades that followed, as the Soviet regime became less brutal, a number of Mennonites returned to Ukraine and Western Russia where they had formerly lived. In the 1990s the governments of Kazakhstan, Russia and Ukraine gave these people the opportunity to emigrate, and the vast majority emigrated to Germany. The Russian Mennonite immigrants in Germany from the 1990s outnumber the pre-1989 community of Mennonites by three to one.\nBy 2015, the majority of Russian Mennonites and their descendants live in Latin America, Germany and Canada.\nThe world's most conservative Mennonites (in terms of culture and technology) are the Mennonites affiliated with the Lower and Upper Barton Creek Colonies in Belize. Lower Barton is inhabited by Plautdietsch speaking Russian Mennonites, whereas Upper Barton Creek is mainly inhabited by Pennsylvania Dutch language-speaking Mennonites from North America. Neither group uses motors or paint.\nNorth America.\nPersecution and the search for employment forced Mennonites out of the Netherlands eastward to Germany in the 17th century. As Quaker Evangelists moved into Germany they received a sympathetic audience among the larger of these German-Mennonite congregations around Krefeld, Altona, Hamburg, Gronau and Emden. It was among this group of Quakers and Mennonites, living under ongoing discrimination, that William Penn solicited settlers for his new colony. The first permanent settlement of Mennonites in the American colonies consisted of one Mennonite family and twelve Mennonite-Quaker families of German extraction who arrived from Krefeld, Germany, in 1683 and settled in Germantown, Pennsylvania. Among these early settlers was William Rittenhouse, a lay minister and owner of the first American paper mill. Jacob Gottschalk was the first bishop of this Germantown congregation. Four members of that early group of Mennonites and Mennonite-Quaker, Francis Daniel Pastorius, Abraham op den Graeff, Derick op den Graeff (both cousins to William Penn) and Garret Hendericks signed the first formal protest against slavery in the United States in 1688. The treatise was addressed to slave-holding Quakers in an effort to persuade them to change their ways.\nIn the early 18th century, 100,000 Germans from the Palatinate emigrated to Pennsylvania, where they became known collectively as the Pennsylvania Dutch (from the Anglicization of \"Deutsch\", which now means German but used to mean West Germanic). The Palatinate region had been repeatedly overrun by the French in religious wars, and Queen Anne had invited the Germans to go to the British colonies. Of these immigrants, around 2,500 were Mennonites and 500 were Amish. This group settled farther west than the first group, choosing less expensive land in the Lancaster area. The oldest Mennonite meetinghouse in the United States is the Hans Herr House in West Lampeter Township. A member of this second group, Christopher Dock, authored \"Pedagogy\", the first American monograph on education. Today, Mennonites also reside in Kishacoquillas Valley (also known as Big Valley), a valley in Huntingdon and Mifflin counties in Pennsylvania.\nDuring Colonial America, Mennonites were distinguished from other Pennsylvania Germans in three ways: their opposition to the American Revolutionary War in which other German settlers participated on both sides; their resistance to public education; and their disapproval of religious revivalism. Contributions of Mennonites during their period include the idea of separation of church and state and opposition to slavery.\nFrom 1812 to 1860, another wave of Mennonite immigrants settled farther west in Ohio, Indiana, Illinois and Missouri. These Swiss-German speaking Mennonites, along with Amish, came from Switzerland and Alsace-Lorraine, along with the Amish of northern New York State, formed the nucleus of the Apostolic Christian Church in the United States.\nThere were also Mennonite settlements in Canada from those who emigrated there chiefly from the United States (Upstate New York, Maryland, and Pennsylvania):\nAccording to a 2017 report,\n\"there are two basic strains of Mennonites in Canada: the Swiss-South German Mennonites came via Pennsylvania, and the Dutch-North German Mennonites came via Russia (Ukraine). In the late 1700s and early 1800s \"Swiss\" Mennonites from Pennsylvania settled in southern Ontario. In the 1870s, a large group of \"Russian\" Mennonites from Ukraine moved to southern Manitoba. Further waves of \"Russian\" Mennonites came to Canada in the 1920s and 1940s\". In the last 50 years, Mennonites have been coming to Canada from Mexico. \nDuring the 1880s, smaller Mennonite groups settled as far west as California, especially around the Paso Robles area.\nOld Order Mennonites and Amish are often grouped together in the popular press. That is incorrect, according to a 2017 report by Canadian Mennonite magazine: The customs of Old Order Mennonites, the Amish communities and Old Colony Mennonites have a number of similarities, but the cultural differences are significant enough so that members of one group would not feel comfortable moving to another group. The Old Order Mennonites and Amish have the same European roots and the language spoken in their homes is the same German dialect. Old Colony Mennonites use Low German, a different German dialect.\nModerate to progressive Mennonites.\n\"Old\" Mennonite Church (MC).\nThe Swiss-German Mennonites who immigrated to North America in the 18th and 19th centuries and settled first in Pennsylvania, then across the midwestern states (initially Ohio, Indiana, and Kansas), are the root of the former Mennonite Church denomination (MC), colloquially called the \"Old Mennonite Church\". This denomination had offices in Elkhart, Indiana, and was the most populous progressive Mennonite denomination before merging with the General Conference Mennonite Church (GCMC) in 2002.\nMennonite Brethren Church.\nThe Mennonite Brethren Church was established among Plautdietsch-speaking Russian Mennonites in 1860, and has congregations in more than 20 countries, representing about 500,000 members as of 2019.\nMennonite Church USA.\nThe Mennonite Church USA (MCUSA) and the Mennonite Church Canada are the resulting denominations of the 2002 merger of the (General Assembly) Mennonite Church and the General Conference Mennonite Church. Total membership in Mennonite Church USA denominations decreased from about 133,000, before the merger in 1998, to a total membership of 120,381 in the Mennonite Church USA in 2001. In 2013, membership had fallen to 97,737 members in 839 congregations. In 2016, it had fallen to 78,892 members after the withdrawal of the Lancaster Mennonite Conference. In May 2021 the main page of their website stated a membership of about 62,000.\nPennsylvania remains the hub of the denomination but there are also large numbers of members in Ohio, Indiana, Kansas, and Illinois.\nIn 1983, the \"General Assembly of the Mennonite Church\" met jointly with the \"General Conference Mennonite Church\" in Bethlehem, Pennsylvania, in celebration of 300 years in the Americas. Beginning in 1989, a series of consultations, discussions, proposals, and sessions (and a vote in 1995 in favor of merger) led to the unification of these two major North American Mennonite bodies into one denomination organized on two fronts \u2013 the Mennonite Church USA and the Mennonite Church Canada. The merger was \"finalized\" at a joint session in St. Louis, Missouri in 1999, and the Canadian branch moved quickly ahead. The United States branch did not complete their organization until the meeting in Nashville, Tennessee in 2001, which became effective 1 February 2002.\nThe merger of 1999\u20132002 at least partially fulfilled the desire of the founders of the General Conference Mennonite Church to create an organization under which all Mennonites could unite. Yet not all Mennonites favored the merger. The Alliance of Mennonite Evangelical Congregations represents one expression of the disappointment with the merger and the events that led up to it.\nMennonite Church Canada.\nMennonite Church Canada is a conference of Mennonites in Canada, with head offices in Winnipeg, Manitoba. As of 2003, the body had about 35,000 members in 235 churches. Beginning in 1989, a series of consultations, discussions, proposals, and sessions led to the unification of two North American bodies (the \"Mennonite Church &amp; General Conference Mennonite Church\") and the related Canadian Conference of Mennonites in Canada into the Mennonite Church USA and the Mennonite Church Canada in 2000.\nThe organizational structure is divided into five regional conferences. Denominational work is administered through a board elected by the delegates to the annual assembly. MC Canada participates in the Canadian Council of Churches, the Evangelical Fellowship of Canada, and the Mennonite World Conference.\nConservative Mennonites.\nConservative Mennonites include numerous groups that identify with the more conservative or traditional element among Mennonite or Anabaptist groups but not necessarily Old Order groups. The majority of Conservative Mennonite churches historically has an Amish and not a Mennonite background. They emerged mostly from the middle group between the Old Order Amish and Amish Mennonites. For more, see Amish Mennonite: Division 1850\u20131878.\nThose identifying with this group drive automobiles, have telephones and use electricity, and some may have personal computers. They also have Sunday school, hold revival meetings, and operate their own Christian schools/parochial schools.\nAccording to a University of Waterloo report, \"of the estimated 59,000 Mennonites in Ontario, only about twenty percent are members of conservative groups\". The same report estimated that \"there are about 175,000 Mennonites in Canada\".\nOld Colony Mennonites.\nOld Colony Mennonites are conservative Mennonite groups who are the majority of German speaking so-called Russian Mennonites that originated in the Chortitza Colony in Russia, including the Chortitza, Reinlander, and Sommerfelder groups, which are now most common in Latin America and Canada. There are some 400,000 Russian Mennonites in the world, including children and not yet baptized young people. They should not be confused with Old Order Mennonites with whom they have some similarities.\nOld Order Mennonites.\nThe Old Order Mennonite are living a lifestyle similar to or a bit more liberal than the Old Order Amish. There were more than 27,000 adult, baptized members of Old Order Mennonites in North America and Belize in 2008/9. The total population of Old Order Mennonites groups including children and adults not yet baptized normally is two to three times larger than the number of baptized, adult members, which indicates that the population of Old Order Mennonites was roughly between 60,000 and 80,000 in 2008/9.\nAlternative service.\nDuring World War II, Mennonite conscientious objectors were given the options of noncombatant military service, serving in the medical or dental corps under military control, or working in parks and on roads under civilian supervision. Over 95% chose the latter and were placed in Alternative Service camps. Initially the men worked on road building, forestry and firefighting projects. After May 1943, as a labor shortage developed within the nation, men were shifted into agriculture, education and industry. The 10,700 Canadian objectors were mostly Mennonites (63%) and Doukhobors (20%).\nIn the United States, Civilian Public Service (CPS) provided an alternative to military service during World War II. From 1941 to 1947, 4,665 Mennonites, Amish and Brethren in Christ were among nearly 12,000 conscientious objectors who performed \"work of national importance\" in 152 CPS camps throughout the United States and Puerto Rico. The draftees worked in areas such as soil conservation, forestry, fire fighting, agriculture, social services and mental health.\nThe CPS men served without wages and with minimal support from the federal government. The cost of maintaining the CPS camps and providing for the needs of the men was the responsibility of their congregations and families. Mennonite Central Committee coordinated the operation of the Mennonite camps. CPS men served longer than regular draftees, not being released until well past the end of the war. Initially skeptical of the program, government agencies learned to appreciate the men's service and requested more workers from the program. CPS made significant contributions to forest fire prevention, erosion and flood control, medical science and reform of the mental health system.\nSchisms.\nPrior to emigration to America, Anabaptists in Europe were divided between those of Dutch/North German and Swiss/South German background. At first, the Dutch/North German group took their name from Menno Simons, who led them in their early years. Later the Swiss/South German group also adopted the name \"Mennonites\". A third group of early Anabaptists, mainly from south-east Germany and Austria were organized by Jakob Hutter and became the Hutterites. The vast majority of Anabaptists of Swiss/South German ancestry today lives in the US and Canada, while the largest group of Dutch/North German Anabaptists are the Russian Mennonites, who live today mostly in Latin America.\nA trickle of North German Mennonites began the migration to America in 1683, followed by a much larger migration of Swiss/South German Mennonites beginning in 1707. The Amish are an early split from the Swiss/South German, that occurred in 1693. Over the centuries many Amish individuals and whole churches left the Amish and became Mennonites again.\nAfter immigration to America, many of the early Mennonites split from the main body of North American Mennonites and formed their own separate and distinct churches. The first schism in America occurred in 1778 when Bishop Christian Funk's support of the American Revolution led to his excommunication and the formation of a separate Mennonite group known as Funkites. In 1785 the Orthodox Reformed Mennonite Church was formed, and other schisms occurred into the 21st century. Many of these churches were formed as a response to deep disagreements about theology, doctrine, and church discipline as evolution both inside and outside the Mennonite faith occurred. Many of the modern churches are descended from those groups that abandoned traditional Mennonite practices.\nLarger groups of Dutch/North German Mennonites came to North America from the Russian Empire after 1873, especially to Kansas and Manitoba. While the more progressive element of these Mennonites assimilated into mainstream society, the more conservative element emigrated to Latin America. Since then there has been a steady flow of Mennonite emigrants from Latin America to North America.\nThese historical schisms have had an influence on creating the distinct Mennonite denominations, sometimes using mild or severe shunning to show its disapproval of other Mennonite groups.\nSome expelled congregations were affiliated both with the Mennonite Church and the General Conference Mennonite Church. The latter did not expel the same congregations. When these two Mennonite denominations formally completed their merger in 2002 to become the new Mennonite Church USA and Mennonite Church Canada denominations, it was still not clear, whether the congregations that were expelled from one denomination, yet included in the other, are considered to be \"inside\" or \"outside\" of the new merged denomination. Some Mennonite conferences have chosen to maintain such \"disciplined\" congregations as \"associate\" or \"affiliate\" congregations in the conferences, rather than to expel such congregations. In virtually every case, a dialogue continues between the disciplined congregations and the denomination, as well as their current or former conferences.\nSchools.\nSeveral Mennonite groups established schools, universities and seminaries. Conservative groups, like the Holdeman, have not only their own schools, but their own curriculum and teaching staff (usually, but not exclusively, young unmarried women).\nEthnic Mennonites.\nThough Mennonites are a global denomination with church membership from Europe, Asia, Africa and the Americas, certain Mennonite communities that are descended from \u00e9migr\u00e9s from Switzerland and Russia bear the designation of ethnic Mennonites.\nIn contemporary society, Mennonites are described either as a religious denomination with members of different ethnic origins, or as both an ethnic group and a religious denomination. There is controversy among Mennonites about this issue, with some insisting that they are simply a religious group, while others argue that they form a distinct ethnic group. Historians and sociologists have increasingly started to treat Mennonites as an ethno-religious group, while others have begun to challenge that perception. Discussion also exists as to the term \"ethnic Mennonite\"; conservative Mennonite groups, who speak Pennsylvania Dutch, Plautdietsch (Low German), or Bernese German fit well into the definition of an ethnic group, while more liberal groups and converts in developing countries do not.\nList of Mennonites surnames.\nThis is a list of surnames common among Mennonites in Canada originating (indirectly) from Russia, in descending frequency. The number in brackets indicates the number of places they are higher than on a 20-entry list of surnames of Mennonites in Canada originating (indirectly) from Russia. This list only includes surnames higher on the list concerning West Prussian Mennonites than on the list of surnames of Mennonites in Canada.\nSurnames of Frisians include Abrahams, Arens, Behrends, Cornelius, Daniels, Dirksen, Doercksen, Frantzen, Goertzen, Gossen, Harms, Lowen, Thiessen, Petkau, Heinrichs, Jantzen, Pauls, Peters, Siemens, and Woelms. Surnames that mostly occur in Frisian congregations include Adrian, Brandt, Buller, Caspar, Flaming, Hamm, Harms, Isaak, Kettler, Kliewer, Knels, Stobbe, Teus, T\u00f6ws, and Toews, additionally, Pauls, Peters, Unruh, and Fransen and Schmidt. Nickel also is a name mainly of Frisian Mennonites denomination. Unger is a name in congregation of Frisian Mennonites denomination. Foth/Vodt and Arentsen are most likely of Frisian congregations.\nEnvironmental impacts.\nAcross Latin America, Mennonite colonization has been seen as a driver of environmental damage associated with land clearance in countries including Belize, Bolivia, Colombia, Mexico, Paraguay, and Peru, while indigenous peoples in Suriname have expressed similar concerns. Since the early- to mid-twentieth century, Mennonite colonization has brought a characteristic, religious approach to cultivation (not generally found in either peasant or corporate farming) and the potential to impact a range of different biomes. Mennonite farmers have cleared large areas of wilderness (greater than the size of the Netherlands) across major transnational regions of Latin America such as the Gran Chaco, the Chiquitano, and the Amazon rainforest. In the process, they have unintentionally devastated many precious natural habitats, often leading to conflict with indigenous peoples. Their commercial success in transforming previously wild lands to make way for soybean production and cattle ranching appears to have provided inspiration for others, including some conglomerates that have reproduced the model on a massive scale. While habitat destruction by Mennonite colonies has been on a smaller scale overall than that recently inflicted by a few very large corporations, the environmental damage is increasingly being contested, sometimes in the form of legal challenges.\nThe Monitoring of the Andean Amazon Project (MAAP), conducted by the Amazon Conservation Association, has identified Mennonite colonization as a new driver of deforestation in Bolivia and Peru. In Peru, MAAP has identified over 7,000 hectares (27 square miles) of rainforest lost to deforestation between 2017 and 2023 following the arrival of Mennonite settlers, and their colonies have been charged with illegal deforestation.\nOn the Yucat\u00e1n Peninsula in Mexico, agricultural expansion following Mennonite settlement has been a driver of deforestation of the native tropical rainforest. In July 2018, Mexican Mennonites were fined $500,000 for unauthorized logging on 1,445 hectares (5\u00bd square miles) of forested ejidos (shared ownership lands) in Quintana Roo.\nControversies.\nAs of 2007, the Quebec government imposed a standard curriculum on all schools (public and private). While private schools may add optional material to the compulsory curriculum, they may not replace it. The Quebec curriculum was unacceptable to the parents of the only Mennonite school in the province. They said they would leave Quebec after the Education Ministry threatened legal actions. The province threatened to invoke youth protection services if the Mennonite children were not registered with the Education Ministry; they either had to be home-schooled using the government-approved material, or attend a \"sanctioned\" school. The local population and its mayor supported the local Mennonites. The Evangelical Fellowship of Canada wrote that year to the Quebec government to express its concerns about this situation. By September 2007, some Mennonite families had already left Quebec.\nBetween 2005 and 2009, more than 100 girls and women in the Manitoba Colony of Bolivia were raped at night in their homes by a group of colony men who sedated them with animal anesthetic. Girls and women, including elderly women and relatives to the perpetrators, reported these attacks, but were at first dismissed as \"wild female imagination\", or else attributed to ghosts or demons. Eventually a group of colony men were caught in the act. The colony elders, deciding that the case was too difficult to handle themselves, called local police to take the perpetrators into custody in 2011. The youngest victim was three years old, and the oldest was 65. The offenders used a type of gas used by veterinarians to sedate animals during medical procedures. Despite long custodial sentences for the convicted men, an investigation in 2013 reported continuing cases of similar assaults and other sexual abuses. Canadian author Miriam Toews has made these crimes the center of her 2018 novel \"Women Talking\".\nConnections between farmers and Mexican drug cartels in the state of Chihuahua have seen their parallels across Mexico throughout the Mexican drug war.\nService projects.\nThe Mennonite Disaster Service, based in North America, is a volunteer network of Anabaptist churches which provide both immediate and long-term responses to hurricanes, floods, and other disasters in the U.S. and Canada.\nMennonite Central Committee (MCC), founded on 27 September 1920, in Chicago, Illinois, provides disaster relief around the world alongside their long-term international development programs. In 1972, Mennonites in Altona, Manitoba, established the MCC Thrift Shops which has grown to become a worldwide source of assistance to the needy.\nSince the latter part of the 20th century, some Mennonite groups have become more actively involved with peace and social justice issues, helping to found Christian Peacemaker Teams and Mennonite Conciliation Service.\nMembership.\nAccording to a 2018 census by the Mennonite World Conference (MWC), it has 107 member denominations in 58 countries, and 1.47 million baptized members. Their membership in 2023 included 108 denominations from 60 countries, and around 1.45 million baptized members in over 10,180 congregations. As of 2023, 84% of baptized members in MWC member churches were African, Asian or Latin American, and 16% were located in Europe and North America.\nAfrica has the highest membership growth rate by far, with an increase of 10% to 12% every year, particularly in Ethiopia due to new conversions. African Mennonite churches underwent a dramatic 228% increase in membership during the 1980s and 1990s, attracting thousands of new converts in Tanzania, Kenya, and the Congo. Programs were also founded in Botswana and Swaziland during the 1960s. Mennonite organizations in South Africa, initially stifled under apartheid due to the Afrikaner government's distrust of foreign pacifist churches, have expanded substantially since 1994. In recognition of the dramatic increase in the proportion of African adherents, the Mennonite World Conference held its assembly in Bulawayo, Zimbabwe, in 2003.\nIn Latin America growth is not as high as in Africa, but strong because of the high birth rates of traditional Mennonites of German ancestry. Growth in Mennonite membership is steady and has outpaced total population growth in North America, the Asia/Pacific region and Caribbean region. Europe has seen a slow and accelerating decline in Mennonite membership since about 1980.\nOrganization worldwide.\nThe most basic unit of organization among Mennonites is the church. There are hundreds or thousands of Mennonite churches and groups, many of which are separate from all others. Some churches are members of regional or area conferences. And some regional or area conferences are affiliated with larger national or international conferences. There is no single world authority on among Mennonites, however there is a Mennonite World Committee (MWC) includes Mennonites from 60 countries. The MWC does not make binding decisions on behalf of members but coordinates Mennonite causes aligning with the MWC's shared convictions.\nFor the most part, there is a host of independent Mennonite churches along with a myriad of separate conferences with no particular responsibility to any other group. Independent churches can contain as few as fifty members or as many as 20,000 members. Similar size differences occur among separate conferences. Worship, church discipline and lifestyles vary widely between progressive, moderate, conservative, Old Order and orthodox Mennonites in a vast panoply of distinct, independent, and widely dispersed classifications. There is no central authority that claims to speak for all Mennonites, as the 20th century passed, cultural distinctiveness between Mennonite groups has decreased.\nThe largest Mennonite/Anabaptist groups are:\nOrganization: North America.\nIn 2015, there were 538,839 baptized members organized into 41 bodies in the United States, according to the Mennonite World Conference. The largest group of that number is the Old Order Amish. According to the Association of Religion Data Archives, in 2001 there were 80,820 Old Order Amish church members living in the United States. The U.S. Conference of Mennonite Brethren Churches comprises 34,500 members. 27,000 are part of a larger group known collectively as Old Order Mennonites. Another 78,892 of that number are from the Mennonite Church USA.\nTotal membership in Mennonite Church USA denominations decreased from about 133,000, before the MC-GC merger in 1998, to about 114,000 after the merger in 2003. In 2016 it had fallen to under 79,000. Membership of the Mennonite Church USA is on the decline.\nCanada had 143,720 Mennonites in 16 organized bodies as of 2015. Of that number, the Canadian Conference of Mennonite Brethren Churches had 37,508 baptized members and the Mennonite Church Canada had 31,000 members.\nAs of 2012, there were an estimated 100,000 Old Colony Mennonites in Mexico. These Mennonites descend from a mass migration in the 1920s of roughly 6,000 Old Colony Mennonites from the Canadian provinces of Manitoba and Saskatchewan. In 1921, a Canadian Mennonite delegation arriving in Mexico received a \"privilegium\", a promise of non-interference, from the Mexican government. This guarantee of many freedoms was the impetus that created the two original Old Colony settlements near Patos Nuevo Ideal, Durango, Cuauht\u00e9moc, Chihuahua and La Honda, Zacatecas.\nOn the other hand, the Mennonite World Conference cites only 33,881 Mennonites organized into 14 bodies in Mexico.\nOrganization: Europe.\nGermany has the largest contingent of Mennonites in Europe. The Mennonite World Conference counts 47,202 baptized members within 7 organized bodies in 2015. The largest group is the \"Bruderschaft der Christengemeinde in Deutschland\" (Mennonite Brethren), which had 20,000 members in 2010. Another such body is the Union of German Mennonite Congregations or \"Vereinigung der Deutschen Mennonitengemeinden\". Founded in 1886, it has 27 Congregations with 5,724 members and is part of the larger \"Arbeitsgemeinschaft Mennonitischer Gemeinden in Deutschland\" or AMG (Assembly/Council of Mennonite Churches in Germany), which claims 40,000 overall members from various groups. Other AMG member groups include: \"Ru\u00dfland-Deutschen Mennoniten\", \"Mennoniten-Br\u00fcdergemeinden\"(Independent Mennonite Brethren congregations), \"WEBB-Gemeinden\", and the \"Mennonitischen Heimatmission\". However, not all German Mennonites belong to this larger AMG body. Upwards of 40,000 Mennonites emigrated from Russia to Germany starting in the 1970s.\nThe Mennonite presence remaining in the Netherlands, \"Algemene Doopsgezinde Societeit\" or ADS (translated as \"General Mennonite Society\"), maintains a seminary, as well as organizing relief, peace, and mission work, the latter primarily in Central Java and New Guinea. They have 121 congregations with 10,200 members according to the World Council of Churches, although the Mennonite World Conference cites only 7680 members.\nSwitzerland had 1800 Mennonites belonging to 14 Congregations which are part of the \"Konferenz der Mennoniten der Schweiz (Altt\u00e4ufer), Conf\u00e9rence mennonite suisse (Anabaptiste)\" (Swiss Mennonite Conference). \nIn 2015, there were 2078 Mennonites in France. The country's 32 autonomous Mennonite congregations have formed the \"Association des \u00c9glises \u00c9vang\u00e9liques Mennonites de France\".\nWhile Ukraine was once home to tens of thousands of Mennonites, in 2015 the number totalled just 499. They are organized among three denominations: \"Association of Mennonite Brethren Churches of Ukraine\", \"Church of God in Christ, Mennonite (Ukraine)\", and \"Evangelical Mennonite Churches of Ukraine (Beachy Amish Church \u2013 Ukraine)\".\nThe U.K. had but 326 members within two organized bodies as of 2015. There is the Nationwide Fellowship Churches (UK) and the larger Brethren in Christ Church United Kingdom. Additionally, there is the registered charity, \"The Mennonite Trust\" (formerly known as \"London Mennonite Centre\"), which seeks to promote understanding of Mennonite and Anabaptist practices and values.\nProselytism.\nThere is an organisation called Gospel Tract and Bible Society (GTBS), affiliated to\nChurch of God in Christ, Mennonite which prints religious tracts in the US and distributes them worldwide, claiming to publish and distribut tracts in 59 languages in 149 countries. The Canadian branch spent C$745,772 on foreign activities in 2022. In some cases unwanted leaflets are distributed in, for example, a predominantly Muslim country, causing alarm.\nIn popular culture.\nMennonites have been portrayed in many areas of popular culture, especially literature, film, and television. Notable novels about or written by Mennonites include \"A Complicated Kindness\" by Miriam Toews, \"Peace Shall Destroy Many\" by Rudy Wiebe, \"The Salvation of Yasch Siemens\" by Armin Wiebe, \"The Russlander\" by Sandra Birdsell, \"A Year of Lesser\" by David Bergen, \"A Dream of a Woman\" by Casey Plett, and \"Once Removed\" by Andrew Unger. Rhoda Janzen's memoir \"Mennonite in a Little Black Dress\" was a best-seller. In 1975 Victor Davies composed the Mennonite Piano Concerto and in 1977 composer Glenn Gould featured Manitoba Mennonites in his experimental radio documentary \"The Quiet in the Land\", part three of his Solitude Trilogy. In the 1990s, photographer Larry Towell documented the lives of Canadian and Mexican Mennonites, subsequently published in a volume by Phaidon Press. In 2007, Mexican director Carlos Reygadas directed \"Silent Light\", the first ever feature film in the Russian Mennonite dialect of Plautdietsch. Other films depicting Mennonites include \"I Propose We Never See Each Other Again After Tonight\", as well as \"All My Puny Sorrows\" and the Oscar-winning \"Women Talking\", both based on Miriam Toews novels. Mennonites have also been depicted on television, including the show \"Pure\", and in episodes of \"Schitt's Creek\", \"Letterkenny\" and \"The Simpsons\", which was created by Matt Groening, himself of Russian Mennonite descent. Andrew Unger's satirical news website \"The Unger Review\" (formerly called \"The Daily Bonnet\") pokes fun at Mennonite culture and traditions.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20799", "revid": "4246661", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20799", "title": "MMIX", "text": "64 bit RISC architecture by Donald Knuth\nMMIX (pronounced \"em-mix\") is a 64-bit reduced instruction set computer (RISC) architecture designed by Donald Knuth, with significant contributions by John L. Hennessy (who contributed to the design of the MIPS architecture) and Richard L. Sites (who was an architect of the Alpha architecture).\nKnuth has said that: \"MMIX is a computer intended to illustrate machine-level aspects of programming. In my books \"The Art of Computer Programming\", it replaces MIX, the 1960s-style machine that formerly played such a role\u2026 I strove to design MMIX so that its machine language would be simple, elegant, and easy to learn. At the same time I was careful to include all of the complexities needed to achieve high performance in practice, so that MMIX could in principle be built and even perhaps be competitive with some of the fastest general-purpose computers in the marketplace.\"\nKnuth started the design of MMIX in 1999, and released the stable version of the design in 2011. The processor is numbered as \"2009\" with Knuth explaining that this is the arithmetic mean from the numbers of other computer architectures; as well as being \"MMIX\" in Roman numerals.\nArchitecture.\nMMIX is a big-endian 64-bit reduced instruction set computer (RISC), with 256 64-bit general-purpose registers, 32 64-bit special-purpose registers, fixed-length 32-bit instructions and a 64-bit virtual address space. The MMIX instruction set comprises 256 opcodes, one of which is reserved for future expansion. MMIX uses IEEE 754 floating-point numbers.\nInstructions.\nAll instructions have an associated mnemonic. For example, instruction #20 (32 decimal) is associated with ADD. Most instructions have the symbolic form , where OP specifies the sort of instruction, X specifies the register used to store the result of the instruction and the rest specify the operands of the instruction. Each of these fields is eight bits wide. For example, means \"Set $0 to the sum of $1 and 3.\"\nMost instructions can take either immediate values or register contents; thus a single instruction mnemonic may correspond to one of two opcodes.\nMMIX programs are typically constructed using the MMIXAL assembly language. The below is a simple MMIXAL program, which prints the string \"Hello, world!\":\n LOC #100 % Set the address of the program\n % initially to 0x100.\nMain GETA $255,string % Put the address of the string\n % into register 255.\n TRAP 0,Fputs,StdOut % Write the string pointed to by\n % register 255 to the standard\n % output file.\n TRAP 0,Halt,0 % End process.\nstring BYTE \"Hello, world!\",#a,0 % String to be printed. #a is\n % newline, 0 terminates the\n % string.\nRegisters.\nThere are 256 directly addressable general-purpose architectural registers in an MMIX chip, designated by $0 through $255, and 32 special-purpose architectural registers. The special-purpose registers can be accessed with the GET and PUT instructions.\nTwo of the special registers, rL and rG, determine which of the general registers are local and which are global. All registers from $0... ([rL] \u2212 1) are local registers, and represent a window into an internal stack of registers. Registers from [rL]... ([rG] \u2212 1) are \"marginal registers\", they always return 0 if they are used as a source in an operation. Using a marginal register as the destination of an operation will cause the machine to automatically increase rL to include that register. All registers [rG]... $255 are called global registers, and are not part of the register stack.\nLocal register stack.\nThe local register stack provides each subroutine with its own rL local registers, designated by $0 through $(rL \u2212 1). Whenever a subroutine is called, a number of local registers are pushed down the stack (by shifting the start of the window). The arguments of the called subroutine are left in the remaining local registers. When a subroutine finishes it pops the previously pushed registers. Because the internal stack can contain only a finite number of registers, it may be necessary to store a part of the stack in memory. This is implemented with the special registers rO and rS which record which part of the local register stack is in memory and which part is still in local physical registers. The register stack provides for fast subroutine linkage.\nSpecial registers.\nThe 32 special physical architectural registers are as follows:\nLike programs running on almost all other CPUs,\nMMIX programs can be interrupted in several ways.\nExternal hardware, such as timers, are a common source of preemption interrupts.\nMany instructions cause an interrupt in certain exceptional cases; such as the memory protection page fault exceptions used to implement virtual memory, and floating point exception handling.\nMMIX has 2 kinds of interrupts: \"trips\" and \"traps\".\nThe main difference between \"trips\" and \"traps\" is that\ntraps send control to a \"trap handler\" program in the operating system (trapping), but\ntrips send control to a \"trip handler\" program in the user application (tripping).\nUsers can also force any interrupt handler to run with explicit software interrupt instructions TRIP and TRAP, similar to some kinds of trap in other computer systems.\nIn particular, a system call from a user program to the operating system uses a TRAP instruction.\nHardware implementations.\nAs of \u00a02015[ [update]], no known hardware implementations of the MMIX instruction set architecture exist. However, the fpgammix project implements MMIX in Verilog, making it possible to implement using a field-programmable gate array.\nSoftware tools.\nThe MMIX instruction set architecture is supported by a number of software tools for computer architecture research and software development.\nCompiler.\nThe GNU Compiler Collection includes an MMIX back-end for its C/C++ compilers, contributed by Hans-Peter Nilsson and part of the main GCC distribution since late 2001. As of \u00a02017[ [update]], the MMIX back-end to GCC continues to be actively developed and maintained by volunteers.\nThe above tools could theoretically be used to compile, build, and bootstrap an entire FreeBSD, Linux, or other similar operating system kernel onto MMIX hardware, were such hardware to exist.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20803", "revid": "1319301263", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20803", "title": "Maastricht Treaty", "text": "1992 founding treaty of the European Union\nThe Treaty on European Union, commonly known as the Maastricht Treaty, is the foundation treaty of the European Union (EU). Concluded in 1992 between the then-twelve member states of the European Communities, it announced \"a new stage in the process of European integration\" chiefly in provisions for a shared European citizenship, for the eventual introduction of a single currency, and (with less precision) for common foreign and security policies, and a number of changes to the European institutions and their decision-making procedures, not least a strengthening of the powers of the European Parliament and more majority voting on the Council of Ministers. Although these were seen by many to presage a \"federal Europe\", key areas remained inter-governmental with national governments collectively taking key decisions. This constitutional debate continued through the negotiation of subsequent treaties (see below), culminating in the 2007 Treaty of Lisbon. \nIn the wake of the Eurozone debt crisis unfolding from 2009, the most enduring reference to the Maastricht Treaty has been to the rules of compliance \u2013 the \"Maastricht criteria\" \u2013 for the currency union.\nAgainst the background of the end of the Cold War and the re-unification of Germany, and in anticipation of accelerated globalisation, the treaty negotiated tensions between member states seeking deeper integration and those wishing to retain greater national control. The resulting compromise faced what was to be the first in a series of EU treaty ratification crises.\nOverview.\nHaving \"resolved to continue the process of creating an ever closer union among the people of Europe\", the Treaty proposes \"further steps to be taken in order to advance European integration\" under seven titles.\nTitle I, Common Provisions, establishes the European Union (EU) on the foundation of the three, already partially merged, European Communities: the European Economic Community (EEC), the European Coal and Steel Community (ECSC) and the European Atomic Energy Community (Euratom). It confirms among its objectives are \"the introduction of a citizenship of the Union\" common to the nationals of the Member States; \"economic and monetary union, ultimately including a single currency\"; and \"a common foreign and security policy including the eventual framing of a common defence\".\nTitle II, Provisions Amending the Treaty Establishing the European Economic Community, reformulates the EEC as the central \"pillar\" of the Union. It amends the EEC's Treaty of Rome constitution, renaming it the European Community to reflect the Union's broader ambition. Amendments incorporate (as detailed in attached protocols) a staged progression toward monetary union including the price-stability-first criteria for adoption of the single currency and for the operations of the prospective European Central Bank (ECB).\nOther amendments create the office of European Ombudsman, expand the Structural Fund assistance to the poorer EU regions; and broaden Community competencies in education, culture, public health, consumer protection, trans-European networks, industry and the environment.\nIn these and other areas which do not fall within Community's \"exclusive competence\", in accordance with \"the principle of subsidiarity\" action is to be taken only if, \"by reason of the scale or effects\", the objectives cannot be more \"efficiently\" achieved by the Member States themselves.\nIn several of these areas, the Treaty seeks to enhance the \"democratic functioning\" of the institutions by conceding the directly elected European Parliament rights not only of consultation but also of co-decision on some categories of European legislation. It also grants the Parliament the power to confirm (and therefore to veto) the Council's nominations for the European Commission, the Community's executive.\nTitles III and IV amend the treaties establishing the ECSC and Euratom to complete their absorption into the structure of European Community.\nTitle V and VI extend existing intergovernmental consultations on foreign-policy, security and defence matters, and on \"cooperation in the fields of justice and home affairs\". In both cases, Member States are to \"inform and consult one another within the Council [of Ministers]\", but otherwise cooperate independently of Community institutions.\nTitle VII, Final Provisions, covers a number of anomalous issues. Provided that all Member States ratify, it rules that the Treaty should come into force on 1 January 1993.\nArticles within the Treaty were referred to by using the letters A to S.\nAnnexed to the Treaty is a Protocol, and an Agreement, on Social Policy. With a view to ensuring that the dynamic of the European single market respect certain minimum social and employment protections, these allow the Council of Ministers to approve relevant proposals from the European Commission on the basis of a qualified majority rather than unanimous consent.\nThe United Kingdom was not a party of the Agreement on Social Policy and secured an \"opt out\" from the protocol. It was to do the same with respect to the \"obligation\" to enter the final, single-currency, stage of monetary union (the UK would not have to give up the pound sterling).\nProcedural history.\nSignatories.\nThe signatory nations were represented by:\nIn consequence of the Dutch Presidency of the Council of the European Communities during the previous six months of negotiation, the Treaty was signed in the Netherlands, in the city of Maastricht. The twelve members of the European Communities signing the Treaty on 7 February 1992 were Belgium, Denmark, France, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Luxembourg, Portugal, Spain, the Netherlands and the United Kingdom.\nRatification.\nThe Treaty noted that it should be \"ratified by the High Contracting Parties in accordance with their respective constitutional requirement\". In the cases of Denmark, France and Ireland this required referendums.\nIn the first Danish referendum, on 2 June 1992, the treaty was rejected by a margin of 50.7% to 49.3%. Concessions secured by the end of year in Edinburgh including, critically, the same exemption secured by Britain from the single currency (Denmark would not have to give up the krone), allowed for a second referendum. On 18 May 1993, the Maastricht Treaty was endorsed by a vote of 56.7%.\nIn Ireland, the Eleventh Amendment of the Constitution, allowing the state to ratify the Treaty, was approved in a referendum held on 18 June 1992 with the support of 69.1% of votes cast.\nIn September 1992, a referendum in France narrowly supported the ratification of the treaty, with 50.8% in favour. This narrow vote for ratification in France, known at the time as the \", led Jacques Delors to comment that \"Europe began as an elitist project in which it was believed that all that was required was to convince the decision-makers. That phase of benign despotism is over.\"\nIn the United Kingdom parliament ratification did not command a clear majority. In protest against the social-policy opt out, Labour opposed, while \"anti-federalists\" split the governing Conservatives. Prime Minister John Major was able to face down his \"Maastricht Rebels\" only by tying ratification to the survival of the government in a vote of confidence. (Researchers and observers suggest that, in the United Kingdom, the Maastricht Treaty represented \"a critical turning point\" in terms of divisions within the Conservative Party over European integration and the ruling party's ultimate fragmentation in 2016 into Leave and Remain factions).\nIn Germany, the Maastricht Treaty passed the Bundestag on December 2, 1992, with a majority of 543 out of 562, and the Bundesrat with unanimity. The Bundestag was required to amend the Grundgesetz (German Basic Law) to \u201clegalize Germany\u2019s membership in the European Union (Article 23) as well as to install a European Monetary Union (Article 88).\u201d The ratification was delayed by challenges at the German Federal Constitutional Court, the complainants claiming the amendments transferring sovereign competencies to the European Union violated democratic principles (Article 20 and 38(1)) of the Grundgesetz that were unamendable (Article 79(3)); hence the Maastricht Treaty should be inadmissible. The court delivered its judgment on October 12, 1993 ruling the Maastricht Treaty compatible with the Grundgesetz, but provided that the European Union could not endow itself with more powers without the Bundestag\u2019s approval. The court also confirmed its Solange II decision accepting the supremacy of European Court of Justice decisions while retaining the power to review secondary community law as to guarantee basic rights protection in close cooperation with the European Court of Justice. Germany was the last member state to ratify the treaty and it entered into force on November 1, 1993.\nCitizenship of the European Union.\nFrom the establishment of the European Economic Community in 1957, integrationists argued the free movement of workers was the logical corollary of the free movement of capital, goods and services and integral to the establishment of a common (and later single) European market. In time, the tension between the transferred worker as \"a mobile unit of production\" contributing to the success of the single market, and the reality of the Community migrants as individuals, seeking to exercise \"a personal right\" to live and work in another state for their own, and their families', welfare, asserted itself. The Treaty built on the growing suggestion that there was a Community-wide basis for citizenship rights.\nThe Treaty rules that \"every person holding the nationality of a Member State shall be a citizen of the Union\". This common and parallel citizenship accords the Member State migrants not only the civil right to take up residence and employment, but also, and for the first time, political rights. In a new EU country of residence Member-State nationals have the right to vote, and to stand, in both local and European elections. Unresolved in the Treaty is the question of their access to social rights. Political debate continued as to who should have access to public services and welfare systems funded by taxation.\nEconomic and monetary union.\nFranco-German agreement.\nFrench President Fran\u00e7ois Mitterrand was forced to abandon the centrepiece of his Socialist programme in 1983, a job creating reflation, due to speculation against the franc. Since then, Mitterrand had been committed to drawing Germany into a currency partnership. After the fall of the Berlin Wall in late 1989, Germany sought re-unification. France, the UK, and the rest of Europe expressed their concerns over re-unification. When German Chancellor Helmut Kohl asked for re-unification in 1990, Mitterrand would only accept in the event Germany would abandon the Deutsche Mark and adopt a common currency. Without consulting Karl Otto P\u00f6hl, President of the Bundesbank, Kohl accepted the deal. Despite this win for France, it was widely perceived that the cost of German cooperation was German dictation of the rules for a single currency. The Bundesbank had signalled that Germany's economic success would come before being \"a good european\".\nThe ERM crises.\nIn the UK, the Maastricht rebellion drew on the experience of Black Wednesday. On 16 September 1992 the British government had been forced to withdraw the pound sterling from the European Exchange Rate Mechanism (ERM). This was the centrepiece of the European Monetary System (EMS), agreed in 1978 as a means of reducing the \"barrier\" that exchange-rate volatility presented for intra-Community commerce (and for the management of payments under the Common Agricultural Policy). \nBritain had signed up to the ERM in 1990 as a token of the government's commitment to control inflation (then running at three times the rate of Germany). From the beginning of 1990, high German interest rates, set by the Bundesbank to counteract inflationary impact of the expenditure on German reunification, caused significant stress across the whole of the ERM. By the time of their own ratifications debates, France and Denmark also found themselves under pressure in foreign exchange markets, their currencies trading close to the bottom of their ERM bands. In Britain, the government of John Major failed in a costly attempt to keep the pound above its mandated exchange rate limit. While a political humiliation, sterling's exit from the ERM was followed in the UK by economic recovery and a significant fall in employment. \nThe Maastricht criteria.\nHaving \"resolved to achieve the strengthening and the convergence and to establish an economic and monetary union including... a single and stable currency\", the Treaty ruled that \"Member States shall regard their economic policies as a matter of common concern\", and that the obligations assumed should be a matter for \"mutual surveillance\". Commonly known as the Maastricht criteria, these obligations represented the performance thresholds for member states to progress toward the third stage of European Economic and Monetary Union (EMU), the adoption the common currency (designated at the 1995 Madrid European Council as the Euro).\nThe four \"convergence criteria\", as detailed in attached protocols, impose control over inflation, public debt and the public deficit, exchange rate stability and domestic interest rates. With limited leeway granted in exceptional circumstances, the obligations are to maintain:\n1. inflation at a rate no more than 1.5 percentage points higher than the average of the three best performing (lowest inflation) Member States;\n2. a \"budgetary position\" that avoids \"excessive\" government deficits defined in ratios to gross domestic product (GDP) of greater than 3% for annual deficits and 60% for gross government debt;\n3. the exchange rate of the national currency within \"the normal fluctuation margins by the exchange-rate mechanism of the European Monetary System without severe tensions for at least the last two years\"; and\n4. nominal long-term interest rates no more than 2 percentage points higher than in the three Member States with the lowest inflation.\nThe European Central Bank mandate.\nThese criteria in turn dictated the mandate of the European System of Central Banks comprising the national central banks, but to include the prospective currency-issuing European Central Bank. As envisaged by the Treaty, the ECB replaced its shadow European Monetary Institute on 1 June 1998, and began exercising its full powers with the introduction of the euro on 1 January 1999.\nThe Treaty dedicates the EU central banking system to price stability, and gives it \"a degree of independence from elected officials\" greater even \"than that of its putative model, the German Bundesbank\". Whereas the Bundesbank, under article 12 of its constitution, is \"bound to support the general economic policy of the [German] Federal Government\", the obligation of the ECB to \"support the general economic policies in the Community\" is to be \"without prejudice\" to price stability, the Bank's \"primary objective\". It is further conditioned by the express understanding that \"neither the ECB, nor a national central bank, nor any member of their decision-making bodies, shall seek or take instructions from Community institutions or bodies from any Government of a Member State or from any other body.\"\nSeeming to further preclude any possibility of the single-currency banking system being used to regulate European financial markets in support of potentially inflationary policies, the Treaty expressly prohibits the ECB or any Member State central extending \"overdraft facilities or any other type of credit facility\" to \"Community institutions or bodies, central governments, regional, local or other public authorities, other bodies governed by public law, or public undertakings of Member States\", or the purchase from them debt instruments.\nThe Maastricht economic-policy model.\nCritics felt that, in limiting the role of the future ECB and euro in national, or Union-coordinated, reflationary policies, Maastricht affirmed what by the late 1980s was the general economic-policy orthodoxy within the Community. This has been described as a \"reversed Keynesianism\": macro-economic policy not to secure a full-employment level of demand, but, through the restrictive control of monetary growth and public expenditure, to maintain price and financial market stability; micro economic policy, not to engineer income and price controls in support of fiscal expansion, but to encourage job creation by reducing barriers to lower labour costs. The commitment to monetary union and the convergence criteria denied member states the resort to currency deflation to ease balance-of-payments constraints on domestic spending, and left labour market \"flexibility\" as the main mean of coping with asymmetric economic shocks.\nThese constraints were to become the focus of political scrutiny and public protest in the new-century European debt crisis. Beginning in 2009 with Greece, the governments of several Euro-zone countries (Portugal, Ireland, Spain and Cyprus) declared themselves unable to repay or refinance their government debt or to bail out over-indebted banks without assistance from third parties. The \"austerity\" they had subsequently to impose as a condition of assistance from Germany and other of their trade-surplus EU partners, raised calls for new arrangements to better manage payment imbalances between member states, and ease the burden of adjustment upon wage-, and benefit-, dependent households. Greek finance minister Yanis Varoufakis credited the Maastricht criteria with framing of a union of deflation and unemployment.\nTaking issue in defence of the Maastricht criteria, German finance minister Wolfgang Sch\u00e4uble argued that \"the old way to stimulate growth will not work.\" There is a real \"moral hazard\" in allowing Member States to accumulate higher debts within the Eurozone \u2013 higher debts which, ultimately, have no relationship to higher growth. The Maastricht criteria, he insisted, were correct in placing the onus for growth on \"competitiveness, structural reforms, investment, and sustainable financing\".\nForeign and security policy, justice and home affairs.\nSet alongside the European Community, the cooperation proposed in the Maastricht Treaty on foreign and security policy, and on justice and home affairs, were characterised in official commentary as the second and third \"pillars\" of the Union. The Treaty, however, proposed no significant departures in these areas. Coordination in foreign and security policy had taken place since the beginning of the 1970s under the name of European Political Cooperation (EPC), which had been first written into the treaties by the 1987 Single European Act. Cooperation on law enforcement, criminal justice, asylum, and immigration and other judicial matters was being pursued under the 1990 Schengen Agreement and Convention.\nThe new provisions called on governments to \"inform and consult one another within the Council of Ministers\", but otherwise continued cooperation on the basis of intergovernmental liaison outside of the EC and its institutions. The West European Union, an until recently moribund club within NATO, is described as \"an integral part of the development of the Union\", and asked it to help \"elaborate and implement decisions and actions of the Union which have defence implications. Yet it is clear that nothing is to be construed as systematically constraining the foreign or defence policies of the individual Member States. \"Failing a Council decision\", which would require unanimity, a Member State is free to take such action as it considers \"necessary\". This, in part, was a concession to United Kingdom which continued to insist on the sufficiency of the North Atlantic alliance (supported by the non-aligned Member States, Ireland and Austria, at the 1997 Amsterdam summit, the UK prevented a merger of the WEU and the EU),\nSubsidiarity and co-decision.\nAs an implicit presumption subsidiarity may have been considered a check upon the supranational development of the EEC. But in making it an explicit constitutional principle the Maastricht Treaty opened up \"debates about whether this strengthened the states, regions or local government vis-\u00e0-vis the EU or vice versa\". Subsidiarity can be read as a federalising principle. For every endeavour it poses the question of whether national or Community policy is the most effective means, and elevates simple utility above any deference to national or local feeling, albeit with a presumption that action will be taken at European level only where national efforts cannot achieve the objective in question.\nSceptics note that the Treaty offers no legally actionable definition of subsidiarity. Rather there are \"a series of tentative indications for Community action in a document full of imprecise concepts: 'sufficiently', 'better achieved', 'what is necessary', 'to achieve the objectives', subjective notions which leave the way wide open for interpretation or practical developments.\" Jacques Santer, Prime Minister of Luxembourg, conceded that consensus around the principle of subsidiarity had been possible only because \"it conceals different interpretations\".\nThe 1992 Treaty may have introduced a more consequential constitutional principle in its promotion \"co-decision\". It introduced procedures that made the European Parliament \"co-legislator with the Council of Ministers\" and have since been developed and extended to nearly all areas where the Council decides on legislation by qualified majority voting. The \"foundations of co-decision in the Maastricht Treaty\" have led to ways to reconcile differences between the Parliament and the Council, formally through a \"conciliation procedure\" and informally through \"trialogues\" involving negotiations between the European Parliament, Council and Commission, which have become standard in most legislative procedures.\nAmending Treaties.\nIn establishing the European Union the Maastricht Treaty amended the treaties that had established the European Communities in the 1950s. Following the EU accessions of Austria, Finland, and Sweden, it was in turn amended by the treaties of Amsterdam (1997), and Nice (2001). Following the accession of a further twelve states, ten from the former Eastern Bloc \u2013 Bulgaria, the Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Romania, Slovakia and Slovenia \u2013 plus Cyprus and Malta, and an aborted Treaty on a European Constitution, the Treaty on European Union and the Treaty Establishing the European Community (TEC) were more comprehensively revisited. The 2007 Treaty of Lisbon amends both again and renames the TEC as the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union (TFEU).\nTimeline.\nSince the end of World War II, most sovereign European countries have entered into treaties and thereby co-operated and harmonised policies (or \"pooled sovereignty\") in an increasing number of areas, in the European integration project or the \"construction of Europe\" (). The following timeline outlines the legal inception of the European Union (EU)\u2014the principal framework for this unification. The EU inherited many of its present organizations, institutions, and responsibilities from the European Communities (EC), which were founded in the 1950s in the spirit of the Schuman Declaration.\n&lt;br&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20804", "revid": "50512162", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20804", "title": "Magdeburg", "text": "Capital of Saxony-Anhalt, Germany\nMagdeburg ( , , ; ) is the capital of the German state of Saxony-Anhalt. The city is on the Elbe river.\nOtto I, the Holy Roman Emperor and the founder of the Archbishopric of Magdeburg, was buried in the city's cathedral after his death. Magdeburg's version of German town law, known as Magdeburg rights, spread throughout Central and Eastern Europe. In the Late Middle Ages, Magdeburg was one of the largest and most prosperous German cities and a notable member of the Hanseatic League. One of the most notable people from the city was Otto von Guericke, famous for his experiments with the Magdeburg hemispheres.\nMagdeburg has experienced three major devastations in its history. In 1207 the first catastrophe struck the city, with a fire burning down large parts of the city, including the Ottonian cathedral. The Catholic League sacked Magdeburg in 1631, resulting in the death of 25,000 non-combatants, the largest loss of the Thirty Years' War. During World War II the Allies bombed the city in 1945 and destroyed much of the city centre. Today, around 46% of the city consists of buildings from before 1950.\nAfter World War II, the city belonged to the German Democratic Republic from 1949 to 1990. Since then, many new construction projects have been implemented and old buildings have been restored. Magdeburg celebrated its 1,200th anniversary in 2005.\nMagdeburg is on Autobahn 2 and Autobahn 14, connecting Eastern and Western Europe as well as northern and southern Germany. Significant industries include machines, healthcare, mechanical engineering, environmental technology, circular economy, logistics, culture, wood and information and communications technology.\nThere are numerous cultural institutions in the city, including the Theater Magdeburg and the Museum of Cultural History. The city is also the location of two universities, the Otto von Guericke University Magdeburg and the Magdeburg-Stendal University of Applied Sciences.\nHistory.\nEarly years.\nFounded by Charlemagne in 805 as Magadoburg (probably from Old High German \"magado\" for \"big\", \"mighty\" and \"burg\" for \"fortress\"), the town was fortified in 919 by King Henry the Fowler against the Magyars and Slavs. In 929 King Otto I granted the city to his English-born wife Edith as dower. Queen Edith loved the town and often resided there; at her death she was buried in the crypt of the Benedictine abbey of Saint Maurice, later rebuilt as the cathedral. In 937, Magdeburg was the seat of a royal assembly. Otto I repeatedly visited Magdeburg, establishing a convent here about 937 and was later buried in the cathedral. He granted the abbey the right to income from tithes and to corv\u00e9e labour from the surrounding countryside.\nThe Archbishopric of Magdeburg was founded in 968 at the synod of Ravenna; Adalbert of Magdeburg was consecrated as its first archbishop. The archbishopric under Adalbert included the bishoprics of Havelberg, Brandenburg, Merseburg, Meissen and Naumburg-Zeitz. The archbishops played a prominent role in the German colonisation of the Slavic lands east of the Elbe river.\nIn 1035 Magdeburg received a patent giving the city the right to hold trade exhibitions and conventions. This formed the basis of German town law to become known as the Magdeburg rights. These laws were adopted and modified throughout Central and Eastern Europe. Visitors from many countries began to trade with Magdeburg. The town was burnt down in 1188.\nIn the 13th century, Magdeburg became a member of the Hanseatic League. With more than 20,000 inhabitants Magdeburg was one of the largest cities in the Holy Roman Empire. The town had active maritime commerce on the west (towards Flanders), with the countries of the North Sea, and maintained traffic and communication with the interior (for example Braunschweig).\nEarly modern period.\nThe citizens constantly struggled against the archbishop, becoming nearly independent from him by the end of the 15th century. Around Easter 1497, the then twelve-year-old Martin Luther attended school in Magdeburg, where he was exposed to the teachings of the Brethren of the Common Life. In 1524, he was called to Magdeburg, where he preached and caused the city's defection from Roman Catholicism. The Protestant Reformation had quickly found adherents in the city, where Luther had been a schoolboy. Emperor Charles V repeatedly outlawed the unruly town, which had joined the League of Torgau and the Schmalkaldic League.\nAs it had not accepted the Augsburg Interim decree (1548), the city, by the emperor's commands, was besieged (1550\u20131551) by Maurice, Elector of Saxony, but it retained its independence. The rule of the archbishop was replaced by that of administrators belonging to Protestant dynasties. In the following years, Magdeburg gained a reputation as a stronghold of Protestantism and became the first major city to publish the writings of Martin Luther. In Magdeburg, Matthias Flacius and his companions wrote their anti-Catholic pamphlets and the \"Magdeburg Centuries\", in which they argued that the Roman Catholic Church had become the kingdom of the Antichrist.\nIn 1629 the city withstood its first siege during the Thirty Years' War, by Albrecht von Wallenstein, a Protestant convert to Catholicism. However, in 1631, imperial troops under Johann Tserclaes, Count of Tilly, stormed the city and massacred the inhabitants, killing about 20,000 and burning the city.\nAfter the war, a population of only 4,000 remained. Under the Peace of Westphalia (1648), Magdeburg was to be assigned to Brandenburg-Prussia after the death of the administrator August of Saxe-Weissenfels, as the semi-autonomous Duchy of Magdeburg. This occurred in 1680.\nThe city made an astonishingly quick recovery, due especially to the energy and dedication of its mayor Otto von Guericke, who was also a noted scientist. Just six years after the end of the terribly destructive war, Magdeburg was the scene of the famous scientific experiment known as The \"Magdeburg hemispheres\" by which the existence of vacuum \u2013 hitherto hotly debated \u2013 was empirically proven, with enormous implications for the later developments of physics.\nIn the 1680s, communes of French Huguenots and Walloons were founded in the city, which, as of 1700, constituted of 1,282 and 1,731 people, respectively.\n19th century.\nIn the course of the Napoleonic Wars, the fortress surrendered to French troops in 1806. The city was annexed to the French-controlled Kingdom of Westphalia in the 1807 Treaty of Tilsit. King J\u00e9r\u00f4me appointed Count Heinrich von Blumenthal as mayor. In 1815, after the Napoleonic Wars, Magdeburg was made the capital of the new Prussian Province of Saxony.\n20th century.\nIn 1912, the old fortress was dismantled, and in 1908, the municipality Rothensee became part of Magdeburg.\nDuring World War I, Polish leader J\u00f3zef Pi\u0142sudski and his close associate Kazimierz Sosnkowski were imprisoned in the city by Germany in 1917\u20131918.\nDuring the Weimar Republic the was published as a local newspaper in Magdeburg.\nDuring World War II, Magdeburg was the location of 30 forced labour detachments of the Stalag XI-A prisoner-of-war camp for some 4,500 Allied POWs, a camp for Sinti and Romani people (see also \"Romani Holocaust\"), and three subcamps of the Buchenwald concentration camp, in which mostly Jewish men and boys and Soviet, Polish and Jewish women were imprisoned. In April 1945, dozens of prisoners were massacred by the \"Volkssturm\" and Hitler Youth, and surviving prisoners were sent on death marches towards the Ravensbr\u00fcck and Sachsenhausen concentration camps.\nMagdeburg was heavily bombed by British and American air forces during the Second World War. The RAF bombing raid on the night of 16 January 1945 destroyed much of the city centre. The death toll is estimated at 2,000\u20132,500. Near the end of World War II, the city of about 340,000 became capital of the Province of Magdeburg. Brabag's Magdeburg/Rothensee plant that produced synthetic oil from lignite coal was a target of the Oil Campaign of World War II. The suburbs north of the city, called the Nordfront, were destroyed as well as some of the city's main streets with its Baroque buildings.\nIt was occupied by 9th US Army troops on 18 April 1945 and was left to the Red Army on 1 July 1945. Post-war the area was part of the Soviet Zone of Occupation and many of the remaining pre-World War II city buildings were destroyed, with only a few buildings near the cathedral and in the southern part of the old city being restored to their pre-war state. Before the reunification of Germany, many surviving \"Gr\u00fcnderzeit\" buildings were left uninhabited and, after years of degradation, waiting for demolition. \nFrom 1949 until German reunification on 3 October 1990, Magdeburg belonged to the German Democratic Republic.\nSince German reunification.\nIn 1990 Magdeburg became the capital of the new state of Saxony-Anhalt within reunified Germany. Huge parts of the city and its centre were also rebuilt in a modern style. Its economy is one of the fastest-growing in the former East German states.\nIn 2005 Magdeburg celebrated its 1200th anniversary.\nThe city was hit by the 2013 European floods. Authorities declared a state of emergency and said they expected the Elbe river to rise higher than in 2002. In Magdeburg, with water levels of above normal, about 23,000 residents had to leave their homes on 9 June.\nOn 20 December 2024, at least five people were killed and more than 200 injured at the Magdeburg Christmas market when a car was driven into the crowd. The suspect, who was arrested at the scene, was identified in German media as Taleb al-Abdulmohsen, a Saudi psychiatrist living in Germany since 2006.\nIntel will build its largest plant in Europe in the south of the city by 2027.\nGeography.\nMagdeburg is one of the major towns along the Elbe Cycle Route (Elberadweg). Its area is .\nDistricts.\nThe city of Magdeburg is divided into 40 \"Stadtteile\" (districts). Three of these, the former municipalities Beyendorf-Sohlen, Pechau and Randau-Calenberge, have a special status as \"Ortschaften\". The \"Stadtteile\" of Magdeburg are:\nClimate.\nMagdeburg has an oceanic climate (K\u00f6ppen: \"Cfb\"; Trewartha: \"Dobk\") according to K\u00f6ppen climate classification. The weather is damp and chilly in winters, with 71.7 days per year in which the minimum temperature is below the freezing point, and 15.6 days with maximum temperature below the mark. Magdeburg is warm and relatively wet in summer and can sometimes become hot. Annually, 48.9 days have maximum temperature above , of which 12 days have daily maximum above .\nOn average, there are 20.9 days with thunder and 0.8 days with hail, annually. Thunder is more common in spring and summer than other times of the year, while hail exclusively occurs in spring and summer months.\nThe Magdeburg weather station has recorded the following extreme values:\nPopulation.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAs of 2021, Magdeburg has a population of about 237,000. Its population grew rapidly after the end of 19th century due to industrialization. In 1885, the population was 100,000, and doubled after only five years. Magdeburg reached its greatest population in 1940, at approximately 346,000. At that time the city was poised to become a giant metropolis, but the events of WWII changed its future. After the war, in the East Germany era, Magdeburg recovered its industrial base to a degree, particularly the Machine industry, and became one of the important cities of East Germany. In 1991, when Magdeburg became the capital of the state of Saxony-Anhalt, its population was about 275,000. After the German Reunification, the population of Magdeburg declined due to some loss of industries, when many residents moved to former West Germany. Since 2011, the population has stabilized at around 240,000.\nPolitics.\nMayor and city council.\nThe mayor of Magdeburg is independent politician Simone Borris since 2022. The most recent mayoral election was held on 24 April 2022, with a runoff held on 8 May, and the results were as follows:\nThe most recent city council election was held on 9 June 2024, and the results were as follows:\nEducation.\nThe Otto-von-Guericke University Magdeburg (German: Otto-von-Guericke-Universit\u00e4t Magdeburg) was founded in 1993 and is one of the newest universities in Germany. The university in Magdeburg has about 13,000 students in nine faculties. There are 11,700 papers published in international journals from this institute.\nThe Magdeburg-Stendal University of Applied Sciences was founded in 1991. There are 30 direct study programs in five departments in Magdeburg and two departments in Stendal. The university has more than 130 professors and approximately 4,500 students at Magdeburg and 1,900 at Stendal.\nCulture and architecture.\nEntertainment.\nMagdeburg has a municipal theatre, Theater Magdeburg.\nMagdeburg is well known for the Magdeburg Christmas market, which is an attraction for 1.5\u00a0million visitors every year. Other events are the \"Stadtfest\", \"Christopher Street Day\", \"Elbe in Flames\", and the \"Europafest Magdeburg\". The autumn fair (formerly men's fair) of Magdeburg goes back to Germany's oldest folk festival. The tradition dates back to September 1010, when the holy feast of the Theban Legion was celebrated in Magdeburg (then called Magathaburg).\nArchitecture.\nCathedral.\nOne of Magdeburg's most impressive buildings is the Lutheran Cathedral of Saints Catherine and Maurice with a height of , making it the tallest church building of eastern Germany. It is notable for its beautiful and unique sculptures, especially the \"Twelve Virgins\" at the Northern Gate, the depictions of Otto I the Great and his wife Editha as well as the statues of St Maurice and St Catherine. \nThe predecessor of the cathedral was a church built in 937 within an abbey, called St. Maurice. Emperor Otto I the Great was buried here beside his wife in 973. St. Maurice burnt to ashes in 1207. The exact location of that church remained unknown for a long time. The foundations were rediscovered in May 2003, revealing a building long and wide.\nThe construction of the new church lasted 300 years. The cathedral of Saints Catherine and Maurice was the first Gothic church building in Germany. The building of the steeples was completed as late as 1520.\nWhile the cathedral was virtually the only building to survive the massacres of the Thirty Years' War, it suffered damage in World War II. It was soon rebuilt and completed in 1955.\nThe square in front of the cathedral (also called the \"Neuer Markt\", or \"new marketplace\") was occupied by an imperial palace (\"Kaiserpfalz\"), which was destroyed in the fire of 1207. The stones from the ruin were used for the building of the cathedral. The presumed remains of the palace were excavated in the 1960s.\nSports.\nMagdeburg has a proud history of sports teams. 1. FC Magdeburg plays in the 2. Bundesliga, the second division of German football. They are the only East German football club to have won the UEFA Cup Winners' Cup. The now-defunct clubs SV Victoria 96 Magdeburg and Cricket Viktoria Magdeburg were among the first football clubs in Germany.\nThere is also the very successful handball team, SC Magdeburg. They won multiple times the Handball-Bundesliga (HBL), DHB-Pokal, DHB-Supercup, EHF European League, EHF Champions League, EHF Men's Champions Trophy and the IHF Men's Super Globe.\nThe discus was re-discovered in Magdeburg in the 1870s by Christian Georg Kohlrausch, a gymnastics teacher.\nTwin towns \u2013 sister cities.\nMagdeburg is twinned with:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20805", "revid": "48328960", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20805", "title": "Motet", "text": "Vocal musical composition in Western classical music\nIn Western classical music, a motet is mainly a vocal musical composition, of highly diverse form and style, from high medieval music to the present. The motet was one of the preeminent polyphonic forms of Renaissance music. According to the English musicologist Margaret Bent, \"a piece of music in several parts with words\" is as precise a definition of the motet as will serve from the 13th to the late 16th century and beyond. The late 13th-century theorist Johannes de Grocheo believed that the motet was \"not to be celebrated in the presence of common people, because they do not notice its subtlety, nor are they delighted in hearing it, but in the presence of the educated and of those who are seeking out subtleties in the arts\".\nEtymology.\nIn the early 20th century, it was generally believed \"motet\" came from the Latin \"movere\" (to move), though a derivation from the French (\"word\", or \"phrase\") had also been suggested. The Medieval Latin for \"motet\" is \"motectum\", and the Italian was also used. If the word is from Latin, the name describes the movement of the different voices against one another. Today, however, the French etymology is favoured by reference books, as the word \"motet\" in 13th-century French had the sense of \"little word\". The troped \"clausulas\" that were the forerunner of the motet were originally called \"motelli\" (from the French \"mot\", \"word\"), soon replaced by the term .\nMedieval examples.\nThe earliest motets arose in the 13th century from the \"organum\" tradition exemplified in the Notre-Dame school of L\u00e9onin and P\u00e9rotin. The motet probably arose from clausula sections in a longer sequence of . Clausulae represent brief sections of longer polyphonic settings of chant with a note-against-note texture. In some cases, these sections were composed independently and \"substituted\" for existing setting. These clausulae could then be \"troped,\" or given new text in the upper part(s), creating motets. From these first motets arose a medieval tradition of secular motets. These were two- to four-part compositions in which different texts, sometimes in different vernacular languages, were sung simultaneously over a (usually Latin-texted) \"cantus firmus\" usually adapted from a melismatic passage of Gregorian chant on a single word or phrase. It is also increasingly argued that the term \"motet\" could in fact include certain brief single-voice songs. \nThe texts of upper voices include subjects as diverse as courtly love odes, pastoral encounters with shepherdesses, political attacks, and many Christian devotions, especially to the Virgin Mary. In many cases, the texts of the upper voices are related to the themes of the chant passage they elaborate on, even in cases where the upper voices are secular in content. Most medieval motets are anonymous compositions and significantly re-use music and text. They are transmitted in a number of contexts, and were most popular in northern France. The largest surviving collection is in the Montpellier Codex.\nIncreasingly in the 14th and 15th centuries, motets made use of repetitive patterns often termed panisorhythmic; that is, they employed repeated rhythmic patterns in all voices\u2014not only the \"cantus firmus\"\u2014which did not necessarily coincide with repeating melodic patterns. Philippe de Vitry was one of the earliest composers to use this technique, and his work evidently had an influence on that of Guillaume de Machaut, one of the most famous named composers of late medieval motets.\nMedieval composers.\nOther medieval motet composers include:\nRenaissance examples.\nThe compositional character of the motet changed entirely during the transition from medieval to Renaissance music, as most composers abandoned the use of a repeated figure as a \"cantus firmus\". Guillaume Dufay was a transitional figure in this regard, writing one of the last important motets in the medieval, isorhythmic style, \"Nuper rosarum flores\", in 1436. During the second half of the fifteenth century Motets stretched the \"cantus firmus\" to greater lengths compared to the surrounding multi-voice counterpoint, adopting a technique of contemporary 'tenor masses'. This obscured the \"cantus firmus\" rhythm more than in medieval isorhythmic motets. Cascading, passing chords created by the interplay of voices and the absence of an obvious beat distinguish medieval and renaissance motet styles.\nMotet frequently used the texts of antiphons and the Renaissance period marked the flowering of the form. The Renaissance motet is polyphonic, sometimes with an imitative counterpoint, for a chorus singing a Latin and usually sacred text. It is not connected to a specific liturgy, making it suitable for any service.\nMotets were sacred madrigals and the language of the text was decisive: Latin for a motet and the vernacular for a madrigal. The relationship between the forms is clearest in composers of sacred music, such as Giovanni Pierluigi da Palestrina, whose \"motets\" setting texts from the \"Canticum Canticorum\" are among the most lush and madrigal-like, while his madrigals using Petrarch's poems could be performed in a church. Religious compositions in vernacular languages were often called \"madrigali spirituali\", \"spiritual madrigals\". These Renaissance motets developed in episodic format with separate phrases of the text given independent melodic treatment and contrapuntal development.\nSecular motets, known as \"ceremonial motets\", typically set a Latin text to praise a monarch, music or commemorate a triumph. The theme of courtly love, often found in the medieval secular motet, was banished from the Renaissance motet. Ceremonial motets are characterised by clear articulation of formal structure and by clear diction, because the texts would be novel for the audience. Adrian Willaert, Ludwig Senfl, and Cipriano de Rore are prominent composers of ceremonial motets from the first half of the 16th century.\nRenaissance composers.\nThe motet was one of the preeminent forms of Renaissance music. Important composers of Renaissance motets include:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nIn the latter part of the 16th century, Giovanni Gabrieli and other composers developed a new style, the polychoral motet, in which two or more choirs of singers (or instruments) alternated. This style of motet was sometimes called the \"Venetian motet\" to distinguish it from the \"Netherlands\" or \"Flemish\" motet written elsewhere. \"If Ye Love Me\" by Thomas Tallis serves the demand of the Church of England for English texts, and a focus on understanding the words, beginning in homophony.\nBaroque examples.\nIn Baroque music, especially in France where the motet was very important, there were two distinct, and very different types of motet: \"petits motets\", sacred choral or chamber compositions whose only accompaniment was a basso continuo; and \"grands motets\", which included massed choirs and instruments up to and including a full orchestra. Jean-Baptiste Lully, Michel Richard de Lalande, Marc-Antoine Charpentier were important composers of this sort of motet. Their motets often included parts for soloists as well as choirs; they were longer, including multiple movements in which different soloist, choral, or instrumental forces were employed. Lully's motets also continued the Renaissance tradition of semi-secular Latin motets in works such as \"Plaude Laetare Gallia\", written to celebrate the baptism of King Louis XIV's son; its text by Pierre Perrin begins:\n&lt;poem&gt;\"Plaude laetare Gallia\"\n\"Rore caelesti rigantur lilia,\"\n\"Sacro Delphinus fonte lavatur\"\n\"Et christianus Christo dicatur.\"&lt;/poem&gt;\nIn France, Pierre Robert (24 grands motets), Henry Dumont (grands &amp; petits motets), Marc-Antoine Charpentier (206 different types of motets), Michel-Richard de La Lande (70 grands motets), Henry Desmarest (20 grands motets), Fran\u00e7ois Couperin (motets lost), Nicolas Bernier, Andr\u00e9 Campra, Charles-Hubert Gervais (42 grands motets), Louis-Nicolas Cl\u00e9rambault, Fran\u00e7ois Giroust (70 grands motets) were also important composers. In Germany, too, pieces called motets were written in the new musical languages of the Baroque. Heinrich Sch\u00fctz wrote many motets in series of publications, for example three books of Symphoniae sacrae, some in Latin and some in German. Hans Leo Hassler composed motets such as \"Dixit Maria\", on which he also based a mass composition.\nJ. S. Bach's compositions.\nSix motets attributed to Johann Sebastian Bach and catalogued BWV 225\u2013230 are relatively long pieces combining German hymns with biblical texts, several of them composed for funerals. They are mostly written in \"a cappella\" style, \"basso continuo\", with instruments playing colla parte. The first five, for double chorus, are almost certainly composed by Bach and are written in \"a cappella\" style, though strings and oboes appear to have accompanied colla parte. \"Lobet dem Herrn\" is for SATB with \"basso continuo\".\nThe funeral cantata \"O Jesu Christ, meins Lebens Licht\", BWV 118 (1736\u201337?) is regarded as a motet, though it has independent instrumental parts. The motet \"Sei Lob und Preis mit Ehren\", BWV 231 is an arrangement of a movement from Bach's Cantata 28, and the authenticity of the arrangement is not certain. For a few more motets, such as \"Ich lasse dich nicht\", BWV Anh 159, Bach's authorship is debated.\nLater 18th century - present.\nLater 18th-century composers wrote few motets. Johann Christoph Friedrich Bach composed an extended chorale motet \"Wachet auf, ruft uns die Stimme\", combining Baroque techniques with the galant style. Mozart's Ave verum corpus (K. 618) is this genre. Rameau, Mondonville and Giroust also wrote grands motets.\nIn the 19th century, some German composers continued to write motets. Felix Mendelssohn composed \"Jauchzet dem Herrn, alle Welt\", \"Denn er hat seinen Engeln befohlen\" and \"Mitten wir im Leben sind\". Johannes Brahms composed three motets on biblical verses, \"Fest- und Gedenkspr\u00fcche\". Josef Rheinberger composed \"Abendlied\". Anton Bruckner composed about 40 motets, mainly in Latin, including \"Locus iste\". French composers of motets include Camille Saint-Sa\u00ebns and C\u00e9sar Franck. In English similar compositions are called anthems. Some later English composers, such as Charles Villiers Stanford, wrote motets in Latin. Most of these compositions are a cappella and some, such as Edward Elgar's three motets Op. 2, are accompanied by organ.\nIn the 20th century, composers of motets have often consciously imitated earlier styles. In 1920, Ralph Vaughan Williams composed \"O clap your hands\", a setting of verses from Psalm 47 for a four-part choir, organ, brass, and percussion, called a motet. Carl Nielsen set in \"Tre Motetter\" three verses from different psalms as motets, first performed in 1930. Francis Poulenc set several Latin texts as motets, first \"Quatre motets pour un temps de p\u00e9nitence\" (1938). Maurice Durufl\u00e9 composed \"Quatre Motets sur des th\u00e8mes gr\u00e9goriens\" in 1960, and \"Notre P\u00e8re\" in 1977. Other examples include works by Richard Strauss, Charles Villiers Stanford, Edmund Rubbra, Lennox Berkeley, Morten Lauridsen, Edward Elgar, Hugo Distler, F. Melius Christiansen, Ernst Krenek, Michael Finnissy, Karl Jenkins and Igor Stravinsky.\nArvo P\u00e4rt has composed motets, including \"Da pacem Domine\" in 2006, as have Dave Soldier (Motet: Harmonies of the World, with rules from Johannes Kepler), Sven-David Sandstr\u00f6m, Enjott Schneider, Ludger St\u00fchlmeyer and Pierre Pincemaille.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20806", "revid": "7098284", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20806", "title": "Madrigal (disambiguation)", "text": "Madrigal is a European musical form of the 16th and 17th centuries.\nMadrigal may also refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nPeople.\nMadrigal is also used as a Spanish surname that refers to:\nOther uses.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "20807", "revid": "69412", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20807", "title": "Merlin", "text": "Legendary Welsh wizard\nMerlin (, , ) is a mythical figure prominently featured in the legend of King Arthur and best known as a magician, along with several other main roles. The familiar depiction of Merlin, based on an amalgamation of historical and legendary figures, was introduced by the 12th-century Catholic cleric Geoffrey of Monmouth and then built on by the French poet Robert de Boron and prose successors in the 13th century. Geoffrey\u2019s account presented Merlin as both a prophet and royal advisor. \nGeoffrey seems to have combined earlier Welsh tales of Myrddin and Ambrosius, two legendary Briton prophets with no connection to Arthur, to form the composite figure that he called Merlinus Ambrosius. His rendering of the character became immediately popular, especially in Wales. Later chronicle and romance writers in France and elsewhere expanded the account to produce a more full, multifaceted character, creating one of the most important figures in the imagination and literature of the Middle Ages.\nMerlin's traditional biography casts him as an often-mad cambion, born of a mortal woman and an incubus, from whom he inherits his supernatural powers and abilities. His most notable abilities commonly include prophecy and shapeshifting. Merlin matures to an ascendant sagehood and engineers the birth of Arthur through magic and intrigue. Later stories have Merlin as an advisor and mentor to the young king until he disappears from the tale, leaving behind a series of prophecies foretelling events to come. A popular version from the French prose cycles tells of Merlin being bewitched and forever sealed up or killed by his student, the Lady of the Lake, after having fallen in love with her. Other texts variously describe his retirement, at times supernatural, or death.\nName.\nThe name Merlin is derived from the Welsh name of the legendary bard that Geoffrey of Monmouth Latinised to in his works. Medievalist Gaston Paris suggests that Geoffrey chose the form rather than the expected \"*Merdinus\" to avoid a resemblance to the Anglo-Norman word (from Latin ) for feces. 'Merlin' may also be an adjective, in which case he should be called \"The Merlin\", from the French meaning blackbird. According to Martin Aurell, the Latin form \"Merlinus\" is a euphony of the Welsh form \"Myrddin\" to bring him closer to the blackbird (Latin \"merula\") into which he could metamorphose through his shamanic powers, as was notably the case for Merlin's Irish counterpart.\n\"Myrddin\" may be a combination of *\"mer\" (mad) and the Welsh (man), to mean 'madman'. It may also mean '[of] many names' if it was derived from the Welsh , myriad. In his (1862), La Villemarqu\u00e9 derived \"Marz[h]in\", which he considered the original form of Merlin's name, from the Breton word (wonder) to mean 'wonder man'. or \"Merlin's Enclosure\" is an early name for Great Britain as stated in the third series of Welsh Triads.\nCelticist Alfred Owen Hughes Jarman suggested that the Welsh name () was derived from the toponym , the Welsh name for the town known in English as Carmarthen. This contrasts with the popular folk etymology that the town was named after the bard. The name Carmarthen is derived from the town's previous Roman name Moridunum, in turn, derived from the Celtic Brittonic \"moridunon\", 'sea fort[ress]'. Eric P. Hamp proposed a similar etymology: \"Morij:n\", 'the maritime' or 'born of the sea'. There is no obvious connection between Merlin and the sea in the texts about him, but Claude Sterckx has suggested that Merlin's father in the Welsh texts, Morfryn, might have been a sea spirit. Philippe Walter connected it with the figure of the insular Celtic sea god Manann\u00e1n.\nFolklorist Jean Markale proposed that the name of Merlin is of French origin and means 'little blackbird', an allusion to the mocking and provocative personality usually attributed to him in medieval stories. The Welsh \"Myrddin\" could be also phonetically connected to the name Martin and some of the powers and other attributes of the 4th-century French Saint Martin of Tours (and his disciple Saint Hilaire) in hagiography and folklore are similar to these of Merlin. If a relationship between the two figures does exist, however, it may rather be a reverse one in which the Merlin tradition inspired the later accounts of the saint's miracles and life.\nLegend.\nOverview.\nAs summarized by Danielle Qu\u00e9ruel of the Biblioth\u00e8que nationale de France,\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nGeoffrey and his sources.\nGeoffrey's composite Merlin is based mostly on the North Brythonic poet and seer Myrddin Wyllt, that is Myrddin the Wild (known as \"Merlinus Caledonensis\" or \"Merlin Sylvestris\" in later texts influenced by Geoffrey), appearing in 12th-century poems such as \"Afallennau Myrddin\" (\"Myrddin's Apple Trees\") or \"Yr Oianau\" (\"The Piglet\"). Myrddin's legend has parallels with a northern Welsh and southern Scottish story of the mad prophet Lailoken (\"Laleocen\"), probably the same as Myrddin son of Morfryn (\"Myrddin map Morfryn\") mentioned in the Welsh Triads, and with \"Buile Shuibhne\", an Irish tale of the wandering insane king Suibihne mac Colm\u00e1in (often Anglicised to \"Sweeney\").\nIn Welsh poetry, Myrddin was a bard who was driven mad after witnessing the horrors of war and subsequently fled civilization to become a wild man of the wood in the 6th century. He roamed the Caledonian Forest until he was cured of his madness by Kentigern, also known as Saint Mungo. Geoffrey had Myrddin in mind when he wrote his earliest surviving work, the \"Prophetiae Merlini\" (\"Prophecies of Merlin\", c. 1130), which he claimed were the actual words of the legendary poet (including some distinctively apocalyptic prophecies for Geoffrey's contemporary 12th century); however, the work reveals little about Merlin's background.\nGeoffrey was further inspired by Emrys (Old Welsh: \"Embreis\"), a character based in part on the 5th-century historical figure of the Romano-British war leader Ambrosius Aurelianus (Welsh name \"Emrys Wledig\", also known as Myrddin Emrys). When Geoffrey included Merlin in his next work, \"Historia Regum Britanniae\" (c. 1136), he supplemented his characterisation of Merlin by attributing stories of Ambrosius to Merlin. These stories were taken from one of Geoffrey's primary sources, the early 9th-century \"Historia Brittonum\" attributed to Nennius. In this source, Ambrosius was discovered when the King of the Britons, Vortigern, attempted to erect a tower at Dinas Emrys (City of Emrys). More than once, the tower collapsed before completion. Vortigen's wise men advised him that the only solution was to sprinkle the foundation with the blood of a child born without a father. Ambrosius was rumoured to be such a child. When he was brought before the king, Ambrosius revealed that below the foundation of the tower was a lake containing two dragons battling into each other, representing the struggle between the invading Saxons (the white dragon) and the native Celtic Britons (the red dragon). Geoffrey retold the story in his \"Historia Regum Britanni\u00e6\", adding new episodes that tie Merlin with King Arthur and his predecessors. Geoffrey stated that this Ambrosius was also called \"Merlin\", hence Ambrosius Merlinus.\nGeoffrey's account of Merlin's early life is based on the story from the \"Historia Brittonum\". At the same time, however, Geoffrey also turned Ambrosius Aurelianus into the separate character of Uther Pendragon's brother Aurelius Ambrosius. Geoffrey added his own embellishments to the tale, which he set in Carmarthen, Wales (Welsh: Caerfyrddin). While Nennius' \"fatherless\" Ambrosius eventually reveals himself to be the son of a Roman consul, Geoffrey's Merlin is fathered by an incubus demon through a nun, daughter of the King of Dyfed (Demetae, today's South West Wales). Usually, the name of Merlin's mother is not stated, but it is given as Adhan in the oldest version of the Prose \"Brut\", the text also naming his grandfather as King Conaan.\nMerlin is born all hairy and already able to speak like an adult, as well as possessing supernatural knowledge that he uses to save his mother. The story of Vortigern's tower is the same; the underground dragons, one white and one red, represent the Saxons and the Britons, and their final battle is a portent of things to come. At this point Geoffrey inserted a long section of Merlin's prophecies, taken from his earlier \"Prophetiae Merlini\". Geoffrey also told two further tales of the character. In the first, Merlin creates Stonehenge as a burial place for Aurelius Ambrosius, bringing the stones from Ireland. In the second, Merlin's magic enables the new British king, Uther Pendragon, to enter into Tintagel Castle in disguise and to father Arthur with his enemy's wife, Igerna (Igraine). These episodes appear in many later adaptations of Geoffrey's account. Merlin subsequently disappears from the narrative. He does not tutor or advise Arthur as in later versions.\nGeoffrey dealt with Merlin again in his third work, \"Vita Merlini\" (1150). He based it on stories of the original 6th-century Myrddin, set long after his time frame for the life of Merlin Ambrosius. Nevertheless, Geoffrey asserts that the characters and events of \"Vita Merlini\" are the same as told in the \"Historia Regum Britanniae\". Here, Merlin survives the reign of Arthur, whose fall he is told about by Taliesin. Merlin spends a part of his life as a madman in the woods and marries a woman named Guendoloena (a character inspired by the historic king Gwenddoleu ap Ceidio). He eventually retires to observing stars from his house with seventy windows in the remote woods of Rhydderch. There, he is often visited by Taliesin and by his own sister Ganieda (a Latinized name of Myrddin's sister Gwenddydd), who has become queen of the Cumbrians and is also endowed with prophetic powers. Compared to Geoffrey's \"Historia\", his \"Vita\" seems to have little influence on the later portrayals of Merlin.\nMark Chorvinsky hypothesized that Merlin is based on a historical person, probably a 5th and/or 6th-century druid living in southern Scotland. Nikolai Tolstoy makes a similar argument based on the fact that early references to Merlin describe him as possessing characteristics which modern scholarship would recognize as druidical (but that sources of the time would not have recognized), the inference being that those characteristics were not invented by the early chroniclers but belonged to a real person. If so, the hypothetical proto-Merlin would have lived about a century after the hypothetical historical Arthur.\nA late version of the \"Annales Cambriae\" (dubbed the \"B-text\", written at the end of the 13th century) and influenced by Geoffrey, records that in the year 573 after \"the battle of Arfderydd, between the sons of Eliffer and Gwenddolau son of Ceidio; in which battle Gwenddolau fell; Myrddin went mad.\" The earliest version of the same entry in \"Annales Cambriae\" (in the \"A-text\", written c. 1100), as well as a later copy (the \"C-text\", written towards the end of the 13th century) do not mention Myrddin. Myrddin furthermore shares similarities with the shamanic bard figure of Taliesin, alongside whom he appears in the Welsh Triads and in \"Vita Merlini\", as well as in the poem \"Ymddiddan Myrddin a Thaliesin\" (\"The Conversation between Myrddin and Taliesin\") from \"The Black Book of Carmarthen\", which was dated by Rachel Bromwich as \"certainly\" before 1100, that is predating \"Vita Merlini\" by at least half century while telling a different version of the same story. According to Villemarqu\u00e9, the origin of the legend of Merlin lies with the Roman story of Marsus, a son of Circe, which eventually influenced the Breton and Welsh tales of a supernaturally-born bard or enchanter named Marzin or Marddin. \nRomance reimagination.\nAround the turn of the 13th century, Robert de Boron retold and expanded on this material in \"Merlin\", an Old French epic poem inspired by Wace's \"Roman de Brut\", an Anglo-Norman creative adaptation of Geoffrey's \"Historia\". The work presents itself as the story of Merlin's life as told by Merlin himself to be written down by the \"real\" author while the actual author claimed merely to translate the story into French. Only a few lines of what is believed to be the original text have survived, but a more popular prose version had a great influence on the emerging genre of Arthurian-themed chivalric romance.\nAs in Geoffrey's \"Historia\", Merlin is created as a demon spawn, but in Robert's account he is explicitly to become the Antichrist intended to reverse the effect of the Harrowing of Hell. The infernal plot is thwarted when a priest named Blaise (the story's narrator and perhaps Merlin's divine twin in a hypothetical now-lost oral tradition) is contacted by the child's mother; Blaise immediately baptizes the boy at birth, thus freeing him from the power of Satan and his intended destiny. The demonic legacy invests Merlin (already able to speak fluently even as a newborn) with a preternatural knowledge of the past and present, which is supplemented by God, who gives the boy prophetic knowledge of the future. The text lays great emphasis on Merlin's power to shapeshift, his joking personality, and his connection to the Holy Grail, the quest for which he later foretells.\n\"Merlin\" was originally part of a cycle of Robert's poems telling the story of the Grail over the centuries. The narrative of \"Merlin\" is largely based on Geoffrey's familiar tale of Vortigern's Tower, Uther's war against the Saxons, and Arthur's conception. New in this retelling is the episode of young Arthur (who had been secreted away by Merlin) drawing the sword from the stone, an event orchestrated by Merlin in the role of kingmaker. Earlier, Merlin also instructs Uther to establish the original, quasi-religious chivalric order of the Round Table for fifty members, following his own act of creating the table itself as a replica of both the Last Supper table and the table of Joseph of Arimathea. The text ends with the coronation of Arthur. The prose version of Robert's poem was then continued in the 13th-century \"Merlin Continuation\", telling of King Arthur's early wars and Merlin's role in them. In this text, also known as the \"Suite du Merlin\", the mage both predicts and, wielding elemental magic, influences the course of battles, in addition to helping the young Arthur in other ways. Eventually, he arranges the reconciliation between Arthur and his rivals, and the surrender of the defeated Saxons and their departure from Britain.\nThe extended prose rendering of \"Merlin\" was incorporated as a foundation of the \"Lancelot-Grail\", a vast cyclical series of Old French prose works also known as the Vulgate Cycle, in the form of the \"Estoire de Merlin\" (\"Story of Merlin\"), also known as the Vulgate \"Merlin\" or the Prose \"Merlin\". There, while not identifying his mother, it is stated that Merlin was named after his grandfather on her side. The Vulgate's Prose \"Lancelot\" further relates that after growing up in the borderlands between 'Scotland' (i.e. Pictish lands) and 'Ireland' (i.e. Argyll), Merlin \"possessed all the wisdom that can come from demons, which is why he was so feared by the Bretons and so revered that everyone called him a holy prophet and the ordinary people all called him their god.\" In the Vulgate Cycle's version of \"Merlin\", his acts include arranging the consummation of Arthur's desire for \"the most beautiful maiden ever born,\" Lady Lisanor of Cardigan, resulting in the birth of Arthur's illegitimate son Lohot from before the marriage to Guinevere. Merlin seems to be inherently evil in the so-called non-cyclic \"Lancelot\", where he was born as the \"fatherless child\" from not a supernatural rape of a virgin but a consensual union between a lustful demon and an unmarried beautiful young lady and was never baptized.\nA further reworking and an alternative continuation of the Prose \"Merlin\" were included within the subsequent Post-Vulgate Cycle as the Post-Vulgate \"Suite du Merlin\" or the Huth \"Merlin\", the so-called \"romantic\" rewrite (as opposed to the so-called \"historical\" original of the Vulgate). It added some content such as Merlin providing Arthur with the sword Excalibur through a Lady of the Lake, while either removing or altering many other episodes. Merlin's magical interventions in the Post-Vulgate versions of his story are relatively limited and markedly less spectacular, even compared to the magical feats of his own students, and his character becomes less moral. In addition, Merlin's prophecies also include sets of alternative possibilities (meaning future can be changed) instead of only certain outcomes. The Post-Vulgate Cycle has Merlin warn Arthur of how the birth of his other son will bring great misfortune and ruin to his kingdom, which then becomes a self-fulfilling prophecy. Eventually, long after Merlin is gone, his advice to dispose of the baby Mordred through an event evoking the Biblical Massacre of the Innocents leads to the deaths of many, among them Arthur.\nLater developments.\nBoth \"Merlin\" and its continuations have been adapted in verse and prose, translated into several languages, and further modified to various degrees by other authors. Notably, the Post-Vulgate \"Suite\" (along with an earlier version of the Prose \"Merlin\") was the main source for the opening section of Thomas Malory's English-language compilation work \"Le Morte d'Arthur\" which formed a now-iconic version of the legend. Compared to some of his French sources (such as the Vulgate \"Lancelot\" which described Merlin as \"treacherous and disloyal by nature, like his [demon] father before him\"), Malory limited the extent of the negative association of Merlin and his powers. He is relatively rarely condemned as demonic by other characters such as King Lot, instead he is presented as an ambiguous trickster.\nAs the Arthurian myths were retold, Merlin's prophetic \"seer\" aspects were sometimes de-emphasized (or even seemingly vanish entirely, as in the fragmentary and more fantastical \"Livre d'Artus\") in favor of portraying him as a wizard and an advisor to the young Arthur, sometimes in the struggle between good and evil sides of his character, and living in deep forests connected with nature. Through his ability to change his shape, he may appear as a \"wild man\" figure, evoking his prototype Myrddin Wyllt, as a civilized man of any age (including as a very young child), or even as a talking animal. His guises can be highly deformed and animalistic even when Merlin is presenting as a human or humanoid being. In the \"Perceval en prose\" (also known as the Didot \"Perceval\" and usually also attributed to Robert), where Merlin is the initiator of the Grail Quest and cannot die until the end of days, he eventually retires after Arthur's downfall by turning himself into a bird and entering the mysterious \"esplumoir\", never to be seen again.\nThe earliest English verse romance concerning Merlin is \"Of Arthour and of Merlin\" of the late 13th century, which drew from the chronicles and the Vulgate Cycle. In English-language medieval texts that conflate Britain with the Kingdom of England, the Anglo-Saxon enemies against whom Merlin aids first Uther and then Arthur tend to be replaced by the Saracens or simply just invading pagans. The earliest Merlin work written in Germany was Caesarius of Heisterbach's Latin theological text \"Dialogus Miraculorum\" (1220). Among other medieval works dealing with the Merlin legend is the 13th-century French romance \"Le Roman de Silence,\" and the 13th-14th Italian story collection \"Il Novellino\" that pictures him as a righteous seer chastising people for their sins. Conversely, the \"Orygynale Cronykil of Scotland\", which sympathizes with Mordred as usual in Scottish chronicle tradition, particularly attributes Merlin's supernatural evil influence on Arthur to its very negative portrayal of his rule. He is also a villainous figure, opposing Arthur's daughter, in the late Irish romance \"Eachtra Mhel\u00f3ra agus Orlando\".\nIn the Second Continuation of \"Perceval, the Story of the Grail\", written around 1210, a young daughter of Merlin called the Lady of the High Peak of Mont Dolorous, appears to guide Perceval towards the Grail Castle. Merlin's usually unspecified mother is sometimes called Adhan or Aldan, or Optima, as in Bauduin (Baudouin) Butor's 1294 romance known as either \"Les Fils du Roi Constant\" or \"Pandragus et Libanor\". Paolino Pieri's 14th-century Italian \"La Storia di Merlino\", which invents a new version of the story of Merlin's youth, names his mother as Marinaia. Ulrich F\u00fcetrer's 15th-century \"Buch der Abenteuer\", in the section based on Albrecht von Scharfenberg's lost \"Merlin\", turns Merlin into father of Uter, effectively making Merlin's grandson Arthur a part-devil too. The eponymous redeemed half-demon Gowther is Merlin's half-brother in the 15th-century English poem \"Sir Gowther\".\nIn the prose chivalric romance tradition, Merlin has a major weakness: young beautiful women of \"femme fatale\" archetype. This is what leads him to his doom by a Lady of the Lake. Besides her, Merlin's apprentice in chivalric romances is often King Arthur's half-sister, Morgan le Fay, who is sometimes depicted as Merlin's lover and sometimes as just his unrequited love interest. Contrary to many modern works in which they are archenemies, Merlin and Morgan are never opposed to each other in any medieval tradition, other than she forcibly rejecting him in some texts. Merlin's love for Morgan is so great that he even lies to the king to save her in the Huth \"Merlin\", which is the only instance of him ever intentionally misleading Arthur. In the Venetian prose romance \"[Les] Proph\u00e9ties de Merlin\", also known as the \"Proph\u00e9cies de Merlin\" (c. 1274-79), he further tutors Sebile, two other witch queens, and the Lady of the Isle of Avalon (Dama di Isola do Vallone). Other figures who learn sorcery from Merlin include the Wise Damsel in the Italian prose romance \"Historia di Merlino\", and the male wizard Mabon in the Post-Vulgate \"Merlin Continuation\" and in the Prose \"Tristan\". While Merlin's apprentices gain or expand their magical powers through him, his prophetic powers cannot be passed on.\nMerlin's prophecies.\nThe works dealing with Merlin's prophecies did not end with Geoffrey's \"Prophetiae\". Particularly in Britain, Merlin remained as much as a prophet as a magician up to and including the 16th century, when political content in the style of Agrippa d'Aubign\u00e9 continued to be written using Merlin's name to guarantee their authenticity. For instance, John of Cornwall's 12th-century Latin poem \"Prophecy of Merlin\" contains a selection of 'updated' prophecies from Geoffrey's \"Prophetae\" that come with the author's interpretations relating them to his contemporary Cornish and English political affairs. The late medieval \"Vita di Merlino con le sue Profetie\" (1379), combining Merlin romance material and prophecies related to the author's recent contemporary history and politics, became the first Arthurian text printed in Italy.\nThe influential \"Proph\u00e9ties de Merlin\" (later abridged and clarified in Pieri's \"Storia\") was written in French but obviously by an Italian in Venice (falsely claiming to be one \"Richard from Ireland\") on the bidding of Frederick II, Holy Roman Emperor and to propagate on his behalf. It contains long prophecies mostly concerned with 11th to 13th-century history and contemporary politics relating to Italy and the Holy Land, some supposedly told by Merlin's ghost after his death, interspersed with episodes relating Merlin's deeds and with assorted Arthurian adventures in which Merlin does not appear at all. The German \"Sagen von Merlin\" from the same era, which included the War of the Keys between Frederick and the Papacy, contains prophecies directed against the Popes. The widely circulated short political tract \"Expositio Abbatis Joachimi super Sibillis et Merlino\" (c. 1240), falsely attributed to Joachim of Fiore, contains the praise of Frederick's miraculous birth, which backfired, making it look like the coming of Antichrist. \nDuring the 15th century, old Welsh works predicting the Celtic revenge and victory over the Saxons were recast as Merlin's (Myrddin's) prophecies and used along with Geoffrey by the propaganda of the Welsh-descended Henry VII of England (who fought under the red dragon banner) of the House of Tudor, which claimed to trace its lineage directly to Arthur. Later, the Tudors' Welsh supporters, including bards, interpreted the prophecy of King Arthur's return as having been fulfilled after the Tudors' ascent to the throne of England that they sought to legitimize following the Wars of the Roses. Prophecies attributed to Merlin have been also previously used by the 14th-century Welsh hero Owain Glynd\u0175r in his fight against the English rule. The vagueness of Merlin's prophecies enabled British monarchs and historians to continue using them even in the early modern period. Notably, the King of Scotland and later also of England and Ireland, James VI and I, claimed his 1603 unification of Britain into the United Kingdom had been foretold by Merlin.\nTales of Merlin's end.\nIn the prose romance tradition, Merlin's eventual undoing comes from his lusting after another of his female students: the one often named Viviane, among various other names and spellings (including Malory's own Nyneve that his editor William Caxton changed to Nymue which in turn eventually became the now-popular Nimue). Her character and relation to Merlin have been added to the legend of Merlin in the prose continuations of de Boron Merlin, identifying her with the figure of Lancelot's supernatural foster mother. She is also called a fairy (French \"fee\") like Morgan and described as a Lady of the Lake, or the \"chief Lady of the Lake\" in the case of Malory's Nimue. In the Arthurian prequel \"Perceforest\", the ancestry of both Merlin and the Lady of the Lake is descended from the ancient fairy Morgane (unrelated to Arthur's sister). Here, their bloodline had been cursed by Morgane out of false belief that her daughter was raped by a human (really her lover) so that a female descendant is destined to kill a male one.\nThere are several different versions of their story. Common themes in most of them include Merlin actually having the prior prophetic knowledge of her plot against him (one exception is the Spanish Post-Vulgate \"Baladro\" where his foresight ability is explicitly dampened by sexual desire) but lacking either ability or will to counteract it in any way, along with her using one of his own spells to get rid of him. Usually (including in \"Le Morte d'Arthur\"), having learned everything she could from him, Viviane will then also replace the eliminated Merlin within the story, taking up his role as Arthur's adviser and court mage. However, Merlin's fate of either demise or eternal imprisonment, along with his destroyer or captor's motivation (from her fear of Merlin and protecting her own virginity, to her jealousy of his relationship with Morgan), is recounted differently in several variants of this motif. The exact form of his prison or grave can be also variably a cave, a tree, or hole either within or under a large rock (according to \"Le Morte d'Arthur\", this happens somewhere in Benwick, the kingdom of Lancelot's father), or an invisible tower made of magic with no physical walls. The scene is sometimes explicitly placed in the enchanted forest of Broc\u00e9liande, a legendary location today identified with the real-life Paimpont forest in Brittany. A Breton tradition cited by Roger Sherman Loomis in \"Celtic Myth and Arthurian Romance\" (where he also asserts that it \"seems almost certain that Morgan le Fay and the Lady of the Lake were originally the same person\" in the legend) has Merlin trapped by his mistress inside a tree on the \u00cele de Sein.\nNiniane, as the Lady of the Lake student of Merlin is known in the \"Livre d'Artus\" continuation of \"Merlin\", is mentioned as having broken his heart before his later second relationship with Morgan, but here the text does not tell how exactly Merlin did vanish, other than relating his farewell meeting with Blaise. In the Vulgate \"Merlin\", she (aged just 12 at the time) makes Merlin sleep forever in a pit in the forest of Darnantes \"and that is where he remained, for never again did anyone see or hear of him or have news to tell of him.\" In the Post-Vulgate \"Suite de Merlin\", the young King Bagdemagus (one of the early Knights of the Round Table) manages to find the rock under which Merlin is entombed alive by Niviene, as she is named there. He communicates with Merlin, but is unable to lift the stone; what follows next is supposedly narrated in the mysterious text \"Conte del Brait\" (\"Tale of the Cry\"). In the \"Proph\u00e9ties de Merlin\", his tomb is unsuccessfully searched for by various parties, including Morgan and her enchantresses, but the tomb cannot be accessed due to the deadly magic traps around it, while the Lady of the Lake comes to taunt Merlin, asking if he has rotted yet. She only allows Tristan's half-brother Meliadus the Younger (her lover, groomed by her from childhood) to access it and record his prophecies. One notably alternate version that has a happier ending for Merlin is the \"Premiers Faits\" section of the \"Livre du Graal\", where Niniane peacefully confines him in Broc\u00e9liande with walls of air, visible only as a mist to others but as a beautiful yet unbreakable crystal tower to him (only Merlin's disembodied voice can escape his prison one last time when he speaks to Gawain on the knight's quest to find him), where they then spend almost every night together as lovers. Besides evoking the final scenes from \"Vita Merlini\", this particular variant of their story also mirrors a certain episode type found in romances in two versions. There, depending on the variant, Merlin can be object of one-sided desire by a different amorous sorceress who (unsuccessfully) plots to trap him, or it is him who does trap an unwilling lover with his magic.\nUnrelated to the legend of the Lady of the Lake, other purported sites of Merlin's burial include a cave deep inside Merlin's Hill (), outside Carmarthen. Carmarthen is also associated with Merlin more generally, including through the 13th-century manuscript known as the \"Black Book\" and the local lore of Merlin's Oak. In North Welsh tradition, Merlin retires to Bardsey Island (), where he lives in a house of glass () with the Thirteen Treasures of the Island of Britain (). One site of his tomb is said to be Marlborough Mound in Wiltshire, known in medieval times as \"Merlebergia\" (the Abbot of Cirencester wrote in 1215: \"Merlin's tumulus gave you your name, Merlebergia\").\nAnother site associated with Merlin's burial, in his 'Merlin Silvestris' aspect, is the confluence of the Pausalyl Burn and River Tweed in Drumelzier, Scotland. The 15th-century \"Scotichronicon\" tells that Merlin himself underwent a triple-death, at the hands of some shepherds of the under-king Meldred: stoned and beaten by the shepherds, he falls over a cliff and is impaled on a stake, his head falls forward into the water, and he drowns. The fulfillment of another prophecy, ascribed to Thomas the Rhymer, came about when a spate of the Tweed and Pausayl occurred during the reign of the Scottish James VI and I on the English throne: \"When Tweed and Pausayl meet at Merlin's grave, / Scotland and England one king shall have.\"\nModern culture.\nMerlin and stories involving him have continued to be popular from the Renaissance to the present day, especially since the renewed interest in the legend of Arthur in modern times. During the French Renaissance, Merlin would continue to be uniquely appealing figure of theater and ballet even after the interest in Arthur himself had already waned. Since the Romantic period, Merlin has been typically depicted as a wise old man with a long white beard, creating a modern wizard archetype reflected in many fantasy characters, such as J. R. R. Tolkien's Gandalf or J. K. Rowling's Dumbledore, who also use some of his other traits. As noted by Arthurian scholar Alan Lupack, \"numerous novels, poems and plays center around Merlin. In American literature and popular culture, Merlin is perhaps the most frequently portrayed Arthurian character.\"\nAccording to Stephen Thomas Knight, Merlin embodies a conflict between knowledge and power: beginning as a symbol of wisdom in the first Welsh stories, he became an advisor to kings in the Middle Ages, and eventually a mentor and teacher to Arthur and others in the works around the world since the 19th century. While some modern authors write about Merlin positively through an explicitly Christian world-view, some New Age movements instead see Merlin as a druid who accesses all the mysteries of the world. For instance, Merlin appears in the teachings of the Montana-based New Age religious-survivalist group Church Universal and Triumphant as one of their \"ascended masters\". Francophone artistic productions since the end of the 20th century have tended to avoid the Christian aspects of the character in favor of the pagan aspects and the \"tradition sylvestre\" (attributing positive values to one's links to forest and wild animals), thus \"dechristianizing\" Merlin to present him as a champion for the idea of return to nature. Diverging from his traditional role in medieval romances, Merlin is also sometimes portrayed as a villain. As Peter H. Goodrich wrote in \"Merlin: A Casebook\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Merlin's primary characteristics continue to be recalled, refined, and expanded today, continually encompassing new ideas and technologies as well as old ones. The ability of this complex figure to endure for more than fourteen centuries results not only from his manifold roles and their imaginative appeal, but also from significant, often irresolvable tensions or polarities [...] between beast and human (Wild Man), natural and supernatural (Wonder Child), physical and metaphysical (Poet), secular and sacred (Prophet), active and passive (Counselor), magic and science (Wizard), and male and female (Lover). Interwoven with these primary tensions are additional polarities that apply to all of Merlin's roles, such as those between madness and sanity, pagan and Christian, demonic and heavenly, mortality and immortality, and impotency and potency.\nThings named in honour of the legendary figure include asteroid 2598 Merlin, the British company Merlin Entertainments, the handheld console Merlin, the literary magazine \"Merlin\", the metal band Merlin, and more than a dozen different British warships each called HMS \"Merlin\". He was one of eight British magical figures who were commemorated on a series of UK postage stamps issued by the Royal Mail in 2011, and one of the three Arthurian figures (along with Arthur and Morgan) commemorated on the gold and silver British pound coins issued by the Royal Mint in 2023. \"Merlinia\", the Ordovician trilobite, is also named after Merlin; the name is given in memory of a Welsh legend in which the broken tail parts of trilobites were identified as butterflies turned to stone by Merlin.\nContrary to a popular belief among the Royal Air Force pilots and general society at the time (and also later), the Merlin engine that powered several British aircraft during the Second World War (including the famous Spitfire fighter that helped to win the Battle of Britain) was not named after the Arthurian legend figure, but after the bird, as dictated by the Rolls-Royce company naming policy. That coincidence nevertheless had a positive effect on British war morale.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n "}
{"id": "20809", "revid": "11952314", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20809", "title": "Montreux Convention Regarding the Regime of the Turkish Straits/Treaty text", "text": ""}
{"id": "20810", "revid": "11096", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20810", "title": "Merchant", "text": "Businessperson who trades in goods that were produced by others\nA merchant is a person or company engaged in trade, conducting sales through stores or online platforms, particularly one that engages in international import and export activities.\nMerchants have been known for as long as humans have engaged in trade and commerce. Merchants and merchant networks operated in ancient Babylonia, Assyria, China, Egypt, Greece, India, Persia, Phoenicia and Rome. During the European medieval period, a rapid expansion in trade and commerce led to the rise of a wealthy and powerful merchant class. The European Age of Discovery opened up new trading routes and gave European consumers access to a much broader range of goods. By the 18th century, a new type of manufacturer-merchant had started to emerge and modernize for the purpose of generating profit, cash flow, sales, and revenue using a combination of human, financial, intellectual and physical capital with a view to fueling economic development and growth.\nEtymology.\nThe English term, \"merchant\" comes from the Middle English, , which is derived from Anglo-Norman , which itself originated from the Vulgar Latin or , formed from present participle of ('to trade, to traffic or to deal in'). The term refers to any type of reseller, but can also be used with a specific qualifier to suggest a person who deals in a given characteristic such as \"speed merchant\", which refer to someone who enjoys fast driving; \"noise merchant\", which refers to a group of musical performers; and \"dream merchant\", which refers to someone who peddles idealistic visionary scenarios.\nTypes of merchants.\nBroadly, merchants can be classified into two categories:\nHowever, the term 'merchant' is often used in a variety of specialised contexts such as in \"merchant banker\", \"merchant navy\" or \"merchant services\".\nHistory.\nMerchants in antiquity.\nMerchants have existed as long as humankind have conducted business, trade or commerce. A merchant class operated in many pre-modern societies. Open-air, public markets, where merchants and traders congregated, functioned in ancient Babylonia and Assyria, China, Egypt, Greece, India, Persia, Phoenicia and Rome. These markets typically occupied a place in the town's centre. Surrounding the market, skilled artisans, such as metal-workers and leather workers, occupied premises in alley ways that led to the open market-place. These artisans may have sold wares directly from their premises, but also prepared goods for sale on market days. In ancient Greece markets operated within the agora (open space), and in ancient Rome in the forum. Rome's forums included the Forum Romanum, the Forum Boarium and Trajan's Forum. The Forum Boarium, one of a series of \"fora venalia\" or food markets, originated, as its name suggests, as a cattle market.\nTrajan's Forum was a vast expanse, comprising multiple buildings with shops on four levels. The Roman forum was arguably the earliest example of a permanent retail shop-front.\nIn antiquity, exchange involved direct selling through permanent or semi-permanent retail premises such as stall-holders at market places or shop-keepers selling from their own premises or through door-to-door direct sales via merchants or peddlers. The nature of direct selling centred around transactional exchange, where the goods were on open display, allowing buyers to evaluate quality directly through visual inspection. Relationships between merchant and consumer were minimal often playing into public concerns about the quality of produce.\nThe Phoenicians became well known amongst contemporaries as \"traders in purple\" \u2013 a reference to their monopoly over the purple dye extracted from the murex shell. The Phoenicians plied their ships across the Mediterranean, becoming a major trading power by the 9th century BCE. Phoenician merchant traders imported and exported wood, textiles, glass and produce such as wine, oil, dried fruit and nuts. Their trading necessitated a network of colonies along the Mediterranean coast, stretching from modern-day Crete through to Tangiers (in present-day Morocco) and northward to Sardinia. The Phoenicians not only traded in tangible goods, but were also instrumental in transporting the trappings of culture. The Phoenicians' extensive trade networks necessitated considerable book-keeping and correspondence. In around 1500\u00a0BCE, the Phoenicians developed a script which was much easier to learn than the pictographic systems used in ancient Egypt and Mesopotamia. Phoenician traders and merchants were largely responsible for spreading their alphabet around the region. Phoenician inscriptions have been found in archaeological sites at a number of former Phoenician cities and colonies around the Mediterranean, such as Byblos (in present-day Lebanon) and Carthage in North Africa.\nThe social status of the merchant class varied across cultures; ranging from high status (the members even eventually achieving titles such as that of Merchant Prince or Nabob) to low status, as in China, Greece and Roman cultures, owing to the presumed distastefulness of profiting from \"mere\" trade rather than from labor or the labor of others as in agriculture and craftsmanship. The Romans defined merchants or traders in a very narrow sense. Merchants were those who bought and sold goods, while landowners who sold their own produce were not classed as merchants. Being a landowner was a \"respectable\" occupation. In contrast, the Romans did not consider the activities of merchants \"respectable\". In the ancient cities of the Middle East, where the bazaar was the city's focal point and heartbeat, merchants who worked in bazaar enjoyed high social status and formed part of local elites. In Medieval Western Europe, the Christian church, which closely associated merchants' activities with the sin of usury, criticised the merchant class, strongly influencing attitudes towards them.\nIn Greco-Roman society, merchants typically did not have high social status, though they may have enjoyed great wealth. Umbricius Scauras, for example, was a manufacturer and trader of garum in Pompeii, circa 35 C.E. His villa, situated in one of the wealthier districts of Pompeii, was very large and ornately decorated in a show of substantial personal wealth. Mosaic patterns in the floor of his atrium were decorated with images of amphorae bearing his personal brand and inscribed with quality claims. One of the inscriptions on the mosaic amphora reads \"G(ari) F(los) SCO[m]/ SCAURI/ EX OFFI[ci]/NA SCAU/RI\" which translates as \"The flower of garum, made of the mackerel, a product of Scaurus, from the shop of Scaurus\". Scaurus' fish sauce had a reputation for very high quality across the Mediterranean; its fame travelled as far away as modern southern France. Other notable Roman merchants included Marcus Julius Alexander (16 \u2013 44 CE), Sergius Orata (fl. c. 95 BCE) and Annius Plocamus (1st century CE).\nIn the Roman world, local merchants served the needs of the wealthier landowners. While the local peasantry, who were generally poor, relied on open-air market places to buy and sell produce and wares, major producers such as the great estates were sufficiently attractive for merchants to call directly at their farm-gates. The very wealthy landowners managed their own distribution, which may have involved exporting. Markets were also important centres of social life, and merchants helped to spread news and gossip.\nThe nature of export markets in antiquity is well documented in ancient sources and in archaeological case-studies. Both Greek and Roman merchants engaged in long-distance trade. A Chinese text records that a Roman merchant named Lun reached southern China in 226 CE. Archaeologists have recovered Roman objects dating from the period 27 BCE to 37 CE from excavation sites as far afield as the Kushan and Indus ports. The Romans sold purple and yellow dyes, brass and iron; they acquired incense, balsam, expensive liquid myrrh and spices from the Near East and India, fine silk from China and fine white marble destined for the Roman wholesale market from Arabia.\nFor Roman consumers, the purchase of goods from the East was a symbol of social prestige.\nMerchants in the medieval period.\nMedieval England and Europe witnessed a rapid expansion in trade and the rise of a wealthy and powerful merchant class. Blintiff has investigated the early medieval networks of market towns and suggests that by the 12th century there was an upsurge in the number of market towns and the emergence of merchant circuits as traders bulked up surpluses from smaller regional, different day markets and resold them at the larger centralised market towns. Peddlers or itinerant merchants filled any gaps in the distribution system. From the 11th century, the Crusades helped to open up new trade routes in the Near East, while the adventurer and merchant, Marco Polo stimulated interest in the far East in the 13th century. Medieval merchants began to trade in exotic goods imported from distant shores including spices, wine, food, furs, fine cloth (notably silk), glass, jewellery and many other luxury goods. Market towns began to spread across the landscape during the medieval period.\nMerchant guilds began to form during the medieval period with a fraternity formed in 1020 in Tiel in the present-day Netherlands, believed to be the first example of a merchant guild. The term, \"guild\" was first used for \"gilda mercatoria\" and referred to body of merchants operating out of St. Omer, France in the 11th century. These guilds controlled the way that trade was to be conducted and codified rules governing the conditions of trade, which incorporated into town charters. By the 13th and 14th centuries, merchant guilds had sufficient resources to have erected guild halls in many major market towns.\n \nDuring the thirteenth century, European businesses became more permanent and were able to maintain sedentary merchants and a system of agents. Merchants specialised in financing, organisation and transport while agents were domiciled overseas and acted on behalf of a principal. These arrangements first appeared on the route from Italy to the Levant, but by the end of the thirteenth century merchant colonies could be found from Paris, London, Bruges, Seville, Barcelona and Montpellier. Over time these partnerships became more commonplace and led to the development of large trading companies. These developments also triggered innovations such as double-entry book-keeping, commercial accountancy, international banking including access to lines of credit, marine insurance and commercial courier services. These developments are sometimes known as the \"commercial revolution.\"\nLuca Clerici has made a detailed study of Vicenza's food market during the sixteenth century. He found that there were many different types of merchants operating out of the markets. For example, in the dairy trade, cheese and butter was sold by the members of two craft guilds (i.e., cheesemongers who were shopkeepers) and that of the so-called \u2018resellers\u2019 (hucksters selling a wide range of foodstuffs), and by other sellers who were not enrolled in any guild. Cheesemongers\u2019 shops were situated at the town hall and were very lucrative. Resellers and direct sellers increased the number of sellers, thus increasing competition, to the benefit of consumers. Direct sellers, who brought produce from the surrounding countryside, sold their wares through the central market place and priced their goods at considerably lower rates than cheesemongers.\nFrom 1300 through to the 1800s a large number of European chartered and merchant companies were established to exploit international trading opportunities. The Company of Merchant Adventurers of London, chartered in 1407, controlled most of the fine cloth imports while the Hanseatic League controlled most of the trade in the Baltic Sea. A detailed study of European trade between the thirteenth and fifteenth century demonstrates that the European age of discovery acted as a major driver of change. In 1600, goods travelled relatively short distances: grain 5\u201310 miles; cattle 40\u201370 miles; wool and wollen cloth 20\u201340 miles. However, in the years following the opening up of Asia and the discovery of the New World, goods were imported from very long distances: calico cloth from India, porcelain, silk and tea from China, spices from India and South-East Asia and tobacco, sugar, rum and coffee from the New World.\nIn Mesoamerica, a tiered system of traders developed independently. The local markets, where people purchased their daily needs were known as \"tianguis\" while \"pochteca\" referred to long-distance, professional merchants traders who obtained rare goods and luxury items desired by the nobility. This trading system supported various levels of pochteca \u2013 from very high status merchants through to minor traders who acted as a type of peddler to fill in gaps in the distribution system. The Spanish conquerors commented on the impressive nature of the local and regional markets in the 15th century. The Mexica (Aztec) market of Tlatelolco was the largest in all the Americas and said to be superior to those in Europe.\nIn much of Renaissance Europe and even after, merchant trade remained seen as a lowly profession and it was often subject to legal discrimination or restrictions, although in a few areas its status began to improve.\nMerchants in the modern era.\nThe \"modern era\" is generally understood to refer to period that started with the rise of consumer culture in seventeenth- and eighteenth-century Europe.\nAs standards of living improved in the 17th century, consumers from a broad range of social backgrounds began to purchase goods that were in excess of basic necessities. An emergent middle class or bourgeoisie stimulated demand for luxury goods, and the act of shopping came to be seen as a pleasurable pastime or form of entertainment. 16th century Spanish and 17th century English nobles had been enticed into participating in trade by the profitability of colonial expeditions. In the 17th century, members of the nobility in many European countries like France or Spain still disliked engaging in merchant activities, but such attitudes changed in the 18th century with governmental encouragement of nobles to invest in trade, and the lifting of old bans on nobles engaging in economic activities.\nAs Britain continued colonial expansion, large commercial organisations came to provide a market for more sophisticated information about trading conditions in foreign lands. Daniel Defoe (c. 1660\u20131731), a London merchant, published information on trade and economic resources of England, Scotland and India. Defoe was a prolific pamphleteer. His many publications include titles devoted to trade, including: \"Trade of Britain Stated\" (1707); \"Trade of Scotland with France\" (1713); \"The Trade to India Critically and Calmly Considered\" (1720) and \"A Plan of the English Commerce\" (1731); all pamphlets that became highly popular with contemporary merchants and business houses.\nArmenians operated as a prominent trade nation during the 17th century. They stood out in international trade due to their vast network \u2013 mostly built by Armenian migrants spread across Eurasia. Armenians had established prominent trade-relations with all big export players such as India, China, Persia, the Ottoman Empire, England, Venice, the Levant, etc. Soon they captured Eastern and Western Europe, Russia, the Levant, the Middle East, Central Asia, India, and the Far East trade routes, carrying out mostly caravan-trade activities. A significant reason for Armenians' massive involvement in international trade was their geographic location \u2013 the Armenian lands stand at the crossroads between Asia and Europe. Another reason was their religion, as they were a Christian nation isolated between Muslim Iran and Muslim Turkey. European Christians preferred to carry out trade with Christians in the region.\nEighteenth-century merchants who traded in foreign markets developed a network of relationships which crossed national boundaries, religious affiliations, family ties, and gender. The historian, Vannneste, has argued that a new \"cosmopolitan merchant mentality\" based on trust, reciprocity and a culture of communal support developed and helped to unify the early modern world. Given that these cosmopolitan merchants were embedded within their societies and participated in the highest level of exchange, they transferred a more outward-looking mindset and system of values to their commercial-exchange transactions, and also helped to disseminate a more global awareness to broader society and therefore acted as agents of change for local society. Successful, open-minded cosmopolitan merchants began to acquire a more esteemed social position within the political elites. They were often sought as advisors for high-level political agents. The English nabobs belong to this era.\nBy the eighteenth century, a new type of manufacturer-merchant was emerging and modern business practices were becoming evident. Many merchants held showcases of goods in their private homes for the benefit of wealthier clients. Samuel Pepys, for example, writing in 1660, describes being invited to the home of a retailer to view a wooden jack. McKendrick, Brewer and Plumb found extensive evidence of eighteenth-century English entrepreneurs and merchants using \"modern\" marketing techniques, including product differentiation, sales promotion and loss-leader pricing. English industrialists, Josiah Wedgewood (1730\u20131795) and Matthew Boulton (1728\u20131809), are often portrayed as pioneers of modern mass-marketing methods. Wedgewood was known to have used marketing techniques such as direct mail, travelling salesmen and catalogues in the eighteenth century. Wedgewood also carried out serious investigations into the fixed and variable costs of production and recognised that increased production would lead to lower unit-costs. He also inferred that selling at lower prices would lead to higher demand and recognised the value of achieving scale economies in production. By cutting costs and lowering prices, Wedgewood was able to generate higher overall profits. Similarly, one of Wedgewood's contemporaries, Matthew Boulton, pioneered early mass-production techniques and product differentiation at his Soho Manufactory in the 1760s. He also practiced planned obsolescence and understood the importance of \"celebrity marketing\" \u2013 that is supplying the nobility, often at prices below cost \u2013 and of obtaining royal patronage, for the sake of the publicity and kudos generated. Both Wedgewood and Boulton staged expansive showcases of their wares in their private residences or in rented halls.\nEighteenth-century American merchants, who had been operating as importers and exporters, began to specialise in either wholesale or retail roles. They tended not to specialise in particular types of merchandise, often trading as general merchants, selling a diverse range of product types. These merchants were concentrated in the larger cities. They often provided high levels of credit financing for retail transactions.\nA system of credit was especially important because there was a shortage of cash in Britain and America following the Revolutionary War. Because the state of both countries was so tumultuous after the war, an honor system was essential to establish social bonds. Without a system to keep people accountable, professional relationships are destroyed, innocent people are left to pay the debts of the perpetrators, and entire trade networks are left financially ruined.\nHistorian Jon Stobart explained in an article that the way merchants often entered these networks was via apprenticeships, and the personal connections made during these relationships \u201creinforced the status of the merchant[s].\u201d Stobart further elaborates that these bonds between masters and apprentices allowed merchants to be known to other people, and more importantly, to be trusted by others. However, the way this social hierarchy was initially introduced allowed it to become rife with exploitation.\nThis is explained in many anecdotes like the story of Daniel Parker, a merchant from Watertown, Massachusetts, who was part of a major commercial network. He was able to escape his debts merely by escaping on a ship to Europe. leaving his friends and family to clean up his mess. If too many people were to exploit these loopholes, it would cause the entire system to collapse. Parker was said to \"maintain his innocence\" despite all the charges of fraud because of his change in environment. In Europe, he had a neutral reputation and therefore was able to conduct his business without negative consequences.\nThe main reason that Parker was able to escape consequences was the idea of \u201csocial credit\u201d and social bonds between merchants. Once he arrived in Britain, no one knew of his history of evading his debts, so people had no reason to distrust him about his financial endeavors. In essence, his social reputation worked similarly to a modern-day credit score. If one has a \u201cgood score\u201d, it\u2019s much easier for that person to do business with others and eventually scam more innocent customers and fellow merchants out of their money. But by keeping people accountable by better communicating between economies, people are able to keep shady merchants such as Parker from playing the system. But because he was able to escape, he was able to manipulate more people. Cutterham explains further in his article that while in London and Amsterdam, Parker \u201cbecame a substantial participant in an emerging international financial market.\u201d He was able to make powerful connections within this new environment, with one of the most influential people he met being the ambassador to the Netherlands from the United States, John Adams. Adams served in this capacity between the years of 1778 and 1788, but of course would become even more notable as the second President of the United States, starting in 1797. \nThe fact that Parker was able to acquaint himself with such powerful and intelligent people goes to show that major reforms needed to be made in the system if prosperity was to be achieved. Network formations during this period were essential to the bonds between merchants. Family businesses within communities were common, but it was fundamentally clear that wider geographical networks were required to sustain larger flows of income.\nIn the nineteenth century, merchants and merchant houses played a role in opening up China and the Pacific to Anglo-American trade interests. Note for example Jardine Matheson &amp; Co. and the merchants of New South Wales. Other merchants profited from natural resources (the Hudson's Bay Company theoretically controlled much of North America, names like Rockefeller and Nobel dominated trade in oil in the US and in the Russian Empire), while still others made fortunes from exploiting new inventions \u2013 selling space on and commodities carried by railways and steamships.\nIn fully planned economies of the 20th century, planners replaced merchants in organising the distribution of goods and services. However, merchants, increasingly labelled with euphemisms such as \"industrialists\", \"businessmen\", \"entrepreneurs\" or \"oligarchs\", continue their activities in the 21st century.\nIn art.\nElizabeth Honig has argued that artists, especially the painters of Antwerp, developed a fascination with merchants from the mid-16th century. The wealthier merchants also had the means to commission artworks with the result that individual merchants and their families became important subject matter for artists. For instance, Hans Holbein the younger painted a series of portraits of Hanseatic merchants working out of London's Steelyard in the 1530s. These included including Georg Giese of Danzig; Hillebrant Wedigh of Cologne; Dirk Tybis of Duisburg; Hans of Antwerp, Hermann Wedigh, Johann Schwarzwald, Cyriacus Kale, Derich Born and Derick Berck. Paintings of groups of merchants, notably officers of the merchant guilds, also became subject matter for artists and documented the rise of important mercantile organisations.\nIn 2022, Dutch photographer Loes Heerink spend hours on bridges in Hanoi to take pictures of Vietnamese street Merchants. She published a book called Merchants in Motion: the art of Vietnamese Street Vendors.\nIn architecture.\nAlthough merchant halls were known in antiquity, they fell into disuse and were not reinvented until Europe's medieval period. During the 12th century, powerful guilds which controlled the way that trade was conducted were established and were often incorporated into the charters granted to market towns. By the 13th and 14th centuries, merchant guilds had acquired sufficient resources to erect guild halls in many major market towns. Many buildings have retained the names derived from their former use as the home or place of business of merchants:\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20812", "revid": "18779361", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20812", "title": "Meteor", "text": "Body that enters the Earth's atmosphere\nA meteor, known colloquially as a &lt;dfn&gt;shooting star&lt;/dfn&gt;, is a glowing streak of a small body (usually meteoroid) going through Earth's atmosphere, after being heated to incandescence by collisions with air molecules in the upper atmosphere, creating a streak of light via its rapid motion and sometimes also by shedding glowing material in its wake. Meteors typically occur in the mesosphere at altitudes from . The root word \"meteor\" comes from the Greek \"mete\u014dros\", meaning \"high in the air\".\nMillions of meteors occur in Earth's atmosphere daily. Most meteoroids that cause meteors are about the size of a grain of sand, i.e. they are usually or smaller. Meteoroid sizes can be calculated from their mass and density which, in turn, can be estimated from the observed meteor trajectory in the upper atmosphere.\nMeteors may occur in showers, which arise when Earth passes through a stream of debris left by a comet, or as \"random\" or \"sporadic\" meteors, not associated with a specific stream of space debris. A number of specific meteors have been observed, largely by members of the public and largely by accident, but with enough detail that orbits of the meteoroids producing the meteors have been calculated. The atmospheric velocities of meteors result from the movement of Earth around the Sun at about , the orbital speeds of meteoroids, and the gravity well of Earth.\nMeteors become visible between about above Earth. They usually disintegrate at altitudes of . Meteors have roughly a fifty percent chance of a daylight (or\u00a0near daylight) collision with Earth. Most meteors are, however, observed at night, when darkness allows fainter objects to be recognized. For bodies with a size scale larger than to several meters meteor visibility is due to the atmospheric ram pressure (not friction) that heats the meteoroid so that it glows and creates a shining trail of gases and melted meteoroid particles. The gases include vaporised meteoroid material and atmospheric gases that heat up when the meteoroid passes through the atmosphere. Most meteors glow for about a second.\nHistory.\nMeteors were not known to be an astronomical phenomenon until early in the nineteenth century. Before that, they were seen in the West as an atmospheric phenomenon, like lightning, and were not connected with strange stories of rocks falling from the sky. In 1807, Yale University chemistry professor Benjamin Silliman investigated a meteorite that fell in Weston, Connecticut. Silliman believed the meteor had a cosmic origin, but meteors did not attract much attention from astronomers until the spectacular meteor storm of November 1833. People all across the eastern United States saw thousands of meteors, radiating from a single point in the sky. Careful observers noticed that the radiant, as the point is called, moved with the stars, staying in the constellation Leo.\nThe astronomer Denison Olmsted extensively studied this storm, concluding that it had a cosmic origin. After reviewing historical records, Heinrich Wilhelm Matthias Olbers predicted the storm's return in 1867, drawing other astronomers' attention to the phenomenon. Hubert A. Newton's more thorough historical work led to a refined prediction of 1866, which proved correct. With Giovanni Schiaparelli's success in connecting the Leonids (as they are called) with comet Tempel-Tuttle, the cosmic origin of meteors was firmly established. Still, they remain an atmospheric phenomenon and retain their name \"meteor\" from the Greek word for \"atmospheric\".\nFireball.\nA fireball is a brighter-than-usual meteor which can be also seen during daylight. The International Astronomical Union (IAU) defines a fireball as \"a meteor brighter than any of the planets\" (apparent magnitude \u22124 or greater). The International Meteor Organization (an amateur organization that studies meteors) has a more rigid definition. It defines a fireball as a meteor that would have at least magnitude of \u22123 if seen at zenith. This definition corrects for the greater distance between an observer and a meteor near the horizon. For example, a meteor of magnitude \u22121 at 5 degrees above the horizon would be classified as a fireball because, if the observer had been directly below the meteor, it would have appeared as magnitude \u22126.\nFireballs reaching apparent magnitude \u221214 or brighter are called bolides. The IAU has no official definition of \"bolide\", and generally considers the term synonymous with \"fireball\". Astronomers often use \"bolide\" to identify an exceptionally bright fireball, particularly one that explodes in a meteor air burst. They are sometimes called detonating fireballs. It may also be used to mean a fireball which creates audible sounds. In the late twentieth century, bolide has also come to mean any object that hits Earth and explodes, with no regard to its composition (asteroid or comet). The word \"bolide\" comes from the Greek \u03b2\u03bf\u03bb\u03af\u03c2 (\"bolis\") which can mean \"a missile\" or \"to flash\". If the magnitude of a bolide reaches \u221217 or brighter it is known as a superbolide. A relatively small percentage of fireballs hit Earth's atmosphere and then pass out again: these are termed Earth-grazing fireballs. Such an event happened in broad daylight over North America in 1972. Another rare phenomenon is a meteor procession, where the meteor breaks up into several fireballs traveling nearly parallel to the surface of Earth.\nA steadily growing number of fireballs are recorded at the American Meteor Society every year. There are several thousand fireballs a day, but most go unnoticed because most occur over the ocean and half occur during daytime. A European Fireball Network and a NASA All-sky Fireball Network detect and track many fireballs.\nEffect on atmosphere.\nThe entry of meteoroids into Earth's atmosphere produces three main effects: ionization of atmospheric molecules, dust that the meteoroid sheds, and the sound of passage. During the entry of a meteoroid or asteroid into the upper atmosphere, an ionization trail is created, where the air molecules are ionized by the passage of the meteor. Such ionization trails can last up to 45 minutes at a time.\nSmall, sand-grain sized meteoroids are entering the atmosphere constantly, essentially every few seconds in any given region of the atmosphere, and thus ionization trails can be found in the upper atmosphere more or less continuously. When radio waves are bounced off these trails, it is called meteor burst communications. Meteor radars can measure atmospheric density and winds by measuring the decay rate and Doppler shift of a meteor trail. Most meteoroids burn up when they enter the atmosphere. The left-over debris is called \"meteoric dust\" or just meteor dust. Meteor dust particles can persist in the atmosphere for up to several months. These particles might affect climate, both by scattering electromagnetic radiation and by catalyzing chemical reactions in the upper atmosphere.\nMeteoroids or their fragments enter a phase called dark flight after deceleration to terminal velocity when they are no longer emitting visible light. Dark flight starts when they decelerate to about .\n Larger fragments fall further down the strewn field.\nColours.\nThe visible light produced by a meteor may take on various hues, depending on the chemical composition of the meteoroid, and the speed of its movement through the atmosphere. As layers of the meteoroid abrade and ionize, the colour of the light emitted may change according to the layering of minerals. Colours of meteors depend on the relative influence of the metallic content of the meteoroid versus the superheated air plasma, which its passage engenders:\nAcoustic manifestations.\nThe sound generated by a meteor in the upper atmosphere, such as a sonic boom, typically arrives many seconds after the meteor event itself. Occasionally, as with the Leonid meteor shower of 2001, \"crackling\", \"swishing\", or \"hissing\" sounds have been reported, occurring at the same instant as a meteor flare. These are sometimes called electrophonic sounds. Similar sounds have also been reported during intense displays of Earth's auroras. \nTheories on the generation of these sounds may partially explain them. For example, scientists at NASA suggested that the turbulent ionized wake of a meteor interacts with Earth's magnetic field, generating pulses of radio waves. As the trail dissipates, megawatts of electromagnetic power could be released, with a peak in the power spectrum at audio frequencies. Physical vibrations induced by the electromagnetic impulses would then be heard if they are powerful enough to make grasses, plants, eyeglass frames, the hearer's own body (see microwave auditory effect), and other conductive materials vibrate. This proposed mechanism, although proven plausible by laboratory work, remains unsupported by corresponding measurements in the field. Sound recordings made under controlled conditions in Mongolia in 1998 support the contention that the sounds are real. \"(Also see Bolide.)\"\nMeteor shower.\nA meteor shower is the result of an interaction between a planet, such as Earth, and streams of debris from a comet or other source. The passage of Earth through cosmic debris from comets and other sources is a recurring event in many cases. Comets can produce debris by water vapor drag, as demonstrated by Fred Whipple in 1951, and by breakup. Each time a comet swings by the Sun in its orbit, some of its ice vaporizes and a certain amount of meteoroids are shed. The meteoroids spread out along the entire orbit of the comet to form a meteoroid stream, also known as a \"dust trail\" (as opposed to a comet's \"dust tail\" caused by the very small particles that are quickly blown away by solar radiation pressure).\nThe frequency of fireball sightings increases by about 10\u201330% during the weeks of vernal equinox. Even meteorite falls are more common during the northern hemisphere's spring season. Although this phenomenon has been known for quite some time, the reason behind the anomaly is not fully understood by scientists. Some researchers attribute this to an intrinsic variation in the meteoroid population along Earth's orbit, with a peak in big fireball-producing debris around spring and early summer. Others have pointed out that during this period the ecliptic is (in the northern hemisphere) high in the sky in the late afternoon and early evening. This means that fireball radiants with an asteroidal source are high in the sky (facilitating relatively high rates) at the moment the meteoroids \"catch up\" with Earth, coming from behind going in the same direction as Earth. This causes relatively low relative speeds and from this low entry speeds, which facilitates survival of meteorites. It also generates high fireball rates in the early evening, increasing chances of eyewitness reports. This explains a part, but perhaps not all of the seasonal variation. Research is in progress for mapping the orbits of the meteors to gain a better understanding of the phenomenon.\n The Peekskill Meteorite was recorded on October\u00a09, 1992 by at least 16 independent videographers. Eyewitness accounts indicate the fireball entry of the Peekskill meteorite started over West Virginia at 23:48 UT (\u00b11\u00a0min). The fireball, which traveled in a northeasterly direction, had a pronounced greenish colour, and attained an estimated peak visual magnitude of \u221213. During a luminous flight time that exceeded 40 seconds the fireball covered a ground path of some . One meteorite recovered at Peekskill, New York, for which the event and object gained their name, had a mass of and was subsequently identified as an H6 monomict breccia meteorite. The video record suggests that the Peekskill meteorite had several companions over a wide area. The companions are unlikely to be recovered in the hilly, wooded terrain in the vicinity of Peekskill.\n A large fireball was observed in the skies near Bone, Sulawesi, Indonesia on October\u00a08, 2009. This was thought to be caused by an asteroid approximately in diameter. The fireball contained an estimated energy of 50 kilotons of TNT, or about twice the Nagasaki atomic bomb. No injuries were reported.\n A large bolide was reported on 18 November 2009 over southeastern California, northern Arizona, Utah, Wyoming, Idaho and Colorado. At 00:07 local time a security camera at the high altitude W. L. Eccles Observatory located above sea level recorded a movie of the passage of the object to the north. It had a spherical \"ghost\" image slightly trailing the main object (likely a lens reflection of the intense fireball), and a bright fireball explosion associated with the breakup of a substantial fraction of the object. An object trail continued northward after the fireball. The shock from the final breakup triggered seven seismological stations in northern Utah. The seismic data yielded a terminal location of the object at 40.286 N, \u2212113.191 W, altitude . This is above the Dugway Proving Grounds, a closed Army testing base.\n The Chelyabinsk meteor was an extremely bright, exploding fireball, or superbolide, measuring about across, with an estimated mass of as the relatively small asteroid entered Earth's atmosphere. It was the largest natural object known to have entered Earth's atmosphere since the Tunguska event in 1908. Over 1,500 people were injured, mostly by glass from shattered windows caused by the air burst approximately above the environs of Chelyabinsk, Russia on 15 February 2013. An increasingly bright streak was observed during morning daylight with a large contrail lingering behind. At no less than one minute and up to at least three minutes after the object peaked in intensity (depending on distance from trail), a large concussive blast was heard that shattered windows and set-off car alarms, which was followed by a number of smaller explosions.\n On November 11, 2019, a meteor was spotted streaking across the skies of the Midwestern United States. In the St. Louis Area, security cameras, dashcams, webcams, and video doorbells captured the object as it burned up in the earth's atmosphere. The superbolide meteor was part of the South Taurids meteor shower. It traveled east to west ending its flight somewhere near Wellsville, Missouri.\nMonitoring.\nIn a range of countries networks of sky observing installations have been set up to monitor meteors.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20813", "revid": "37371155", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20813", "title": "Michael Milken", "text": "American financier, racketeer and securities fraudster (born 1946)\nMichael Robert Milken (born July 4, 1946) is an American financier. He is known for his role in the development of the market for high-yield bonds (\"junk bonds\"), which led to his reputation as the \"Junk Bond King\", and his conviction and sentence following a guilty plea on felony charges for violating U.S. securities laws. Milken's compensation while head of the high-yield bond department at Drexel Burnham Lambert in the late 1980s exceeded $1 billion over a four-year period, a record for U.S. income at that time. With a net worth of $6 billion as of 2022, he is among the richest people in the world.\nMilken was indicted for racketeering and securities fraud in 1989 in an insider trading investigation. In a plea bargain, he pleaded guilty to securities and reporting violations but not to racketeering or insider trading. Milken was sentenced to ten years in prison, fined $600 million (although his personal website claims $200 million) and permanently barred from the securities industry by the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission. His sentence was later reduced to two years for cooperating with testimony against his former colleagues and for good behavior. Milken was pardoned by President Donald Trump in February 2020.\nMilken is a co-founder of the Milken Family Foundation, chairman of the Milken Institute, and founder of medical philanthropies funding research on melanoma, cancer, and other life-threatening diseases. A prostate cancer survivor, Milken has devoted significant resources to research on the disease.\nEarly life and education.\nMilken was born into a middle-class Jewish family in Encino, California.\nHe graduated from Birmingham High School where he was the head cheerleader and worked while in school at a diner. His classmates included future Disney president Michael Ovitz and actresses Sally Field and Cindy Williams. In 1968, he graduated from the University of California, Berkeley with a BS with highest honors. He was elected to Phi Beta Kappa and was a member of the Sigma Alpha Mu fraternity. He received his MBA from the Wharton School of the University of Pennsylvania. While at Berkeley, Milken was influenced by credit studies authored by W. Braddock Hickman, a former president of the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland, who noted that a portfolio of non-investment grade bonds offered \"risk-adjusted\" returns greater than that of an investment-grade portfolio.\nCareer.\nThrough his Wharton professors, Milken landed a summer job at Drexel Harriman Ripley, an old-line investment bank, in 1969. After completing his MBA, he joined Drexel (by then known as Drexel Firestone) as director of low-grade bond research. He was also given control of some capital and permitted to trade. Over the next 17 years, he had only four down months.\nDrexel merged with Burnham and Company in 1973 to form Drexel Burnham. Despite the firm's name, Burnham was the nominal survivor; the Drexel name came first only at the insistence of the more powerful investment banks, whose blessing was necessary for the merged firm to inherit Drexel's position as a \"major\" firm.\nMilken was one of the few prominent holdovers from the Drexel side of the merger, and he became the merged firm's head of convertibles. He persuaded his new boss, fellow Wharton alumnus Tubby Burnham, to let him start a high-yield bond trading department\u2014an operation that soon earned a 100 percent return on investment. By 1976, Milken's income at the firm, which had become Drexel Burnham Lambert, was estimated at $5 million a year. In 1978, Milken moved the high-yield bond operation to Century City in Los Angeles.\nHigh-yield bonds and leveraged buyouts.\nBy the mid-1980s, Milken's network of high-yield bond buyers (notably Fred Carr's Executive Life Insurance Company and Tom Spiegel's Columbia Savings &amp; Loan) had reached a size that enabled him to raise large amounts of money quickly.\nThis money-raising ability also facilitated the activities of leveraged buyout (LBO) firms such as Kohlberg Kravis Roberts and of the so-called \"greenmailers\". Most of them were armed with a \"highly confident letter\" from Drexel, a tool Drexel's corporate finance wing crafted that promised to raise the necessary debt in time to fulfill the buyer's obligations. It carried no legal status, but by that time Milken had a reputation for being able to make markets for any bonds that he underwrote. For this reason, \"highly confident letters\" were considered to reliably demonstrate capacity to pay. Supporters, like George Gilder in his book \"Telecosm\" (2000), state that Milken was \"a key source of the organizational changes that have impelled economic growth over the last twenty years. Most striking was the productivity surge in capital, as Milken... and others took the vast sums trapped in old-line businesses and put them back into the markets.\"\nDespite his influence in the financial world during the 1980s, (at least one source called him the most powerful American financier since J. P. Morgan), Milken is an intensely private man who shuns publicity; he reportedly owned almost all photographs taken of him.\nLater career.\nMilken and his brother Lowell founded Knowledge Universe in 1996, as well as Knowledge Learning Corporation (KLC), the parent company of KinderCare Learning Centers, the largest for-profit child care provider in the country. Michael Milken was chairman of Knowledge Universe until it was sold in 2015.\nHe invested in K12 Inc., a publicly traded education management organization (EMO) that provides online schooling, including to charter school students, for whom services are paid by tax dollars, which is the largest EMO in terms of enrollment.\nScandal.\nDan Stone, a former Drexel executive, wrote in his book \"April Fools\" that Milken was under nearly constant scrutiny from the Securities and Exchange Commission from 1979 onward due to unethical and sometimes illegal behavior in the high-yield department.\nMilken's role in such behavior has been much debated. Stone claims that Milken viewed the securities laws, rules, and regulations with a degree of contempt, feeling they hindered the free flow of trade. However, Stone said that while Milken condoned questionable and illegal acts by his colleagues, Milken himself personally followed the rules. Milken often contacted Fred Joseph, Drexel's president and CEO, with ethical questions; Joseph was known for his strict view of the securities laws.\nOn the other hand, several of the sources James B. Stewart used for \"Den of Thieves\" told him that Milken often tried to get as much as five times the maximum markup on trades that was permitted at the time.\nHarvey A. Silverglate, a defense attorney who represented Milken during the appellate process, disputes that view in his book \"Three Felonies a Day\": \"Milken's biggest problem was that some of his most ingenious but entirely lawful maneuvers were viewed, by those who initially did not understand them, as felonious, precisely because they were novel \u2013 and often extremely profitable.\"\nIvan Boesky and an intensifying investigation.\nThe SEC inquiries never advanced beyond the investigation phase until 1986, when arbitrageur Ivan Boesky pleaded guilty to securities fraud as part of a larger insider trading investigation. As part of his plea, Boesky implicated Milken in several illegal transactions, including insider trading, stock manipulation, fraud, and stock parking (buying stocks for the benefit of another). This led to an SEC probe of Drexel, as well as a separate criminal probe by Rudy Giuliani, then United States Attorney for the Southern District of New York. Although both investigations were almost entirely focused on Milken's department, Milken refused to talk with Drexel (which launched its own internal investigation) except through his lawyers. It turned out that Milken's legal team believed Drexel would be forced to cooperate with the government at some point, believing that a securities firm would not survive the bad publicity of a long criminal and SEC probe.\nFor two years, Drexel insisted that nothing illegal had occurred, even when the SEC sued Drexel in 1988. Later that year, Giuliani began considering an indictment of Drexel under the powerful Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations (RICO) Act. Drexel management, concluding that a financial institution could not possibly survive a RICO indictment, immediately began plea bargain talks. However, talks collapsed on December 19, when Giuliani made several demands that went beyond even what those who believed an indictment would destroy the firm were willing to accept. For example, Giuliani demanded that Milken leave the firm if indicted.\nOnly a day later, Drexel lawyers discovered suspicious activity in one of the limited partnerships Milken set up to allow members of his department to make their own investments. That entity, MacPherson Partners, had acquired several warrants for the stock of Storer Broadcasting in 1985. At the time, Kohlberg Kravis Roberts was in the midst of a leveraged buyout of Storer, and Drexel was lead underwriter for the bonds being issued. One of Drexel's other clients bought several Storer warrants and sold them back to the high-yield bond department. The department in turn sold them to MacPherson. This partnership included Milken, other Drexel executives, and a few Drexel customers. It also included several managers of money market funds who had worked with Milken in the past. It appeared that the money managers bought the warrants for themselves and did not offer the same opportunity to the funds they managed. Some of Milken's children also received warrants, according to Stewart, raising the appearance of Milken self-dealing.\nThe warrants to money managers were especially problematic. At the very least, Milken's actions were a serious breach of Drexel's internal regulations, and the money managers had breached their fiduciary duty to their clients. At worst, the warrants could have been construed as bribes to the money managers, to influence decisions they made for their funds.\nIndeed, several money managers were eventually convicted on bribery charges. The discovery of MacPherson Partners\u2014whose existence had not been known to the public at the time\u2014seriously eroded Milken's credibility with the board. On December 21, 1988, Drexel entered an Alford plea to six counts of stock parking and stock manipulation. It allowed Drexel to maintain its innocence while conceding that it \"was not in a position to dispute\" the allegations made by the government. As part of the deal, Drexel agreed that Milken had to leave the firm if indicted.\nIndictment and sentencing.\nIn March 1989, a federal grand jury indicted Milken, Lowell Milken, and Bruce L. Newberg, a former Drexel junk bond trader, on 98 counts of racketeering, mail fraud and securities fraud and sought $1.845 billion in forfeitures. The indictment included a long list of misconduct, including insider trading, tax evasion, stock manipulation, tax fraud, stock parking (concealing \"Drexel's ownership of 6f securities by causing the securities to be secretly purchased or sold through affiliates of Boesky or Princeton/Newport for the purpose of gaining secret and unlawful advantages and profits in corporate takeover contests\"), and other crimes. One charge was that Boesky paid Drexel $5.3 million in 1986 for Milken's share of profits from illegal trading. This payment was represented as a consulting fee to Drexel. Shortly afterward, Milken resigned from Drexel and formed his own firm, International Capital Access Group.\nMilken's protege Terren Peizer had worked as a junk bond salesman for Milken, managing an account with which Drexel had an illegal arrangement that included insider trading and phony tax losses. Peizer provided material evidence to prosecutors against Milken. At Milken's pre-sentencing hearing for securities fraud in 1990, Peizer testified against Milken in exchange for immunity from both criminal prosecution and SEC sanctions.\nOn April 24, 1990, Milken pleaded guilty to six counts of securities and tax violations. Three of them involved dealings with Boesky to conceal the real owner of a stock:\nTwo other counts were related to tax evasion in transactions Milken carried out for a client of the firm, David Solomon, a fund manager:\nThe last count was for conspiracy to commit these five violations.\nAs part of his plea, Milken agreed to pay $200 million in fines. At the same time, he agreed to a settlement with the SEC in which he paid $400 million to investors who had been hurt by his actions. He also accepted a lifetime ban from any involvement in the securities industry. In a related civil lawsuit against Drexel, he agreed to pay $500 million to Drexel's investors.\nCritics of the government charge that the government indicted Milken's brother Lowell to pressure Milken to settle, a tactic some legal scholars condemn as unethical. \"I am troubled by \u2013 and other scholars are troubled by \u2013 the notion of putting relatives on the bargaining table,\" said Vivian Berger, a professor at Columbia University Law School, in a 1990 interview with \"The New York Times\". As part of the deal, the case against Lowell was dropped. Federal investigators also questioned some of Milken's relatives about their investments.\nAt Milken's sentencing, Judge Kimba Wood told him:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nIn statements to a parole board in 1991, Judge Wood estimated that the \"total loss from Milken's crimes\" was $318,000, less than the government's estimate of $4.7 million, and she recommended that he be eligible for parole in three years. Milken's sentence was later reduced to two years from ten; he served 22 months.\n2013 SEC investigation.\nIn February 2013, the SEC announced that they were investigating whether Milken violated his lifetime ban from the securities industry. The investigation concerned Milken's allegedly providing investment advice through Guggenheim Partners. Since 2011, the SEC had been investigating Guggenheim's relationship with Milken.\nPresidential pardon.\nIn June 2018, it was reported that some of president Donald Trump's supporters and friends, including Kevin McCarthy, Rupert Murdoch, Sheldon Adelson, Elaine Chao, and Rudy Giuliani, the onetime federal prosecutor whose criminal investigation led to Milken's conviction, were urging the president to pardon Milken. Milken's attempts to secure a presidential pardon spanned multiple administrations.\nOn February 18, 2020, Trump granted a full pardon to Milken. However, his previous trading license which he lost following his conviction still remained void, and he would still have to reapply and obtain a new trading license in order to return to trading securities.\nPhilanthropy.\nAccording to \"Forbes\", Milken has given away between 5\u201310% of his fortune, earning a philanthropy score of 3 out of 5. Upon his release from prison in 1993, Milken founded the Prostate Cancer Foundation for prostate cancer research, which by 2010 was \"the largest philanthropic source of funds for research into prostate cancer\". Milken himself was diagnosed with advanced prostate cancer in the same month he was released. His cancer is currently in remission. The Prostate Cancer Foundation works closely with Major League Baseball through its Home Run Challenge program to promote awareness of prostate cancer and raise money for medical research. Each season in the weeks leading up to Father's Day, Milken visits many ballparks and appears on TV and radio broadcasts during the games.\nIn 2003, Milken launched a Washington, D.C.\u2013based think tank called FasterCures, which seeks greater efficiency in researching all serious diseases. Initiatives of FasterCures include TRAIN, Partnering for Cures, and the Philanthropy Advisory Service.\nIn March 2014, President Steven Knapp of George Washington University in Washington, D.C. announced the university was renaming its public health school after Milken as a result of a total of $80 million in gifts, $50 million from the Milken Institute and the Milken Family Foundation and $30 million gift from Viacom chairman Sumner Redstone. The gifts were designated for research and scholarship on public health issues.\nIn September 2025, Milken officially opened the Milken Center for Advancing the American Dream (MCAAD) next to the White House in Washington, D.C., an interactive museum that features artists, entrepreneurs, and innovators in health and education. MCAAD also highlights the American financial system.\nIn popular culture.\nMilken became the first recipient of the Ig Nobel Economics Prize in 1991.\nAyad Akhtar's 2016 play \"\", set during the bond trading scandals of the 1980s, is partly based on Milken's \"fall from grace\". Milken is the inspiration for the main character in the play.\nMilken is referenced by Hank Scorpio in \"The Simpsons\" episode \u201cYou Only Move Twice\u201d.\nMilken is referenced by Chris Stevens in \"Northern Exposure\" Season 6, Ep. 5 \u2013 The Robe (31:29). \u201cTrust and honesty. The age-old quest of Diogenes in a post-Milken universe.\u201d\nMilken is referenced in the Futurama episode \"Future Stock\". \nPersonal life.\nMilken is married to Lori Anne Hackel, whom he had dated in high school. The couple have three children. He reportedly follows a vegetarian-like diet rich in fruits and vegetables for its health benefits and has co-authored two vegan cookbooks with Beth Ginsberg.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Sister-inline/styles.css\"/&gt; Media related to at Wikimedia Commons"}
{"id": "20814", "revid": "1808194", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20814", "title": "Mentat", "text": ""}
{"id": "20815", "revid": "1951353", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20815", "title": "Mayerling", "text": "Village in Baden, Austria\nMayerling is a small village (pop. 200) in Lower Austria belonging to the municipality of Alland in the district of Baden. It is situated on the Schwechat river, in the Wienerwald (\"Vienna woods\"), southwest of Vienna. From 1550, it was in the possession of the abbey of Heiligenkreuz.\nThe Mayerling incident.\nIn 1886, Crown Prince Rudolf of Austria, only son of Emperor Franz Joseph I of Austria and Empress Elisabeth, and heir to the Austro-Hungarian crown, acquired the manor and transformed it into a hunting lodge. It was in this hunting lodge that, on 30 January 1889, he was found dead with his mistress, Baroness Mary Vetsera, apparently as a result of suicide. \nExactly what happened is unknown, but on 31 July 2015, the Austrian National Library issued copies of Vetsera's letters of farewell to her mother and other family members. The letters \u2014 written in Mayerling shortly before the deaths \u2014 state clearly and unambiguously that Mary Vetsera was preparing to commit suicide alongside Rudolf, out of love.\nAfter the deaths of Rudolf and Vetsera, Emperor Franz Joseph, who wanted to endow a new church building, had the hunting lodge changed into a convent which then was settled by nuns of the Discalced Carmelite Order. The church was dedicated to Our Lady of Mount Carmel, the convent to Saint Joseph. A statue of the Virgin Mary in the Lady Chapel has the facial features of the Empress Elisabeth and a dagger pierces the Immaculate Heart of Mary. The position of the main cross in the chapel is supposed to be where the bed of Rudolf of Austria and Mary Vetsera were situated. Prayers are still said daily by the nuns for the repose of the souls of Rudolf and Mary.\nA visitor center nearby the convent was opened in 2014. This center, the restored tea pavilion and some other rooms with objects from the 19th century now form the exhibition of the \"Museum Altes Jagdschloss Mayerling\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20816", "revid": "20483999", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20816", "title": "Musical keyboard", "text": "Musical instrument component\nA musical keyboard is the set of adjacent depressible levers or keys on a musical instrument. Keyboards typically contain keys for playing the twelve notes of the Western musical scale, with a combination of larger, longer keys and smaller, shorter keys that repeats at the interval of an octave. Pressing a key on the keyboard makes the instrument produce sounds\u2014either by mechanically striking a string or tine (acoustic and electric piano, clavichord), plucking a string (harpsichord), causing air to flow through a pipe organ, striking a bell (carillon), or activating an electronic circuit (synthesizer, digital piano, electronic keyboard). Since the most commonly encountered keyboard instrument is the piano, the keyboard layout is often referred to as the piano keyboard or simply piano keys.\nDescription.\nThe twelve notes of the Western musical scale are laid out with the lowest note on the left. The longer keys (for the seven \"natural\" notes of the C major scale: C, D, E, F, G, A, B) just forward. Because these keys were traditionally covered in ivory they are often called the \"white notes\" or \"white keys\". The keys for the remaining five notes\u2014which are not part of the C major scale\u2014(i.e., C\u266f/D\u266d, D\u266f/E\u266d, F\u266f/G\u266d, G\u266f/A\u266d, A\u266f/B\u266d) (see Sharp and Flat) are raised and shorter. Because these keys receive less wear, they are often made of black colored wood and called the \"black notes\" or \"black keys\". Black keys form a pentatonic scale. The entire pattern repeats at the interval of an octave.\nThe arrangement of longer keys for C major with intervening, shorter keys for the intermediate semitones date to the 15th century. Many keyboard instruments dating from before the nineteenth century, such as harpsichords and pipe organs, have a keyboard with the colours of the keys reversed: the \"white notes\" are made of ebony and the \"black notes\" are covered with softer white bone. A few electric and electronic instruments from the 1960s and subsequent decades have also done this; Vox's electronic organs of the 1960s, Farfisa's FAST portable organs, Hohner's Clavinet L, one version of the Korg Poly-800 synthesizer and Roland's digital harpsichords.\nSome 1960s electronic organs used reverse colors or gray sharps or naturals to indicate the lower part (or parts) of a single keyboard divided into two parts, each controlling a different registration or sound. Such keyboards accommodate melody and contrasting accompaniment without the expense of a second manual, and were a regular feature in Spanish and some English organs of the renaissance and baroque eras. The break was between middle C and C-sharp, or outside of Iberia between B and C. Broken keyboards reappeared in 1842 with the harmonium, the split occurring at E4/F4.\nThe reverse-colored keys on Hammond organs such as the B3, C3 and A100 are latch-style radio buttons for selecting pre-set sounds.\nSize and historical variation.\nThe chromatic range (also called \"compass\") of keyboard instruments has tended to increase. Harpsichords often extended over five octaves (&gt;60\u00a0keys) in the 18th century, while most pianos manufactured since about 1870 have 88 keys. The lowest pitch (frequency: 27.5\u00a0Hz) of an 88-key piano is equivalent to a sub contrabass in the range name. Some modern pianos have even more notes (a B\u00f6sendorfer 290 \"Imperial\" has 97 keys, and a Stuart &amp; Sons model has 108 keys). While modern synthesizer keyboards commonly have either 61, 76 or 88 keys, small MIDI controllers are available with 25 keys (digital systems allow shifting octaves, pitch, and \"splitting\" ranges dynamically, which, in some cases, reduce the need for dedicated keys. However, smaller keyboards will typically limit which musical scores can be played). Organs normally have 61 keys per manual, though some spinet models have 44 or 49. An organ pedalboard is a keyboard with long pedals played by the organist's feet. Pedalboards vary in size from 12 to 32 notes or 42 on a touring organ used by Cameron Carpenter.\nIn a typical keyboard layout, \"black note\" keys have uniform width, and \"white note\" keys have uniform width and uniform spacing at the front of the keyboard. In the larger gaps between the \"black\" keys, the width of the natural notes C, D and E differ slightly from the width of keys F, G, A and B. This allows close to uniform spacing of 12 keys per octave while maintaining uniformity of seven \"natural\" keys per octave.\nOver the last three hundred years, the octave span distance found on historical keyboard instruments (organs, virginals, clavichords, harpsichords, and pianos) has ranged from as little as to as much as .\nModern piano keyboards ordinarily have an octave span of , resulting in the width of black keys averaging and white keys about at the base, disregarding space between keys. \nIn recent years, there has been evidence of a correlation between pianists with smaller hand spans and hand or arm injuries. Several reduced-size standards have been proposed for these pianists. A 7/8 size ( octave span) keyboard was developed by Canadian Christopher Donison in the 1970s. This size, along with the 15/16 size ( octave span) and a smaller size (130\u00a0mm (5.1\u00a0in) octave span) have since been developed and marketed by Steinbuhler &amp; Company in Pennsylvania. These three sizes are registered as DS6.0, DS5.5 and DS5.1. The company was converted to the non-profit http:// in 2018. Hailun USA manufactures pianos in the two alternative DS6.0 and DS5.5 sizes through an agreement with the DS Standard Foundation. Since 2013, a global network of pianists, teachers and performing arts health professionals has been increasingly advocating for change to the 'one size fits all' approach to piano keyboard manufacturing by major companies. This network is known as PASK (http://). U.S. pianist Hannah Reimann has promoted piano keyboards with narrower octave spans and has a U.S. patent on the apparatus and methods for modifying existing pianos to provide interchangeable keyboards of different sizes. Narrower keyboards are available from Steinway &amp; Sons USA in new grand pianos or as a retrofit to existing pianos.\nThere have been variations in the design of the keyboard to address technical and musical issues. The earliest designs of keyboards were based heavily on the notes used in Gregorian chant (the seven diatonic notes plus B-flat) and as such would often include B\u266d and B\u266e both as diatonic \"white notes\", with the B\u266e at the leftmost side of the keyboard and the B\u266d at the rightmost. Thus, an octave would have \"eight\" \"white keys\" and only four \"black keys\". The emphasis on these eight notes would continue for a few centuries after the \"seven and five\" system was adopted, in the form of the short octave: the eight aforementioned notes were arranged at the leftmost side of the keyboard, compressed in the keys between E and C (at the time, accidentals that low were very uncommon and thus not needed). During the sixteenth century, when instruments were often tuned in meantone temperament, some harpsichords were constructed with the G\u266f and E\u266d keys split into two. One portion of the G\u266f key operated a string tuned to G\u266f and the other operated a string tuned to A\u266d, similarly one portion of the E\u266d key operated a string tuned to E\u266d, the other portion operating a string tuned to D\u266f. This type of keyboard layout, known as the enharmonic keyboard, extended the flexibility of the harpsichord, enabling composers to write keyboard music calling for harmonies containing the so-called \"wolf\" fifth (G-sharp to E-flat), but without producing aural discomfort in the listeners (see Split sharp). The \"broken octave\", a variation of the aforementioned short octave, similarly used split keys to add accidentals left out of the short octave. Other examples of variations in keyboard design include the Jank\u00f3 keyboard and the chromatic keyboard systems on the chromatic button accordion and bandone\u00f3n.\nElectronic keyboards.\nSimpler electronic keyboards have switches under each key. Depressing a key connects a circuit, which triggers tone generation. Most keyboards use a keyboard matrix circuit, in which 8 rows and 8 columns of wires cross \u2014 thus, 16 wires can provide 8\u00a0\u00d7\u00a08\u00a0=\u00a064 crossings, which the keyboard controller scans to determine which key was pressed. The problem with this system is that it provides only a crude binary on/off signal for each key. Better electronic keyboards employ two sets of slightly offset switches for each key. By determining the timing between the activation of the first and second switches, the velocity of a key press can be determined, greatly improving the performance dynamic of a keyboard. The best electronic keyboards have dedicated circuits for each key, providing polyphonic aftertouch.\nAdvanced electronic keyboards may provide hundreds of key touch levels and have 88 keys, as most pianos do.\nPlaying techniques.\nDespite their visual similarity, different keyboard instrument types require different techniques. The piano hammer mechanism produces a louder note the faster the key is pressed, while the harpsichord's plectrum mechanism does not perceptibly vary the volume of the note with different touch on the keyboard. The pipe organ's volume and timbre are controlled by the flow of air from the bellows and the stops preselected by the player. Players of these instruments therefore use different techniques to color the sound. An arranger keyboard may be preset to produce any of a range of voices as well as percussion and other accompaniments that respond to chords played by the left hand.\nEven though the keyboard layout is simple and all notes are easily accessible, playing requires skill. A proficient player has undertaken much training to play accurately and in tempo. Beginners seldom produce a passable rendition of even a simple piece due to lack of technique. The sequences of movements of the player's hands can be very complicated. Problems include wide-spanned chords, which can be difficult for people with small hands, chords requiring unusual hand positions that can initially be uncomfortable, and fast scales, trills and arpeggios.\nPlaying instruments with \"velocity sensitive\" (or \"dynamic\") keyboards (i.e., that respond to varying playing velocity) may require finger independence, so that some fingers play \"harder\" while others play more softly. Pianists call this control of touch velocity \"voicing\" (not to be confused with a piano technician's \"voicing\" of a piano by modifying the hardness of the hammers). Keyboardists speak of playing harder and softer, or with more or less force. This may accurately describe the player's experience\u2014but in the mechanics of the keyboard, velocity controls musical dynamics. The faster the player depresses the key, the louder the note. Players must learn to coordinate two hands and use them independently. Most music is written for two hands; typically the right hand plays the melody in the treble range, while the left plays an accompaniment of bass notes and chords in the bass range. Examples of music written for the left hand alone include several of Leopold Godowsky's 53 Studies on Chopin's Etudes, Maurice Ravel's Piano Concerto for the Left Hand and Sergei Prokofiev's Piano Concerto No. 4 for the left hand. In music that uses counterpoint technique, both hands play different melodies at the same time.\nOther uses.\nA number of percussion instruments\u2014such as the xylophone, marimba, vibraphone, or glockenspiel\u2014 have pitched elements arranged in the keyboard layout. Rather than pressing a key, the performer typically strikes each element (e.g., a metal or wood bar) with a mallet.\nThere are some examples of a musical keyboard layout used for non-musical devices. For example, some of the earliest printing telegraph machines used a layout similar to a piano keyboard.\nKeyboards with alternative sets of keys.\nThere are some rare variations of keyboards with more or fewer than 12 keys per octave, mostly used in microtonal music, after the discoveries and theoretical developments of musician and inventor Juli\u00e1n Carrillo (1875\u20131965).\nSome free-reed instrument keyboards such as accordions and Indian harmoniums include microtones. Electronic music pioneer Pauline Oliveros played one of these. Egyptian belly-dance musicians like Hossam Ramzy use custom-tuned accordions so they can play traditional scales. The small Garmon accordion played in the music of Azerbaijan sometimes has keys that can play microtones when a \"shift\" key is pressed.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20817", "revid": "715696", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20817", "title": "Musical tuning", "text": "Terms for tuning an instrument and a systems of pitches\nIn music, there are two common meanings for tuning:\nTuning practice.\nTuning is the process of adjusting the pitch of one or many tones from musical instruments to establish typical intervals between these tones. Tuning is usually based on a fixed reference, such as A = 440\u00a0Hz. The term \"out of tune\" refers to a pitch/tone that is either too high (sharp) or too low (flat) in relation to a given reference pitch. While an instrument might be in tune relative to its own range of notes, it may not be considered 'in tune' if it does not match the chosen reference pitch. Some instruments become 'out of tune' with temperature, humidity, damage, or simply time, and must be readjusted or repaired.\nDifferent methods of sound production require different methods of adjustment:\nThe sounds of some instruments, notably unpitched percussion instrument such as cymbals, are of indeterminate pitch, and have irregular overtones not conforming to the harmonic series. See .\nTuning may be done aurally by sounding two pitches and adjusting one of them to match or relate to the other. A tuning fork or electronic tuning device may be used as a reference pitch, though in ensemble rehearsals often a piano is used (as its pitch cannot be adjusted for each performance). Symphony orchestras and concert bands usually tune to an A440 or a B\u266d, respectively, provided by the principal oboist or clarinetist, who tune to the keyboard if part of the performance.\nWhen only strings are used, then the principal string (violinist) typically has sounded the tuning pitch, but some orchestras have used an electronic tone machine for tuning. Tuning can also be done through a prior recording; this method uses simultaneous audio.\nInterference beats are used to objectively measure the accuracy of tuning. As the two pitches approach a harmonic relationship, the frequency of beating decreases. When tuning a unison or octave it is desired to reduce the beating frequency until it cannot be detected. For other intervals, this is dependent on the tuning system being used.\nHarmonics may be used to facilitate tuning of strings that are not themselves tuned to the unison. For example, lightly touching the highest string of a cello at the middle (at a node) while bowing produces the same pitch as doing the same a third of the way down its second-highest string. The resulting unison is more easily and quickly judged than the quality of the perfect fifth between the fundamentals of the two strings.\nOpen strings.\nIn music, the term open string refers to the fundamental note of the unstopped, full string.\nThe strings of a guitar are normally tuned to fourths (excepting the G and B strings in standard tuning, which are tuned to a third), as are the strings of the bass guitar and double bass. Violin, viola, and cello strings are tuned to fifths. However, non-standard tunings (called scordatura) exist to change the sound of the instrument or create other playing options.\nTo tune an instrument, often only one reference pitch is given. This reference is used to tune one string, to which the other strings are tuned in the desired intervals. On a guitar, often the lowest string is tuned to an E. From this, each successive string can be tuned by fingering the fifth fret of an already tuned string and comparing it with the next higher string played open. This works with the exception of the G string, which must be stopped at the fourth fret to sound B against the open B string above. Alternatively, each string can be tuned to its own reference tone.\nNote that while the guitar and other modern stringed instruments with fixed frets are tuned in equal temperament, string instruments without frets, such as those of the violin family, are not. The violin, viola, and cello are tuned to beatless just perfect fifths and ensembles such as string quartets and orchestras tend to play in fifths based Pythagorean tuning or to compensate and play in equal temperament, such as when playing with other instruments such as the piano. For example, the cello, which is tuned down from A220, has three more strings (four total) and the just perfect fifth is about two cents off from the equal tempered perfect fifth, making its lowest string, C\u2212, about six cents more flat than the equal tempered C.\nThis table lists open strings on some common string instruments and their standard tunings from low to high unless otherwise noted.\nAltered tunings.\nViolin scordatura was employed in the 17th and 18th centuries by Italian and German composers, namely, Biagio Marini, Antonio Vivaldi, Heinrich Ignaz Franz Biber (who in the \"Rosary Sonatas\" prescribes a great variety of scordaturas, including crossing the middle strings), Johann Pachelbel and Johann Sebastian Bach, whose \"Fifth Suite For Unaccompanied Cello\" calls for the lowering of the A string to G. In Mozart's \"Sinfonia Concertante\" in E-flat major (K. 364), all the strings of the solo viola are raised one half-step, ostensibly to give the instrument a brighter tone so the solo violin does not overshadow it.\nScordatura for the violin was also used in the 19th and 20th centuries in works by Niccol\u00f2 Paganini, Robert Schumann, Camille Saint-Sa\u00ebns, Gustav Mahler, and B\u00e9la Bart\u00f3k. In Saint-Sa\u00ebns' \"Danse Macabre\", the high string of the violin is lower half a tone to the E\u266d so as to have the most accented note of the main theme sound on an open string. In Mahler's Symphony No. 4, the solo violin is tuned one whole step high to produce a harsh sound evoking Death as the Fiddler. In Bart\u00f3k's \"Contrasts\", the violin is tuned G\u266f-D-A-E\u266d to facilitate the playing of tritones on open strings.\nAmerican folk violinists of the Appalachians and Ozarks often employ alternate tunings for dance songs and ballads. The most commonly used tuning is A-E-A-E. Likewise banjo players in this tradition use many tunings to play melody in different keys. A common alternative banjo tuning for playing in D is A-D-A-D-E. Many Folk guitar players also used different tunings from standard, such as D-A-D-G-A-D, which is very popular for Irish music.\nA musical instrument that has had its pitch deliberately lowered during tuning is said to be \"down-tuned\" or \"tuned down\". Common examples include the electric guitar and electric bass in contemporary heavy metal music, whereby one or more strings are often tuned lower than concert pitch. This is not to be confused with electronically changing the fundamental frequency, which is referred to as pitch shifting.\nTuning of unpitched percussion instruments.\nMany percussion instruments are \"tuned\" by the player, including pitched percussion instruments such as timpani and tabla, and unpitched percussion instruments such as the snare drum.\nTuning pitched percussion follows the same patterns as tuning any other instrument, but tuning unpitched percussion does not produce a specific pitch. For this reason and others, the traditional terms \"tuned percussion\" and \"untuned percussion\" are avoided in recent organology.\nTuning systems.\nA \"tuning system\" is the system used to define which tones, or pitches, to use when playing music. In other words, it is the choice of number and spacing of frequency values used.\nDue to the psychoacoustic interaction of tones and timbres, various tone combinations sound more or less \"natural\" in combination with various timbres. For example, using harmonic timbres:\nMore complex musical effects can be created through other relationships.\nThe creation of a tuning system is complicated because musicians want to make music with more than just a few differing tones. As the number of tones is increased, conflicts arise in how each tone combines with every other. Finding a successful combination of tunings has been the cause of debate, and has led to the creation of many different tuning systems across the world. Each tuning system has its own characteristics, strengths and weaknesses.\nSystems for the twelve-note chromatic scale.\nIt is impossible to tune the twelve-note chromatic scale so that all intervals are pure. For instance, three pure major thirds stack up to , which at cents is nearly a quarter tone away from the octave (1200\u00a0cents). So there is no way to have both the octave and the major third in just intonation for all the intervals in the same twelve-tone system. Similar issues arise with the fifth , and the minor third , or any other choice of harmonic-series based pure intervals.\nMany different compromise methods are used to deal with this, each with its own characteristics, and advantages and disadvantages.\nThe main ones are:\n In just intonation, the frequencies of the scale notes are related to one another by simple numeric ratios, a common example of this being to define the ratios for the seven notes in a C\u00a0major scale, plus the return to the tonic an octave up on the 8th (\"perfect 8th\" or octave). In this example, though many intervals are pure, the interval from D to A ( to ) is instead of the expected . The same issue occurs with most just intonation tunings. This can be dealt with to some extent using alternative pitches for the notes. Even that, however, is only a partial solution, as an example makes clear: If one plays the sequence C G D A E C in just intonation, using the intervals , , and , then the second C in the sequence is higher than the first by a syntonic comma of . This is the infamous \"comma pump\". Each time around the comma pump, the pitch continues to spiral upwards. This shows that it is impossible to keep to any small fixed system of pitches if one wants to stack musical intervals this way. So, even with \"adaptive tuning\", the musical context may sometimes require playing musical intervals that are not pure. Instrumentalists with the ability to vary the pitch of their instrument may micro-adjust some of the intervals naturally; there are also systems for adaptive tuning in software (microtuners). Harmonic fragment scales form a rare exception to this issue. In tunings such as 1:1, 9:8, 5:4, 3:2, 7:4, 2:1, all the pitches are chosen from the harmonic series (divided by powers of 2 to reduce them to the same octave), so all the intervals are related to each other by simple numeric ratios. \n A Pythagorean tuning is technically both a type of just intonation and a zero-comma meantone tuning, in which the frequency ratios of the notes are all derived from the number ratio\u00a03:2. Using this approach for example, the 12\u00a0notes of the Western chromatic scale would be tuned to the following ratios: 1:1, 256:243, 9:8, 32:27, 81:64, 4:3, 729:512, 3:2, 128:81, 27:16, 16:9, 243:128, 2:1\u00a0. Also called \"3-limit\" because it uses no prime factors other than 2 and 3, this Pythagorean system was of primary importance in Western musical development in the Medieval and Renaissance periods. As with nearly all just intonation systems, it has a wolf interval. In the example given, it is the interval between the 729:512 and the256:243 (F to D, if one tunes the to C). The major and minor thirds are also impure, but at the time when this system was at its zenith, the third was considered a dissonance, so this was of no concern. See also: Sh\u00ed-\u00e8r-l\u01dc.\n A system of tuning that averages out pairs of ratios used for the same interval (such as 9:8 and 10:9). The best known form of this temperament is quarter-comma meantone, which tunes major thirds justly in the ratio of 5:4 and divides them into two whole tones of equal size \u2013 this is achieved by flattening the fifths of the Pythagorean system slightly (by a quarter of a syntonic comma). However, the fifth may be flattened to a greater or lesser degree than this and the tuning system retains the essential qualities of meantone temperament. Historical examples include and meantone.\n Any one of a number of systems where the ratios between intervals are unequal, but approximate to ratios used in just intonation. Unlike meantone temperament, the amount of divergence from just ratios varies according to the exact notes being tuned, so that C\u2013E is probably tuned closer to a 5:4 ratio than, say, D\u2013F. Because of this, well temperaments have no wolf intervals.\n The standard twelve-tone equal temperament is a special case of meantone temperament (extended eleventh-comma), in which the twelve notes are separated by logarithmically equal distances (100\u00a0cents): // (.ogg format, 96.9\u00a0KB). This is the most common tuning system used in Western music, and is the standard system used as a basis for tuning a piano. Since this scale divides an octave into twelve equal-ratio steps and an octave has a frequency ratio of two, the frequency ratio between adjacent notes is then the twelfth root of two, However, the octave can be divided into other than 12\u00a0equal divisions, some of which may be more harmonically pleasing, as far as thirds, sixths, and harmonic sevenths (via augmented sixths) are concerned, such as 19 equal temperament (extended meantone), 31 equal temperament (extended quarter-comma meantone) and 53 equal temperament (extended Pythagorean tuning).\nTuning systems that are not produced with exclusively just intervals are usually referred to as \"temperaments\".\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20818", "revid": "1329099", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20818", "title": "Musical", "text": "Musical is the adjective of music.\nMusical may also refer to:\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n Topics referred to by the same termThis page lists articles about music-related subjects with the same or similar names. "}
{"id": "20821", "revid": "48643156", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20821", "title": "Miller\u2013Urey experiment", "text": "Experiment testing the origin of life\nThe Miller\u2013Urey experiment, or Miller experiment, was an experiment in chemical synthesis carried out in 1952 that simulated the conditions thought at the time to be present in the atmosphere of the early, prebiotic Earth. It is seen as one of the first successful experiments demonstrating the synthesis of organic compounds from inorganic constituents in an origin of life scenario. The experiment used methane (CH4), ammonia (NH3), hydrogen (H2), in ratio 2:2:1, and water (H2O). Applying an electric arc (simulating lightning) resulted in the production of amino acids.\nIt is regarded as a groundbreaking experiment, and the classic experiment investigating the origin of life (abiogenesis). It was performed in 1952 by Stanley Miller, supervised by Nobel laureate Harold Urey at the University of Chicago, and published the following year. At the time, it supported Alexander Oparin's and J. B. S. Haldane's hypothesis that the conditions on the primitive Earth favored chemical reactions that synthesized complex organic compounds from simpler inorganic precursors.\nAfter Miller's death in 2007, scientists examining sealed vials preserved from the original experiments showed that more amino acids were produced in the original experiment than Miller reported with paper chromatography. While evidence suggests that Earth's prebiotic atmosphere might have typically had a composition different from the gas used in the Miller experiment, prebiotic experiments continue to produce racemic mixtures of simple-to-complex organic compounds, including amino acids, under varying conditions. Moreover, researchers have shown that transient, hydrogen-rich atmospheres \u2013 conducive to Miller\u2013Urey synthesis \u2013 would have occurred after large asteroid impacts on early Earth.\nHistory.\nFoundations of organic synthesis and the origin of life.\nUntil the 19th century, there was considerable acceptance of the theory of spontaneous generation, the idea that \"lower\" animals, such as insects or rodents, arose from decaying matter. However, several experiments in the 19th century \u2013 particularly Louis Pasteur's swan neck flask experiment in 1859 \u2014 disproved the theory that life arose from decaying matter. Charles Darwin published \"On the Origin of Species\" that same year, describing the mechanism of biological evolution. While Darwin never publicly wrote about the first organism in his theory of evolution, in a letter to Joseph Dalton Hooker, he speculated:But if (and oh what a big if) we could conceive in some warm little pond with all sorts of ammonia and phosphoric salts, light, heat, electricity etcetera present, that a protein compound was chemically formed, ready to undergo still more complex changes [...]\"\nAt this point, it was known that organic molecules could be formed from inorganic starting materials, as Friedrich W\u00f6hler had described the W\u00f6hler synthesis of urea from ammonium cyanate in 1828. Several other early seminal works in the field of organic synthesis followed, including Alexander Butlerov's synthesis of sugars from formaldehyde and Adolph Strecker's synthesis of the amino acid alanine from acetaldehyde, ammonia, and hydrogen cyanide. In 1913, Walther L\u00f6b synthesized amino acids by exposing formamide to silent electric discharge, so scientists were beginning to produce the building blocks of life from simpler molecules, but these were not intended to simulate any prebiotic scheme or even considered relevant to origin of life questions.\nBut the scientific literature of the early 20th century contained speculations on the origin of life. In 1903, physicist Svante Arrhenius hypothesized that the first microscopic forms of life, driven by the radiation pressure of stars, could have arrived on Earth from space in the panspermia hypothesis. In the 1920s, Leonard Troland wrote about a primordial enzyme that could have formed by chance in the primitive ocean and catalyzed reactions, and Hermann J. Muller suggested that the formation of a gene with catalytic and autoreplicative properties could have set evolution in motion. Around the same time, Alexander Oparin's and J. B. S. Haldane's \"Primordial soup\" ideas were emerging, which hypothesized that a chemically-reducing atmosphere on early Earth would have been conducive to organic synthesis in the presence of sunlight or lightning, gradually concentrating the ocean with random organic molecules until life emerged. In this way, frameworks for the origin of life were coming together, but at the mid-20th century, hypotheses lacked direct experimental evidence.\nStanley Miller and Harold Urey.\nAt the time of the Miller\u2013Urey experiment, Harold Urey was a Professor of Chemistry at the University of Chicago who had a well-renowned career, including receiving the Nobel Prize in Chemistry in 1934 for his isolation of deuterium and leading efforts to use gaseous diffusion for uranium isotope enrichment in support of the Manhattan Project. In 1952, Urey postulated that the high temperatures and energies associated with large impacts in Earth's early history would have provided an atmosphere of methane (CH4), water (H2O), ammonia (NH3), and hydrogen (H2), creating the reducing environment necessary for the Oparin-Haldane \"primordial soup\" scenario.\nStanley Miller arrived at the University of Chicago in 1951 to pursue a PhD under nuclear physicist Edward Teller, another prominent figure in the Manhattan Project. Miller began to work on how different chemical elements were formed in the early universe, but, after a year of minimal progress, Teller was to leave for California to establish Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory and further nuclear weapons research. Miller, having seen Urey lecture on his 1952 paper, approached him about the possibility of a prebiotic synthesis experiment. While Urey initially discouraged Miller, he agreed to allow Miller to try for a year. By February 1953, Miller had mailed a manuscript as sole author reporting the results of his experiment to \"Science.\" Urey refused to be listed on the manuscript because he believed his status would cause others to underappreciate Miller's role in designing and conducting the experiment and so encouraged Miller to take full credit for the work. Despite this the set-up is still most commonly referred to including both their names. After not hearing from \"Science\" for a few weeks, a furious Urey wrote to the editorial board demanding an answer, stating, \"If \"Science\" does not wish to publish this promptly we will send it to the \"Journal of the American Chemical Society\".\" Miller's manuscript was eventually published in \"Science\" in May 1953.\nExperiment.\nIn the original 1952 experiment, methane (CH4), ammonia (NH3), and hydrogen (H2) were all sealed together in a 2:2:1 ratio (1 part H2) inside a sterile 5-L glass flask connected to a 500-mL flask half-full of water (H2O). The gas chamber was intended to represent Earth's prebiotic atmosphere, while the water simulated an ocean. The water in the smaller flask was boiled such that water vapor entered the gas chamber and mixed with the \"atmosphere\". A continuous electrical spark was discharged between a pair of electrodes in the larger flask. The spark passed through the mixture of gases and water vapor, simulating lightning. A condenser below the gas chamber allowed aqueous solution to accumulate into a U-shaped trap at the bottom of the apparatus, which was sampled.\nAfter a day, the solution that had collected at the trap was pink, and after a week of continuous operation the solution was deep red and turbid, which Miller attributed to organic matter absorbed onto colloidal silica. The boiling flask was then removed, and mercuric chloride (a poison) was added to prevent microbial contamination. The reaction was stopped by adding barium hydroxide and sulfuric acid, and evaporated to remove impurities. Using paper chromatography, Miller identified five amino acids present in the solution: glycine, \u03b1-alanine and \u03b2-alanine were positively identified, while aspartic acid and \u03b1-aminobutyric acid (AABA) were less certain, due to the spots being faint.\nMaterials and samples from the original experiments remained in 2017 under the care of Miller's former student, Jeffrey Bada, a professor at the UCSD, Scripps Institution of Oceanography who also conducts origin of life research. As of 2013[ [update]], the apparatus used to conduct the experiment was on display at the Denver Museum of Nature and Science.\nChemistry of experiment.\nIn 1957 Miller published research describing the chemical processes occurring inside his experiment. Hydrogen cyanide (HCN) and aldehydes (e.g., formaldehyde) were demonstrated to form as intermediates early on in the experiment due to the electric discharge. This agrees with current understanding of atmospheric chemistry, as HCN can generally be produced from reactive radical species in the atmosphere that arise when CH4 and nitrogen break apart under ultraviolet (UV) light. Similarly, aldehydes can be generated in the atmosphere from radicals resulting from CH4 and H2O decomposition and other intermediates like methanol. Several energy sources in planetary atmospheres can induce these dissociation reactions and subsequent hydrogen cyanide or aldehyde formation, including lightning, ultraviolet light, and galactic cosmic rays.\nFor example, here is a set photochemical reactions of species in the Miller\u2013Urey atmosphere that can result in formaldehyde:\n H2O + \"hv\" \u2192 H + OH\n CH4 + OH \u2192 CH3 + HOH\n CH3 + OH \u2192 CH3OH\n CH3OH + \"hv\" \u2192 CH2O (formaldehyde) + H2\nA photochemical path to HCN from NH3 and CH4 is:\n NH3 + \"hv\" \u2192 NH2 + H\n NH2 + CH4 \u2192 NH3 + CH3\n NH2 + CH3 \u2192 CH5N\n CH5N + \"hv\" \u2192 HCN + 2H2\nOther active intermediate compounds (acetylene, cyanoacetylene, etc.) have been detected in the aqueous solution of Miller\u2013Urey-type experiments, but the immediate HCN and aldehyde production, the production of amino acids accompanying the plateau in HCN and aldehyde concentrations, and slowing of amino acid production rate during HCN and aldehyde depletion provided strong evidence that Strecker amino acid synthesis was occurring in the aqueous solution.\nStrecker synthesis describes the reaction of an aldehyde, ammonia, and HCN to a simple amino acid through an aminoacetonitrile intermediate:\n CH2O + HCN + NH3 \u2192 NH2-CH2-CN (aminoacetonitrile) + H2O\n NH2-CH2-CN + 2H2O \u2192 NH3 + NH2-CH2-COOH (glycine)\nFurthermore, water and formaldehyde can react via Butlerov's reaction to produce various sugars like ribose.\nThe experiments showed that simple organic compounds, including the building blocks of proteins and other macromolecules, can abiotically be formed from gases with the addition of energy.\nRelated experiments and follow-up work.\nContemporary experiments.\nThere were a few similar spark discharge experiments contemporaneous with Miller\u2013Urey. An article in \"The New York Times\" (March 8, 1953) titled \"Looking Back Two Billion Years\" describes the work of Wollman M. MacNevin at Ohio State University, before the Miller Science paper was published in May 1953. MacNevin was passing 100,000V sparks through methane and water vapor and produced \"resinous solids\" that were \"too complex for analysis.\" Furthermore, K. A. Wilde submitted a manuscript to \"Science\" on December 15, 1952, before Miller submitted his paper to the same journal in February 1953. Wilde's work, published on July 10, 1953, used voltages up to only 600V on a binary mixture of carbon dioxide (CO2) and water in a flow system and did not note any significant reduction products. According to some, the reports of these experiments explain why Urey was rushing Miller's manuscript through \"Science\" and threatening to submit to the \"Journal of the American Chemical Society.\"\nBy introducing an experimental framework to test prebiotic chemistry, the Miller\u2013Urey experiment paved the way for future origin of life research. In 1961, Joan Or\u00f3 produced milligrams of the nucleobase adenine from a concentrated solution of HCN and NH3 in water. Or\u00f3 found that several amino acids were also formed from HCN and ammonia under those conditions. Experiments conducted later showed that the other RNA and DNA nucleobases could be obtained through simulated prebiotic chemistry with a reducing atmosphere. Other researchers also began using UV-photolysis in prebiotic schemes, as the UV flux would have been much higher on early Earth. For example, UV-photolysis of water vapor with carbon monoxide was found to yield various alcohols, aldehydes, and organic acids. In the 1970s, Carl Sagan used Miller\u2013Urey-type reactions to synthesize and experiment with complex organic particles dubbed \"tholins\", which likely resemble particles formed in hazy atmospheres like that of Titan.\nModified Miller\u2013Urey experiments.\nMuch work has been done since the 1950s toward understanding how Miller\u2013Urey chemistry behaves in various environmental settings. In 1983, testing different atmospheric compositions, Miller and another researcher repeated experiments with varying proportions of H2, H2O, N2, CO2 or CH4, and sometimes NH3. They found that the presence or absence of NH3 in the mixture did not significantly impact amino acid yield, as NH3 was generated from N2 during the spark discharge. Additionally, CH4 proved to be one of the most important atmospheric ingredients for high yields, likely due to its role in HCN formation. Much lower yields were obtained with more oxidized carbon species in place of CH4, but similar yields could be reached with a high H2/CO2 ratio. Thus, Miller\u2013Urey reactions work in atmospheres of other compositions as well, depending on the ratio of reducing and oxidizing gases. More recently, Jeffrey Bada and H. James Cleaves, graduate students of Miller, hypothesized that the production of nitrites, which destroy amino acids, in CO2 and N2-rich atmospheres may explain low amino acids yields. In a Miller\u2013Urey setup with a less-reducing (CO2 + N2 + H2O) atmosphere, when they added calcium carbonate to buffer the aqueous solution and ascorbic acid to inhibit oxidation, yields of amino acids greatly increased, demonstrating that amino acids can still be formed in more neutral atmospheres under the right geochemical conditions. In a prebiotic context, they argued that seawater would likely still be buffered and ferrous iron could inhibit oxidation.\nIn 1999, after Miller suffered a stroke, he donated the contents of his laboratory to Bada. In an old cardboard box, Bada discovered unanalyzed samples from modified experiments that Miller had conducted in the 1950s. In a \"volcanic\" apparatus, Miller had amended an aspirating nozzle to shoot a jet of steam into the reaction chamber. Using high-performance liquid chromatography and mass spectrometry, Bada's lab analyzed old samples from a set of experiments Miller conducted with this apparatus and found some higher yields and a more diverse suite of amino acids. Bada speculated that injecting the steam into the spark could have split water into H and OH radicals, leading to more hydroxylated amino acids during Strecker synthesis. In a separate set of experiments, Miller added hydrogen sulfide (H2S) to the reducing atmosphere, and Bada's analyses of the products suggested order-of-magnitude higher yields, including some amino acids with sulfur moieties.\nA 2021 work highlighted the importance of the high-energy free electrons present in the experiment. It is these electrons that produce ions and radicals, and represent an aspect of the experiment that needs to be better understood.\nAfter comparing Miller\u2013Urey experiments conducted in borosilicate glassware with those conducted in Teflon apparatuses, a 2021 paper suggests that the glass reaction vessel acts as a mineral catalyst, implicating silicate rocks as important surfaces in prebiotic Miller\u2013Urey reactions.\nEarly Earth's prebiotic atmosphere.\nWhile there is a lack of geochemical observations to constrain the exact composition of the prebiotic atmosphere, recent models point to an early \"weakly reducing\" atmosphere; that is, early Earth's atmosphere was likely dominated by CO2 and N2 and not CH4 and NH3 as used in the original Miller\u2013Urey experiment. This is explained, in part, by the chemical composition of volcanic outgassing. Geologist William Rubey was one of the first to compile data on gases emitted from modern volcanoes and concluded that they are rich in CO2, H2O, and likely N2, with varying amounts of H2, sulfur dioxide (SO2), and H2S. Therefore, if the redox state of Earth's mantle \u2014 which dictates the composition of outgassing \u2013 has been constant since formation, then the atmosphere of early Earth was likely weakly reducing, but there are some arguments for a more-reducing atmosphere for the first few hundred million years.\nWhile the prebiotic atmosphere could have had a different redox condition than that of the Miller\u2013Urey atmosphere, the modified Miller\u2013Urey experiments described in the above section demonstrated that amino acids can still be abiotically produced in less-reducing atmospheres under specific geochemical conditions. Furthermore, harkening back to Urey's original hypothesis of a \"post-impact\" reducing atmosphere, a recent atmospheric modeling study has shown that an iron-rich impactor with a minimum mass around 4\u00d71020 \u2013 5\u00d71021 kg would be enough to transiently reduce the entire prebiotic atmosphere, resulting in a Miller\u2013Urey-esque H2-, CH4-, and NH3-dominated atmosphere that persists for millions of years. Previous work has estimated from the lunar cratering record and composition of Earth's mantle that between four and seven such impactors reached the Hadean Earth.\nA large factor controlling the redox budget of early Earth's atmosphere is the rate of atmospheric escape of H2 after Earth's formation. Atmospheric escape \u2013 common to young, rocky planets \u2014 occurs when gases in the atmosphere have sufficient kinetic energy to overcome gravitational energy. It is generally accepted that the timescale of hydrogen escape is short enough such that H2 made up &lt; 1% of the atmosphere of prebiotic Earth, but, in 2005, a hydrodynamic model of hydrogen escape predicted escape rates two orders of magnitude lower than previously thought, maintaining a hydrogen mixing ratio of 30%. A hydrogen-rich prebiotic atmosphere would have large implications for Miller\u2013Urey synthesis in the Hadean and Archean, but later work suggests solutions in that model might have violated conservation of mass and energy. That said, during hydrodynamic escape, lighter molecules like hydrogen can \"drag\" heavier molecules with them through collisions, and recent modeling of xenon escape has pointed to a hydrogen atmospheric mixing ratio of at least 1% or higher at times during the Archean.\nTaken together, the view that early Earth's atmosphere was weakly reducing, with transient instances of highly-reducing compositions following large impacts is generally supported.\nExtraterrestrial sources of amino acids.\nConditions similar to those of the Miller\u2013Urey experiments are present in other regions of the Solar System, often substituting ultraviolet light for lightning as the energy source for chemical reactions. The Murchison meteorite that fell near Murchison, Victoria, Australia in 1969 was found to contain an amino acid distribution remarkably similar to Miller\u2013Urey discharge products. Analysis of the organic fraction of the Murchison meteorite with Fourier-transform ion cyclotron resonance mass spectrometry detected over 10,000 unique compounds, albeit at very low (ppb\u2013ppm) concentrations. In this way, the organic composition of the Murchison meteorite is seen as evidence of Miller\u2013Urey synthesis outside Earth.\nComets and other icy outer-solar-system bodies are thought to contain large amounts of complex carbon compounds (such as tholins) formed by processes akin to Miller\u2013Urey setups, darkening surfaces of these bodies. Some argue that comets bombarding the early Earth could have provided a large supply of complex organic molecules along with the water and other volatiles, however very low concentrations of biologically-relevant material combined with uncertainty surrounding the survival of organic matter upon impact make this difficult to determine.\nRelevance to the origin of life.\nThe Miller\u2013Urey experiment was proof that the building blocks of life could be synthesized abiotically from gases, and introduced a new prebiotic chemistry framework through which to study the origin of life. Simulations of protein sequences present in the last universal common ancestor (LUCA), or the last shared ancestor of all extant species today, show an enrichment in simple amino acids that were available in the prebiotic environment according to Miller\u2013Urey chemistry. This suggests that the genetic code from which all life evolved was rooted in a smaller suite of amino acids than those used today. Thus, while creationist arguments focus on the fact that Miller\u2013Urey experiments have not generated all 22 genetically-encoded amino acids, this does not actually conflict with the evolutionary perspective on the origin of life.\nAnother common criticism is that the racemic mixture (containing both L and D enantiomers) of amino acids produced in a Miller\u2013Urey experiment is not exemplary of abiogenesis theories, as life on Earth today uses almost exclusively L-amino acids. While it is true that Miller\u2013Urey setups produce racemic mixtures, the origin of homochirality is a separate area in origin of life research.\nRecent work demonstrates that magnetic mineral surfaces like magnetite can be templates for the enantioselective crystallization of chiral molecules, including RNA precursors, due to the chiral-induced spin selectivity (CISS) effect. Once an enantioselective bias is introduced, homochirality can then propagate through biological systems in various ways. In this way, enantioselective synthesis is not required of Miller\u2013Urey reactions if other geochemical processes in the environment are introducing homochirality.\nFinally, Miller\u2013Urey and similar experiments primarily deal with the synthesis of monomers; polymerization of these building blocks to form peptides and other more complex structures is the next step of prebiotic chemistry schemes. Polymerization requires condensation reactions, which are thermodynamically unfavored in aqueous solutions because they expel water molecules. Scientists as far back as John Desmond Bernal in the late 1940s thus speculated that clay surfaces would play a large role in abiogenesis, as they might concentrate monomers. Several such models for mineral-mediated polymerization have emerged, such as the interlayers of layered double hydroxides like green rust over wet-dry cycles. Some scenarios for peptide formation have been proposed that are even compatible with aqueous solutions, such as the hydrophobic air-water interface and a novel \"sulfide-mediated \u03b1-aminonitrile ligation\" scheme, where amino acid precursors come together to form peptides. Polymerization of life's building blocks is an active area of research in prebiotic chemistry.\nAmino acids identified.\nBelow is a table of amino acids produced and identified in the \"classic\" 1952 experiment, as analyzed by Miller in 1952 and more recently by Bada and collaborators with modern mass spectrometry, the 2008 re-analysis of vials from the volcanic spark discharge experiment, and the 2010 re-analysis of vials from the H2S-rich spark discharge experiment. While not all proteinogenic amino acids have been produced in spark discharge experiments, it is generally accepted that early life used a simpler set of prebiotically-available amino acids.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20823", "revid": "7611264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20823", "title": "Majority function", "text": "Boolean function\nIn Boolean logic, the majority function (also called the median operator) is the Boolean function that evaluates to false when half or more arguments are false and true otherwise, i.e. the value of the function equals the value of the majority of the inputs.\nBoolean circuits.\nA \"majority gate\" is a logical gate used in circuit complexity and other applications of Boolean circuits. A majority gate returns true if and only if more than 50% of its inputs are true.\nFor instance, in a full adder, the carry output is found by applying a majority function to the three inputs, although frequently this part of the adder is broken down into several simpler logical gates.\nMany systems have triple modular redundancy; they use the majority function for majority logic decoding to implement error correction.\nA major result in circuit complexity asserts that the majority function cannot be computed by AC0 circuits of subexponential size.\nProperties.\nFor any \"x\", \"y\", and \"z\", the ternary median operator \u2329\"x\", \"y\", \"z\"\u232a satisfies the following equations.\nAn abstract system satisfying these as axioms is a median algebra.\nOther useful properties of the ternary median operator function include:\nTies.\nMost applications deliberately force an odd number of inputs so they don't have to deal with the question of what happens when exactly half the inputs are 0 and exactly half the inputs are 1. The few systems that calculate the majority function on an even number of inputs are often biased towards \"0\" \u2013 they produce \"0\" when exactly half the inputs are 0 \u2013 for example, a 4-input majority gate has a 0 output only when two or more 0's appear at its inputs. In a few systems, the tie can be broken randomly.\nMonotone formulae for majority.\nFor \"n\" = 1 the median operator is just the unary identity operation \"x\". For \"n\" = 3 the ternary median operator can be expressed using conjunction and disjunction as \"xy\" + \"yz\" + \"zx\".\nFor an arbitrary \"n\" there exists a monotone formula for majority of size O(\"n\"5.3). This is proved using probabilistic method. Thus, this formula is non-constructive.\nApproaches exist for an explicit formula for majority of polynomial size:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Sister-inline/styles.css\"/&gt; Media related to at Wikimedia Commons"}
{"id": "20824", "revid": "37442177", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20824", "title": "Modula", "text": "Programming language\nThe Modula programming language is a descendant of the Pascal language. It was developed in Switzerland, at ETH Zurich, in the mid-1970s by Niklaus Wirth, the same person who designed Pascal. The main innovation of Modula over Pascal is a module system, used for grouping sets of related declarations into program units; hence the name \"Modula\". The language is defined in a report by Wirth called \"Modula. A language for modular multiprogramming\" published 1976.\nModula was first implemented by Wirth on a PDP-11. Very soon, other implementations followed, most importantly, the compilers developed for University of York Modula, and one at Philips Laboratories named PL Modula, which generated code for the LSI-11 microprocessor.\nThe development of Modula was discontinued soon after its publication. Wirth then concentrated his efforts on Modula's successor, Modula-2.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20825", "revid": "38471288", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20825", "title": "Monolithic kernel", "text": "OS that runs entirely in kernel-mode\nA monolithic kernel is an operating system architecture with the entire operating system running in kernel space. The monolithic model differs from other architectures such as the microkernel in that it alone defines a high-level virtual interface over computer hardware. A set of primitives or system calls implement all operating system services such as process management, concurrency, and memory management. \nDevice drivers can be added to the kernel as loadable kernel modules.\nLoadable modules.\nModular operating systems such as OS-9 and most modern monolithic-kernel operating systems such as OpenVMS, Linux, FreeBSD, NetBSD, Solaris, and AIX can dynamically load (and unload) executable kernel modules at runtime. \nThis modularity of the operating system is at the binary (image) level and not at the architecture level. Modular monolithic operating systems are not to be confused with the architectural level of modularity inherent in server-client operating systems (and its derivatives sometimes marketed as hybrid kernel) which use microkernels and servers (not to be mistaken for modules or daemons).\nPractically speaking, dynamically loading modules is simply a more flexible way of handling the operating system image at runtime\u2014as opposed to rebooting with a different operating system image. The modules allow easy extension of the operating systems' capabilities as required. Dynamically loadable modules incur a small overhead when compared to building the module into the operating system image. \nHowever, in some cases, loading modules dynamically (as-needed) helps to keep the amount of code running in kernel space to a minimum; for example, to minimize operating system footprint for embedded devices or those with limited hardware resources. Namely, an unloaded module need not be stored in scarce random access memory.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20826", "revid": "2731577", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20826", "title": "Mithraism", "text": "Mystery religion in the Roman Empire\nMithraism, also known as the Mithraic mysteries or the Cult of Mithras, was a Roman mystery religion focused on the god Mithras. Although inspired by Iranian worship of the Zoroastrian divinity (\"yazata\") Mithra, the Roman Mithras was linked to a new and distinctive imagery, and the degree of continuity between Persian and Greco-Roman practice remains debatable.\nThe mysteries were popular among the Imperial Roman army from the 1st to the 4th century\u00a0AD.\nWorshippers of Mithras had a complex system of seven grades of initiation and communal ritual meals. Initiates called themselves \"syndexioi\", those \"united by the handshake\". They met in dedicated \"mithraea\" (singular \"mithraeum\"), underground temples that survive in large numbers. The cult appears to have had its centre in Rome, and was popular throughout the western half of the empire, as far south as Roman Africa and Numidia, as far east as Roman Dacia, as far north as Roman Britain, and to a lesser extent in Roman Syria in the east.\nMithraism is viewed as a rival of early Christianity.(phttps://) In the 4th\u00a0century, Mithraists faced persecution from Christians, and the religion was subsequently suppressed and eliminated in the Roman Empire by the end of the century.\nNumerous archaeological finds, including meeting places, monuments, and artifacts, have contributed to modern knowledge about Mithraism throughout the Roman Empire.\nThe iconic scenes of Mithras show him being born from a rock, slaughtering a bull, and sharing a banquet with the god Sol (the Sun). About 420\u00a0sites have yielded materials related to the cult. Among the items found are about 1000\u00a0inscriptions, 700\u00a0examples of the bull-killing scene (tauroctony), and about 400\u00a0other monuments.(pxxi)\nIt has been estimated that there would have been at least 680\u00a0mithraea in the city of Rome. No written narratives or theology from the religion survive; limited information can be derived from the inscriptions and brief or passing references in Greek and Latin literature. Interpretation of the physical evidence remains problematic and contested.\nName.\nThe term \"Mithraism\" is a modern convention. Writers of the Roman era referred to it by phrases such as \"Mithraic mysteries\", \"mysteries of Mithras\" or \"mysteries of the Persians\".\nModern sources sometimes refer to the Roman religion as \"Roman Mithraism\" or \"Western Mithraism\" to distinguish it from Persian worship of Mithra.\nEtymology.\nThe name \"Mithras\" (Latin, equivalent to Greek \"\u039c\u03af\u03b8\u03c1\u03b1\u03c2\") is a form of \"Mithra\", the name of an old, pre-Zoroastrian, and, later on, Zoroastrian, god \u2013 a relationship understood by Mithraic scholars since the days of Franz Cumont.\nAn early example of the Greek form of the name is in a 4th\u00a0century\u00a0BCE work by Xenophon, the \"Cyropaedia\", which is a biography of the Persian king Cyrus the Great.\nThe exact form of a Latin or classical Greek word varies due to the grammatical process of inflection. There is archaeological evidence that in Latin worshippers wrote the nominative form of the god's name as \"Mithras\". Porphyry's Greek text \"De\u00a0Abstinentia\" (\u03a0\u03b5\u03c1\u1f76 \u1f00\u03c0\u03bf\u03c7\u1fc6\u03c2 \u1f10\u03bc\u03c8\u03cd\u03c7\u03c9\u03bd), has a reference to the now-lost histories of the Mithraic mysteries by Euboulus and Pallas, the wording of which suggests that these authors treated the name \"Mithra\" as an indeclinable foreign word.\nRelated deity-names in other languages include:\nIn Sanskrit, \"mitra\" is an unusual name of the sun god, mostly known as \"Surya\" or \"Aditya\", however.\nIranian \"Mithra\" and Sanskrit \"Mitra\" are believed to come from the Indo-Iranian word \"mitr\u00e1s\", meaning \"contract, agreement, covenant\".\nModern historians have different conceptions about whether these names refer to the same god or not. John R. Hinnells has written of Mitra / Mithra / Mithras as a single deity, worshipped in several different religions. On the other hand, David Ulansey considers the bull-slaying Mithras to be a new god who began to be worshipped in the 1st\u00a0century BCE, and to whom an old name was applied.\nMary Boyce, an academic researcher on ancient Iranian religions, writes that even though Roman Mithraism seems to have had less Iranian content than ancient Romans or modern historians used to think, nonetheless \"as the name \"Mithras\" alone shows, this content was of some importance\".\nIconography.\nMuch about the cult of Mithras is only known from reliefs and sculptures. There have been many attempts to interpret this material.\nMithras-worship in the Roman Empire was characterized by images of the god slaughtering a bull. Other images of Mithras are found in the Roman temples, for instance Mithras banqueting with Sol, and depictions of the birth of Mithras from a rock. But the image of bull-slaying (tauroctony) is always in the central niche.(p6) Textual sources for a reconstruction of the theology behind this iconography are very rare. (See section Interpretations of the bull-slaying scene below.)\nThe practice of depicting the god slaying a bull seems to be specific to Roman Mithraism. According to David Ulansey, this is \"perhaps the most important example\" of evident difference between Iranian and Roman traditions: \"...\u00a0there is no evidence that the Iranian god Mithra ever had anything to do with killing a bull.\"(p8)\nBull-slaying scene.\nIn every mithraeum the centerpiece was a representation of Mithras killing a sacred bull, an act called the tauroctony.\nThe image may be a relief, or free-standing, and side details may be present or omitted. The centre-piece is Mithras clothed in Anatolian costume and wearing a Phrygian cap; who is kneeling on the exhausted bull, holding it by the nostrils(p77) with his left hand, and stabbing it with his right. As he does so, he looks over his shoulder towards the figure of Sol. A dog and a snake reach up towards the blood. A scorpion seizes the bull's genitals. A raven is flying around or is sitting on the bull. One or three ears of wheat are seen coming out from the bull's tail, sometimes from the wound. The bull was often white. The god is sitting on the bull in an unnatural way with his right leg constraining the bull's hoof and the left leg is bent and resting on the bull's back or flank. The two torch-bearers on either side are dressed like Mithras: \"Cautes\" with his torch pointing up, and \"Cautopates\" with his torch pointing down.(p98\u201399) Sometimes Cautes and Cautopates carry shepherds' crooks instead of torches.\nThe event takes place in a cavern, into which Mithras has carried the bull, after having hunted it, ridden it and overwhelmed its strength.(p74) Sometimes the cavern is surrounded by a circle, on which the twelve signs of the zodiac appear. Outside the cavern, top left, is Sol the sun, with his flaming crown, often driving a quadriga. A ray of light often reaches down to touch Mithras. At the top right is Luna, with her crescent moon, who may be depicted driving a biga.\nIn some depictions, the central tauroctony is framed by a series of subsidiary scenes to the left, top and right, illustrating events in the Mithras narrative; Mithras being born from the rock, the water miracle, the hunting and riding of the bull, meeting Sol who kneels to him, shaking hands with Sol and sharing a meal of bull-parts with him, and ascending to the heavens in a chariot. In some instances, as is the case in the stucco icon at Santa Prisca Mithraeum in Rome, the god is shown heroically nude. Some of these reliefs were constructed so that they could be turned on an axis. On the reverse was another, more elaborate feasting scene. This indicates that the bull killing scene was used in the first part of the celebration, then the relief was turned, and the second scene was used in the second part of the celebration.\nBesides the main cult icon, a number of mithraea had several secondary tauroctonies, and some small portable versions, probably meant for private devotion, have also been found.\nBanquet.\nThe second most important scene after the tauroctony in Mithraic art is the so-called banquet scene. The banquet scene features Mithras and Sol Invictus banqueting on the hide of the slaughtered bull. On the specific banquet scene on the Fiano Romano relief, one of the torchbearers points a caduceus towards the base of an altar, where flames appear to spring up. Robert Turcan has argued that since the caduceus is an attribute of Mercury, and in mythology Mercury is depicted as a psychopomp, the eliciting of flames in this scene is referring to the dispatch of human souls and expressing the Mithraic doctrine on this matter. Turcan also connects this event to the tauroctony: The blood of the slain bull has soaked the ground at the base of the altar, and from the blood the souls are elicited in flames by the caduceus.\nBirth from a rock.\nMithras is depicted as being born from a rock. He is often shown as emerging from a rock, already in his youth, with a dagger in one hand and a torch in the other. He is nude, standing with his legs together, and is wearing a Phrygian cap.\nIn some variations, he is shown coming out of the rock as a child, and in one holds a globe in one hand; sometimes a thunderbolt is seen. There are also depictions in which flames are shooting from the rock and also from Mithras' cap. One statue had its base perforated so that it could serve as a fountain, and the base of another has the mask of a water god. Sometimes Mithras also has other weapons such as bows and arrows, and there are also animals such as dogs, serpents, dolphins, eagles, other birds, lions, crocodiles, lobsters and snails around. On some reliefs, there is a bearded figure identified as the water god Oceanus, and on some there are the gods of the four winds. In these reliefs, the four elements could be invoked together. Sometimes Victoria, Luna, Sol, and Saturn also seem to play a role. Saturn in particular is often seen handing over the dagger or short sword to Mithras, used later in the tauroctony.\nIn some depictions, Cautes and Cautopates are also present; sometimes they are depicted as shepherds.\nOn some occasions, an amphora is seen, and a few instances show variations like an egg birth or a tree birth. Some interpretations show that the birth of Mithras was celebrated by lighting torches or candles.\nLion-headed figure.\nOne of the most characteristic and poorly-understood features of the Mysteries is the naked lion-headed figure often found in Mithraic temples, named by the modern scholars with descriptive terms such as \"leontocephaline\" (lion-headed) or \"leontocephalus\" (lion-head).\nHis body is a naked man's, entwined by a serpent (or two serpents, like a caduceus), with the snake's head often resting on the lion's head. The lion's mouth is often open. He is usually represented as having four wings, two keys (sometimes a single key), and a sceptre in his hand. Sometimes the figure is standing on a globe inscribed with a diagonal cross. On the figure from the Ostia Antica Mithraeum (left, CIMRM\u00a0312), the four wings carry the symbols of the four seasons, and a thunderbolt is engraved on his chest. At the base of the statue are the hammer and tongs of Vulcan and Mercury's cock and wand (caduceus). A rare variation of the same figure is also found with a human head and a lion's head emerging from its chest.\nAlthough animal-headed figures are prevalent in contemporary Egyptian and Gnostic mythological representations, no exact parallel to the Mithraic leontocephaline figure has been found.\nBased on dedicatory inscriptions for altars, the name of the figure is conjectured to be \"Arimanius\", a Latinized form of the name \"Ahriman\" \u2013 perplexingly, a demonic figure in the Zoroastrian pantheon. Arimanius is known from inscriptions to have been a god in the Mithraic cult as seen, for example, in images from the \"Corpus Inscriptionum et Monumentorum Religionis Mithriacae\" (CIMRM) such as CIMRM\u00a0222 from Ostia, CIMRM\u00a0369 from Rome, and CIMRM\u00a01773 and 1775 from Pannonia.\nSome scholars identify the lion-man as Aion, or Zurvan, or Cronus, or Chronos, while others assert that it is a version of the Zoroastrian Ahriman or the more benign Vedic Aryaman.\nAlthough the exact identity of the lion-headed figure is debated by scholars, it is largely agreed that the god is associated with time and seasonal change.(p94)\nRituals and worship.\nAccording to M.J. Vermaseren and C.C. van\u00a0Essen, the Mithraic New Year and the birthday of Mithras was on 25 December.\nBeck disagreed strongly.(p299, note\u202f12)\nClauss states: \"The Mithraic Mysteries had no public ceremonies of its own. The festival of \"Natalis Invicti\", held on 25\u00a0December, was a general festival of the Sun, and by no means specific to the Mysteries of Mithras.\"\nMithraic initiates were required to swear an oath of secrecy and dedication.\nMithras was thought to be a \"warrior hero\" similar to Greek heroes.\nMithraic catechism.\nApparently, some grade rituals involved the recital of a catechism, wherein the initiate was asked a series of questions pertaining to the initiation symbolism and had to reply with specific answers. An example of such a catechism, apparently pertaining to the Leo grade, was discovered in a fragmentary Egyptian papyrus (Papyrus Berolinensis 21196), and reads:\nAlmost no Mithraic scripture or first-hand account of its rituals survives; with the exception of the aforementioned oath and catechism, and the document known as the Mithras Liturgy, from 4th century Egypt, whose status as a Mithraist text has been questioned by scholars including Franz Cumont. The walls of mithraea were commonly whitewashed, and where this survives, it tends to carry extensive repositories of graffiti; and these, together with inscriptions on Mithraic monuments, form the main source for Mithraic texts.\nFeasting.\nThe archaeology of numerous mithraea indicates that most rituals were associated with feasting \u2013 as eating utensils and food residues are often found. These tend to include both animal bones and also very large quantities of fruit residues.(p115) The presence of large numbers of cherry-stones in particular would tend to confirm mid-summer (late June, early July) as a season especially associated with Mithraic festivities. The Virunum \"album\", in the form of an inscribed bronze plaque, records a Mithraic festival of commemoration as taking place on 26\u00a0June 184. Beck argues that religious celebrations on this date are indicative of special significance being given to the summer solstice; but this time of the year coincides with ancient recognition of the solar maximum at midsummer, when iconographically identical holidays such as Fors Fortuna (ancient Rome), Saint John's Eve, and J\u0101\u0146i (Lithuania) are also observed.\nFor their feasts, Mithraic initiates reclined on stone benches arranged along the longer sides of the mithraeum\u00a0\u2013 typically there might be room for 15 to 30\u00a0diners, but very rarely many more than 40\u00a0men.(p43) Counterpart dining rooms, or \"triclinia\", were to be found above ground in the precincts of almost any temple or religious sanctuary in the Roman empire, and such rooms were commonly used for their regular feasts by Roman 'clubs', or \"collegia\". Mithraic feasts probably performed a very similar function for Mithraists as the \"collegia\" did for those entitled to join them; indeed, since qualification for Roman \"collegia\" tended to be restricted to particular families, localities or traditional trades, Mithraism may have functioned in part as providing clubs for the unclubbed. The size of the mithraeum is not necessarily an indication of the size of the congregation.\nAltars, iconography, and suspected doctrinal diversity.\nEach mithraeum had several altars at the further end, underneath the representation of the tauroctony, and also commonly contained considerable numbers of subsidiary altars, both in the main mithraeum chamber and in the ante-chamber or narthex.(p49) These altars, which are of the standard Roman pattern, each carry a named dedicatory inscription from a particular initiate, who dedicated the altar to Mithras \"in fulfillment of his vow\", in gratitude for favours received.\nBurned residues of animal entrails are commonly found on the main altars, indicating regular sacrificial use, though mithraea do not commonly appear to have been provided with facilities for ritual slaughter of sacrificial animals (a highly specialised function in Roman religion), and it may be presumed that a mithraeum would have made arrangements for this service to be provided for them in co-operation with the professional \"victimarius\"(p568) of the civic cult. Prayers were addressed to the Sun three times a day, and Sunday was especially sacred.\nIt is doubtful whether Mithraism had a monolithic and internally consistent doctrine.\nIt may have varied from location to location.(p16) The iconography is relatively coherent. It had no predominant sanctuary or cultic centre; and, although each mithraeum had its own officers and functionaries, there was no central supervisory authority. In some mithraea, such as that at Dura Europos, wall paintings depict prophets carrying scrolls, but no named Mithraic sages are known, nor does any reference give the title of any Mithraic scripture or teaching. It is known that initiates could transfer with their grades from one Mithraeum to another.(p139)\nMithraeum.\nTemples of Mithras are sunk below ground, windowless, and very distinctive. In cities, the basement of an apartment block might be converted; elsewhere they might be excavated and vaulted over, or converted from a natural cave. Mithraic temples are common in the empire; although unevenly distributed, with considerable numbers found in Rome, Ostia, Numidia, Dalmatia, Britain and along the Rhine/Danube frontier, while being somewhat less common in Greece, Egypt, and Syria. According to Walter Burkert, the secret character of Mithraic rituals meant that Mithraism could only be practiced within a Mithraeum. Some new finds at Tienen show evidence of large-scale feasting and suggest that the mystery religion may not have been as secretive as was generally believed.\nFor the most part, mithraea tend to be small, externally undistinguished, and cheaply constructed; the cult generally preferring to create a new centre rather than expand an existing one. The mithraeum represented the cave to which Mithras carried and then killed the bull; and where stone vaulting could not be afforded, the effect would be imitated with lath and plaster. They are commonly located close to springs or streams; fresh water appears to have been required for some Mithraic rituals, and a basin is often incorporated into the structure.(p73) There is usually a narthex or ante-chamber at the entrance, and often other ancillary rooms for storage and the preparation of food. The extant mithraea present us with actual physical remains of the architectural structures of the sacred spaces of the Mithraic cult. \"Mithraeum\" is a modern coinage and mithraists referred to their sacred structures as \"speleum\" or \"antrum\" (cave), \"crypta\" (underground hallway or corridor), \"fanum\" (sacred or holy place), or even \"templum\" (a temple or a sacred space).\nIn their basic form, mithraea were entirely different from the temples and shrines of other cults. In the standard pattern of Roman religious precincts, the temple building functioned as a house for the god, who was intended to be able to view, through the opened doors and columnar portico, sacrificial worship being offered on an altar set in an open courtyard \u2013 potentially accessible not only to initiates of the cult, but also to \"colitores\" or non-initiated worshippers.(p493) Mithraea were the antithesis of this.(p355)\nDegrees of initiation.\nIn the \"Suda\" under the entry \"Mithras\", it states that \"No one was permitted to be initiated into them (the mysteries of Mithras), until he should show himself holy and steadfast by undergoing several graduated tests.\" Gregory Nazianzen refers to the \"tests in the mysteries of Mithras\".\nThere were seven grades of initiation into Mithraism, which are listed by St.\u00a0Jerome. Manfred Clauss states that the number of grades, seven, must be connected to the planets. A mosaic in the Mithraeum of Felicissimus, Ostia Antica depicts these grades, with symbolic emblems that are connected either to the grades or are symbols of the planets. The grades also have an inscription beside them commending each grade into the protection of the different planetary gods. In ascending order of importance, the initiatory grades were:(p133\u2013138)\nElsewhere, as at Dura-Europos, Mithraic graffiti survive giving membership lists, in which initiates of a mithraeum are named with their Mithraic grades. At Virunum, the membership list or \"album sacratorum\" was maintained as an inscribed plaque, updated year by year as new members were initiated. By cross-referencing these lists it is possible to track some initiates from one mithraeum to another; and also speculatively to identify Mithraic initiates with persons on other contemporary lists such as military service rolls and lists of devotees of non-Mithraic religious sanctuaries. Names of initiates are also found in the dedication inscriptions of altars and other cult objects.\nClauss noted in 1990 that overall, only about 14% of Mithraic names inscribed before 250\u00a0CE identify the initiate's grade \u2013 and hence questioned the traditional view that all initiates belonged to one of the seven grades. Clauss argues that the grades represented a distinct class of priests, \"sacerdotes\". Gordon maintains the former theory of Merkelbach and others, especially noting such examples as Dura where all names are associated with a Mithraic grade. Some scholars maintain that practice may have differed over time, or from one Mithraeum to another.\nThe highest grade, \"pater\", is by far the most common one found on dedications and inscriptions \u2013 and it would appear not to have been unusual for a mithraeum to have several men with this grade. The form \"pater patrum\" (father of fathers) is often found, which appears to indicate the \"pater\" with primary status. There are several examples of persons, commonly those of higher social status, joining a mithraeum with the status \"pater\" \u2013 especially in Rome during the 'pagan revival' of the 4th\u00a0century. It has been suggested that some mithraea may have awarded honorary \"pater\" status to sympathetic dignitaries.\nThe initiate into each grade appears to have been required to undertake a specific ordeal or test,(p103) involving exposure to heat, cold or threatened peril. An 'ordeal pit', dating to the early 3rd\u00a0century, has been identified in the mithraeum at Carrawburgh. Accounts of the cruelty of the emperor Commodus describes his amusing himself by enacting Mithraic initiation ordeals in homicidal form. By the later 3rd\u00a0century, the enacted trials appear to have been abated in rigor, as 'ordeal pits' were floored over.\nAdmission into the community was completed with a handshake with the \"pater\", just as Mithras and Sol shook hands. The initiates were thus referred to as \"syndexioi\" (those united by the handshake). The term is used in an inscription by Proficentius\nand derided by Firmicus Maternus in \"De errore profanarum religionum\",\na 4th\u00a0century Christian work attacking paganism. In ancient Iran, taking the right hand was the traditional way of concluding a treaty or signifying some solemn understanding between two parties.\nRitual re-enactments.\nActivities of the most prominent deities in Mithraic scenes, Sol and Mithras, were imitated in rituals by the two most senior officers in the cult's hierarchy, the \"Pater\" and the \"Heliodromus\".(p288\u2013289) The initiates held a sacramental banquet, replicating the feast of Mithras and Sol.(p288\u2013289)\nReliefs on a cup found in Mainz appear to depict a Mithraic initiation. On the cup, the initiate is depicted as being led into a location where a \"Pater\" would be seated in the guise of Mithras with a drawn bow. Accompanying the initiate is a mystagogue, who explains the symbolism and theology to the initiate. The Rite is thought to re-enact what has come to be called the 'Water Miracle', in which Mithras fires a bolt into a rock, and from the rock now spouts water.\nRoger Beck has hypothesized a third processional Mithraic ritual, based on the Mainz cup and Porphyrys. This scene, called 'Procession of the Sun-Runner', shows the \"Heliodromus\" escorted by two figures representing Cautes and Cautopates (see below) and preceded by an initiate of the grade \"Miles\" leading a ritual enactment of the solar journey around the mithraeum, which was intended to represent the cosmos.\nConsequently, it has been argued that most Mithraic rituals involved a re-enactment by the initiates of episodes in the Mithras narrative, a narrative whose main elements were: birth from the rock, striking water from stone with an arrow shot, the killing of the bull, Sol's submission to Mithras, Mithras and Sol feasting on the bull, the ascent of Mithras to heaven in a chariot. A noticeable feature of this narrative (and of its regular depiction in surviving sets of relief carvings) is the absence of female personages (the sole exception being Luna watching the tauroctony in the upper corner opposite Helios, and the presumable presence of Venus as patroness of the \"nymphus\" grade).(p33)\nMembership.\nOnly male names appear in surviving inscribed membership lists. Historians including Cumont and Richard Gordon have concluded that the cult was for men only.\nThe ancient scholar Porphyry refers to female initiates in Mithraic rites.\nThe early 20th-century historian A.S. Geden wrote that this may be due to a misunderstanding. According to Geden, while the participation of women in the ritual was not unknown in the Eastern cults, the predominant military influence in Mithraism makes it unlikely in this instance. It has recently been suggested by David Jonathan that \"Women were involved with Mithraic groups in at least some locations of the empire.\"(p121)\nSoldiers were strongly represented amongst Mithraists, and also merchants, customs officials and minor bureaucrats. Few, if any, initiates came from leading aristocratic or senatorial families until the 'pagan revival' of the mid-4th century; but there were always considerable numbers of freedmen and slaves.(p39)\nEthics.\nClauss suggests that a statement by Porphyry, that people initiated into the Lion grade must keep their hands pure from everything that brings pain and harm and is impure, means that moral demands were made upon members of congregations.\nA passage in the \"Caesares\" of Julian the Apostate refers to \"commandments of Mithras\".\nTertullian, in his treatise \"On the Military Crown\" records that Mithraists in the army were officially excused from wearing celebratory coronets on the basis of the Mithraic initiation ritual that included refusing a proffered crown, because \"their only crown was Mithras\".\nHistory and development.\nMithras before the Roman Mysteries.\nAccording to the archaeologist Maarten Vermaseren, evidence from Commagene from the 1st century BCE demonstrates the \"reverence paid to Mithras\" but does not refer to \"the mysteries\".\nIn the colossal statuary erected by King Antiochus\u00a0I (69\u201334\u00a0BCE) at Mount Nemrut, Mithras is shown beardless, wearing a Phrygian cap\n(or the similar headdress \u2013 a Persian tiara), in Iranian (Parthian) clothing, and was originally seated on a throne alongside other deities and the king himself.\nOn the back of the thrones there is an inscription in Greek, which includes the compound name \"Apollo-Mithras-Helios\" in the genitive case (\"\u1f08\u03c0\u03cc\u03bb\u03bb\u03c9\u03bd\u03bf\u03c2 \u039c\u03af\u03b8\u03c1\u03bf\u03c5 \u1f29\u03bb\u03af\u03bf\u03c5\").\nVermaseren also reports about a Mithras cult in Fayum in the 3rd\u00a0century BCE.(p467)\nR.D.\u00a0Barnett has argued that the royal seal of King\u00a0Saussatar of the Mitanni from c.\u20091450\u00a0BCE depicts a tauroctonous Mithras.\nBeginnings of Roman Mithraism.\nThe origins and spread of the Mysteries have been intensely debated among scholars and there are radically differing views on these issues. According to Clauss, mysteries of Mithras were not practiced until the 1st\u00a0century\u00a0CE. According to Ulansey, the earliest evidence for the Mithraic mysteries places their appearance in the middle of the 1st\u00a0century\u00a0BCE: The historian Plutarch says that in 67\u00a0BCE the pirates of Cilicia (a province on the southeastern coast of Asia Minor, that provided sea access to adjacent Commagene) were practicing \"secret rites\" of Mithras.\nAccording to C.M. Daniels, whether any of this relates to the origins of the mysteries is unclear.\nThe unique underground temples or mithraea appear suddenly in the archaeology in the last quarter of the 1st\u00a0century\u00a0CE.(p118)\nEarliest archaeology.\nInscriptions and monuments related to the Mithraic Mysteries are catalogued in a two volume work by Maarten J. Vermaseren, the \"Corpus Inscriptionum et Monumentorum Religionis Mithriacae\" (or CIMRM). The earliest monument showing Mithras slaying the bull is thought to be CIMRM\u00a0593, found in Rome. There is no date, but the inscription tells us that it was dedicated by a certain Alcimus, steward of T. Claudius Livianus. Vermaseren and Gordon believe that this Livianus is a certain Livianus who was commander of the Praetorian guard in 101\u00a0CE, which would give an earliest date of 98\u201399\u00a0CE.\nFive small terracotta plaques of a figure holding a knife over a bull have been excavated near Kerch in the Crimea, dated by Beskow and Clauss to the second half of the 1st\u00a0century\u00a0BCE, and by Beck to 50\u00a0BCE\u00a0\u2013 50\u00a0CE. These may be the earliest tauroctonies, if they are accepted to be a depiction of Mithras.\nThe bull-slaying figure wears a Phrygian cap, but is described by Beck and Beskow as otherwise unlike standard depictions of the tauroctony. Another reason for not connecting these artifacts with the Mithraic Mysteries is that the first of these plaques was found in a woman's tomb.\nAn altar or block from near SS. Pietro e Marcellino on the Esquiline in Rome was inscribed with a bilingual inscription by an Imperial freedman named T. Flavius Hyginus, probably between 80 and 100\u00a0CE. It is dedicated to \"Sol Invictus Mithras\".\nCIMRM\u00a02268 is a broken base or altar from Novae/Steklen in Moesia Inferior, dated 100\u00a0CE, showing Cautes and Cautopates.\nOther early archaeology includes the Greek inscription from Venosia by Sagaris \"actor\" probably from 100\u2013150\u00a0CE; the Sidon \"cippus\" dedicated by Theodotus priest of Mithras to Asclepius, 140\u2013141\u00a0CE; and the earliest military inscription, by C.\u00a0Sacidius Barbarus, centurion of XV Apollinaris, from the bank of the Danube at Carnuntum, probably before 114\u00a0CE.(p150)\nAccording to C.M. Daniels, the Carnuntum inscription is the earliest Mithraic dedication from the Danube region, which along with Italy is one of the two regions where Mithraism first struck root.\nThe earliest dateable mithraeum outside Rome dates from 148\u00a0CE. The Mithraeum at Caesarea Maritima is the only one in Palestine and the date is inferred.\nEarliest cult locations.\nAccording to Roger Beck, the attested locations of the Roman cult in the earliest phase (c.\u200980\u2013120\u00a0CE) are as follows:\nMithraea datable from pottery\nDatable dedications\nClassical literature about Mithras and the Mysteries.\nAccording to Boyce, the earliest literary references to the mysteries are by the Latin poet Statius, about 80\u00a0CE, and Plutarch (c.\u00a0100\u00a0CE).\nStatius.\nThe Thebaid (c.) an epic poem by Statius, pictures Mithras in a cave, wrestling with something that has horns.\nThe context is a prayer to the god Phoebus.\nThe cave is described as \"persei\", which in this context is usually translated \"Persian\". According to the translator J.H.\u00a0Mozley it literally means \"Persean\", referring to \"Perses\", the son of Perseus and Andromeda,(p29) this Perses being the ancestor of the Persians according to Greek legend.\nJustin Martyr.\nWriting in approximately 145\u00a0CE, the early Christian apologist Justin Martyr charges the cult of Mithras with imitating the Christian communion,\nWhich the wicked devils have imitated in the mysteries of Mithras, commanding the same things to be done. For, that bread and a cup of water are placed, with certain incantations, in the mystic rites of one who is being initiated, you either know or can learn.\nPlutarch.\nThe Greek biographer Plutarch (46\u2013127\u00a0CE) says that \"secret mysteries ... of Mithras\" were practiced by the pirates of Cilicia, the coastal province in the southeast of Anatolia, who were active in the 1st\u00a0century\u00a0BCE: \"They likewise offered strange sacrifices; those of Olympus I mean; and they celebrated certain secret mysteries, among which those of Mithras continue to this day, being originally instituted by them.\"\nHe mentions that the pirates were especially active during the Mithridatic wars (between the Roman Republic and King Mithridates VI of Pontus) in which they supported the king. The association between Mithridates and the pirates is also mentioned by the ancient historian Appian.\nThe 4th\u00a0century commentary on Vergil by Servius says that Pompey settled some of these pirates in Calabria in southern Italy.\nDio Cassius.\nThe historian Dio Cassius (2nd to 3rd\u00a0century\u00a0CE) tells how the name of Mithras was spoken during the state visit to Rome of Tiridates I of Armenia, during the reign of Nero. (Tiridates was the son of Vonones II of Parthia, and his coronation by Nero in 66\u00a0CE confirmed the end of a war between Parthia and Rome.) Dio Cassius writes that Tiridates, as he was about to receive his crown, told the Roman emperor that he revered him \"as Mithras\". Roger Beck thinks it possible that this episode contributed to the emergence of Mithraism as a popular religion in Rome.\nPorphyry.\nThe philosopher Porphyry (3rd\u20134th\u00a0century\u00a0CE) gives an account of the origins of the Mysteries in his work \"De antro nympharum\" (\"The Cave of the Nymphs\"). Citing Eubulus as his source, Porphyry writes that the original temple of Mithras was a natural cave, containing fountains, which Zoroaster found in the mountains of Persia. To Zoroaster, this cave was an image of the whole world, so he consecrated it to Mithras, the creator of the world. Later in the same work, Porphyry links Mithras and the bull with planets and star-signs: Mithras himself is associated with the sign of Aries and the planet Mars, while the bull is associated with Venus.\nPorphyry is writing close to the demise of the cult, and Robert Turcan has challenged the idea that Porphyry's statements about Mithraism are accurate. His case is that far from representing what Mithraists believed, they are merely representations by the Neoplatonists of what it suited them in the late 4th century to read into the mysteries.\nMerkelbach &amp; Beck believed Porphyry's work \"is in fact thoroughly coloured with the doctrines of the Mysteries\".(p308 note\u202f37)\nBeck holds that classical scholars have neglected Porphyry's evidence and have taken an unnecessarily skeptical view of Porphyry.\nAccording to Beck, Porphyry's \"De antro\" is the only clear text from antiquity which tells us about the intent of the Mithraic mysteries and how that intent was realized.\nDavid Ulansey finds it important that Porphyry \"confirms ... that astral conceptions played an important role in Mithraism.\"(p18)\nMithras Liturgy.\nIn later antiquity, the Greek name of Mithras (\u039c\u03af\u03b8\u03c1\u03b1\u03c2) occurs in the text known as the \"Mithras Liturgy\", a part of the \"Paris Greek Magical Papyrus\"\nhere Mithras is given the epithet \"the great god\", and is identified with the sun god Helios.\nThere have been different views among scholars as to whether this text is an expression of Mithraism as such. Franz Cumont argued that it is not;(p12)\nMarvin Meyer thinks it is;\nwhile Hans Dieter Betz sees it as a synthesis of Greek, Egyptian, and Mithraic traditions.\nModern debate on origin.\nCumont's hypothesis: from Persian state religion.\nScholarship on Mithras begins with Franz Cumont, who published a two volume collection of source texts and images of monuments in French in 1894\u20131900, \"Textes et monuments figur\u00e9s relatifs aux myst\u00e8res de Mithra\" [French: \"Texts and Illustrated Monuments Relating to the Mysteries of Mithra\"]. An English translation of part of this work was published in 1903, with the title \"The Mysteries of Mithra\". Cumont's hypothesis, as the author summarizes it in the first 32\u00a0pages of his book, was that the Roman religion was \"the Roman form of Mazdaism\",(p298) the Persian state religion, disseminated from the East. He identified the ancient Aryan deity who appears in Persian literature as Mithras with the Hindu god Mitra of the Vedic hymns. According to Cumont, the god Mithra came to Rome \"accompanied by a large representation of the Mazdean Pantheon.\" Cumont considers that while the tradition \"underwent some modification in the Occident ... the alterations that it suffered were largely superficial.\"\nCriticisms and reassessments of Cumont.\nCumont's theories came in for severe criticism from John R. Hinnells and R.L. Gordon at the First International Congress of Mithraic Studies held in 1971. John Hinnells was unwilling to reject entirely the idea of Iranian origin, but wrote: \"we must now conclude that his reconstruction simply will not stand. It receives no support from the Iranian material and is in fact in conflict with the ideas of that tradition as they are represented in the extant texts. Above all, it is a theoretical reconstruction which does not accord with the actual Roman iconography.\" He discussed Cumont's reconstruction of the bull-slaying scene and stated \"that the portrayal of Mithras given by Cumont is not merely unsupported by Iranian texts but is actually in serious conflict with known Iranian theology.\" Another paper by R.L.\u00a0Gordon argued that Cumont severely distorted the available evidence by forcing the material to conform to his predetermined model of Zoroastrian origins. Gordon suggested that the theory of Persian origins was completely invalid and that the Mithraic mysteries in the West were an entirely new creation.\nA similar view has been expressed by Luther H. Martin: \"Apart from the name of the god himself, in other words, Mithraism seems to have developed largely in and is, therefore, best understood from the context of Roman culture.\"(pxiv)\nAccording to Hopfe, \"All theories of the origin of Mithraism acknowledge a connection, however vague, to the Mithra/Mitra figure of ancient Aryan religion.\" Reporting on the Second International Congress of Mithraic Studies, 1975, Ugo Bianchi says that although he welcomes \"the tendency to question in historical terms the relations between Eastern and Western Mithraism\", it \"should not mean obliterating what was clear to the Romans themselves, that Mithras was a 'Persian' (in wider perspective: an Indo-Iranian) god.\"\nBoyce wrote, \"no satisfactory evidence has yet been adduced to show that, before Zoroaster, the concept of a supreme god existed among the Iranians, or that among them Mithra \u2013 or any other divinity \u2013 ever enjoyed a separate cult of his or her own outside either their ancient or their Zoroastrian pantheons.\" She also said that although recent studies have minimized the Iranizing aspects of the self-consciously Persian religion \"at least in the form which it attained under the Roman Empire\", the name \"Mithras\" is enough to show \"that this aspect is of some importance.\" She also says that \"the Persian affiliation of the Mysteries is acknowledged in the earliest literary references to them.\"\nBeck tells us that since the 1970s scholars have generally rejected Cumont, but adds that recent theories about how Zoroastrianism was during the period BCE now make some new form of Cumont's east\u2013west transfer possible. He says that\n... an indubitable residuum of things Persian in the Mysteries and a better knowledge of what constituted actual Mazdaism have allowed modern scholars to postulate for Roman Mithraism a continuing Iranian theology. This indeed is the main line of Mithraic scholarship, the Cumontian model which subsequent scholars accept, modify, or reject. For the transmission of Iranian doctrine from East to West, Cumont postulated a plausible, if hypothetical, intermediary: the Magusaeans of the Iranian diaspora in Anatolia. More problematic \u2013 and never properly addressed by Cumont or his successors \u2013 is how real-life Roman Mithraists subsequently maintained a quite complex and sophisticated Iranian theology behind an occidental facade. Other than the images at Dura of the two 'magi' with scrolls, there is no direct and explicit evidence for the carriers of such doctrines. ... Up to a point, Cumont's Iranian paradigm, especially in Turcan's modified form, is certainly plausible.\nHe also says that \"the old Cumontian model of formation in, and diffusion from, Anatolia ... is by no means dead \u2013 nor should it be.\"\nModern theories.\nBeck theorizes that the cult was created in Rome, by a single founder who had some knowledge of both Greek and Oriental religion, but suggests that some of the ideas used may have passed through the Hellenistic kingdoms. He observes that \"Mithras \u2013 moreover, a Mithras who was identified with the Greek Sun god Helios\" was among the gods of the syncretic Greco-Armenian-Iranian royal cult at Nemrut, founded by Antiochus\u00a0I of Commagene in the mid 1st\u00a0century\u00a0BCE. While proposing the theory, Beck says that his scenario may be regarded as Cumontian in two ways. Firstly, because it looks again at Anatolia and Anatolians, and more importantly, because it hews back to the methodology first used by Cumont.\nMerkelbach suggests that its mysteries were essentially created by a particular person or persons and created in a specific place, the city of Rome, by someone from an eastern province or border state who knew the Iranian myths in detail, which he wove into his new grades of initiation; but that he must have been Greek and Greek-speaking because he incorporated elements of Greek Platonism into it. The myths, he suggests, were probably created in the milieu of the imperial bureaucracy, and for its members. Clauss tends to agree. Beck calls this \"the most likely scenario\" and states \"Until now, Mithraism has generally been treated as if it somehow evolved Topsy-like from its Iranian precursor \u2013 a most implausible scenario once it is stated explicitly.\"\nArchaeologist Lewis M. Hopfe notes that there are only three mithraea in Roman Syria, in contrast to further west. He writes: \"Archaeology indicates that Roman Mithraism had its epicenter in Rome ... the fully developed religion known as Mithraism seems to have begun in Rome and been carried to Syria by soldiers and merchants.\"\nTaking a different view from other modern scholars, Ulansey argues that the Mithraic mysteries began in the Greco-Roman world as a religious response to the discovery by the Greek astronomer Hipparchus of the astronomical phenomenon of the precession of the equinoxes \u2013 a discovery that amounted to discovering that the entire cosmos was moving in a hitherto unknown way. This new cosmic motion, he suggests, was seen by the founders of Mithraism as indicating the existence of a powerful new god capable of shifting the cosmic spheres and thereby controlling the universe.\nA. D. H. Bivar, L. A. Campbell, and G. Widengren have variously argued that Roman Mithraism represents a continuation of some form of Iranian Mithra worship. More recently, Parvaneh Pourshariati has made similar claims.\nAccording to Antonia Tripolitis, Roman Mithraism originated in Vedic India and picked up many features of the cultures which it encountered in its westward journey.\nLater history.\nThe first important expansion of the mysteries in the Empire seems to have happened quite quickly, late in the reign of Antoninus Pius (b.\u00a0121\u00a0CE, d.\u00a0161\u00a0CE) and under Marcus Aurelius. By this time all the key elements of the mysteries were in place.\nMithraism reached the apogee of its popularity during the 2nd and 3rd centuries, spreading at an \"astonishing\" rate at the same period when the worship of Sol Invictus was incorporated into the state-sponsored cults.(p299)\nAt this period a certain Pallas devoted a monograph to Mithras, and a little later Euboulus wrote a \"History of Mithras\", although both works are now lost.\nAccording to the 4th\u00a0century Historia Augusta, the emperor Commodus participated in its mysteries but it never became one of the state cults.\nThe historian Jacob Burckhardt writes:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Mithras is the guide of souls which he leads from the earthly life into which they had fallen back up to the light from which they issued ... It was not only from the religions and the wisdom of Orientals and Egyptians, even less from Christianity, that the notion that life on earth was merely a transition to a higher life was derived by the Romans. Their own anguish and the awareness of senescence made it plain enough that earthly existence was all hardship and bitterness. Mithras-worship became one, and perhaps the most significant, of the religions of redemption in declining paganism.\nPersecution and Christianization.\nThe religion and its followers faced persecution in the 4th century from Christianization, and Mithraism came to an end at some point between its last decade and the 5th century. Ulansey states that \"Mithraism declined with the rise to power of Christianity, until the beginning of the fifth century, when Christianity became strong enough to exterminate by force rival religions such as Mithraism.\"\nAccording to Speidel, Christians fought fiercely with this feared enemy and suppressed it during the late 4th\u00a0century. Mithraic sanctuaries were destroyed and religion was no longer a matter of personal choice.\nAccording to L.H. Martin, Roman Mithraism came to an end with the anti-pagan decrees of the Christian emperor Theodosius during the last decade of the 4th\u00a0century.\nClauss states that inscriptions show Mithras as one of the cults listed on inscriptions by Roman senators who had not converted to Christianity, as part of the \"pagan revival\" among the elite in the second half of the 4th century.\nBeck states that \"Quite early in the [fourth] century the religion was as good as dead throughout the empire.\"(p299) Archaeological evidence indicates the continuance of the cult of Mithras up until the end of the 4th\u00a0century. In particular, large numbers of votive coins deposited by worshippers have been recovered at the Mithraeum at Pons Sarravi (Sarrebourg) in Gallia Belgica, in a series that runs from Gallienus (r. 253\u2013268) to Theodosius I (r. 379\u2013395). These were scattered over the floor when the mithraeum was destroyed, as Christians apparently regarded the coins as polluted; therefore, providing reliable dates for the functioning of the mithraeum up until near the end of the century.\nFranz Cumont states that Mithraism may have survived in certain remote cantons of the Alps and Vosges into the 5th\u00a0century. According to Mark Humphries, the deliberate concealment of Mithraic cult objects in some areas suggests that precautions were being taken against Christian attacks. In areas like the Rhine frontier, barbarian invasions may have also played a role in the end of Mithraism.\nAt some of the mithraeums that have been found below churches, such as the Santa Prisca Mithraeum and the San Clemente Mithraeum, the ground plan of the church above was made in a way to symbolize Christianity's domination of Mithraism. The cult disappeared earlier than that of Isis. Isis was still remembered in the Middle Ages as a pagan deity, but Mithras was already forgotten in late antiquity.(p171)\nInterpretations of the bull-slaying scene.\nAccording to Cumont, the imagery of the tauroctony was a Graeco-Roman representation of an event in Zoroastrian cosmogony described in a 9th-century Zoroastrian text, the Bundahishn. In this text the evil spirit Ahriman (not Mithra) slays the primordial creature Gavaevodata, which is represented as a bovine.\nCumont held that a version of the myth must have existed in which Mithras, not Ahriman, killed the bovine. But according to Hinnells, no such variant of the myth is known, and that this is merely speculation: \"In no known Iranian text [either Zoroastrian or otherwise] does Mithra slay a bull.\"(p291)\nDavid Ulansey finds astronomical evidence from the mithraeum itself. He reminds us that the Platonic writer Porphyry wrote in the 3rd\u00a0century\u00a0CE that the cave-like temple Mithraea depicted \"an image of the world\" and that Zoroaster consecrated a cave resembling the world fabricated by Mithras.\nThe ceiling of the Caesarea Maritima Mithraeum retains traces of blue paint, which may mean the ceiling was painted to depict the sky and the stars.\nBeck has given the following celestial composition of the Tauroctony:\nSeveral celestial identities for the Tauroctonous Mithras (TM) himself have been proposed. Beck summarizes them in the table below.\nUlansey has proposed that Mithras seems to have been derived from the constellation of Perseus, which is positioned just above Taurus in the night sky. He sees iconographic and mythological parallels between the two figures: both are young heroes, carry a dagger, and wear a Phrygian cap. He also mentions the similarity of the image of Perseus killing the Gorgon and the tauroctony, both figures being associated with caverns and both having connections to Persia as further evidence.\nMichael Speidel associates Mithras with the constellation of Orion because of the proximity to Taurus, and the consistent nature of the depiction of the figure as having wide shoulders, a garment flared at the hem, and narrowed at the waist with a belt, thus taking on the form of the constellation.\nIn opposition to the theories above, which link Mithras to specific constellations, Jelbert suggests that the deity represented the Milky Way. Jelbert argues that within the tauroctony image, Mithras' body is analogous to the path of the Milky Way that bridges Taurus and Scorpius, and that this bifurcated section mirrors the shape, scale and position of the deity relative to the other characters in the scene. The notion of Mithras as the Milky Way would have resonated with his status as god of light and lord of genesis, suggests Jelbert, due to the luminosity of this celestial feature, as well as the location of the traditional soul gates at Taurus-Gemini and Scorpius- Sagittarius, portals once believed to represent the points of entry for the soul at birth and death respectively.\nBeck has criticized Speidel and Ulansey of adherence to a literal cartographic logic, describing their theories as a \"will-o'-the-wisp\" that \"lured them down a false trail\". He argues that a literal reading of the tauroctony as a star chart raises two major problems: it is difficult to find a constellation counterpart for Mithras himself (despite efforts by Speidel and Ulansey) and that, unlike in a star chart, each feature of the tauroctony might have more than a single counterpart. Rather than seeing Mithras as a constellation, Beck argues that Mithras is the prime traveller on the celestial stage (represented by the other symbols of the scene), the Unconquered Sun moving through the constellations. But again, Meyer holds that the Mithras Liturgy reflects the world of Mithraism and may be a confirmation for Ulansey's theory of Mithras being held responsible for the precession of equinoxes.\nPeter Chrisp posits that the killing was of a \"sacred bull\" and that the \"act [was] believed\" to create the universe's life force and maintain it.\nComparable belief systems.\nThe cult of Mithras was part of the syncretic nature of ancient Roman religion. Almost all Mithraea contain statues dedicated to gods of other cults, and it is common to find inscriptions dedicated to Mithras in other sanctuaries, especially those of Jupiter Dolichenus.(p158) Mithraism was not an alternative to Rome's other traditional religions, but was one of many forms of religious practice, and many Mithraic initiates can also be found participating in the civic religion, and as initiates of other mystery cults.\nChristianity.\nEarly Christian apologists noted similarities between Mithraic and Christian rituals, but nonetheless took an extremely negative view of Mithraism: they interpreted Mithraic rituals as evil copies of Christian ones. For instance, Tertullian wrote that as a prelude to the Mithraic initiation ceremony, the initiate was given a ritual bath and at the end of the ceremony, received a mark on the forehead. This mark on the forehead may have likely been the Latin letter, \"M\", which stood for the name of their messianic god-king Mithras. Tertullian also described these rites as a diabolical counterfeit of the baptism and chrismation of Christians. Justin Martyr contrasted Mithraic initiation communion with the Eucharist:\nWherefore also the evil demons in mimicry have handed down that the same thing should be done in the Mysteries of Mithras. For that bread and a cup of water are in these mysteries set before the initiate with certain speeches you either know or can learn.\nErnest Renan suggested in 1882 that, under different circumstances, Mithraism might have risen to the prominence of modern-day Christianity. Renan wrote: \"If the growth of Christianity had been arrested by some mortal malady, the world would have been Mithraic\".\nThis theory has since been contested. Leonard Boyle wrote in 1987 that \"too much ... has been made of the 'threat' of Mithraism to Christianity\",\npointing out that there are only fifty known mithraea in the entire city of Rome. J.A.\u00a0Ezquerra holds that since the two religions did not share similar aims, there was never any real threat of Mithraism taking over the Roman world.\nMithraism had backing from the Roman aristocracy during a time when their conservative values were seen as under attack during the rising tides of Christianity.\nAccording to Mary Boyce, Mithraism was a potent enemy for Christianity in the West, though she is sceptical about its hold in the East.\nF.\u00a0Coarelli (1979) has tabulated forty actual or possible Mithraea and estimated that Rome would have had \"not less than 680\u2013690\" mithraea.\nL.M. Hopfe states that more than 400\u00a0Mithraic sites have been found. These sites are spread all over the Roman empire from places as far as Dura-Europos in the east, and England in the west. He, too, says that Mithraism may have been a rival of Christianity. David Ulansey thinks Renan's statement \"somewhat exaggerated\", but does consider Mithraism \"one of Christianity's major competitors in the Roman Empire\".\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20828", "revid": "50955183", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20828", "title": "Minivan", "text": "Type of van designed for private use\nMinivan (sometimes called simply a van) is a car classification for vehicles designed to transport passengers in the rear seating row(s), with reconfigurable seats in two or three rows. The equivalent classification in Europe is MPV (multi-purpose vehicle), people carrier, or M-segment.\nCompared with a full-size van, most minivans are based on a passenger car platform and have a lower body. Early models, such as the Ford Aerostar and Chevrolet Astro, utilized a compact pickup truck platform. \nMinivans often feature a 'one-box' or 'two-box' body configuration, a higher roof, a flat floor, sliding doors for rear passengers, and high 'H-point' seating. The largest size of minivans is also referred to as 'Large MPV' and became popular following the introduction of the 1984 Dodge Caravan and Renault Espace. Typically, these have platforms derived from D-segment passenger cars or compact pickups. Since the 1990s, the smaller compact MPV and mini MPV sizes of minivans have also become popular.\nAlthough predecessors to the minivan date back to the 1930s, the contemporary minivan body style was developed concurrently by several companies in the early 1980s, most notably by Chrysler (producer of the Chrysler minivans) and Renault (the Renault Espace), both of which were first sold in model year 1984. Minivans cut into and eventually overshadowed the traditional station wagon market, growing in global popularity and diversity throughout the 1990s. Since the 2000s, their reception has varied in different parts of the world. In North America, for example, they have been largely eclipsed by crossovers and SUVs, while in Asia, they are often marketed as luxury cars.\nEtymology.\nThe term \"minivan\" originated in North America and the United Kingdom in 1959. In the UK, the Mini Van was a small van manufactured by Austin Motor Company based on the newly introduced Mini car. In the US, the term was used to differentiate the smaller passenger vehicles from full-size vans (such as the Ford E-Series, Dodge Ram Van, and Chevrolet Van), which were then called 'vans'.\nThe first known use of the term was in 1959, but not until the 1980s was it commonly used.\nCharacteristics.\nChassis.\nIn contrast to larger vans, most modern minivans/MPVs use a front-engine, front-wheel drive layout, while some model lines offer all-wheel drive as an option (ie. Toyota Sienna, Toyota Previa, Chrysler Pacifica ). Alongside adopting the form factor introduced by Chrysler minivans, the configuration allows for less engine intrusion and a lower floor in the passenger compartment. In line with larger full-size vans, unibody construction has been commonly used (the spaceframe design of the Renault Espace and the General Motors APV minivans being exceptions).\nMinivans/MPVs are produced on distinct chassis architecture or share platforms with other vehicles such as sedans and crossover SUVs. Minivans do not have as much ground clearance, towing capacity, or off-road capability compared to SUVs. Minivans provide more space for passengers and cargo than sedans and SUVs.\nBody style.\nMinivans/MPVs use either a two-box or a one-box body design with A, B, C, and D pillars. The cabin may be fitted with two, three, or four rows of seats, with the most common configurations being 2+3+2 or 2+3+3. Compared to other types of passenger vehicles, the body shape of minivans is designed to maximize interior space for both passengers and cargo. It is achieved by lengthening the wheelbase, creating a flatter floor, taller roof, and more upright side profile, but not as prominent as commercial-oriented vans that are boxier in profile. Practicality and comfort for passengers are also enhanced with a larger rear cargo space opening and larger windows.\nSome minivans/MPVs may use sliding doors, while others offer conventional forward-hinged doors. Initially, a feature of the 1982 Nissan Prairie, the 1996 Chrysler minivans introduced a driver-side sliding door; by 2002, all minivans were sold with doors on both sides of the body. Most minivans are configured with a rear lift gate; few minivans have used panel-style rear doors, for example, cargo versions of the Chevrolet Astro, Ford Aerostar, and the Mercedes-Benz V-Class.\nInterior.\nMost minivans have a reconfigurable interior to carry passengers and their effects. The first examples were designed with removable rear seats unlatched from the floor for removal and storage (in line with larger vans); however, users gave poor reception to the design as many seats were heavy and hard to remove. In 1995, the Honda Odyssey was introduced with a third-row seat that folded flat into the floor, which was then adopted by many competitors, including Chrysler that introduced third-row and fold-flat second-row seats in 2005.\nHigh-end minivans may include distinguished features such as captain seats or Ottoman seats, as opposed to bench seats for the second row.\nPredecessors.\nBefore the adoption of the \"minivan\" term, there is a long history of one-box passenger vehicles roughly approximating the body style, with the 1936 Stout Scarab often cited as the first minivan. The passenger seats in the Scarab were moveable and could be configured for the passengers to sit around a table in the rear of the cabin. Passengers entered and exited the Scarab via a centrally mounted door.\nThe DKW Schnellaster\u2014manufactured from 1949 until 1962\u2014featured front-wheel drive, a transverse engine, a flat floor, and multi-configurable seating, all of which would later become characteristics of minivans.\nIn 1950, the Volkswagen Type 2 adapted a bus-shaped body to the chassis of a small passenger car (the Volkswagen Beetle). When Volkswagen introduced a sliding side door to the Type 2 in 1968, it then had the prominent features that would later come to define a minivan: compact length, three rows of forward-facing seats, station wagon-style top-hinged tailgate/liftgate, sliding side door, passenger car base.\nThe 1956\u20131969 Fiat Multipla also had many features in common with modern minivans. The Multipla was based on the chassis of the Fiat 600 and had a rear engine and cab forward layout.\nThe early 1960s saw Ford and Chevrolet introduce \"compact\" vans for the North American market, the Econoline Club Wagon and Greenbrier respectively. The Ford version was marketed in the Falcon series, the Chevrolet in the Corvair 95 series. The Econoline grew larger in the 1970s, while the Greenbrier was joined by (and later replaced by) the Chevy Van.\nNorth America.\nDue to their larger footprint and engines, minivans developed for the North American market are distinct from most minivans/MPVs marketed in other regions, such as Europe and Asia. As of 2020[ [update]], average exterior length for minivans in North America ranged around , while many models use V6 engines with more than mainly to fulfill towing capacity requirements which North American customers demand.\nIn 2021, sales of the segment totalled 310,630 units in the U.S. (2.1% of the overall car market), and 33,544 in Canada (2.0% of the overall car market). As of 2022[ [update]], the passenger-oriented minivan segment consists of the Toyota Sienna, Chrysler Pacifica, Chrysler Voyager, Honda Odyssey, and Kia Carnival.\nHistory.\n1970s and 1980s.\nIn the late 1970s, Chrysler began a development program to design \"a small affordable van that looked and handled more like a car.\" The result of this program was the first American minivans based on the S platform, the 1984 Plymouth Voyager and Dodge Caravan. The S minivans debuted the minivan design features of front-wheel drive, a flat floor and a sliding door for rear passengers.\nThe term minivan came into use largely compared to size to full-size vans; at six feet tall or lower, 1980s minivans were intended to fit inside a typical garage door opening. In 1984, \"The New York Times\" described minivans \"the hot cars coming out of Detroit,\" noting that \"analysts say the mini-van has created an entirely new market, one that may well overshadow the... station wagon.\"\nIn response to the popularity of the Voyager/Caravan, General Motors released the 1985 Chevrolet Astro and GMC Safari badge-engineered twins, and Ford released the 1986 Ford Aerostar. These vehicles used a traditional rear-wheel drive layout, unlike the Voyager/Caravan.\nTo match the launch of minivans by American manufacturers, Japanese manufacturers introduced the Toyota Van, Nissan Vanette, and Mitsubishi Delica to North America in 1984, 1986, and 1987, respectively. These vehicles were marketed with the generic \"Van\" and \"Wagon\" names (for cargo and passenger vans, respectively).\nIn 1989, the Mazda MPV was released as the first Japanese-brand minivan developed from the ground up specifically for the North American market. Its larger chassis allowed an optional V6 engine and four-wheel drive to fit. In contrast to the sliding doors of American minivans, a hinged passenger-side door was used. A driver-side entry was added for 1996, as Mazda gradually remarketed the model line as an early crossover SUV.\nBy the end of the 1980s, demand for minivans as family vehicles had largely superseded full-size station wagons in the United States.\n1990s.\nDuring the 1990s, the minivan segment underwent several significant changes. Many models switched to the front-wheel drive layout used by the Voyager/Caravan minivans. For example, Ford replaced the Aerostar with the front-wheel drive Mercury Villager for 1993 and the Ford Windstar for 1995. The models also increased in size due to the extended-wheelbase (\"Grand\") versions of the Voyager and Caravan, launched in 1987. An increase in luxury features and interior equipment was seen in the Eddie Bauer version of the 1988 Ford Aerostar, the 1990 Chrysler Town &amp; Country, and the 1990 Oldsmobile Silhouette. The third-generation Plymouth Voyager, Dodge Caravan, and Chrysler Town &amp; Country \u2013 released for the 1996 model year \u2013 had an additional sliding door on the driver's side.\nFollowing the 1990 discontinuation of the Nissan Vanette in the United States, Nissan also ended the sale of the second-generation Nissan Axxess. Nissan reentered the segment by forming a joint venture with Ford to develop and assemble a minivan that became the Nissan Quest and its Mercury Villager counterpart.\nToyota also introduced the Toyota Previa in 1990 to replace the Van/Wagon in North America. It was designed solely as a passenger vehicle sized to compete with American-market minivans. For 1998, the Toyota Sienna became the first Japanese-brand minivan assembled in North America, replacing the Toyota Previa in that market. For 1999, Honda introduced a separate version of the Odyssey for North America, with North America receiving a larger vehicle with sliding doors. These Japanese minivans targeted a higher price bracket as they were considerably larger and had better handling/horsepower over their domestic counterparts (i.e. Dodge Caravan).\nThe highest selling year for minivans was in 2000, when 1.4 million units were sold. At that time, domestic minivans were produced in large volumes and often sold for cheaper than midsize cars, however Japanese minivans were more expensive than either.\n2000s and 2010s.\nIn the 2000s, sales of minivans began to decrease. In 2013, the segment's sales reached approximately 500,000, one-third of its 2000 peak. Market share of minivans in 2019 reached around 2% after a steady decline from 2004, when the segment recorded above 6% of share. It has been suggested that the falling popularity of minivans is due to the increasing popularity of SUVs and crossovers, as well as the minivan's increasingly undesirable image as a vehicle for older drivers or the soccer mom demographics. Manufacturers have responded by marketing minivans as premium vehicles as well as lowering production volumes, resulting in a long waiting list for minivans such as the Toyota Sienna.\nDespite the increasing popularity of three-row crossover SUVs, they have not completely replaced minivans in form or function. The Chrysler Pacifica crossover SUV (the nameplate which was later reused for a minivan in 2017) which was released in 2004 had less passenger room with its third-row seats being considered too small, compared to that of the Chrysler Town &amp; Country minivan which was also less expensive and more fuel-efficient. Even twenty years later while crossover SUVs had improved, minivans still hold such advantages; compared to the similar-sized Toyota Grand Highlander crossover SUV which is considerably more expensive when comparably equipped, the Toyota Sienna minivan has easier loading thanks to sliding doors and lower ground clearance, more cargo space behind the 3rd row, and better comfort for the 3rd-row passengers.\nFrom 2000 onward, several minivan manufacturers adopted boxier square-based exterior designs. Compared to the 1990s, minivans have also been positioned as more upmarket vehicles with available advanced equipment, including power doors and liftgate; seating that folded flat into the cabin floor, rear-view camera; parking sensors; DVD/VCR entertainment systems; and in-dash navigation (entertainment and navigation only offered on higher-end trims). However, the Quest and Sedona only echo these design changes in their third and second respective generations. At the same time, Chrysler introduced fold-flat seating in 2005 (under the trademark \u201cStow-n\u2019-go\u201d). \nMazda's MPV did not feature power doors and was discontinued in 2017.\nDue to the market decline, North American sales of the Volkswagen Eurovan ceased in 2003. Ford exited the segment in 2006 when the Ford Freestar was canceled, Chrysler discontinued its short-wheelbase minivans in 2007, and General Motors left the market segment in 2009 with the cancellation of the Chevrolet Uplander. However, Volkswagen marketed the Volkswagen Routan (a rebadged Chrysler RT minivans) between 2009 and 2013. In 2010, Ford started importing the commercial-oriented Ford Transit Connect Wagon from Turkey. A similar vehicle, the Mercedes-Benz Metris, entered the North American market in 2016.\nThe Kia Sedona, which was introduced for the 2002 model year, is notable for being the first minivan from a South Korean manufacturer in the region. For 2007, Kia also introduced the three-row Kia Rondo compact MPV, where it was prominently marketed as a crossover due to its small size and the use of hinged rear doors.\nAnother compact MPV released to the market was the Mazda5 in 2004, a three-row vehicle with rear sliding doors. Mazda claimed the model \"does not fit into any traditional (North American) segmentation.\" The Ford C-Max was released for 2013 as a hybrid electric and battery electric compact MPV with sliding doors. However, it did not offer third-row seating in North America.\nEurope.\nIn Europe, the classification is commonly known as \"MPV\", \"people carrier\", or officially M-segment, and includes van-based vehicles and smaller vehicles with two-row seating.\nHistory.\n1980s.\nThe 1984 Renault Espace was the first European-developed minivan developed primarily for passenger use (as the earlier DKW and Volkswagen used their commercial van platforms in a minibus variant). Beginning development in the 1970s under the European subsidiaries of Chrysler, the Espace was intended as a successor for the Matra Rancho, leading to its use of front-hinged doors. While slow-selling at the time of its release, the Espace would become the most successful European-brand minivan.\nInitially intending to market the Espace in North America through American Motors Corporation (AMC), the 1987 sale of AMC to Chrysler canceled the plans for Renault to do so. In the late 1980s, Chrysler and Ford commenced sales of American-designed minivans in Europe (categorized as full-size in the region), selling the Chrysler Voyager and Ford Aerostar. General Motors imported the Oldsmobile Silhouette (branded as the Pontiac Trans Sport), later marketing the American-produced Opel/Vauxhall Sintra.\n1990s.\nIn the 1990s, several joint ventures produced long-running minivan designs. In 1994, badge engineered series of Eurovans was introduced, produced by Sevel Nord and marketed by Citro\u00ebn, Fiat, Lancia, and Peugeot. The Eurovans were built with two sliding doors; the gearshift was located on the dashboard to increase interior space, and a petal-type handbrake was adopted. In 1995, Ford of Europe and Volkswagen entered a joint venture, producing the Ford Galaxy, SEAT Alhambra, and Volkswagen Sharan minivans, featuring front-hinged rear side doors.\nIn 1996, Mercedes introduced the Mercedes-Benz V-Class as a standard panel van for cargo (called Vito) or with passenger accommodations substituted for part or all of the load area (called V-Class or Viano). In 1998, the Fiat Multipla was released. A two-row, six-seater MPV with a 3+3 seat configuration borrowing its name from an older minivan, it is notable for its highly controversial design.\nMarket reaction to these new full-size MPV models was mixed. Consumers perceived MPVs as large and truck-like despite boasting similar footprints as large sedans. Arguably, cultural reasons regarding vehicle size and high fuel prices were a factor. During 1996 and 1997, the Western European MPV market expanded from around 210,000 units to 350,000 units annually. However, the growth did not continue as expected, resulting in serious plant overcapacity.\nRenault set a new \"compact MPV\" standard with the Renault Sc\u00e9nic in 1996, which became popular. Based on the C-segment M\u00e9gane platform, it offered the same multi-use and flexibility aspects as the larger MPVs but with a much smaller footprint.\n2000s.\nAfter the success of the Renault Sc\u00e9nic, other makers have developed similar European-focused products, such as the Opel Zafira that offered three-row seating, Citro\u00ebn Xsara Picasso and others.\nAsia.\nJapan.\nIn Japan, the classification is known as and defined by its three-row seating capacity.\nBefore the birth of minivans with modern form factors, tall wagon-type vehicles with large seating capacity in Japan were known as light vans. They commonly adopted mid-engine, cab over design, and rear-wheel drive layout with one-box form factor. Examples included the Toyota TownAce, Toyota HiAce, Nissan Vanette, Mitsubishi Delica and Mazda Bongo. These vehicles were based on commercial vehicles, which created a gap compared to sedans regarding ride quality and luxury.\nThe Nissan Prairie, released in 1982, is considered the first Japanese compact minivan. Derived closely from a compact sedan, the Prairie was marketed as a \"boxy sedan\", configured with sliding doors, folding rear seats, and a lifting rear hatch. The Mitsubishi Chariot adopted nearly the same form factor, instead using wagon-style front-hinged doors.\nIn 1990, Toyota introduced the Toyota Estima in Japan, which carried over the mid-engine configuration of the TownAce. Along with its highly rounded exterior, the Estima was distinguished by its nearly panoramic window glass. The Estima was redesigned in 2000, adopting a front-wheel drive layout and offered with a hybrid powertrain since 2001. In 2002, Toyota introduced the Toyota Alphard which was developed as a luxury-oriented model.\nIn 2020, Lexus introduced their first luxury minivan, the Lexus LM, produced with varying degrees of relation with the Toyota Alphard/Vellfire. The LM designation stands for \"Luxury Mover\".\nNissan introduced the Nissan Serena in 1991 and the Nissan Elgrand in 1997.\nIn 1995, Honda entered the minivan segment by introducing the Honda Odyssey. The Odyssey was designed with front-hinged doors and as derived from the Honda Accord. It came with advantages such as sedan-like driving dynamics and a lower floor to allow for easy access. A design feature that would become adopted by other manufacturers, the Odyssey introduced a rear seat that folded flat into the floor (replacing a removable rear seat). The Odyssey evolved into a low-roof, estate-like minivan until 2013, when it adopted a high-roof body with rear sliding doors. Honda also produced the Honda Stepwgn mid-size MPV since 1996, which is designed with a higher cabin and narrow width, and the Honda Stream since 2000 to slot below the Odyssey.\nIn 2020, minivans made up 20.8% of total automobile sales in Japan, behind SUVs and compact hatchbacks, making it one of the largest minivan markets in the world.\nSouth Korea.\nIn South Korea, both the terms \"minivan\" and \"MPV\" are used. The Kia Carnival (also sold the Kia Sedona) was introduced in 1998 with dual sliding doors. Sharing its configuration with the Honda Odyssey, the Hyundai Trajet was sold from 1999 to 2008. Introduced in 2004, the SsangYong Rodius is the highest-capacity minivan, seating up to 11 passengers. It was discontinued in 2019.\nCurrent minivans marketed in South Korea are the Kia Carnival and Hyundai Staria, along with imported options such as the Toyota Sienna (originally for North America) and later generations of Honda Odyssey.\nChina.\nIn 1999, Shanghai GM commenced production of the Buick GL8 MPV, derived from a MPV platform designed by GM in the United States. After two generations of production, the GL8 is the final minivan produced by General Motors or its joint ventures today. It remained dominant in the high-end minivan segment of the market.\nSales of MPVs in China increased rapidly in 2015 and 2016 when the Chinese government lifted the one-child policy in favor of the two-child policy, which pushed customer preference toward three-row vehicles in anticipation of a larger family. In 2016, 2,497,543 minivans were sold in China, a major increase from 2012, which recorded 936,232 sales. However, sales volume has shrunk ever since, with only 1,082,028 MPVs sold in the domestic market in 2021 (4.1% of the total car market), around 720,000 of which were sold by domestic manufacturers.\nThe Denza D9 introduced in 16 May 2022 in China, Sales for the Chinese market were commenced in 23 August 2022, with the first units rolling out in 21 October 2022, while deliveries began in 25 October 2022. It made its global debut in Thailand on March 2023 at the 44th Bangkok International Motor Show.\nIn August 2022, Zeekr introduced the Zeekr 009 electric MPV, deliveries of the 009 began in the first quarter of 2023 in China.\nOn November 17, 2023, XPENG officially showcased the XPeng X9, it sits on the SEPA 2.0 platform with three rows and 7 seats in a setup of 2-2-3. The drag coefficient is 0.227Cd. The XPeng X9 battery options include a 84.5 kWh lithium iron phosphate (LFP) battery pack supplied by Eve Energy and a 101.5 kWh ternary NMC battery pack from CALB. The XPeng X9's SEPA 2.0 platform supports 800V charging enabling adding of range within 10 minutes of charging time.\nThe Li Mega introduced in November 2023 at the Auto Guangzhou, where pre-orders were accepted. The minivan is notable for its distinctive exterior design, which contributes in aerodynamics with a wind resistance drag coefficient of just 0.215 Cd, the lowest among MPVs globally currently in production.\nIndonesia.\nThe MPV segment is the most popular passenger car segment in Indonesia, with a market share of 40 percent in 2021.\nIndia.\nThe category is commonly known as multi utility vehicle (MUV) or MPV. In fiscal year 2020, the sales volume of the segment totaled 283,583 vehicles, or 10.3% of industry total.\nLuxury MPV.\nSeveral manufacturers produce upscale MPVs positioned as luxury cars, primarily marketed in select Asian markets. They generally have three rows for six- or seven-seats; however, range-topping flagship models may also offer a two-row option with four seats, which typically have more features than their lower-priced counterparts.\nExamples of luxury MPV models include Mercedes-Benz V-Class, Lexus LM, Buick GL8, Hongqi HQ9, Denza D9, Li Mega, Toyota Alphard, Nissan Elgrand, Volvo EM90, and the Zeekr 009.\nSize categories.\nMini MPV.\nMini MPV \u2013 an abbreviation for Mini Multi-Purpose Vehicle \u2013 is a vehicle size class for the smallest size of minivans (MPVs). The Mini MPV size class sits below the compact MPV size class, and the vehicles are often built on the platforms of B-segment hatchback models.\nSeveral minivans based on B-segment platforms have been marketed as 'leisure activity vehicles' in Europe. These include the Fiat Fiorino and Ford Transit Courier.\nExamples: \u00a0\nCompact MPV.\nCompact MPV \u2013 an abbreviation for Compact Multi-Purpose Vehicle \u2013 is a vehicle size class for the middle size of MPVs/minivans. The Compact MPV size class sits between the mini MPV and minivan size classes.\nCompact MPVs remain predominantly European, although they are also built and sold in many Latin American and Asian markets. As of 2016, the only compact MPV sold widely in the United States was the Ford C-Max.\nExamples: \u00a0\nRelated categories.\nLeisure activity vehicle.\nA leisure activity vehicle (abbreviated LAV), also known as van-based MPV and \"ludospace\" in French, is the passenger-oriented version of small commercial vans primarily marketed in Europe. One of the first LAVs was the 1977 Matra Rancho (among the first crossover SUVs and a precursor to the Renault Espace), with European manufacturers expanding the segment in the late 1990s, following the introduction of the Citro\u00ebn Berlingo and Renault Kangoo.\nLeisure activity vehicles are typically derived from supermini or subcompact car platforms, differing from mini MPVs in body design. To maximize interior space, LAVs feature a taller roof, more upright windshield, and longer hood/bonnet with either a liftgate or barn doors to access the boot. Marketed as an alternative to sedan-derived small family cars, LAVs have seating with a lower H-point than MPVs or minivans, offering two (or three) rows of seating.\nThough sharing underpinnings with superminis, subcompacts, and mini MPVs, using an extended wheelbase can make leisure activity vehicles longer than those from which they are derived. For example, the Fiat Dobl\u00f2 is one of the longest LAVs with a total length of , versus the of the Opel Meriva (a mini MPV) and the of the Peugeot 206 SW (a supermini).\nAsian utility vehicle.\nAn Asian utility vehicle (abbreviated AUV) originates from the Philippines to describe basic and affordable vehicles with either large seating capacity or cargo designed to be sold in developing countries. These vehicles are usually available in minivan-like wagon body style with a seating capacity of 7 to 16 passengers. They are usually based on a compact pickup truck with body-on-frame chassis and rear-wheel drive to maximize its load capacity and durability while maintaining low manufacturing costs. Until the 2000s, AUVs were popular in Southeast Asia, particularly in Indonesia, the Philippines, Taiwan, and some African markets.\nThe first AUV is the Toyota Tamaraw/Kijang, introduced in the Philippines and Indonesia in 1975 as a pickup truck with an optional rear cabin. In the 1990s, other vehicles such as the Isuzu Panther/Hi-Lander/Crosswind and Mitsubishi Freeca/Adventure/Kuda emerged in the AUV segment. Modern equivalent of AUV is the Toyota Innova, an MPV that is the direct successor to the Kijang which in its first two generations were built with body-on-frame construction. The vehicle's third generation switched to unibody construction.\nThree-row SUV.\nWith the decline of the minivan/MPV category in many regions, such as North America and Europe, in the mid-2010s, SUVs and crossovers with three rows of seating became popular alternatives. Compared to minivans, three-row SUVs lose sliding doors and generally offer less interior space due to the higher priorities on exterior styling and higher ground clearance.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nVideos"}
{"id": "20829", "revid": "4967956", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20829", "title": "Moxie", "text": "Carbonated beverage\nMoxie is a brand of carbonated beverage that is among the first mass-produced soft drinks in the United States. It was created around 1876 by Augustin Thompson as a patent medicine called \"Moxie Nerve Food\" and was produced in Lowell, Massachusetts. It has been described as having \"a bitter aftertaste that some say is similar to root beer.\" It is flavored with gentian root extract, an extremely bitter substance commonly used in herbal medicine.\nMoxie was designated the official soft drink of Maine on May 10, 2005. It continues to be regionally popular today, particularly in New England states. It was previously produced by the Moxie Beverage Company of Bedford, New Hampshire, until Moxie was purchased by The Coca-Cola Company in 2018.\nThe name has become the word \"moxie\" in American English, a noun meaning energy, determination, and spunk.\nHistory.\nMoxie originated around 1876 as a patent medicine called \"Moxie Nerve Food\", by Augustin Thompson in Lowell, Massachusetts. Thompson claimed that it contained an extract from a rare, unnamed South American plant, which is now known to be gentian root. Moxie, he claimed, was especially effective against \"paralysis, softening of the brain, nervousness, and insomnia\".\nThompson claimed that he named the beverage after a Lieutenant Moxie, a purported friend of his, who he claimed had discovered the plant and used it as a panacea, and the company he created continued to promulgate legendary stories about the word's origin. In Maine, where Thompson was born and raised, the word \"moxie\", apparently of Algonquian origin, appears in lake and river names, such as Moxie Falls, and in the local name of a plant, the moxie-plum; it is likely that Thompson borrowed the name from one of those. The Online Etymology Dictionary proposes that the term is an Abenaki word meaning 'dark water', while Frederic Cassidy argued that its origin was an Algonquian root \"maski-\", meaning 'herbal infusion'.\nAfter a few years, Thompson added soda water to the formula and changed the product's name to \"Beverage Moxie Nerve Food\". By 1884 he was selling Moxie both in bottles and in bulk as a soda fountain syrup. In 1885, he received a trademark for the term. He marketed it as \"a delicious blend of bitter and sweet, a drink to satisfy everyone's taste.\" Thompson died in 1903.\nIn 1907, the Moxie Nerve Food Company of New England filed a lawsuit in Boston against the Modox Company and others, alleging that they had copied the ingredients of Moxie and were using the name \"Modox\", which closely resembles \"Moxie\", and were infringing upon patents and trademarks. The suit was dismissed by the judge, who said the court could not protect the legitimate part of the plaintiff's business in this case. In a later case in New York, the Moxie Nerve Food Company won a lawsuit against Modox, which subsequently went out of business.\nPresident Calvin Coolidge was known to favor the drink, and Boston Red Sox slugger Ted Williams endorsed it on radio and in print. The company also marketed a beverage called \"Ted's Root Beer\" in the early sixties. Author E. B. White once claimed that \"Moxie contains gentian root, which is the path to the good life.\"\nThe brand suffered a significant decline in sales during the 1930s.\nThe Catawissa Bottling Company in Catawissa, Pennsylvania is one of six bottlers in the United States that produce Moxie. Catawissa has produced it since 1945. Polar Beverages also bottles Moxie in Worcester, Massachusetts, as does Orca Beverage in Mukilteo, Washington.\nSince 1962.\nSugar-free Diet Moxie was introduced in 1962, three years after \"Mad\" magazine began placing the Moxie logo in the background of its articles, which increased public awareness of it. The magazine also introduced a short-lived girlfriend for its mascot Alfred E. Neuman who was named \"Moxie.\" As a result of \"Mad\"'s efforts, sales of the soft drink increased 10% which led to the \"Mad About Moxie\" campaign.\nThe Moxie brand was purchased in 1966 by the Monarch Beverage Company of Atlanta. In 2007 Monarch sold it to its previous owner, Cornucopia Beverages of Bedford, New Hampshire, which is owned by the Coca-Cola Bottling Company of Northern New England, a subsidiary of the Kirin Brewery Company, which is a subsidiary of Kirin Company, Limited, which is a subsidiary of Kirin Holdings Company, Limited, based in Tokyo, Japan (a member of the Mitsubishi \"keiretsu\").\nIn its decision to step up efforts to distribute the product, Cornucopia cited increasing requests for Moxie from fans across the country. In 2007 it launched pilot sales in Florida and in 2010 granted distribution in Florida to Florida Micro Beverage Distributors.\nIn 2011, Cornucopia began doing business as the Moxie Beverage Company to market Moxie and Moxie-branded products. A website, DrinkMoxie.com, was created to promote Moxie. Drink recipes using Moxie were created.\nDemand for Moxie has waned in recent years, although the brand persists in New England and Pennsylvania.\nOn August 28, 2018, the Coca-Cola Company announced its purchase of Moxie from Coca-Cola Bottling Company of Northern New England Inc. for an unspecified amount.\nAdvertising.\nMoxie advertising in the 19th and early 20th centuries emphasized Moxie as a health drink and \"nerve food\".\nIn its advertising, Moxie used \"Make Mine Moxie!\" jingles, the slogan \"Just Make It Moxie for Mine\", and a \"Moxie Man\" logo. The Moxie Man has appeared on labels in some form since 1906, and the image of a man pointing forward most associated with the brand was first introduced in 1911. The identity of the \"Moxie Man\", or \"Moxie Boy\" as he was called in the 1920s, was apparently not known at that time, with a 1922 ad in the \"Boston Herald\" by F. M. Archer proclaiming \"in almost every town and city in the United States there is someone who believes they know the original of the Moxie Boy. In view of the many thousands of different opinions on this subject, we may offer a prize to the person who picks the actual boy, furnishing us photographic proofs, etc...the Moxie Boy, now a man (and some man at that), who posed for this picture many, many years ago, in fact before some of the readers of this article were born.\" For many years the urban legend was that Archer himself was Moxie's mascot, but he would have been about 50 at its introduction in 1911, disproving this theory. In recent years a historical group, The Moxie Congress, was able to ascertain that the man was likely a model for the lithographers printing these advertisements, and with some confidence it is posited that the \"Moxie Boy\" was one John T. Chamberlain of Revere, Massachusetts. In 2010 the Moxie Man logo was removed from labels for a brief period because it was thought to be too old-fashioned. In 2011 the company's head of marketing, Ryan Savage, made the executive decision to bring the logo back in response to complaints from long-standing customers.\nA unique advertising tool was the Moxie Horsemobile, a modified automobile whose driver sits on a large model of a horse. The first Horsemobiles were deployed around early 1916. A 1935 Rolls-Royce Moxie Horsemobile was sold for $55,000 at the May 20, 2011, Mecum Auction in Indianapolis, Indiana. Moxie at one time maintained about two dozen of them, and they appeared in parades and other public functions.\nDerivative products.\nThere is a Moxie Energy Drink and a variety of Olde New England Seltzers. The energy drink is citrus-based; it lacks Moxie's gentian root tang, caramel color, and (as of 2008) its distinctive branding; similarly, the waters are simply carbonated waters with fruit flavors marketed under the Moxie brand.\nMoxie ice cream is seasonally available in Maine in limited quantities and is mild in flavor as compared to the soft drink.\nMoxie has been used as a cooking additive by chefs for its herbaceous, savory-sweet flavor profile. It is generally used in reductions as a glaze for meats such as lamb, as well as in baked beans.\n\"Moxie\" as a slang term.\nMoxie was early advertised as \"nerve food\" which would \"strengthen the nervous system\" and was \"very healthful\" and a \"drink for athletes\" which \"strengthens and invigorates\". The term \"moxie\", which derives from the drink name, has the approximate meaning of \"energy, determination, spunk, daring courage, nerve, spirit, guts\". This term was extant from about the 1930s and has continued in use, to some extent, into the early 21st century, as in \"This kid's got moxie!\"\nReferences.\nNotes\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading"}
{"id": "20832", "revid": "45796270", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20832", "title": "Manifesto", "text": "Written declaration of principles and intentions\nA manifesto is a written declaration of the intentions, motives, or views of the issuer, be it an individual, group, political party, or government. A manifesto can accept a previously published opinion or public consensus, but many prominent manifestos\u2014such as those of various artistic movements\u2014reject accepted knowledge in favor of a new idea. Manifestos relating to religious belief are generally referred to as \"creeds\" or \"confessions of faith\".\nEtymology.\nThe Italian word , itself derived from the Latin , meaning \"clear\" or \"conspicuous\". Its first recorded use in English is from 1620, in Nathaniel Brent's translation of the Italian from Paolo Sarpi's \"History of the Council of Trent\": \"To this citation he made answer by a Manifesto\" (p.\u00a0102). Similarly, \"They were so farre surprised with his Manifesto, that they would never suffer it to be published\" (p.\u00a0103).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20833", "revid": "1234701", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20833", "title": "Mary Tyler Moore", "text": "American actress &amp; television producer (1936\u20132017)\nMary Tyler Moore (December 29, 1936 \u2013 January 25, 2017) was an American actress, producer, and social advocate. She is best known for her roles on \"The Dick Van Dyke Show\" (1961\u20131966) and \"The Mary Tyler Moore Show\" (1970\u20131977), which \"helped define a new vision of American womanhood\" and \"appealed to an audience facing the new trials of modern-day existence\". Moore won six Primetime Emmy Awards and three Golden Globe Awards. She was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Actress for her performance in \"Ordinary People\". Moore had major supporting roles in the musical film \"Thoroughly Modern Millie\" and the dark comedy film \"Flirting with Disaster\". Moore also received praise for her performance in the television film \"Heartsounds\". Moore was an advocate for animal rights, vegetarianism and diabetes awareness and research.\nEarly life.\nMoore was born in the Brooklyn Heights neighborhood in New York City, in 1936 to Marjorie (n\u00e9e Hackett) and George Tyler Moore. Her father was a clerk. The family was of Irish Catholic descent. They lived in Flatbush for a time and later moved to Flushing, Queens.\nMoore was the oldest of three children, with a younger brother John and a younger sister Elizabeth. Moore's paternal great-grandfather, Confederate Lieutenant Colonel Lewis Tilghman Moore, owned the house that is now the Stonewall Jackson's Headquarters Museum in Winchester, Virginia.\nWhen Moore was eight years old, the family relocated to Los Angeles, California in 1945, at the recommendation of her uncle, an employee of MCA. She was raised Catholic and attended St. Rose of Lima Parochial School in Brooklyn until the third grade. In Los Angeles, Moore attended Saint Ambrose School and Immaculate Heart High School in the Los Feliz neighborhood.\nMoore's sister Elizabeth died at age 21 \"from a combination of... painkillers and alcohol.\" Her brother died at the age of 47 from kidney cancer.\nCareer.\nTelevision.\nEarly appearances.\nMoore's television career began in 1955 with a job as \"Happy Hotpoint\", a tiny elf dancing on Hotpoint home appliances in TV commercials that ran during breaks on \"The Adventures of Ozzie and Harriet\". After appearing in 39 Hotpoint commercials in five days, she received approximately $6,000 (). She became pregnant while still working as \"Happy\", and Hotpoint ended her work when it became too difficult to conceal her pregnancy with the elf costume.\nMoore was an uncredited&lt;ref name=\"Evanier/Mary-Record\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; photographic model for record album covers,&lt;ref name=\"tralfaz/coverart/MTM\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;&lt;ref name=\"gottahaverockandroll/38091\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; many for the Tops Records label,&lt;ref name=\"latimes/covers-20170126\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; and auditioned for the role of the elder daughter of Danny Thomas for his long-running TV show, but was turned down. Much later, Thomas explained that \"she missed it by a nose... no daughter of mine could ever have a nose that small\".\nMoore's first regular television role was as 'Sam' a mysterious and glamorous telephone switchboard operator/receptionist in the series \"Richard Diamond, Private Detective\" with David Janssen. Sam's sultry voice was heard talking to Richard Diamond from her switchboard; however, only her legs and occasionally her hands appeared on camera\u2014never her face, adding to the character's mystique. After creating a minor sensation by appearing as Sam in 12 episodes of \"Richard Diamond\" as an uncredited player, Moore asked for a raise\u2014and was promptly fired by the show's producers and replaced by Roxane Brooks in the role. However, Moore was able to parlay the publicity from 'revealing' Sam's identity to the press into several flattering articles and profiles, giving her career a boost.\nAbout this time, she guest-starred in John Cassavetes' NBC detective series \"Johnny Staccato\", and also in the series premiere of \"The Tab Hunter Show\" in September 1960 and the \"Bachelor Father\" episode \"Bentley and the Big Board\" in December 1960. In 1961, Moore appeared in several big parts in movies and on television, including \"Bourbon Street Beat\"; \"77 Sunset Strip\"; \"Surfside 6\"; \"Wanted: Dead or Alive\" with Steve McQueen; \"Steve Canyon\"; \"Hawaiian Eye\"; \"Thriller\" and \"Lock-Up\". She also appeared in a February 1962 episode of \"Straightaway\".\n\"The Dick Van Dyke Show\" (1961\u20131966).\nIn 1961, Carl Reiner cast Moore in \"The Dick Van Dyke Show\", a weekly series based on Reiner's own life and career as a writer for Sid Caesar's television variety show \"Your Show of Shows\", telling the cast from the outset that it would run for no more than five years. The show was produced by Danny Thomas's company, and Thomas himself recommended her. He remembered Moore as \"the girl with three names\" whom he had turned down earlier.\nMoore's energetic comic performances as Van Dyke's character's wife, begun at age 24 (eleven years Van Dyke's junior), made both the actress and her signature fitted capri pants popular, and she became internationally known. When she won her first Emmy Award for her portrayal of Laura Petrie, she said, \"I know this will never happen again.\" As Laura Petrie, Moore often wore styles that recalled the fashion of Jackie Kennedy, such as capri pants, echoing an ideal of the Kennedy administration's Camelot.\n\"The Mary Tyler Moore Show\" (1970\u20131977).\nIn 1970, after performing in the one-hour musical special \"Dick Van Dyke and the Other Woman\", Moore and husband Grant Tinker successfully pitched a sitcom that centered on Moore to CBS. \"The Mary Tyler Moore Show\" was a half-hour newsroom sitcom featuring Ed Asner as her gruff boss Lou Grant. \"The Mary Tyler Moore Show\" bridged aspects of the Women's Movement with mainstream culture by portraying an independent woman whose life focused on her professional career rather than marriage and family.\nThe show marked the first big hit for film and television producer James L. Brooks, who would also do more work for Moore and Tinker's production company. Moore's show proved so popular that three regular characters, Valerie Harper as Rhoda Morgenstern, Cloris Leachman as Phyllis Lindstrom, and Ed Asner as Lou Grant spun off into their own three separate series playing the same characters, albeit with \"Lou Grant\" being an hour-long drama instead of a half-hour sitcom.\nThe premise of the single working woman's life, alternating during the program between work and home, became a television staple.\nAfter six years of ratings in the top 20, the show slipped to number 39 in season seven. Producers decided that the show should end, afraid that the show's legacy might be damaged if it were renewed for another season. Despite the decline in ratings, the 1977 season won its third straight Emmy Award for Outstanding Comedy. Over seven seasons, the program won 29 Emmys and Moore won three awards for Best Lead Actress in a Comedy. The record was unbroken until 2002, when the NBC sitcom \"Frasier\" won its 30th Emmy.\nLater projects.\nOn January 22, 1976, while season six of \"The Mary Tyler Moore Show\" was in progress, Moore appeared in \"Mary's Incredible Dream\", an experimental musical/variety special for CBS, and which also featured Ben Vereen. She described it as \"a totally different concept from anything ever attempted on television... We go from song to dance to song and back again, telling a story of the eternal cycle of man. If viewers don't want to follow the story, they can just enjoy the music and dancing.\" In 1978, she starred in a second CBS special, \"How to Survive the '70s and Maybe Even Bump Into Happiness\", where she received significant support from a strong lineup of guest stars: Bill Bixby, John Ritter, Harvey Korman and Dick Van Dyke. In the 1978\u201379 season, Moore also starred in two unsuccessful CBS variety series. The first, \"Mary\", featured David Letterman, Michael Keaton, Swoosie Kurtz and Dick Shawn in the supporting cast. After CBS canceled that series, it brought Moore back in March 1979 in a new, retooled show, \"The Mary Tyler Moore Hour\". Described as a \"sit-var\" (part situation comedy/part variety series), it had Moore portraying a TV star putting on a variety show. The program lasted just 11 episodes.\nIn the 1985\u201386 season, Moore returned to CBS in a sitcom titled \"Mary\", which suffered from poor reviews, sagging ratings, and strife within the production crew. Moore said she asked network to pull the show because she was unhappy with the direction and production. Moore also starred in the short-lived \"Annie McGuire\" in 1988. In 1995, after another lengthy break from TV series work, Moore was cast as tough, unsympathetic newspaper owner Louise \"the Dragon\" Felcott on the CBS drama \"New York News\", the third series in which her character was involved in the news media. Moore was disappointed with the writing of her character and was negotiating with producers to get out of her contract for the series when it was canceled.\nIn the mid-1990s, Moore appeared as herself on two episodes of \"Ellen\". She guest-starred on Ellen DeGeneres's \"The Ellen Show\", in 2001. In 2004, Moore reunited with her \"Dick Van Dyke Show\" castmates for a reunion special, \"The Dick Van Dyke Show Revisited\".\nIn 2006, Moore guest-starred as Christine St. George, the high-strung host of a fictional TV show, in three episodes of the Fox sitcom \"That '70s Show\". Moore's scenes were shot on the same sound stage where \"The Mary Tyler Moore Show\" was filmed in the 1970s. She made a guest appearance on the season two premiere of \"Hot in Cleveland\", which starred her former co-star Betty White. It marked the first time that White and Moore had worked together since \"The Mary Tyler Moore Show\" ended in 1977. In the fall of 2013, Moore reprised her role on \"Hot in Cleveland\" in a season four episode that reunited Moore and White with former \"Mary Tyler Moore Show\" cast members Cloris Leachman, Valerie Harper and Georgia Engel. The reunion coincided with Harper's public announcement that she had been diagnosed with terminal brain cancer and was given only a few months to live.\nTheater.\nMoore appeared in several Broadway plays. She was the star of a new musical version of \"Breakfast at Tiffany's\" in December 1966, but the show, titled \"Holly Golightly\", was a flop that closed in previews before opening on Broadway. In reviews of performances in Philadelphia and Boston, critics \"murdered\" the play in which Moore claimed to be singing with bronchial pneumonia.\nShe starred in a gender-reversed revival of \"Whose Life Is It Anyway?\" with James Naughton, which opened on Broadway at the Royale Theatre on February 24, 1980, and ran for 96 performances, and in \"Sweet Sue\", which opened at the Music Box Theatre on January 8, 1987, later transferred to the Royale Theatre, and ran for 164 performances.\nDuring the 1980s, Moore and her production company produced five plays: \"Noises Off\", \"The Octette Bridge Club\", \"A Day in the Death of Joe Egg\", \"Benefactors\", and \"Safe Sex\".\nMoore appeared in previews of the Neil Simon play \"Rose's Dilemma\" at the off-Broadway Manhattan Theatre Club in December 2003 but quit the production after receiving a critical letter from Simon instructing her to \"learn your lines or get out of my play\". Moore had been using an earpiece on stage to feed her lines to the repeatedly rewritten play.\nFilms.\nMoore made her film debut as a nurse in the Jack Lemmon comedy \"Operation Mad Ball\" (1957).&lt;ref name=\"plex.tv/operation-mad-ball\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;&lt;ref name=\"virtual-history/3509\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; Her first speaking part came in \"X-15\" (1961). Following her success on \"The Dick Van Dyke Show\", she appeared in a string of films in the late 1960s (after signing an exclusive contract with Universal Pictures), including \"Thoroughly Modern Millie\" (1967), as a would-be actress in 1920s New York who is taken under the wing of Julie Andrews' title character, and two comedic films released in 1968, \"What's So Bad About Feeling Good?\" with George Peppard, and \"Don't Just Stand There!\" with Robert Wagner. She starred opposite Elvis Presley as a nun in \"Change of Habit\" (1969). Moore's future television castmate Ed Asner appeared in the film as a police officer. \nMoore returned to the big screen in the coming-of-age drama \"Ordinary People\" (1980). She received an Oscar nomination for her portrayal of a grieving mother trying to cope with the drowning death of a son and the suicide attempt of another son (played by Timothy Hutton who won the Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor for his performance). Moore appeared in only two more films during the next fifteen years: \"Six Weeks\" (1982) and \"Just Between Friends\" (1986). She appeared in the independent hit \"Flirting with Disaster\" (1996).\nMoore was in the television movie \"Run a Crooked Mile\" (1969) and starred in several television movies including \"First, You Cry\" (1978), which brought her an Emmy nomination for portraying NBC correspondent Betty Rollin's struggle with breast cancer. Her later TV movies included the medical drama \"Heartsounds\" (1984) with James Garner, which brought her another Emmy nomination, \"Finnegan Begin Again\" (1985) with Robert Preston, which earned her a CableACE Award nomination, the 1988 mini-series \"Lincoln\", which brought her another Emmy nomination for playing Mary Todd Lincoln, and \"Stolen Babies\", for which she won an Emmy Award for Outstanding Supporting Actress in 1993. Later she reunited with former co-stars in \"Mary and Rhoda\" (2000) with Valerie Harper, and \"The Gin Game\" (2003) (based on the Broadway play), with Dick Van Dyke. Moore starred in \"Like Mother, Like Son\" (2001), playing convicted murderer Sante Kimes.\nMemoirs.\nMoore wrote two memoirs. In the first, \"After All\", published in 1995, she acknowledged being a recovering alcoholic, while in \"Growing Up Again: Life, Loves, and Oh Yeah, Diabetes\" (2009), she focuses on living with type 1 diabetes.\nMTM Enterprises.\nIn 1969, Moore and her husband Grant Tinker founded MTM Enterprises, Inc., which produced \"The Mary Tyler Moore Show\" and other successful television shows and films. It also included a record label, MTM Records. MTM Enterprises produced American sitcoms and drama television series such as \"Rhoda\", \"Lou Grant\" and \"Phyllis\" (all spin-offs from \"The Mary Tyler Moore Show)\", \"The Bob Newhart Show\", \"The Texas Wheelers\", \"The Bob Crane Show\", \"Three for the Road\", \"The Tony Randall Show\", \"WKRP in Cincinnati\", \"The White Shadow\", \"Friends and Lovers\", \"St. Elsewhere\", \"Newhart\", and \"Hill Street Blues\", and was later sold to Television South, an ITV Franchise holder in 1988. The MTM logo resembles the Metro Goldwyn Mayer logo, but includes a cat named Mimsie instead of a lion. Currently, the shows of MTM Enterprises are distributed by 20th Century-Fox, which is owned by The Walt Disney Company.\nPersonal life.\nAt age 18 in 1955, Moore married her next-door neighbor, 28-year-old cranberry juice salesman Richard Meeker, and within six weeks she was pregnant with her only child, Richard Carleton Meeker Jr., born on July 3, 1956. Meeker and Moore divorced in 1962. Later that year, Moore married Grant Tinker, a CBS executive and later chairman of NBC, and in 1969 they formed the television production company MTM Enterprises, which created and produced the company's first television series, \"The Mary Tyler Moore Show\". After a 1973 breakup and patch-up, Moore and Tinker announced a permanent separation in 1979 and divorced two years later. In the early 1980s, Moore dated Steve Martin and Warren Beatty. Another relationship, with Michael Lindsay-Hogg, ended when she wanted to be exclusive and he did not.\nOn October 14, 1980, Moore's son Richard died of an accidental gunshot to the head while handling a small .410 shotgun. He was 24 years old. The same model was later taken off the market because of its \"hair trigger\". Three and a half weeks earlier, \"Ordinary People\" had been released where she played a mother who was grieving over the accidental death of her son.\nA 47-year-old Moore married 29-year-old cardiologist Robert Levine on November 23, 1983, at the Pierre Hotel in New York City. They met in 1982 when he treated Moore's mother in New York City on a weekend house call, after Moore and her mother returned from a visit to the Vatican where they had a personal audience with Pope John Paul II. Moore and Levine remained married for 34 years until her death in 2017.\nMoore was an alcoholic much of her life but quit drinking in 1984 when she admitted herself into the Betty Ford Center. One year after getting sober, she quit her three-pack-a-day cigarette habit.\nHealth issues and death.\nMoore was diagnosed with type 1 diabetes in 1969. In 2011, she had surgery to remove a meningioma, a benign brain tumor. In 2014, friends reported that Moore had heart and kidney problems and was nearly blind from complications related to diabetes.\nMoore died at the age of 80 on January 25, 2017, at Greenwich Hospital in Greenwich, Connecticut, from cardiopulmonary arrest complicated by pneumonia after having been placed on a ventilator the week before. She was interred in Oak Lawn Cemetery in Fairfield, Connecticut, in a private ceremony.\nPhilanthropy.\nIn addition to her acting work, Moore was the International Chairperson of JDRF (the Juvenile Diabetes Research Foundation). In this role, she used her celebrity status to help raise funds and awareness of diabetes mellitus type 1.\nIn 2007, in honor of Moore's dedication to the Foundation, JDRF created the \"Forever Moore\" research initiative which will support JDRF's Academic Research and Development and JDRF's Clinical Development Program. The program works on translating basic research advances into new treatments and technologies for those living with type 1 diabetes.\nMoore advocated for animal rights for years and supported charities like the ASPCA and Farm Sanctuary. She helped raise awareness about factory farming methods and promoted more compassionate treatment of farm animals.\nMoore appeared as herself in 1996 on an episode of the Ellen DeGeneres sitcom \"Ellen\". The storyline of the episode includes Moore honoring Ellen for trying to save a 65-year-old lobster from being eaten at a seafood restaurant. She was also a co-founder of Broadway Barks, an annual animal adopt-a-thon held in New York City. Moore and friend Bernadette Peters worked to make it a no-kill city and to encourage adopting animals from shelters.\nIn honor of her father, George Tyler Moore, a lifelong American Civil War enthusiast, in 1995 Moore donated funds to acquire a historic structure in Shepherdstown, West Virginia, for Shepherd College (now Shepherd University) to be used as a center for Civil War studies. The center, named the George Tyler Moore Center for the Study of the Civil War, is housed in the historic Conrad Shindler House (c. 1795), which is named in honor of her great-great-great-grandfather, who owned the structure from 1815 to 1852.\nMoore also contributed to the renovation of a historic house in Winchester, Virginia, that had been used as headquarters by Confederate Major General Thomas J. \"Stonewall\" Jackson during his Shenandoah Valley campaign in 1861\u201362. The house, now known as the Stonewall Jackson's Headquarters Museum, had been owned by Moore's great-grandfather, Lieutenant Colonel Lewis Tilghman Moore, commander of the 4th Virginia Infantry in Jackson's Stonewall Brigade.\nPolitics.\nDuring the 1960s and 1970s, Moore had a reputation as a liberal or moderate, although she endorsed President Richard Nixon for re-election in 1972. She endorsed President Jimmy Carter for re-election in a 1980 campaign television ad. In 2011, her friend and former co-star Ed Asner said during an interview on \"The O'Reilly Factor\" that Moore \"has become much more conservative of late\"; Bill O'Reilly, host of that program, stated that Moore had been a viewer of his show and that her political views had leaned conservative in recent years. In a \"Parade\" magazine article from March 22, 2009, Moore identified herself as a libertarian centrist who watched Fox News. She stated: \"when one looks at what's happened to television, there are so few shows that interest me. I do watch a lot of Fox News. I like Charles Krauthammer and Bill O'Reilly... If McCain had asked me to campaign for him, I would have.\"\nIn an interview for the 2013 PBS series \"Pioneers of Television\", Moore said that she was recruited to join the feminist movement of the 1970s by Gloria Steinem, but did not agree with Steinem's views. Moore said she believed that women have an important role in raising children and that she did not believe in Steinem's view that all women owe it to themselves to have a career.\nActing credits and accolades.\nIn February 1981, Moore was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Actress for her role in the drama film \"Ordinary People\" but lost to Sissy Spacek for her role in \"Coal Miner's Daughter\". In 1981, she won the Golden Globe Award for Best Actress in a Drama for that role.\nMoore received a total of six Emmy Awards, including two for her portrayal of Laura Petrie on \"The Dick Van Dyke Show\" and three for portraying Mary Richards on \"The Mary Tyler Moore Show\". In 1993 she won an Emmy for her portrayal of Georgia Tann in the Lifetime made-for-TV film \"Stolen Babies\".\nOn Broadway, Moore received a Special Tony Award for her performance in \"Whose Life Is It Anyway?\" in 1980, and was nominated for a Drama Desk Award as well. In addition, as a producer, she received nominations for Tony Awards and Drama Desk Awards for MTM's productions of \"Noises Off\" in 1984 and \"Benefactors\" in 1986, and won a Tony Award for Best Revival of a Play or Musical in 1985 for \"Joe Egg\".\nIn 1986, she was inducted into the Television Hall of Fame. In 1987, she received a Lifetime Achievement Award in Comedy from the American Comedy Awards.\nMoore's contributions to the television industry were recognized in 1992 with a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame. The star is located at 7021 Hollywood Boulevard.\nOn May 8, 2002, Moore was present when cable network TV Land and the City of Minneapolis dedicated a statue in downtown Minneapolis of Mary Richards, her character in \"The Mary Tyler Moore Show\". The statue, by artist Gwendolyn Gillen, was chosen from designs submitted by 21 sculptors. The bronze sculpture was located in front of the Dayton's department store, later Macy's, near the corner of 7th Street South and Nicollet Mall. It depicts the iconic moment in the show's opening credits where Moore tosses her tam o' shanter in the air, in a freeze-frame at the end of the montage. While Dayton's is clearly seen in the opening sequence, the store in the background of the hat toss is actually Donaldson's, which was, like Dayton's, a locally based department store with a long history at 7th and Nicollet. In late 2015, the statue was relocated to the city's visitor center during renovations, and was reinstalled in its original location in 2017.\nMoore was awarded the 2011 Screen Actors Guild's lifetime achievement award. In New York City in 2012, Moore and Bernadette Peters were honored by the Ride of Fame and a double-decker bus was dedicated to them and their charity work on behalf of \"Broadway Barks\", which the duo co-founded.\nReferences.\nNotes\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography"}
{"id": "20834", "revid": "49366116", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20834", "title": "Menilite", "text": "Form of opal\nMenilite is a greyish-brown form of the mineraloid opal. It is also known as \"liver opal\" or \"leberopal\" (German), due to its color. It is called menilite because it was first described from M\u00e9nilmontant (Paris), France, where it occurs as concretions within bituminous Early Oligocene Menilite Shales.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20835", "revid": "50474408", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20835", "title": "Mason Remey", "text": "American religious leader (1874\u20131974)\nCharles Mason Remey (15 May 1874 \u2013 4 February 1974) was a prominent member of the early American Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed community, and served in several important administrative capacities. He is well-known for an attempted schism of 1960, in which he claimed leadership and was rejected by the overwhelming majority of Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00eds, who regard him as a Covenant-breaker.\nRemey came from a distinguished naval family of Washington, D.C., and was among the first Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00eds of the United States. He was a contemporary of \u02bbAbdu'l-Bah\u00e1, one of the faith's three central figures, and traveled around the world as a teacher of the faith. As an architect, he designed the Houses of Worship in Kampala and Sydney, both dedicated in 1961, as well as the International Archives building in Haifa.\nIn 1951 he was appointed by Shoghi Effendi as the president of the International Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed Council, and later as a Hand of the Cause. When Shoghi Effendi died in 1957, Remey and the other Hands signed a declaration that he died without leaving a designated successor as Guardian. Remey was elected to serve as one of the nine custodial Hands, a body that became the interim leadership until the election of the Universal House of Justice in 1963.\nIn 1960, Remey declared himself to be the second Guardian and expected the allegiance of the world's Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00eds. His claim was rejected by all the other Hands of the Cause due to his lack of scriptural authority, and he was excommunicated along with about 100 supporters, mostly from the United States. Before his death, Remey's followers split into several rival factions, all of which declined over time.\nBackground.\nBorn in Burlington, Iowa, on 15 May 1874, Remey was the eldest of six children from Rear Admiral George Collier Remey and Mary Josephine Mason Remey. The Navy destroyer USS Remey (1943\u20131974) was named after his father. His maternal grandfather, Charles Mason, was the first Chief Justice of Iowa and candidate for governor in 1867.\nRemey's parents raised him in the Episcopal Church. He studied comparative religion in college, including a course on Buddhism, which made him receptive to other religions.\nRemey studied architecture at Cornell University (1893\u20131896) without completing a degree, and the \u00c9cole des Beaux-Arts in Paris (1896\u20131903). From 1904 to 1908, he became an instructor of architecture at George Washington University.\nWhile studying in Paris Remey learned of the Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed Faith from May (Bolles) Maxwell, the first Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed in Paris, and he accepted it on 31 December 1899, becoming the third Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed in the city. A few months later, the Persian Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed teacher `Abdu\u2019l-Kar\u00edm-i-ihr\u00e1n\u00ed came to Paris and taught the new Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00eds more about the faith. From Paris, Remey went on pilgrimage and met \u02bbAbdu'l-Bah\u00e1 first in February 1901, then in spring/summer that year M\u00edrz\u00e1 Abu'l-Fa\u1e0dl visited Paris and taught the Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00eds there.\nBah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed service, 1903\u20131950.\nAfter embracing the Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed Faith in Paris, Remey returned to Washington, D.C., and became a prominent author, public speaker, and organizer. Remey proposed the idea to the Baha'is in Washington to organize the first local Spiritual Assembly in the city, which he was elected to on 14 March 1907. He made a second pilgrimage to see \u02bbAbdu'l-Bah\u00e1 in 1907, and returned in 1908, 1909, 1914, and 1921. He traveled extensively to lecture in the interests of the faith, visiting Iran, Russia, and Central asia in 1908, and in 1910 became the first Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed to circle the globe on teaching trips, along with his companion Howard Struven. Robert Stockman wrote of his journeys:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;In November 1909 Charles Mason Remey and Howard Struven began the first Bah\u00e1\u2019\u00ed teaching trip to circle the globe. Leaving San Francisco, they traveled to Hawaii, four cities in Japan, Shanghai, Singapore, three cities in Burma, at least eight cities in India, and Palestine; they returned to the United States in June 1910. In 1914 Remey and George Latimer crossed military lines to teach the Faith in France, England, and Germany. Lesser known traveling teaching trips occurred in 1919, 1943, and 1944, to the American south; 1945, to the Northeastern United States; 1945\u201346, to Latin America; 1946, to the Midwest; 1947, to the American south, Europe, and Latin America; 1948, to Germany, Austria, Italy, and England; and 1949, to Europe.\nAccording to William Garlington, Washington D.C. became the third most influential group of American Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00eds in the first decade of the 20th century (after Chicago and New York), because of \"its talented membership, which included leaders such as Laura Barney, Mason Remey, and Pauline Hannen.\"\nAt the first national convention of American Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00eds in March 1909, Remey was the delegate representing Washington, and was elected to the executive committee of the \"Bahai Temple Unity\", a precursor to the National Spiritual Assembly. In 1917\u20131918 Remey chaired a committee investigating the Chicago Reading Room, a study group that combined the teachings of Bah\u00e1\u02bcu'll\u00e1h with those of a Bostonian occultist, ultimately expelling its members as \"violators\". Remey's loyalty brought him praise from \u02bbAbdu'l-Bah\u00e1 and later Shoghi Effendi mentioned him as one of the most eminent Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00eds in America.\nRemey was also a prolific writer, and published several volumes on Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed history and teachings. His first pamphlet was published in 1905 and was among the first material on the religion available to American Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00eds. In part due to his fear of global cataclysm, Remey compiled much of his records and in 1940 he provided copies to several public libraries, requesting them not to be opened until 1995.\nMarriage.\nAccording to Juliet Thompson's diary, \u02bbAbdu'l-Bah\u00e1 suggested that she marry Remey, and in 1909 asked her how she felt about it. They were engaged for a time but did not marry. Thompson anguished over her decision, which she felt would cause \u02bbAbdu'l-Baha disappointment.\nDuring the 1930s, Remey lived in Washington, D.C. where he enjoyed an active social life. He was briefly married to heiress Gertrude Heim Klemm from 17 July 1931 until her suicide on 5 August 1932 (Klemm's gravestone gives the Paris wedding as 11 July). They had no children.\nArchitectural projects.\nHaving studied architecture, Remey made significant achievements in the design of several Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed buildings. Under the guidance of Shoghi Effendi, his designs were used in the temples in Kampala and Sydney (pictured), both dedicated in 1961.\nBefore 1944 a site was selected and purchased for a House of Worship in Tehran, Iran. Upon the request of Shoghi Effendi, Remey provided a design for this temple, which he approved. The drawing of it was published in The Bah\u00e1'\u00ed World XIV: 1963\u20131968, p.\u00a0495. The construction of this temple has been delayed indefinitely, however, due to the hostile political situation in Iran.\nA site has been selected for a House of Worship in the vicinity of the Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed World Centre on Mount Carmel in Haifa, Israel. Since 1971, an obelisk has marked the location where it will be constructed. The design by Mason Remey was approved by Shoghi Effendi. A photo of that model can be found in \"Baha'i World\" vol. XII, p.\u00a0548. It now stands in the upper hall of the Mansion of Bahj\u00ed.\nRemey also designed the International Archives Building, completed in 1957. His design was based on the Parthenon.\nHe provided many design proposals for the Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed temples in Wilmette and Frankfurt, but Louis Bourgeois and Teuto Rocholl, respectively, were selected instead. He also made suggestions for the design of the Shrine of the B\u00e1b.\nThe Remeum.\nRemey had a large personal fortune from his family and his late wife. He spent much of it on two projects: his mansion on Embassy Row in Washington, built around 1930, and the \"Remeum\".\nRemey contracted with Pohick Church in 1937 to build a huge family mausoleum on its grounds in Virginia, to be located on five acres of land about one half-mile south of the church building. Construction began in 1939. According to an article in the Washington \"Evening Star and Daily News\", the mausoleum was planned as a \"magnificent complex of walled courtyards, underground chambers with soaring vaulted ceilings, marble reliefs and statues, carved pillars, chapels and burial vaults\". It was to be four times the size of Pohick Church, using over two million bricks, and costing over a million dollars ($18.9 million in 2021 dollars). It had relief panels depicting historical events in the life of Remey's family, such as the landing of the Mayflower and the sinking of the USS Yorktown; a pair of massive lions guarding the entrance; life-size statues; depictions of Christian saints; and a huge ornate sarcophagus of Portuguese marble was prepared for himself. Remey transported the bodies of fifteen relatives to the Remeum.\nThe grounds were landscaped. The complex had electric chandeliers, ventilation and plumbing. A trust account was established with the church for maintenance. Remey planned to crown it with a three-story structure that would have dwarfed the church. The Remeum was never finished.\nProblems soon developed in the 1950s, and the mausoleum site became the target of vandals. As a preventative measure, the entrance was bricked up to prevent access, but the wall was breached in 1956 by high school boys with axes, as reported by the \"Morning Star\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Rather than being the thing of beauty as it was designed, the mausoleum now resembles a dump. Fragments of smashed marble reliefs and statues litter the floors, along with beer cans, whiskey bottles and old candles. Wooden coffins and chests have been broken to bits and their charred remnants scattered...\nThousands of tiny glass fragments designed to form mosaics have been poured into the ground. Statues too large to steal or smash have been chipped and painted or blackened with soot from candles and torches.\nWhat was planned to serve as a place of worship and remembrance is now the scene of nocturnal beer busts, drug parties, high school initiations and exploring expeditions.\nAn unknown number of urns containing the ashes of cremated bodies still lie amidst the trash in the mausoleum.\nBy 1958 the church vestry became concerned, and in 1962 refused to grant permission for any more work to be done on the site. Soon negotiations began to break the original contract; in 1968 the property reverted to the church, and Remey was given five years to remove anything of value from the site. Most of the dead were taken by relatives to another family cemetery in New York; Remey's wife Gertrude was reinterred in the main church cemetery. After the last of the bodies was removed, the Remeum was demolished beginning in 1973 on the orders of the Episcopal church, and the last of the aboveground ruins was finally bulldozed ten years later. Little remains on the site to mark the former presence of the complex save an obelisk dedicated to Remey's parents and a pair of structures which served as chimneys or vents.\nRobert Stockman wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The Remeum reflected a nearly obsessive concern about immortality and his future place in history that Remey increasingly manifested as he grew older.\nService in Haifa, 1950\u20131959.\nIn November 1950, Shoghi Effendi announced to a small group, including Remey, his intention of appointing them to an International Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed Council. Remey moved his residence from Washington to Haifa, and the public announcement of the Council was made on 9 January 1951. The Council was the first international Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed body, intended to be a forerunner to the Universal House of Justice while forging links with authorities in the newly emerged Israel, assisting with the completion of the Shrine of the B\u00e1b, and negotiating for status as a religious court in Israel.\nRemey was appointed president of the council in March 1951, with Amelia Collins as vice-president. A further announcement in March 1952 appointed several more officers to the Council and R\u00fah\u00edyyih Kh\u00e1num as the liaison between the Council and the Guardian.\nRemey was included in Shoghi Effendi's first contingent of 12 appointments to the rank of Hand of the Cause on 24 December 1951. Remey attended all four international teaching conferences in 1953, in Kampala, Chicago, Stockholm, and New Delhi.\nDuring this time he continued several Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed architectural projects.\nDeath of Shoghi Effendi.\nThe Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed world entered a leadership crisis upon the death of Shoghi Effendi, who died without children or an appointed successor. All male descendants of Baha'u'llah were either dead or excommunicated, and the hereditary institution of the Guardian was defunct.\nWhen Shoghi Effendi died on 4 November 1957, his personal room and safe were sealed and constantly guarded. 26 of the 27 living Hands arrived by 17 November, and on 19 November, Mason Remey along with 8 others found all seals intact and searched the room for a will, which was not found.\nFirst Conclave.\nLater the Hands of the Cause met in a private conclave at Bahj\u00ed on 20 November. They decided that the situation of the Guardian having died without being able to appoint a successor was a situation not dealt with in the texts that define the Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed administration, and that the matter would need to be reviewed and adjudicated by the Universal House of Justice, an institution envisaged by Baha'u'llah that had not yet been elected. Their unanimous proclamation made 25 November stated,\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Shoghi Effendi Rabbani, passed away... without having appointed his successor;\nAND WHEREAS it is now fallen upon us... to preserve the unity, the security and the development of the Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed World Community and all its institutions;\nAND WHEREAS in accordance with the Will and Testament of \u02bbAbdu'l-Bah\u00e1...;\nWe nominate and appoint from our own number to act on our behalf as the Custodians of the Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed World Faith [list of nine] to exercise... all such functions, rights and powers in succession to the Guardian of the Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed Faith... as are necessary to serve the interests of the Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed World Faith, and this until such time as the Universal House of Justice, upon being duly established and elected... may otherwise determine.\nRemey signed the declaration that Shoghi Effendi died \"without having appointed his successor\" and was also appointed as one of the Custodians to stay in Haifa. Several other proclamations were made that day specifying the authority and procedural functioning of the Hands and the Custodians. Among them were,\nA longer proclamation, also signed by all the Hands, was sent to the Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00eds of the world on 25 November, which mentioned several points about the continuation of authority of the Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed Faith:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt; The Aghs\u00e1n (branches) one and all are either dead or have been declared violators of the Covenant by the Guardian... The first effect of the realization that no successor to Shoghi Effendi could have been appointed by him was to plunge the Hands of the Cause into the very abyss of despair.\n...we Hands of the Cause have constituted a body of nine Hands to serve at the Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed World Centre. This body of nine Hands will energetically deal with the protection of the Faith whenever attacks, whether from within or outside the Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed community, are reported by Hands from their areas or by National or Regional Assemblies or whether they arise within the Holy Land.\nAs to the International Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed Council... that body will in the course of time finally fulfil its purpose through the formation of the Universal House of Justice... The main work of the Council has been to act as the Guardian's representative in matters involving the Israeli Government and its courts of law.\nMeanwhile the entire body of the Hands... will decide when and how the International Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed Council is to evolve through the successive stages outlined by the Guardian, culminating in the call to election of the Universal House of Justice by the membership of all National Spiritual Assemblies.\nWhen that divinely ordained body comes into existence, all the conditions of the Faith can be examined anew...\nFollowing these events \"Time\" magazine reported that there were debates about two possible candidates for Guardian. Though the Hands dedicated to not disclose any details of the conclaves, Remey later revealed memoirs with details of the events. He wrote that his status as president of the International Baha'i Council was never mentioned in any of the conclaves, and that the idea of not having another Guardian was introduced by Rahmatu'll\u00e1h Muh\u00e1jir.\nThe idea of no single person as the supreme head of the religion was disturbing to some Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed of the time. In 1958 two American Hands, Paul Haney and Corinne True, and the NSA began circulating a document expressing their belief that the \"door to the appointment of a second Guardian... is closed\", but it was blocked by an urgent cablegram from the custodial Hands in Haifa, indicating that they were \"greatly disturbed\" and to delete all references to it.\nClaim to Guardianship, 1960\u20131974.\nAs early as January 1959, Remey believed that he was the second Guardian and successor to Shoghi Effendi. According to Remey, this idea developed gradually since the first conclave of the Hands, and at the second conclave (November 1958) he warned the others that they were violating the Covenant by not allowing the continuation of the Guardianship. At the third conclave (November 1959), Remey refused to sign the joint statement of the Hands, which was converting the International Council from an appointed to an elected body, an act that would end his position as president. He then abandoned his position, moved to Washington, and began to circulate the claim that he should be recognized as the second Guardian.\nProclamation.\nIn April 1960, Remey wrote an announcement that he was the successor to Shoghi Effendi, and requested that it be read at the upcoming national convention. In his cover letter to Charles Wolcott, secretary of the National Spiritual Assembly of the United States, he wrote,\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Enclosed I send you my Proclamation of my Guardianship of the Baha'i Faith.\nIf it be the wish of the convention that I go to the Wilmette at this time to meet the Baha'is of America and further proclaim, declare and explain my status for life as commander in chief of Baha'i affairs of the world as I was appointed to do by our late Beloved Guardian as the Second Guardian of the Baha'i Faith, I will be very pleased indeed to meet the convention.\nShould the convention wish this, let them send three believers of their choice to Washington bringing me their invitation to come to them \u2013 these three representatives of the convention to usher me to the convention in waiting for me...\nRemey believed his appointment as president of the international council represented an appointment by Shoghi Effendi as Guardian, because the appointed council was a precursor to the elected Universal House of Justice. In his intended announcement at the convention, he wrote,\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The Beloved Guardian singled me, Mason Remey, out from amongst all of the Believers upon earth to occupy the position of President of the Baha'i International Council. This is the only position suggestive of authority that Shoghi Effendi ever bestowed upon anyone, the only special and specific appointment of authority to any man ever made by him.\nThe Beloved Guardian declared the Baha'i International Council to be the forerunner of and the first step toward the establishment of the Universal House of Justice...\nTherefore, inasmuch as The Beloved Guardian in His Infallibility has thus placed me in command of the Faith... I can do nothing but assume my place that he has given me with all of the responsibilities, the prerequisites and emoluments that go with this position...\nRemey wrote that his delay in announcing his status was to give others \"ample time to discover for themselves\", but \"until now no one, other than I have discovered that such authority was vested in me\". He claimed in the proclamation that he made the declaration as Guardian to the Hands previously (which they claimed was false), and that he had \"definitely known for the past twelve years more or less\". He said that, \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;All these plans of the Hands of the Faith for 1963 that are so absorbing and confusing to the people of the Faith must be dropped and stopped immediately. I am the only one who can command this situation so I have arisen to do so for I alone in all this world have been given the authority and the power to accomplish this.\nI now command the Hands of the Faith to stop all of their preparations for 1963 and furthermore I command all believers... to immediately cease cooperating with and giving support to this fallacious program for 1963.\nExpulsion.\nHis letter to the convention was refused. After a brief attempt at reconciliation and some hesitation among the Hands, he was declared a Covenant-breaker by all 26 remaining Hands of the Cause on 26 July 1960, along with anyone actively supporting his claims. Almost the whole Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed world rejected his claim, which did not even address the requirements that Guardians be descendants of Baha'u'llah \u2014 making him ineligible \u2014 and that appointments must be clearly confirmed by the nine resident Hands of the Cause in Haifa.\nRemey gained very little support around the world, and himself noted that \"almost the entire Baha'i world\" rejected his claim. He sent his proclamation to other National Spiritual Assemblies, and a majority of the one in France accepted him. The 11 other extant National Assemblies rejected him. He gained supporters mostly from the United States, but also in parts of Europe, Pakistan (mostly in Faisalabad and Sialkot), and in Lucknow, India. Estimates of Remey's initial following range from 15, to 100, to 150, to several hundred individuals.\nThe Hands sent Abu'l-Q\u00e1sim Faizi to France as their representative, with specific instructions to dissolve the National Assembly and call for a new election.\nAlthough initially disturbed, the mainstream Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00eds paid little attention to his movement within a few years. The Universal House of Justice was elected in 1963, and the Custodians officially passed their authority as the head of the Faith to the Universal House of Justice, which soon announced that it did not have the power to appoint or legislate to make possible the appointment of a second Guardian to succeed Shoghi Effendi.\nConsolidation.\nRemey wrote three letters to his supporters soon after his excommunication, sharing his belief that \"the only true and legitimate Baha'is are those now serving under the Second Guardian of the Faith.\" He initially called his sect the Orthodox Baha'is Under the Hereditary Guardianship.\nRemey settled in Florence, Italy, until the end of his life. From there he appointed three local spiritual assemblies in Santa Fe, New Mexico, Rawalpindi, Pakistan, and Lucknow, India, then organized the election of two National Assemblies in 1963 \u2013 in the United States and Pakistan.\nIn 1964 the Santa Fe assembly filed a lawsuit against the National Spiritual Assembly (NSA) of the Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00eds of the United States to receive the legal title to the Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed House of Worship in Illinois, and all other property owned by the NSA. The NSA counter-sued and won. The Santa Fe assembly lost the right to use the term \"Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed\" in printed material. Remey then changed the name of his sect from \"Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00eds Under the Hereditary Guardianship\" to \"Abha World Faith\" and also referred to it as the \"Orthodox Faith of Bah\u00e1\u02bcu'll\u00e1h\" or \"Orthodox Abha World Faith\", and himself as the \"Guardian of the Orthodox Baha'is\". In 1966, Remey asked the Santa Fe assembly to dissolve, as well as the second International Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed Council that he had appointed with Joel Marangella, residing in France, as president.\nFracturing.\nBeginning in 1966\u201367, Remey was abandoned by almost all of his followers, and his movement began to weaken and decline rapidly. Besides dissolving the institutions that he had organized, Remey began focusing on impending global catastrophe and criticizing Shoghi Effendi.\nIn the late 1940s, he expressed his belief that nuclear war would destroy much of the world, and by the 1960s he stated publicly that the Earth's axis would tilt and produce global floods. He encouraged his followers to move to high ground in the Rocky Mountains to avoid the imminent floods. These beliefs were the foundation of why he deposited copies of his memoirs in several prominent libraries in 1940, to ensure that a set would survive.\nIn 1966 he became very critical of Shoghi Effendi. In a letter that year he reasoned that Shoghi Effendi had been practicing the religion of the B\u00e1b, and that,\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The first Guardian of the Faith so construed the Master Abdu'l Baha's Will and Testament that he formed his Administration upon the Babi Faith and not upon the Baha'i Faith. This mistake has caused so much confusion and misunderstanding and trouble that the only thing for the second Guardian to do, to set matters aright, is to discard all which Shoghi Effendi did and to institute a New Faith which shall be the Orthodox Faith under the Holy Name of ABHA in order to carry out the conditions that will lead to the establishment of the TRUE Baha'i Faith (of Baha'u'llah) which Faith has not yet been established in the world.\nIn a further letter the following year, Remey again repeated that, \"the First Guardian Shoghi Effendi built his Administration about the Babi Faith and not about the Baha'i Faith. Shoghi Effendi was a very confused soul. He was an ego maniac. He flaunted and disobeyed the laws of the Aqdas and created all this confusion himself.\"\nThese ideas came as a surprise to Remey's small band of followers, and nearly all of them abandoned him. They were not organized until several of them began forming their own groups based on different understandings of succession, even before his death in 1974. The majority of them claimed that Remey was showing signs of senility. The number of people who recognized his claim had greatly diminished by the time of his death.\nBurial.\nFrom 1962, Remey resided in Florence, Italy, and died there on 4 February 1974, at the age of 99. Having been abandoned by all of his followers, he was buried by his non-Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed secretary without religious ceremony in Florence. His obituary in the \"Washington Star\" accidentally gave his name as George Mason Remey.\nResultant groups.\nRemey's claim to Guardianship resulted in the largest schism in the history of the religion, and several small groups continue the belief that Remey was the Guardian and successor to Shoghi Effendi. They are now largely confined to the United States, with few members and no communal religious life. Accurate estimates on size are scarce and dated.\nJoel Marangella.\nIn 1961 Joel Marangella (1918\u20132013) received a letter from Remey, and a note that, \"...in or after 1963. You will know when to break the seal.\" In 1964 Remey appointed members to a second International Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed Council with Marangella as president, significant due to Remey's claim to Guardianship being based on the same appointment. In 1965 Remey activated the council, and in 1966 wrote letters passing the \"affairs of the Faith\" to the council, then later dissolving it. In 1969 Marangella made an announcement that the letter of 1961 was Remey's appointment of him as the third Guardian, and that he had been the Guardian since 1964, invalidating Remey's pronouncements from that point forward.\nMarangella gained the support of most of Remey's followers, who came to be known as Orthodox Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00eds. One source estimated them at no more than 100 members in 1988, with the largest concentration being 11 in Roswell, New Mexico. In a 2007 court case, the group claimed a United States membership of about 40 people.\nDonald Harvey.\nDonald Harvey was appointed by Remey as \"Third Guardian\" in 1967, and the first of five \"elders\", but he later dissolved the body of elders. Donald Harvey never gained much of a following. When Harvey died in 1991, leadership went to Jacques Soghomonian, and when he died in 2013 it passed to E.S. Yazdani.\nLeland Jensen.\nLeland Jensen was initially a supporter of Remey and then left the group. After a stint in prison for sexually molesting a minor, he made several religious claims of his own and established himself as the head of an apocalyptic cult. He believed that Remey was the adopted son of \u02bbAbdu'l-Bah\u00e1, and that Remey's adopted son Joseph Pepe was the third Guardian, something that Pepe refused to entertain. Jensen made headlines for predicting a nuclear holocaust in 1980, and his followers became the subject of academic studies in cognitive dissonance. Membership peaked in 1980 with 150\u2013200, but declined after the failed prophecy of 1980. By 1990 there were fewer than 100 adherents, and defection continued in the 1990s and beyond. They were concentrated in Montana.\nRex King.\nRex King was elected to Remey's NSA of the United States with the most votes, and soon came into conflict with Remey. In 1969 he traveled to Italy with the hope of having Remey pass affairs over to him, but instead was labeled with the \"station of satan\". King supported Marangella's claim, but soon took issue with the way Marangella was interpreting scripture. King rejected all claimants to the Guardianship after Shoghi Effendi including Remey. He claimed that he, Rex King, was a \"regent\" pending the emergence of the second Guardian who was in \"occultation\". Hardly any of Remey's supporters followed King. He called the group the \"Orthodox Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed Faith under the Regency\" and held at least three annual conferences in the 1970s. King died in 1977 and left a will appointing his three sons and a daughter-in-law as a council of regents, who changed their name to \"Tarbiyat Baha'i Community\". They were concentrated in New Mexico.\nWorks.\nRemey wrote several pamphlets that were among the first available to Americans:\nHe also published two books about his travels:\nRemey was a prolific writer. The following are a few examples of other material he produced.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20836", "revid": "45925219", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20836", "title": "Minimalism", "text": "Movements in various forms of art and design\nIn visual arts, music, and other media, minimalism is an art movement that had emerged in the post-World War II era in Western art. It is often interpreted as a reaction to abstract expressionism and modernism. The movement anticipated various post-minimalist practices in contemporary art that extended or critically reflected on minimalism's original aims. Minimalism emphasized reducing art to its essentials, focusing on the object itself and the viewer's experience with minimal mediation from the artist. Prominent artists associated with minimalism include Donald Judd, Agnes Martin, Dan Flavin, Carl Andre, Robert Morris, Anne Truitt, and Frank Stella.\nMinimalism in music features methods like repetition and gradual variation, such as the works of La Monte Young, Terry Riley, Steve Reich, Philip Glass, Julius Eastman and John Adams. The term is sometimes used to describe the plays and novels of Samuel Beckett, the films of Robert Bresson, the stories of Raymond Carver, and the automobile designs of Colin Chapman. In recent years, minimalism has come to refer to anything or anyone that is spare or reduced to its essentials.\nVisual arts and literalist art.\nMinimalism in visual art, sometimes called \"minimal art\", \"literalist art\", and \"ABC Art\", refers to a specific movement of artists that emerged in New York in the early 1960s in response to abstract expressionism. Examples of artists working in painting that are associated with Minimalism include Nassos Daphnis, Frank Stella, Kenneth Noland, Al Held, Ellsworth Kelly, Robert Ryman, and others; those working in sculpture include Donald Judd, Dan Flavin, David Smith, Anthony Caro, and others. Minimalism in painting can be characterized by the use of the hard edge, linear lines, simple forms, and an emphasis on two dimensions. American minimalist artists were heavily influenced by earlier European abstract movements. During that time, New York was hosting exhibitions of the German Bauhaus artists, Russian Constructivists, and Dutch De Stijl artists. Radical abstraction was invented by each of these groups, and they encouraged artists such as Robert Morris, Dan Flavin, and Donald Judd to pursue new artistic trajectories. In order to provide the audience with an instantaneous, purely visual reaction, these artists sought to produce art that had no references to anything other than itself. In order to expose the objective, visual components of art, the subjective, gestural components were removed. Minimalism in sculpture can be characterized by very simple geometric shapes often made of industrial materials like plastic, metal, aluminum, concrete, and fiberglass; these materials are usually left raw or painted a solid color.\nMinimalism was in part a reaction against the painterly subjectivity of Abstract Expressionism that had been dominant in the New York School during the 1940s and 1950s. Dissatisfied with the intuitive and spontaneous qualities of Action Painting, and Abstract Expressionism more broadly, Minimalism as an art movement asserted that a work of art should not refer to anything other than itself and should omit any extra-visual association.\nDonald Judd's work was showcased in 1964 at Green Gallery in Manhattan, as were Flavin's first fluorescent light works, while other leading Manhattan galleries like Leo Castelli Gallery and Pace Gallery also began to showcase artists focused on minimalist ideas.\nMinimalism in visual art broadly.\nIn a broader sense, minimalism as a visual strategy can be traced to the geometric abstractions of painters associated with the Bauhaus movement, as well as the works of Kazimir Malevich, Piet Mondrian, and other artists linked to the De Stijl and Russian Constructivist movement. It also appears in the sculptures of Constantin Br\u00e2ncu\u0219i.\nAs a formal strategy, minimalism has been employed in the paintings of Barnett Newman, Ad Reinhardt, and Josef Albers, as well as in the works of diverse artists including Pablo Picasso, Yayoi Kusama, and Giorgio Morandi. Yves Klein explored the concept through his monochrome paintings, producing them as early as 1949. His first private exhibition of this work was held in 1950, while his first public presentation appeared in the Artist's book \"\" in November 1954.\nLiteralism.\nMichael Fried called the minimalist artists \"literalists\", and used literalism as a pejorative due to his position that the art should deliver transcendental experience with metaphors, symbolism, and stylization. In Fried's (controversial) view, the literalist art needs a spectator to validate it as art: an \"object in a situation\" only becomes art in the eyes of an observer. For example, for a regular sculpture its physical location is irrelevant, and its status as a work of art remains even when unseen. Donald Judd's pieces (see photo), on the other hand, are just objects sitting in the desert sun waiting for a visitor to discover them and accept them as art.\nDesign, architecture, and spaces.\nThe term minimalism is also used to describe a trend in design and architecture, wherein the subject is reduced to its necessary elements. Minimalist architectural designers focus on effectively using vacant space, neutral colors, and eliminating decoration, which is meant to emphasize materiality, tactility, texture, weight, and density. Minimalist architecture became popular in the late 1980s in London and New York, whereby architects and fashion designers worked together in the boutiques to achieve simplicity, using white elements, cold lighting, and large spaces with minimal furniture and few decorative elements.\nThe works of De Stijl artists are a major reference: De Stijl expanded the ideas of expression by meticulously organizing basic elements such as lines and planes. In 1924, The Rietveld Schroder House was commissioned by Truus Schr\u00f6der-Schr\u00e4der, a precursor to minimalism. The house emphasizes its slabs, beams and posts reflecting De Stijl's philosophy on the relationship between form and function. With regard to home design, more attractive \"minimalistic\" designs are not truly minimalistic because they are larger, and use more expensive building materials and finishes.\nMinimalistic design has been highly influenced by Japanese traditional design and architecture. There are observers who describe the emergence of minimalism as a response to the brashness and chaos of urban life. For example, minimalist architecture began to gain traction in 1980s Japan as a result of the country's rising population and rapid expansion of cities. The design was considered an antidote to the \"overpowering presence of traffic, advertising, jumbled building scales, and imposing roadways.\" The chaotic environment was not only driven by urbanization, industrialization, and technology but also the Japanese experience of constantly having to demolish structures on account of the destruction wrought by World War II and the earthquakes, including the calamities it entails such as fire. The minimalist design philosophy did not arrive in Japan by way of another country, as it was already part of the Japanese culture rooted on the Zen philosophy. There are those who specifically attribute the design movement to Japan's spirituality and view of nature.\nArchitect Ludwig Mies van der Rohe (1886\u20131969) adopted the motto \"Less is more\" to describe his aesthetic. His tactic was one of arranging the necessary components of a building to create an impression of extreme simplicity\u2014he enlisted every element and detail to serve multiple visual and functional purposes; for example, designing a floor to also serve as the radiator, or a massive fireplace to also house the bathroom. Designer Buckminster Fuller (1895\u20131983) adopted the engineer's goal of \"Doing more with less\", but his concerns were oriented toward technology and engineering rather than aesthetics.\nConcepts and design elements.\nThe concept of minimalist architecture is to strip everything down to its essential quality and achieve simplicity. The idea is not completely without ornamentation, but that all parts, details, and joinery are considered as reduced to a stage where no one can remove anything further to improve the design.\nThe considerations for 'essences' are light, form, detail of material, space, place, and human condition. Minimalist architects not only consider the physical qualities of the building. They pay attention to details, people, space, nature, and materials, believing this reveals the abstract quality of something that is invisible and aids the search for the essence of those invisible qualities\u2014such as natural light, sky, earth, and air. In addition, they \"open a dialogue\" with the surrounding environment to decide the most essential materials for the construction and create relationships between buildings and sites.\nIn minimalist architecture, design elements strive to convey the message of simplicity. The basic geometric forms, elements without decoration, simple materials, and the repetition of structures represent a sense of order and essential quality. The movement of natural light in buildings reveals simple and clean spaces. In the late 19th century as the arts and crafts movement became popular in Britain, people valued the attitude of 'truth to materials' with respect to the profound and innate characteristics of materials. Minimalist architects humbly 'listen to figure', seeking essence and simplicity by rediscovering the valuable qualities in simple and common materials. Minimalist architecture is meant to declutter a space, attempt to increase functionality and is thought to feel calm and serene. The three principles that architects tend to follow while designing minimalist spaces are: the in, one out rule, zone wise organisation, and the 90/90 rule.\nInfluences from Japanese tradition.\nThe idea of simplicity appears in many cultures, especially the Japanese traditional culture of Zen Buddhist philosophy. The Japanese manipulate the Zen culture into aesthetic and design elements for their buildings. This idea of architecture has influenced Western society, especially in America since the mid-19th century. Moreover, it inspired the minimalist architecture in the 20th century.\nZen concepts of simplicity transmit the ideas of freedom and the essence of living. Simplicity is not only an aesthetic value, but it also has a moral perception that looks into the nature of truth and reveals the inner qualities and essence of materials and objects. For example, the sand garden in temple demonstrates the concepts of simplicity and the essentiality from the considered setting of a few stones and a huge empty space.\nThe Japanese aesthetic principle of refers to empty or open space. It removes all the unnecessary internal walls and opens up the space. The emptiness of spatial arrangement reduces everything down to the most essential quality.\nThe Japanese aesthetic of values the quality of simple and plain objects. It appreciates the absence of unnecessary features, treasures a life in quietness, and aims to reveal the innate character of materials. For example, the Japanese floral art of has the central principle of letting the flower express itself. People cut off the branches, leaves, and blossoms from the plants and only retain the essential part of the plant. This conveys the idea of essential quality and innate character in nature.\nMinimalist architects and their works.\nThe Japanese minimalist architect Tadao Ando conveys the Japanese traditional spirit and his own perception of nature in his works. His design concepts are materials, pure geometry, and nature. He normally uses concrete or natural wood and basic structural form to achieve austerity and rays of light in space. He also sets up a dialogue between the site and nature to create relationship and order with the buildings. Ando's works and the translation of Japanese aesthetic principles are highly influential on Japanese architecture.\nAnother Japanese minimalist architect, Kazuyo Sejima, works on her own and in conjunction with Ryue Nishizawa, as SANAA, producing iconic Japanese Minimalist buildings. Credited with creating and influencing a particular genre of Japanese Minimalism, Sejimas delicate, intelligent designs may use white color, thin construction sections and transparent elements to create the phenomenal building type often associated with minimalism. Works include New Museum (2010) New York City, Small House (2000) Tokyo, and House surrounded By Plum Trees (2003) Tokyo.\nIn Vitra Conference Pavilion, Weil am Rhein, 1993, the concepts are to bring together the relationships between building, human movement, site, and nature. Which as one main point of minimalism ideology that establish dialogue between the building and site. The building uses the simple forms of circle and rectangle to contrast the filled and void space of the interior and nature. In the foyer, there is a large landscape window that looks out to the exterior. This achieves the simple and silence of architecture and enhances the light, wind, time, and nature in space.\nJohn Pawson is a British minimalist architect; his design concepts are soul, light, and order. He believes that though reduced clutter and simplification of the interior to a point that gets beyond the idea of essential quality, there is a sense of clarity and richness of simplicity instead of emptiness. The materials in his design reveal the perception toward space, surface, and volume. Moreover, he likes to use natural materials because of their aliveness, sense of depth and quality of an individual. He is also attracted by the important influences from Japanese Zen Philosophy.\nCalvin Klein Madison Avenue, New York, 1995\u201396, is a boutique that conveys Calvin Klein's ideas of fashion. John Pawson's interior design concepts for this project are to create simple, peaceful and orderly spatial arrangements. He used stone floors and white walls to achieve simplicity and harmony for space. He also emphasises reduction and eliminates the visual distortions, such as the air conditioning, and lamps, to achieve a sense of purity for the interior.\nAlberto Campo Baeza is a Spanish architect and describes his work as essential architecture. He values the concepts of light, idea, and space. Light is essential and achieves the relationship between inhabitants and the building. Ideas are to meet the function and context of space, forms, and construction. Space is shaped by the minimal geometric forms to avoid decoration that is not essential.\nWhile both minimalist and contemporary minimalism stress simplicity, there are some significant differences. Minimalism emphasizes only the essentials and employs simple, large-sized components in less amounts. Modern minimalism, on the other hand, uses more decorative pieces. While modern minimalism includes eye-catching forms, minimalist designs tend to emphasize geometric shapes and straight lines. Another difference is space; modern minimalism permits trendy items, while minimalist environments are open and empty. While modern minimalism incorporates colorful, seductive elements that accentuate the modern aesthetic while keeping a neutral color scheme, minimalist furniture is necessary and practical. Although simplicity is emphasized in both forms, modern minimalism adds trends and gives places a more lively vibe. It is easier to differentiate between the two types when one is aware of these distinctions.\nLiterature.\nLiterary minimalism is characterized by an economy with words and a focus on surface description. Minimalist writers eschew adverbs and prefer allowing context to dictate meaning. Readers are expected to take an active role in creating the story, to \"choose sides\" based on oblique hints and innuendo, rather than react to directions from the writer.\nAustrian architect and theorist Adolf Loos published early writings about minimalism in \"Ornament and Crime\".\nThe precursors to literary minimalism are famous novelists Stephen Crane and Ernest Hemingway.\nSome 1940s-era crime fiction of writers such as James M. Cain and Jim Thompson adopted a stripped-down, matter-of-fact prose style to considerable effect; some classify this prose style as minimalism.\nAnother strand of literary minimalism arose in response to the metafiction trend of the 1960s and early 1970s (John Barth, Robert Coover, and William H. Gass). These writers were also sparse with prose and kept a psychological distance from their subject matter.\nMinimalist writers, or those who are identified with minimalism during certain periods of their writing careers, include the following: Raymond Carver, Ann Beattie, Bret Easton Ellis, Charles Bukowski, K. J. Stevens, Amy Hempel, Bobbie Ann Mason, Tobias Wolff, Grace Paley, Sandra Cisneros, Mary Robison, Frederick Barthelme, Richard Ford, Patrick Holland, Cormac McCarthy, David Leavitt, and Alicia Erian.\nAmerican poets such as William Carlos Williams, early Ezra Pound, Robert Creeley, Robert Grenier, Aram Saroyan, BpNichol, and Geof Huth are sometimes identified with their \"minimalist\" style. Aram Saroyan, specifically, is famous for his one-word poem \"lighght\", which was selected for \"The American Literary Anthology\" and received a $750 cash award from the National Endowment for the Arts, which drew outrage from certain conservative American politicians, such as Jesse Helms. BpNichol, a Canadian poet, is famous for such minimalist poems as \"st*r\", \"em ty\", and \"groww\". These minimalist poems were collected into an anthology of BpNichol's works, entitled \"The Alphabet Game\", edited by Darren Werschler-Henry and Lori Emerson. Geof Huth also creates minimalist poetry, and he may be best known for his concept of the pwoermd, the term he uses to describe a poem made up of only a single word. Depending on the characteristics of the poem, some minimalist poetry may overlap with what others call visual poetry, especially if the concept behind the poem is enhanced by its visual elements. The term \"minimalism\" is also sometimes associated with the briefest of poetic genres, haiku, which originated in Japan, but has been domesticated in English literature by poets such as Nick Virgilio, Raymond Roseliep, and George Swede.\nThe Irish writer Samuel Beckett is well known for his minimalist plays and prose, as is the Norwegian writer Jon Fosse.\nDimitris Lyacos's \"With the People from the Bridge\", combining elliptical monologues with a pared-down prose narrative, is a contemporary example of minimalist playwrighting.\nIn his novel \"The Easy Chain\", Evan Dara includes a 60-page section written in the style of musical minimalism, in particular inspired by composer Steve Reich. Intending to represent the psychological state (agitation) of the novel's main character, the section's successive lines of text are built on repetitive and developing phrases.\nMusic.\nThe term \"minimal music\" was derived around 1970 by Michael Nyman from the concept of minimalism, which was earlier applied to the visual arts. More precisely, it was in a 1968 review in \"The Spectator\" that Nyman first used the term, to describe a ten-minute piano composition by the Danish composer Henning Christiansen, along with several other unnamed pieces played by Charlotte Moorman and Nam June Paik at the Institute of Contemporary Arts in London.\nHowever, the roots of minimal music are older. In France, Yves Klein allegedly conceived his \"Monotone Symphony\" (formally \"The Monotone-Silence Symphony\") between 1947 or 1949 (but premiered only in 1960), a work that consisted of a single 20-minute sustained chord followed by a 20-minute silence.\nFilm and cinema.\nIn film, minimalism usually is associated with filmmakers such as Robert Bresson, Chantal Akerman, Carl Theodor Dreyer, and Yasujir\u014d Ozu. Their films typically tell a simple story with straightforward camera usage and minimal use of score. Paul Schrader named their kind of cinema: \"transcendental cinema\". In the present, a commitment to minimalist film making can be seen in film movements such as Dogme 95, mumblecore, and the Romanian New Wave. Abbas Kiarostami, Elia Suleiman, and Kelly Reichardt are also considered minimalist filmmakers.\nThe Minimalists \u2013 Joshua Fields Millburn, Ryan Nicodemus, and Matt D'Avella \u2013 directed and produced the film \"Minimalism: A Documentary\", which showcased the idea of minimal living in the modern world.\nIn other fields.\nFashion.\nThe capsule wardrobe is an example of minimalism in fashion. Constructed of only a few staple pieces that do not go out of style, and generally dominated by only one or two colors, capsule wardrobes are meant to be light, flexible, and adaptable, and can be paired with seasonal pieces when the situation calls for them. The modern idea of a capsule wardrobe dates back to the 1970s, and is credited to London boutique owner Susie Faux. The concept was further popularized in the next decade by American fashion designer Donna Karan, who designed a seminal collection of capsule workwear pieces in 1985.\nScience communication.\nTo portray global warming to non-scientists, British climate scientist Ed Hawkins developed warming stripes graphics in 2018 that are deliberately devoid of scientific or technical indicia, for ease of understanding by non-scientists. Hawkins explained that \"our visual system will do the interpretation of the stripes without us even thinking about it\".\nWarming stripe graphics resemble color field paintings, stripping out all distractions and using only color to convey meaning. Color field pioneer artist Barnett Newman said he was \"creating images whose reality is self-evident\", an ethos that Hawkins is said to have applied to the problem of climate change and leading one commentator to remark that the graphics are \"fit for the Museum of Modern Art or the Getty.\"\nA tempestry\u2014a portmanteau of \"temperature\" and \"tapestry\"\u2014is a tapestry using stripes of specific colors of yarn to represent respective temperature ranges. The tapestries visually represent global warming occurring at given locations.\nMinimalist lifestyle.\nIn a lifestyle adopting minimalism, there is an effort to use materials which are most essential and in quantities that do not exceed certain limits imposed by the user themselves. There have been many terms evolved from the concept, like minimalist decors, minimalist skincare, minimalist style, minimalist accessories, etc. All such terms signify the usage of only essential products in that niche into one's life. This can help one to focus on things that are important in one's life. It can reduce waste. It can also save the time of acquiring the excess materials that may be found unnecessary.\nA minimalist lifestyle helps to enjoy life with simple things that are available without undue efforts to acquire things that may be bought at great expenses. Minimalism can also lead to less clutter in living spaces.\nNotes and references.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;"}
{"id": "20837", "revid": "140154", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20837", "title": "Ignition magneto", "text": "Part of an engine's ignition system\nAn ignition magneto (also called a high-tension magneto) is an older type of ignition system used in spark-ignition engines (such as petrol engines). It uses a magneto and a transformer to make pulses of high voltage for the spark plugs. The older term \"high-tension\" means \"high-voltage\".\nDesign.\nA simple magneto (an electrical generator using permanent magnets) is able to produce relatively low voltage electricity, however it is unable to produce the high voltages required by a spark plug as used in most modern engines (aside from diesel engines). An \"ignition magneto\" also includes an electrical transformer, which converts the electricity to a higher voltage (with the trade-off being a corresponding reduction in the output current).\nAs the points begin to open, point spacing is initially such that the voltage across the primary coil would arc across the points. A capacitor is placed across the points which absorbs the energy stored in the leakage inductance of the primary coil, and slows the rise time of the primary winding voltage to allow the points to open fully.\nA second coil, with many more turns than the primary, is wound on the same iron core to form an electrical transformer. The ratio of turns in the secondary winding to the number of turns in the primary winding, is called the \"turns ratio\". Voltage across the primary coil results in a proportional voltage being induced across the secondary winding of the coil. The turns ratio between the primary and secondary coil is selected so that the voltage across the secondary reaches a very high value, enough to arc across the gap of the spark plug. As the voltage of the primary winding rises to several hundred volts, the voltage on the secondary winding rises to several tens of thousands of volts, since the secondary winding typically has 100 times as many turns as the primary winding.\nImpulse coupling, induction vibrator, and booster coil.\nBecause the magneto has low voltage output at low speed, starting an engine is more difficult. Therefore, some magnetos have an impulse coupling, a spring-like mechanical linkage between the engine and magneto drive shaft which \"winds up\" and \"lets go\" at the proper moment for spinning the magneto shaft. The impulse coupling uses a spring, a hub cam with flyweights, and a shell. The hub of the magneto rotates while the drive shaft is held stationary, and the spring tension builds up. When the magneto is supposed to fire, the flyweights are released by the action of the body contacting the trigger ramp. This allows the spring to unwind giving the rotating magnet a rapid rotation and letting the magneto spin at such a speed to produce a spark.\nHistory.\nIn the late 1890s, English engineer Frederick Richard Simms collaborated with the German engineer Robert Bosch, and his staff of Arnold Z\u00e4hringer, Young Rall, and Gottlob Honold, in developing the first practical high-tension magneto. In 1900, the Bosch magneto ignition was used in the Gottlieb Daimler engines on the Zeppelin.\nThe first car to use magneto ignition was the 1901 German Mercedes 35 hp racing car, followed by various cars produced by Benz, Mors, Turcat-Mery, and Nesseldorf. Ignition magnetos were soon used on most cars, for both low voltage systems (which used secondary coils to fire the spark plugs) and high voltage magnetos (which fired the spark plug directly, similar to induction coil ignition). Ignition magnetos were largely replaced by ignition coils once batteries became common in cars, since a battery-operated coil can provide a high-voltage spark even at low speeds, making starting easier.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20838", "revid": "24043204", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20838", "title": "Metazoa", "text": ""}
{"id": "20840", "revid": "152145", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20840", "title": "Mystery Science Theater 3000", "text": "American science fiction comedy television series\nMystery Science Theater 3000 (abbreviated as MST3K) is an American science fiction comedy television series created by Joel Hodgson. The show premiered on KTMA-TV (now WUCW) in Saint Paul, Minnesota, on November 24, 1988. It then moved to nationwide broadcast, first on The Comedy Channel for two seasons, then Comedy Central for five seasons until its cancellation in 1996. Thereafter, it was picked up by The Sci-Fi Channel and aired for three more seasons until another cancellation in August 1999. A 60-episode syndication package titled \"The Mystery Science Theater Hour\" was produced in 1993 and broadcast on Comedy Central and syndicated to TV stations in 1995.\nIn 2015, Hodgson led a crowdfunded revival of the series with 14 episodes in its eleventh season, first released on Netflix on April 14, 2017, with another six-episode season following on November 22, 2018. A second successful crowdfunding effort in 2021 produced 13 additional episodes shown on the Gizmoplex, an online platform that Hodgson developed which launched in March 2022. As of 2023[ [update]], 230 episodes and a had been produced as well as four live tours.\nThe show initially starred Hodgson as Joel Robinson, a janitor trapped by two mad scientists (\"The Mads\") on the Earth-orbiting \"Satellite of Love\" and forced to watch a series of B movies to monitor his reaction to them. To keep his sanity, Joel crafts sentient robot companions, including Tom Servo, Crow T. Robot, Cambot and Gypsy, to keep him company and help him humorously comment on each movie as it plays, a process known as riffing. Each two-hour episode would feature a single movie (often edited for time constraints), sometimes preceded by various old shorts and educational films, with Joel, Tom, and Crow watching in silhouette from a row of theater seats at the bottom of the screen. These \"theater segments\" were framed with interstitial sketches called \"host segments\". The show's cast changed over its duration; most notably, the character of Joel was replaced by Mike Nelson (played by Michael J. Nelson) halfway through the show's fifth season. Other cast members, most of whom were also writers for the show, include Trace Beaulieu, Josh Weinstein, Jim Mallon, Kevin Murphy, Frank Conniff, Mary Jo Pehl, Bill Corbett, Paul Chaplin, and Bridget Jones Nelson. The 2017 revival features a primarily new cast, including Jonah Ray who plays the new human test subject Jonah Heston, along with Felicia Day and Patton Oswalt as \"The Mads\" and Baron Vaughn, Hampton Yount, and Rebecca Hanson voicing Tom Servo, Crow T. Robot, and Gypsy, respectively. Season 13 brought back this cast while integrating Emily Connor, played by Emily Marsh, and others from the live tours in this era.\nInitially MST3K did not garner high viewership numbers, but the show's popularity spread through online word-of-mouth by its fans known as \"MSTies\" or \"Mysties\" (who would remind others to \"Keep circulating the tapes\"), frequent repeats, syndication, and home media offerings produced by Rhino Entertainment. Currently, this popularity continues through Shout! Studios, who along with Hodgson, now own the rights to the show and supported the revived series. \"MST3K\" was listed as one of \"Time\" magazine's \"100 Best TV Shows of All-TIME\" in 2007, and \"TV Guide\" has noted \"MST3K\" as one of the top cult television shows. The show won a Peabody Award in 1993, was also nominated for two Emmy Awards in 1994 and 1995, and for the CableACE Award from 1992 to 1997. The show was considered highly influential, contributing towards the practice of social television, and former cast members launched projects similarly on riffing on films, including The Film Crew, RiffTrax, and Cinematic Titanic. \"MST3K\" also brought to light several older movies that had fallen into obscurity or had received little or no public attention when originally released. Many of these films were subsequently identified as among the worst movies ever made, most notably \"\".\nPremise.\nWhile the cast of \"MST3K\" changed throughout its history, the basic premise of the show remains consistent: a human test subject\u2014first Joel Robinson (Joel Hodgson), then Mike Nelson (Michael J. Nelson), and most recently Jonah Heston (Jonah Ray) and Emily Connor (Emily Marsh)\u2014has been imprisoned aboard the spacecraft \"Satellite of Love\" by mad scientists (collectively called \"The Mads\") and is forced to watch a series of bad movies in order to find one that will drive the test subject insane.\nIn an attempt to keep his sanity, Joel built sentient robots (\"the bots\") from parts aboard the \"Satellite of Love\", and they subsequently remained aboard with Joel's successors as test subjects. The Bots include Tom Servo, Crow T. Robot, GPC (formerly Gypsy) who is in charge of satellite operations, and Cambot, the silent recorder of the experiments. Crow and Servo join the human test subject in watching the film in the satellite's theater. To keep from going mad, the trio frequently comment and wisecrack during the movie, a process known as \"riffing\". At regular intervals throughout the movie, the hosts leave the theater and return to the bridge of the satellite to perform sketches (commonly called \"host segments\") that often satirize the film being watched.\nFormat.\nThe general format of an \"MST3K\" episode has remained the same throughout the series' run. Episodes are approximately 90 minutes in running time (excluding commercial breaks) and begin with a short introductory segment in which the human host and the 'bots interact with the Mads before being sent the movie. During Joel Hodgson and Jonah Ray's tenures as hosts (and for a brief period at the start of the Mike Nelson era), the hosts and the Mads engage in an \"invention exchange\" in which they each show off their latest inventions. Sirens and flashing lights (\"Movie Sign\") then signal the characters to enter the theater.\nIn the theater, the human host and 'bots Tom and Crow sit in a row of theater seats, shown in silhouette along the bottom of the screen, an approach Hodgson called \"Shadowramma\". The three then riff on the film (which is sometimes accompanied by one or more shorts) as it plays for both them and the audience. Occasionally, the silhouette format is used as a source of humor, or as a means of creating unobtrusive censor bars for scenes containing nudity. The show transitions into and out of the theater via a \"door sequence\", a series of six doors that open or close as the camera (presumably Cambot) passes through them.\nAt regular intervals throughout the episode, the characters leave the theater and perform sketches, usually inspired by the events of the film or short being shown, frequently making use of original songs and prop comedy. Some sketches bring in new or recurring characters or other devices; the host would consult an external camera, \"Rocket Number Nine\", to show events happening outside the \"Satellite\", and the \"Hexfield Viewscreen\" would be used to communicate with other characters from the ship's bridge. At the end of each sketch, \"Movie Sign\" (a reference to the concept of wormsign from Frank Herbert's classic sci-fi novel \"Dune\") is triggered again, and the characters must re-enter the theater.\nDuring Hodgson's period on the show, the final sketch aboard the \"Satellite\" often included reading of fan mail from the \"MST3K Info Club\". Fan mail readings decreased during Mike Nelson's tenure as host and were dropped entirely once the show moved onto the Sci-Fi Channel. The final sketch of an episode typically ends with the Mads, with the lead Mad asking their lackey to \"push the button\" to end the transmission and transitioning to the credit sequence. After the credits, a humorous short clip from the featured film (or the accompanying short on occasion) is replayed as a \"stinger\" to end the episode.\nIn November 1993, a limited selection of episodes were repackaged into an hour-long show titled \"Mystery Science Theater Hour\", meant to be better suited for off-network syndication. In these, the original episode was split into two parts, each about 45 minutes long, excluding commercials. New skits opening and ending each episode included Mike Nelson portraying television host Jack Perkins.\nProduction history.\nConcept.\nHodgson is credited for devising the show's concept. Prior to the show, Hodgson was an up-and-coming comedian from Minneapolis having moved to Los Angeles and made appearances on \"Late Night with David Letterman\" and \"Saturday Night Live\". He had been invited by Brandon Tartikoff to be on an NBC sitcom co-starring Michael J. Fox, but Hodgson felt the material was not funny and declined (the proposed sitcom went unrealized). He further became dissatisfied with the Hollywood attitudes when they tried to double their offer, acquiring what he called a \"healthy disrespect\" for the industry. He moved back to Minneapolis-St. Paul, taking a job in a T-shirt printing factory that allowed him to conceive of new comedy ideas while he was bored. One such idea was the basis of \"MST3K\", a show to comment humorously on movies and that would also allow him to showcase his own prop comedy-style humor. Hodgson referred to these jokes as \"riffs\", based both on the idea of musical riffs as well as the idea of comedy riffs, a term he attributes to \"The Simpsons\"'s writer Dana Gould. In terms of movie selection, Hodgson had recalled that his college roommate had a copy of \"The Golden Turkey Awards\", and he had previously wondered why no one had made any program about these \"adorable, weird movies\" listed within it.\nHodgson said that part of the idea for \"MST3K\" came from the illustration for the song \"I've Seen That Movie Too\" (drawn by Mike Ross) in the liner notes from Elton John's \"Goodbye Yellow Brick Road\" album, showing silhouettes of a couple sitting in a theater watching \"Gone with the Wind\". Hodgson also likened the show's setting to the idea of a pirate radio station broadcasting from space. Hodgson credits \"Silent Running\", a 1972 science-fiction film directed by Douglas Trumbull, as being perhaps the biggest direct influence on the show's concept. The film is set in the future and centers on a human, Freeman Lowell (Bruce Dern), who is the last crew member of a spaceship containing Earth's last surviving forests. His remaining companions consist only of three robot drones. \"MST3K\" and the Joel Robinson character occasionally reflected Lowell's hippie-like nature. Hodgson wanted the feel of the show to appear homemade, and cited the example of a crude mountain prop used during the \"Saturday Night Live\" sketch \"Night on Freak Mountain\" that received a humorous reaction from the studio audience as the type of aesthetic he wanted for the show. Hodgson had made dozens of such robots from random parts before as art that he sold to friends and others, and knew he could incorporate that into the show.\nBoth old movies and music inspired several of the show's character names as developed by Hodgson. The show's name came from the promotional phrase \"Mystery Scientist\" used by magician Harlan Tarbell and a play on the name of Sun Ra's band, the Myth Science Arkestra. The \"3000\" was added to spoof the common practice of adding \"2000\" to show and product names in light of then-upcoming 21st century, and Hodgson thought it would set his show apart to make it \"3000\". Dr. Forrester was named after the main character of \"The War of the Worlds\". The \"Satellite of Love\" was named after the song of the same name by Lou Reed. Crow T. Robot was inspired by the song \"Crow\" from Jim Carroll's \"Catholic Boy\", while Rocket Number 9's name was inspired by the original name of Sun Ra's album \"Interstellar Low Ways\".\nThe theater shots, the primary component of an episode, are taped in \"Shadowrama\". The \"seats\" were a black-painted foam core board sitting behind the seat (towards the camera) for the host, and stages for the Crow and Tom puppets. The human host wore black clothing while the robot puppets were painted black; the screen they watched was a white luma key screen so as to create the appearance of silhouettes. The actors would follow the movie and the script through television monitors located in front of them, as to create the overall theater illusion.\nThe \"door sequence\" was created to transition from host segments to the theater segments, which Hodgson took inspiration from the \"Mickey Mouse Club\", noting that the commonality to the title credits of \"Get Smart\" was coincidental. In devising this sequence, this also led to Beaulieu creating the dogbone-like shape of the \"Satellite of Love\" with additional inspiration taken from the bone-to-ship transition in the film \"\". Hodgson had wanted to use a \"motivated camera\" for taping, a concept related to motivated lighting; in this mode, all the shots would appear to have been taken from an actual camera that was part of the scene to make the scene appear more realistic. This led to the creation of Cambot as a robot that the host would speak to during host segments or recording them while in the theater, and Rocket Number Nine to show footage outside of the Satellite of Love.\nThe show's theme song, the \"Love Theme from Mystery Science Theater 3000\", was written by Hodgson and Weinstein, which helped to cement some of the broader narrative elements of the show, such as the Mads and Joel being part of an experiment. The song was composed by Charlie Erickson with help from Hodgson in the style of Devo, The Replacements, and The Rivieras (particularly their cover of the song \"California Sun\") and sung by Hodgson. Initial shows used foam letters to make the show's title, but they later created the spinning-moon logo out of a 2-foot (0.6m) diameter fiberglass ball, covered with foam insulation and the lettering cut from additional foam pieces. Hodgson felt they needed a logo with the rotating effect as opposed to a flat 2D image, and though they had envisioned a more detailed prop, with the letters being the tops of buildings on this moon, they had no time or budget for a project of that complexity and went with what they had. Musical numbers would also be used as part of the host segments, which Hodgson said came out naturally from the riffing process; they would find themselves at times singing along with the movie instead of just riffing at it, and took that to extend songs into the host segments.\nKTMA era (1988\u20131989).\nHodgson approached Jim Mallon, at the time the production manager of KTMA, a low-budget local Minneapolis-area independent television station, with his idea of a show based on riffing on movies, using robots that were created out of common objects. Mallon agreed to help produce a pilot episode, and Hodgson hired local area comedians J. Elvis Weinstein (initially going by Josh Weinstein but later changed to J. Elvis as to distinguish himself from Josh Weinstein, a well-known writer for \"The Simpsons\") and Trace Beaulieu to develop the pilot show. By September 1988, Hodgson, Mallon, Weinstein, and Beaulieu shot a 30-minute pilot episode, using segments from the 1968 science-fiction film \"The Green Slime\". The robots and the set were built by Hodgson in an all-nighter. Joel watched the movie by himself, and was aided during the host segments by his robots, Crow (Beaulieu), Beeper, and Gypsy (Weinstein). Hodgson used the narrative that his character named \"Joel Hodgson\" (not yet using his character name of Robinson) had built the \"Satellite of Love\" and launched himself into space. Camera work was by Kevin Murphy, who was employed by KTMA. Murphy also created the first doorway sequence and theater seat design. These initial episodes were recorded at the long since-defunct Paragon Cable studios and customer service center in Hopkins, Minnesota. On review, Hodgson found that of the robots, Beeper's design was not working well, and tried a quick modification by replacing its head with a toy gumball machine top, creating the basis of Tom Servo.\nMallon met with KTMA station manager Donald O'Conner the next month and managed to get signed up for thirteen episodes. Show production was generally done on a 24-hour cycle, starting with Mallon offering a few films from KTMA's library for the writers to select from. Riffing in these episodes was ad-libbed during taping using notes made during preliminary viewings of the selected film. Episodes from this era are noted for their low number of riffs - in some instances 15 minutes of the movie could be shown before the cast made any comments. The show had some slight alterations from the pilot \u2014 the set was lit differently, the robots (now Crow, Servo and Gypsy) joined Joel in the theater, and a new doorway countdown sequence between the host and theater segments was shot. The puppeteers worked personalities into their robots: Crow (Beaulieu) was considered a robotic Groucho Marx, Tom Servo (Weinstein) as a \"smarmy AM radio DJ\", and Gypsy (Mallon) modeled after Mallon's mother who had a \"heart of gold\" but would become disoriented when confronted with a difficult task. The development of the show's theme song would lead to establishing elements for the show's ongoing premise, with Hodgson now portraying himself as the character Joel Robinson.\n\"Mystery Science Theater 3000\" premiered on KTMA at 6:00\u00a0p.m. on Thanksgiving Day, November 24, 1988, with its first episode, \"Invaders from the Deep\", followed by a second episode, \"Revenge of the Mysterons from Mars\" at 8:00\u00a0p.m. The choice of running the premiere on Thanksgiving was by happenstance, as the station felt the show was ready to go at that point, according to Hodgson. Initially, the show's response was unknown, until Mallon set up a phone line for viewers to call in. Response was so great that the initial run of 13 episodes was extended to 21, with the show running to May 1989. Hodgson and Mallon negotiated to secure the rights for the show for themselves, creating Best Brains, Inc., agreeing to split ownership of the idea equally. During this time a fan club was set up and the show held its first live show at Scott Hansen's Comedy Gallery in Minneapolis, to a crowd of over 600.\nDespite the show's success, the station's overall declining fortunes forced it to file for bankruptcy reorganization in July 1989. At the same time, HBO was looking to build a stable of shows for their upcoming Comedy Channel cable network. HBO approached Best Brains and requested a sample of their material. Hodgson and Mallon provided a seven-minute demo reel, which led to the network greenlighting \"MST3K\" as one of the first two shows picked up by the new network. According to Art Bell, one of the creators of the Comedy Channel, \"MST3K\"'s arrival helped the network to fill space that they had originally planned to use short clips of films and television shows that they could not license in time for launch.\nComedy Channel (1989\u20131991) and Comedy Central (1991\u20131996) eras.\nThe Comedy Channel offered Best Brains $35,000 per episode but allowed Best Brains to retain the show's rights. Best Brains was also able to keep production local to Minnesota instead of the network's desire to film in New York City or Los Angeles, as it would have cost four times more per episode, according to Hodgson. Best Brains established an office and warehouse space in Eden Prairie for filming. With an expanded but still limited budget, they were able to hire more writers, including Mike Nelson, Mary Jo Pehl, and Frank Conniff, and build more expansive sets and robot puppets. They retained the characters of Dr. Forrester (Beaulieu) and Dr. Erhardt (Weinstein) from the KTMA era and crafted the larger narrative of each episode being an \"experiment\" they test on Joel. The show began its national run shortly after The Comedy Channel went on the air in November 1989.\n\"MST3K\" was considered The Comedy Channel's signature program, generating positive press about the show despite the limited availability of the cable channel nationwide. After the second season, The Comedy Channel and rival comedy cable network HA! merged to become CTV: The Comedy Network (later changed to Comedy Central). During this period, \"MST3K\" became the newly merged cable channel's signature series, expanding from 13 to 24 episodes a year. To take advantage of the show's status, Comedy Central ran \"Turkey Day\", a 30-hour marathon of \"MST3K\" episodes during Thanksgiving 1991. The name of the event was not only inspired by the traditional turkey meal served on Thanksgiving, but also by use of \"Turkey\" from \"The Golden Turkey Awards\" to represent bad movies. This tradition would be continued through the rest of the Comedy Central era. Though the show did not draw large audience numbers compared to other programming on Comedy Central, such as reruns of \"Saturday Night Live\", the dedicated fans and attention kept the show on the network.\n\"\" was produced during the later half of the Comedy Central era and had a very limited theatrical release in 1996 through Universal Pictures and Gramercy Pictures. It featured Mike and the bots subjected to the film \"This Island Earth\" by Dr. Forrester. Though well received by critics and fans, the film was a financial disappointment due to its limited distribution.\nWriting and taping.\nThe cable network was able to provide a wider library of films for Best Brains to riff from. To ensure that they would be able to produce a funny episode, at least one member of the staff would watch the suggested films completely, generally assuring that the movie would be prime for jokes throughout. Conniff stated that he often would have to watch around twenty films in their entirety before selecting one to use for the show. In one specific case, the second-season episode with the 1969 film \"The Sidehackers\", they had only skimmed the first part of the movie before making the decision to use it, and only later discovered that it contained a scene where a female character is brutally raped and murdered. They decided to stay committed to the film, but cut out the offending scene and had to explain the sudden absence of the affected character to the audience. After this, they carefully scrutinized entire films for other such offensive content, and once one was selected and assured the rights, committed to completing the episode with that film. Obtaining the rights was handled by the cable networks. Some licensing required buying film rights in packages, with the selected bad movies included in a catalog of otherwise good films, making the negotiations odd since the network was only interested in the bad film. Other times, the rights to the film were poorly documented, and the network would follow the chain of custody to locate the copyright owner so as to secure broadcast rights.\nIn contrast to the ad-libbing of riffs from KTMA, the riffs were scripted ahead of time by the writers. An average episode (approximately 90 minutes running time) would contain more than 600 such riffs, and some with upwards of 800 riffs. Riffs were developed with the entire writing staff watching the film together several times through, giving off-the-cuff quips and jokes as the film went along, or identifying where additional material would be helpful for the comedy. The best jokes were polished into the script for the show. Riffs were developed to keep in line with the characterization of Joel, Mike, and the 'bots. Further, the writers tried to maintain respect for the films and avoided making negative riffs about them, taking into consideration that Joel, Mike, and the 'bots were companions to the audience while watching the movie, and they did not want to come off sounding like jerks even if the negative riff would be funny. Hodgson stated that their goal in writing riffs is not to ridicule films as some have often mistaken, but to rather instead consider what they are doing as \"a variety show built on the back of a movie\".\nProduction of an average episode of \"MST3K\" during the Comedy Central period took about five to nine days once the movie was selected and its rights secured. The first few days were generally used for watching the movie and scripting out the riffs and live action segments. The subsequent days were then generally used to start construction of any props or sets that would be needed for the live action segments while the writers honed the script. A full dress rehearsal would then be held, making sure the segments and props worked and fine tuning the script. The host segments would then be taped on one day, and the theater segments on the next. A final day was used to review the completed work and correct any major flaws they caught before considering the episode complete. Live scenes used only practical special effects, and there was minimal post-editing once taping was completed.\nCast changes.\nWeinstein left the show after the first Comedy Channel season, reportedly in disagreement with Hodgson about moving toward using scripted rather than ad-libbed jokes. Murphy replaced him as the voice of Tom Servo, portraying the 'bot as a cultured individual, while Dr. Erhardt was replaced with TV's Frank (Conniff).\nHodgson decided to leave the series halfway through Season Five due to his dislike of being on camera and his disagreements with producer Mallon over creative control of the program. Hodgson also stated that Mallon's insistence on producing a feature film version of the show led to his departure, giving up his rights on the \"MST3K\" property to Mallon. Hodgson later told an interviewer: \"If I had the presence of mind to try and work it out, I would rather have stayed. 'Cause I didn't want to go, it just seemed like I needed to.\" Though they held casting calls for a replacement for Hodgson on camera, the crew found that none of the potential actors really fit the role; instead, having reviewed a test run that Nelson had done with the 'bots, the crew agreed that having Nelson (who had already appeared in several guest roles on the show) replace Hodgson would be the least jarring approach. The replacement of Joel by Mike would lead to an oft-jokingly \"Joel vs. Mike flame war\" among fans, similar to the \"Kirk vs. Picard\" discussions in the \"Star Trek\" fandom.\nConniff left the show after Season Six, looking to get into writing TV sitcoms in Hollywood. TV's Frank was soon replaced on the show by Dr. Forrester's mother, Pearl (Pehl).\nCancellation.\nBy 1996, Comedy Central had started creating an identity for its network under the new leadership of Doug Herzog, which would lead to successful shows like \"The Daily Show\", \"Win Ben Stein's Money\", \"South Park\" and \"Dr. Katz, Professional Therapist.\" This left \"MST3K\" as an oddity on the network taking up limited program space. Herzog, though stating that \"MST3K\" \"helped put the network on the map\" and that its fans were \"passionate\", believed it was necessary to change things around due to the show's declining and lackluster ratings. The network cancelled \"MST3K\" after a six-episode seventh season.\nSci-Fi Channel era (1997\u20131999).\nThe show staff continued to operate for as long as they still had finances to work with. \"MST3K\"'s fan base staged a write-in campaign to keep the show alive. This effort led the Sci-Fi Channel, a subsidiary of USA Networks, to pick up the series. Rod Perth, then-president of programming for USA Networks, helped to bring the show to the Sci-Fi Channel, stating himself to be a huge fan of the show and believing that \"the sci-fi genre took itself too seriously and that this show was a great way of lightening up our own presentation\".\nWriting and production of the show remained relatively unchanged from the Comedy Central period. Before Season Eight commenced filming, Beaulieu opted to leave the show, feeling that anything creative that would be produced by Best Brains would belong to Mallon, and wanted to have more creative ownership himself. To replace Dr. Forrester, two new sidekicks to Pearl were introduced: Professor Bobo (Murphy) and the Observer, a.k.a. \"Brain Guy\" (Corbett). In addition, Corbett took over Crow's voice and puppetry and Best Brains staffer Patrick Brantseg took over Gypsy in the middle of Season Eight. With this replacement, the series' entire original cast had been turned over.\n\"MST3K\" ran for three more seasons on the Sci-Fi Channel. During the Sci-Fi era, Best Brains found themselves more limited by the network: the pool of available films was smaller and they were required to use science fiction films (as per the network's name and programming focus), and the USA Network executives managing the show wanted to see a story arc and had more demands on how the show should be produced. Conflict between Best Brains and the network executives would eventually lead to the show's second cancellation. Peter Keepnews, writing for \"The New York Times\", noted that the frequent cast changes, as well as the poorer selection of films that he felt were more boring than bizarre in their execution, had caused the show to lose its original appeal. Another campaign to save the show was mounted, including several \"MST3K\" fans taking contributions for a full-page ad in the trade publication \"Daily Variety\" magazine, but unlike the first effort, this campaign was unsuccessful.\nThe season 10 finale, \"\", premiered on August 8, 1999, during which, in the show's narrative, Pearl Forrester accidentally sent the \"Satellite of Love\" out of orbit, with Mike and the 'bots escaping and taking up residence in an apartment near Milwaukee, where they continue to riff movies. A \"lost\" episode produced earlier in the season but delayed due to rights issues, \"Merlin's Shop of Mystical Wonders\", was the final season 10 episode of \"MST3K\" (and the last of the original run), broadcast on September 12, 1999. Reruns continued to air on the Sci Fi Channel for several years, ending with \"The Screaming Skull\" on January 31, 2004. The shows later moved to off-network syndication.\nNetflix era revival (2017\u20132018).\nKickstarter funding.\nStarting in 2010, Hodgson had been trying to bring back \"MST3K\", spurred on by fan appreciation of the cast and crew 25 years since the show's premiere and the success of his \"Cinematic Titanic\" project. Hodgson also considered the timing to be ideal, with non-traditional outlets like Netflix picking up original series, and the success of crowdfunding for entertainment projects. However, Hodgson needed to reacquire the rights to the series, at that point still held by Mallon and Best Brains. By 2013, Hodgson was working closely with Shout! Factory, the distribution company handling the home media releases of \"MST3K\", and completed negotiations with Mallon to buy the rights for \"MST3K\" for a seven-figure sum by August 2015, enabling a Kickstarter campaign to fund the revival to move forward. Hodgson felt the Kickstarter approach was necessary so that the show's style and approach would be determined by fans rather than through a network if he had sought traditional broadcast funding, as well as to demonstrate the demand for the show through a successful campaign.\nThe Kickstarter was launched in November 2015, seeking $2 million for the production of three episodes, with stretch goals with additional funding for 12 total episodes. The Kickstarter effort was led by Ivan Askwith, a consultant who also had worked on the \"Veronica Mars\" and \"Reading Rainbow\" Kickstarter campaigns. Hodgson estimated each episode would take $250,000 to make, in addition to five-figure movie licensing rights, in contrast to $100,000 per episode needed for the original series. The campaign reached its base funding within a week of its launch. On the final day of the campaign, Hodgson and Shout! ran a streaming telethon which included appearances from the newly selected cast and crew, and various celebrities that supported the revival to help exceed the target funding levels for twelve episodes. The campaign ended on December 11, 2015, with total funding of $5,764,229 from 48,270 backers, with an additional $600,000 in backer add-ons, which allowed Hodgson to plan two more additional episodes, including a Christmas episode, to bring the total season to fourteen episodes. The Kickstarter became the largest one for Film &amp; Video, surpassing the $5.70 million raised for the \"Veronica Mars\" film, but was ultimately surpassed in March 2019 for an animated series based on the web series \"Critical Role\".\nCasting.\nHodgson believed that the revival would need a whole new cast, pointing out that the cast had completely turned over in the original series. Comedian Jonah Ray plays Jonah Heston, the new host aboard the Satellite of Love, watching and riffing on the films. Hodgson had met Ray while recording an episode of \"The Nerdist Podcast\", and felt he would be a good fit. The voices of Crow and Tom Servo are provided by comedians Hampton Yount and Baron Vaughn, respectively, both of whom Ray recommended to Hodgson. Hodgson felt it was important for Ray to have his say on who would play these parts, since it would help Ray be comfortable in the role. Felicia Day plays Kinga Forrester, Clayton Forrester's daughter and one of the new Mads in charge of the experiments, now operating out of a moon base known as \"Moon 13\". Day had been one of the last to be cast, as Hodgson had scripted out the concept for Forrester's daughter while casting Ray and the others. Hodgson had met Day at the 2015 Salt Lake Comic Con, where she stated her love of \"MST3K\" to him. Hodgson had seen Day's performance in shows like \"The Guild\" and \"Dr. Horrible's Sing-Along Blog\", and felt she matched his idea for the character he had envisioned. Patton Oswalt plays Kinga's henchman, Max, or as his character prefers to be known, \"TV's Son of TV's Frank\"; Hodgson had already planned to invite Oswalt, a longtime friend and self-professed MST3K fan, as a special guest writer for an episode of the revived series, but decided during the Kickstarter that he would also be a good fit on-camera. Rebecca Hanson, an alum of The Second City, took the role of Gypsy as well as Synthia, a clone of Pearl Forrester who assists Kinga. Har Mar Superstar leads the \"Skeleton Crew\", a house band in Kinga's lair.\nPehl, Corbett, and Murphy cameo on the revival, reprising their roles as Pearl, Brain Guy, and Professor Bobo, respectively. Hodgson opened up to the show any of the other cast members to make cameo appearances or aid in the creative process. However, Nelson and Beaulieu stated that they would not be involved with the MST3K revival; Nelson said, \"The brand does not belong to me, and I make and have made (almost) zero dollars off it since it stopped production in 1999.\" Conniff noted on his Twitter that Shout! Factory would be \"cutting [the former cast members] in, financially at least\" on the profits from the series. In addition, other cameos on the new episodes include Neil Patrick Harris, Jerry Seinfeld, and Mark Hamill as P. T. Mindslap. Weinstein initially stated that he had no interest in returning to the show, but eventually reprised his role as Dr. Laurence Erhardt in the second season of the Netflix revival.\nWriting and recording.\nHodgson aimed to follow in the pattern of what made for fan-favorite episodes from the original series, borrowing equally from the Joel and Mike eras; he noted there were about 30 episodes that he and fans universally agreed were the show's best, and expected to use these as templates as the basis of the new show. The new episodes include the Invention Exchange that had been part of the Joel era (and some of the Mike era) of the show. Additionally, while not required by the streaming format of Netflix, the new episodes include bumpers that would have wrapped around commercial breaks if shown on network television; Hodgson considered these breaks necessary as a \"palate cleanser\" as well as to support the narrative for Kinga attempting to commercialize on the \"MST3K\" brand.\nBehind the scenes, the lead writer was Elliott Kalan, former head writer for \"The Daily Show with Jon Stewart\" and host of \"The Flop House\", a podcast about bad movies. Dan Harmon and Joel McHale also wrote for the show, along with the on-screen cast members. Hodgson also brought in guest writers for certain episodes that included Justin Roiland, Rob Schrab, Nell Scovell, Ernie Cline, Pat Rothfuss, Dana Gould, and Tammy Golden. Additionally, Paul &amp; Storm and Robert Lopez composed original songs for the new episodes.\nThe revival retains the live, handcrafted look from the original, a decision that Hodgson had to set down against others involved in production. Set and prop designers included Wayne White, Aaron Somers, Pen Ward, Rebecca Sugar and her younger brother Steven, Justin Jacobs, and Guy Davis, while live and practical special effects were planned by Adam Savage. Justin was tasked with creating full sized versions of new robots M. Waverly and Growler. Other returning staff included: Charlie Erickson, who composed the original show's theme song and composed the new show's theme and other musical arrangements; Beth \"Beez\" McKeever, who worked on the original show's props and designed costumes and props for the new show; Crist Ballas created hair and makeup design; and Paul Chaplin, one of the show's original writers to help write the new shows, along with contributions from Pehl and Corbett. Hodgson himself remained primarily off-camera as the executive producer for the remake, though does appear briefly as Ardy, one of Kinga's henchmen who send Jonah the episode's movie. Hodgson was assisted by Kalan, Richard Foos, Bob Emmer, Garson Foos, Jonathan Stern, and Harold Buchholz. The revival was produced by the companies Satellite of Love, LLC, Alternaversal Productions, and Abominable Pictures.\nProduction for the new season began on January 4, 2016, with movie selection and script writing. The film selection was narrowed down to about twenty movies as of February 2016, with the rights obtained for about half of them, while Shout! Factory was working to secure worldwide distribution rights for the others. Hodgson noted that the films were more recent than those used on the original series, with \"maybe one\" from the 1950s/1960s, but did not want to reveal what these films were until the episodes were broadcast as to have the biggest comedic effect on the audience.\nRecording and most of the production was completed over September and October 2016 in Los Angeles on a very condensed schedule. In the revival, Ray, Yount, and Vaughn recorded the riffs for all fourteen episodes in a sound studio over a period of a week, allowing them to better synchronize the riffs with the film. This also helped to simplify the process of recording the theater segments, since they then only needed to act out their parts. The 'bots were controlled by multiple puppeteers both in the theater and in skits; Yount and Vaughn used radio-controlled equipment to move the 'bots' mouths, while members from The Jim Henson Company helped with manipulating the bodies, allowing them to achieve effects they could not do in the series' original run such as having Crow appear to walk on his own. All skits for the episodes were completed within a single day, which did not allow them for doing multiple takes unless necessary.\nCampaign backers at higher tiers were able to see the first episode at limited \"Red Carpet Kickstarter Screening\" events shown in a few theaters during February and March 2017. The fourteen episodes were released on Netflix on April 14, 2017, though Kickstarter backers had the opportunity to see the episodes in the days preceding this.\nDuring the 2017 \"Turkey Day\" Marathon, Hodgson announced that Netflix had greenlit a twelfth season of \"MST3K\". Shooting of the twelfth season started on June 4, 2018, and would have six episodes, written to encourage bingewatching and make the series more amenable to non-fans. Further, they created a stronger narrative in the host segments, so that casual viewers would recognize the series having a definitive start, middle, and end. Other changes included Rob Schrab coming on as co-director, and actress Deanna Rooney, Ray's wife, playing Dr. Donna St. Phibes, a \"B-movie monster conservationist\" who works with the Mads. Former cast member Weinstein returned to reprise his role as Dr. Erhardt. Hodgson had been trying to also bring back both Beaulieu and Conniff for this season, but could not work out the logistics in time.\nThe 12th season was broadcast on Netflix on Thanksgiving aka \"Turkey Day\", November 22, 2018, which coincided with the show's 30th anniversary. To avoid conflicting with the new season's release, the annual Turkey Day Marathon was pushed forward to November 18, 2018.\nIn November 2019, Hodgson confirmed to Kickstarter backers that the show would not return for a third season on Netflix, but that he would be looking into alternative outlets to carry the show. The two seasons made for Netflix will remain on the service. Ray stated in an April 2020 interview that \"Joel's got some ideas in the pipeline, and it's pretty exciting, what he's working on\", and expected further news later in the year. Hodgson had praised Netflix for helping to bring new fans to \"MST3K\" and said that his production company Alternaversal Productions was still looking for ways to bring the show back through other means, though he did criticize Netflix for forcing an embargo that kept him from providing updates to his fans on the progress on the show until they were ready to announce details.\nGizmoplex era (2022).\nOn April 7, 2021, Hodgson launched a second Kickstarter campaign to continue production of more \"MST3K\" episodes. Given the difficulties with Netflix, Hodgson envisioned a sustainable production approach based on the support of fans and backers who wanted more episodes but without having to worry about the financial support of a broadcast or cable network. In this project, Hodgson set out to produce more episodes and the creation of \"The Gizmoplex\", an online platform designed to showcase these new episodes as well as reruns of past episodes and live events, presented as another experiment by the Mads. Hodgson said that while the Netflix support was helpful for the prior two seasons, the streamer had required the production team to produce all their episodes at once, which did not work well and resulted in creative burn-out. By using the Gizmoplex approach, the production team would be able to produce new content at their own pace. Further, by establishing the continuation of the show in the Gizmoplex format, \"MST3K\" could continue even without Hodgson's involvement, so long as the demand from fans of the show remained.\nDuring the Kickstarter, Hodgson confirmed that due to the name being seen by some as an ethnic slur against Romani and other itinerant peoples, Gypsy was renamed to GPC around 2019.\nThe Kickstarter surpassed its minimum funding goal of $ within 25 hours of launch, and ended with over $ raised, assuring that thirteen regular episodes would be produced, including the series' first 3D episode as well as special Halloween and Christmas episodes. Most of the Netflix series cast\u00a0\u2013 including Ray, Vaughn, Yount, Hanson, Day, and Oswalt\u00a0\u2013 return to their roles. A new hosting cast features Emily Marsh, who had participated in the live tours during the Netflix years, portraying Emily Connor as the test subject, along with other live show performers Conor McGiffin, Kelsey Ann Brady, and Yvonne Freese voicing Tom, Crow, and GPC 2, respectively; Freese would also play Mega Synthia. The last name Connor was in reference to Sarah Connor from the \"Terminator\" franchise. Hodgson reprised his Joel Robinson character for three episodes. Pehl and Weinstein reprised their roles as Pearl Forrester and Dr. Laurence Erhardt, respectively, within this block of episodes. Further, Nelson, Murphy, and Corbett of RiffTrax will offer some of their material to be included among the Gizmoplex' archives.\nDuring the annual 2021 Turkey Day Marathon, the thirteen movies to be riffed as part of the 13th season were announced. These include: \"Santo in The Treasure of Dracula\", \"Robot Wars\", \"Beyond Atlantis\", \"Munchie\", \"Doctor Mordrid\", \"Demon Squad\", \"Gamera vs. Jiger\", \"The Batwoman\", \"The Million Eyes of Sumuru\", \"H. G. Wells' The Shape of Things to Come\", \"The Mask\", \"The Bubble\", and \"The Christmas Dragon\". The first three were presented to backers as pre-release versions starting on March 4, 2022, as a means of testing the Gizmoplex. The public launch of the platform and the thirteenth season was released on May 6, 2022. The second and third episodes premiered in succeeding days, and with remaining episodes and shorts premiering every two weeks afterwards. A year after the season was first shown on the Gizmoplex service, episodes were made available through the \"MST3K\" channel on PlutoTV.\nCrowdfunding for the fourteenth season began in October 2023, with a minimum target of $4.8 million to bring six full movies and six shorts, while reaching $7.4 million would give twelve of each. This goal was later adjusted to $4 million for six full movies and shorts in an attempt to complete the base goal due to slowdowns in donations. The crowdfunding failed to reach its lowered goal, with only 68% raised.\nAs a result, Season 14 could not be made and the series was once again put into hiatus.\nEpisodes.\nThe series broadcast between 1988 and 1999 spanned 197 episodes across ten seasons. The 2017 Netflix revival of fourteen episodes (\"The Return\") was followed by six additional episodes (\"The Gauntlet\") the next year. An additional season on the Gizmoplex platform consisted of thirteen episodes and was released in 2022.\nWhile the pilot episode of \"The Green Slime\" was used to sell the concept to KTMA, it never aired. The initial run of 21 episodes for KTMA were neither rerun nationally nor released onto home video, primarily due to rights issues - apparently KTMA never obtained the rights to show the movies that were riffed. For many years, the first three KTMA episodes were considered to be \"missing episodes\", as no fan copies are known to exist, though master copies of all these episodes reportedly exist according to Mallon. In November 2016, Hodgson reported that master copies of two of the episodes, \"Invaders from the Deep\" and \"Revenge of the Mysterons from Mars\", had been found. The episodes were made available to Kickstarter backers of the new series on November 25, 2016.\nThe credits in the first four seasons on Comedy Central included the phrase \"Keep circulating the tapes\" to encourage fans to share VHS tapings they made with others (as Comedy Central was not widely distributed then), despite the questionable copyright practice. Though the phrase was removed from the credits for legal reasons, the concept of \"keep circulating the tapes\" was held by the show's fans to continue to help introduce others to the show following its broadcast run.\nTurkey Day marathons.\nAn annual event in the Comedy Central era was the Turkey Day marathon that ran on or near the Thanksgiving holiday. The marathon would show between six and twelve rebroadcasts of episodes, often with new material between the episodes from the cast and crew. While the show was on Sci-Fi, one Thanksgiving Day marathon of \"MST3K\" was held during its first season, but lacked any new interstitial material.\nFollowing its acquisition of the series rights in 2013, Shout! Factory has streamed Turkey Day marathons on Thanksgiving, broadcasting multiple \"MST3K\" episodes and wrapped with introductions from Hodgson alongside other cast members at times. The event was intended to be a one-off, but the fans' reaction to it led Hodgson and Shout! to continue the tradition in subsequent years, continuing to be shown through 2024.\nThe 2015 Turkey Day coincided with the Kickstarter for the show's revival, while the 2016 Turkey Day includes the revival's new host Ray co-hosting alongside Hodgson. The 2017 Turkey Day was hosted by Hodgson, Ray and Felicia Day, and concluded with a surprise announcement that the show had been renewed on Netflix for another season.\nHome media.\nHome video releases of \"MST3K\" episodes are complicated by the licensing rights of the featured film and any shorts, and as such many of the nationally televised episodes have not yet been released onto home video. Through the current distributor, Shout! Factory, over 100 of the films have been cleared for home media distribution. With Shout's release of the 39th volume of \"MST3K\" episodes in 2017, the company anticipated that only about a dozen episodes out of 197 from the original series' run will never make it to home video due to licensing rights issues of the movies featured.\nOriginal home media releases were issued by Rhino Entertainment, initially starting with single disc releases before switching to semi-regular four-episode volume sets. According to Hodgson, the people at Rhino who were involved in the distribution of \"MST3K\" eventually left Rhino and joined Shout!, helping to convince that publisher to acquire the rights from Rhino. Since 2008, all releases of \"MST3K\" have been through Shout! (including some reprints of the first Rhino volume set) and have typically been multi-episode volumes or themed packs.\nIn 2014, 80 episodes of the show were made available for purchase or rental on the video streaming site Vimeo. Shout! has uploaded some episodes to YouTube with annotations, as documented by \"The Annotated MST\" fansite, to explain some of the sources of the jokes in the riffs. In February 2015, Shout! launched its own streaming service, Shout! Factory TV, of which selected episodes of \"MST3K\" were included on the service. Selected episodes were also made available on demand through RiffTrax starting in November 2015. Twenty episodes from previous \"MST3K\" seasons were released by Netflix in all regions in anticipation of the revival series.\nAll episodes of Season 11 were released on a DVD/Blu-Ray box set on April 17, 2018, which includes a documentary behind the making of the first revival season.\nAdaptations.\nSyndication.\nIn 1993, the show's staff selected 30 episodes to split into 60 one-hour segments for \"The Mystery Science Theater Hour\". The repackaged series' first-run airings of these half-shows ran from November 1993 to July 1994. Reruns continued through December 1994, and it was syndicated to local stations from September 1995 to September 1996, allowing stations to run the series in a one-hour slot, or the original two hour version. \"MST3K\" returned to television for the first time in ten years in July 2014, when RetroTV began broadcasting the series on Saturday nights, with an encore on Sunday evenings. The following year, they started showing on PBS member stations. In the summer of 2016, Sinclair Broadcast Group and MGM's joint venture sci-fi network Comet picked up the series for a weekly Sunday night double-run; by coincidence, Sinclair's CW station in the Twin Cities, WUCW, which had originated the series when it was KTMA-TV, carries Comet on their second subchannel, returning the series to its original home for the first time in 27 years. The show premiered on IFC on January 7, 2020. It also airs on Z Living.\nFeature film.\nIn 1996, Universal Pictures under the Gramercy Pictures Label released \"Mystery Science Theater 3000: The Movie\", a film adaptation in which Mike and the bots riffed \"This Island Earth\". The film was released on DVD in the United States by Image Entertainment. Universal re-released the film on DVD on May 6, 2008, with a new anamorphic widescreen transfer, Dolby Digital 5.1 Surround Sound mix and the film's original trailer.\nPrint.\nIn 1996, the book, \"The Amazing Colossal Episode Guide\" (written by many of the cast members), was released, which contained a synopsis for every episode from seasons one through six, and even included some behind-the-scenes stories as well. In it, Murphy related two tales about celebrity reactions he encountered. In one, the cast went to a taping of Dennis Miller's eponymous show; when they were brought backstage to meet Miller, the comedian proceeded to criticize the \"MST3K\" cast for their choice of movie to mock in the then-recent episode \"Space Travelers\" (a re-branded version of the Oscar-winning film \"Marooned\"). Murphy also discussed how he met Kurt Vonnegut, one of his literary heroes. When he had mentioned the show and its premise to Vonnegut, the author suggested that even people who work hard on bad films deserve some respect. Murphy then invited Vonnegut to dine with his group, which Vonnegut declined, claiming that he had other plans. When Murphy and friends ate later that night, he saw Vonnegut dining alone in the same restaurant, and remarked that he had been \"faced...but \"nicely\" faced\" by one of his literary heroes.\nDark Horse Comics announced on February 16, 2017, that it had planned a \"MST3K\" comic book series that was set for initial release in 2017. In June 2018, Dark Horse affirmed that the six-issue series would launch in September 2018, and would feature Jonah and the bots riffing on public domain comic books. The first comic was released on September 12, 2018, and it focuses on Jonah and the Bots trying to get out of comics while trying to save Crow when he starts to become a monster in the pages of Horrific. Hodgson oversaw the writing.\nLive shows.\nThe first \"MST3K\" live event was held on June 5 and 6, 1989 at the Comedy Gallery in Minneapolis. Jim Mallon served as the emcee of the event that featured stand-up sets by Joel, Josh Weinstein, and Trace Beaulieu. A Q&amp;A session about the show was conducted, and the show's original pilot was shown. The robots and various props were on display for attendees to see.\nThe first live riffing event, called \"MST Alive!\" was held at the Uptown Theater in Minneapolis on July 11, 1992. There were two showings, both with live riffing of the feature film \"World Without End\", as well as sing-alongs of different songs from the show, followed by a Q&amp;A session. The event was hosted, in character, by Dr. Forrester, TV's Frank, Joel, and the Bots. A second version of \"MST Alive!\" was presented as a part of the first ever MST3K \"ConventioCon ExpoFest-A-Rama\" in 1994. In this show, Forrester and Frank forced Mike and the bots to watch \"This Island Earth\", a film which was later riffed as a part of \"\".\nHodgson and the team for the 2017 revival announced an \"MST3K\" \"Watch Out For Snakes Tour\" during mid-2017 covering 29 cities in the United States and Canada. Jonah and the Bots riff on one of two films live for audiences, either \"Eegah\" (which had already been featured on the original run of \"MST3K\", and which popularized the riff \"Watch out for snakes\", but featured new riffs for this tour) or an unannounced surprise film: \"Argoman the Fantastic Superman\". The tour featured Ray, Yount and Hanson reprising their roles as Jonah Heston, Crow and Gypsy/Synthia. Vaughn was unavailable to perform Servo due to the birth of his child and the role was covered by Tim Ryder. The tour also featured Grant Baciocco as Terry the Bonehead, pre-recorded appearances from Day and Oswalt as Kinga and Max, and a live introduction from Hodgson.\nHodgson and Ray also toured in late 2018 as part of a 30th anniversary of \"MST3K\" in a similar format to the 2017 tour. Hodgson reprised the role of Joel Robinson and riffed movies alongside Ray and the bots during these shows. Ryder continued to perform Tom Servo, while Grant Baciocco, the lead puppeteer, voiced Crow. Rebecca Hanson also joined in her role as Synthia as the host of the show. Movies riffed at these shows included \"The Brain\" and \"Deathstalker II\". During the tour, Hodgson announced that Deanna Rooney will be joining the cast in the twelfth season as a new \"Mad\" working with Kinga and Max.\nThe 2019 live tour, The Great Cheesy Movie Circus Tour, is promoted as Hodgson's \"final live tour\". Most of the tour dates feature the film \"No Retreat, No Surrender\", while a few show \"Circus of Horrors\". The tour was promoted with video production updates and on-the-road updates via the tour's official website. In addition to Joel, the parts of Crow and Servo are portrayed by Nate Begle and Conor McGiffin respectively. Yvonne Freese plays the part of Gypsy and Mega-Synthia, a clone of both Pearl Forrester and the original Synthia. Emily Marsh also features in the tour as the new character Crenshaw.\nThe Time Bubble Tour started on November 2, 2021, in Cleveland, OH with Emily Marsh, Yvonne Freese, Nate Begle and Conor McGiffin reprising their parts from the 2019 tour. Kelsey Brady joined the cast as Swing Puppeteer. The film was Roland Emmerich's \"Making Contact\" (1985).\nOther appearances.\nIn 1996, during promotion for the film, Nelson and the bots were interviewed in-character on MTV, and seen in silhouettes heckling footage from MTV News featuring the band Radiohead. Also that year, Hodgson was a featured guest on Cartoon Network's \"Space Ghost Coast to Coast\".\nIn 1997, the videogame magazine \"PlayStation Underground\" (Volume 2, Number 1) included a Best Brains-produced \"MST3K\" short on one of their promotional discs. The video opened with a host segment of Mike and the Bots playing some PlayStation games, only to go into the theater to riff on some videos from the magazine's past. The feature is about seven minutes long. An Easter egg on the disc has some behind-the-scenes footage of Best Brains filming the sequences.\nNelson and the robot characters appeared in silhouette on an episode of \"Cheap Seats\", a TV series in which the Sklar Brothers commented on clips of sporting events in a manner similar to MST3K.\nIn May 2020, Hodgson announced a special \"Mystery Science Theater 3000 Live Riff-Along\" with a planned date of May 3; the show featured Hodgson along with Emily Marsh, Conor McGiffin, Nate Begle, and Yvonne Freese, who had joined him during the 2019 \"MST3K\" live tour riffing atop the \"MST3K\" season one episode featuring \"Moon Zero Two\" and then riffing to a new short \"Circus Days\". In another charitable event, Hodgson, alongside Weinstein and Corbett reprising their voice roles as Tom Servo and Crow, riffed two new shorts as part of a crowdfunded effort to support MIGIZI, a Native American youth non-profit group whose headquarters were destroyed during the George Floyd protests in May 2020.\nReception and legacy.\nIn 2004, the show was listed as No.\u202f11 in a featured \"TV Guide\" article, \"25 Top Cult Shows Ever!\", and included a sidebar which read, \"Mike Nelson, writer and star (replacing creator Joel Hodgson), recently addressed a college audience: 'There was nobody over the age of 25. I had to ask, \"Where are you seeing this show?\" I guess we have some sort of timeless quality.'\" Three years later, \"TV Guide\" rewrote the article, and bumped \"MST3K\" to #13. In 2007, the show was listed as one of \"Time\" magazine's \"100 Best TV Shows of All-Time\" (it was also chosen as one of the magazine's top 10 shows of 1990).\nIn 2012, the show was listed as #3 in \"Entertainment Weekly\"'s \"25 Best Cult TV Shows from the Past 25 Years\", with the comment that \"\"MST3K\" taught us that snarky commentary can be way more entertaining than the actual media.\"\nThe 2017 relaunch was met with critical acclaim; as of 2025, the first revival season has a 100% rating on Rotten Tomatoes.\nReactions by those parodied.\nThe reactions of those parodied by \"MST3K\" have been mixed. Some notable negative reactions include that of Sandy Frank, who held the rights to several \"Gamera\" films parodied on the show. He said he was \"intensely displeased\" by the mockery directed at him. (The crew once sang the \"Sandy Frank Song\", which said that Frank was \"the source of all our pain\", \"thinks that people come from trees\", Steven Spielberg \"won't return his calls\", and implied that he was too lazy to make his own films.) Because of this, Frank reportedly refused to allow the shows to be rebroadcast once \"MST3K\"'s rights ran out. However, this may in fact be a rumor, as other rumors indicate that the \"Gamera\" films distribution rights prices were increased beyond what Best Brains could afford as a result of the show's success. According to Shout! Factory, the Japanese movie studio Kadokawa Pictures were so horrified with MST3K's treatment of five \"Gamera\" films that they refused to let Shout release the episodes on home video. Brian Ward (one of the members of Shout! Factory) explained to fans on the forums of the official Shout! Factory website that they tried their best to convince them, but \"the Japanese take their \"Gamera\" films very seriously and do not appreciate them being mocked\". However, eventually Shout was able to clear the episodes for a special 2011 release due to the rights in North America shifting away from the Japanese to another North American entity that had no such qualms.\nKevin Murphy has said that Joe Don Baker wanted to \"beat up\" the writers of the show for the relentless riffing Baker received during \"Mitchell\". Murphy later stated that Baker probably meant it in a joking manner, although Mike Nelson has said that he had deliberately avoided encountering Baker while the two happened to be staying at the same hotel. Jeff Lieberman, director of \"Squirm\", was also quite angry at the \"MST3K\" treatment of his film.\nDirector Rick Sloane was shocked at his treatment at the conclusion of \"Hobgoblins\", in which Sloane himself was mercilessly mocked over the film's end credits. In a 2008 interview, however, Sloane clarified his comments, saying that \"I laughed through the entire \"MST3K\" episode, until the very end. I wasn't expecting the humor to suddenly be at my own expense. I was mortified when they dragged out the cardboard cutout and pretended to do an interview with me. I was caught off guard. I had never seen them rip apart any other director before on the show.\" However, he credits the success of the \"MST3K\" episode with inspiring him to make a sequel to \"Hobgoblins\", released in 2009.\nOthers, however, have been more positive: Robert Fiveson and Myrl Schriebman, producers of \"\", said they were \"flattered\" to see the film appear on \"MST3K\". Actor Miles O'Keeffe, the star of the film \"Cave Dwellers\", called Best Brains and personally requested a copy of the \"MST3K\" treatment of the film, saying he enjoyed their skewering of what he had considered to be a surreal experience; according to Hodgson, O'Keeffe said his friends always heckled his performance in the film when it was on, and he appreciated the \"MST3K\" treatment. In the form of an essay and E. E. Cummings-esque poem, Mike Nelson paid tribute to O'Keeffe with a humorous mix of adulation and fear.\nRex Reason, star of \"This Island Earth\", made appearances at several \"MST3K\" events and credits \"MST3K\" with introducing the film to a new generation. The crew of \"Time Chasers\" held a party the night the \"MST3K\" treatment of their film aired and, while reactions were mixed, director David Giancola said, \"Most of us were fans and knew what to expect and we roared with laughter and drank way too much. I had a blast, never laughed so hard in my life.\"\nActor Adam West, star of the 1960s \"Batman\" TV series, co-starred in \"Zombie Nightmare\", another film \"MST3K\" mocked. West apparently held no grudges, as he hosted the 1994 \"Turkey Day\" marathon in which the episode featuring \"Zombie Nightmare\" had its broadcast premiere. Mamie Van Doren (who appeared in episode 112, \"Untamed Youth\", and episode 601, \"Girls Town\"), Robert Vaughn (star of episode 315, \"Teenage Cave Man\", which he called the worst movie ever made) and Beverly Garland (who had appeared in many \"MST3K\"-featured Roger Corman films) also hosted at the marathon.\nAwards.\nIn 1993, \"MST3K\" won a Peabody Award for \"producing an ingenious eclectic series\": \"With references to everything from Proust to \"Gilligan's Island\", \"Mystery Science Theater 3000\" fuses superb, clever writing with wonderfully terrible B-grade movies\". In 1994 and 1995, the show was nominated for the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Individual Achievement in Writing for a Variety or Music Program, but lost both times to \"Dennis Miller Live\". Every year from 1992 to 1997, it was also nominated for CableACE Awards. Its DVD releases have been nominated for Saturn Awards in 2004, 2006, 2007, and 2018.\nThe revival's first season was nominated for a Best Presentation on Television Saturn Award and an OFTA Television Award nod for Best Variety Program.\nInfluence.\nThrough \"MST3K\", many obscure films have been more visible to the public, and several have since been considered some of the worst films ever made and are voted into the Bottom 100 on the Internet Movie Database. Of note is \"\", which was riffed on by \"MST3K\" in its fourth season. \"Manos\" was a very low-budget film produced by Hal Warren, a fertilizer salesman at the time, taking on a dare from a screenwriter friend to show that anyone could make a horror film. The film suffered from numerous production issues due to its limited filming equipment, and many critics describe the result using a riff from \"MST3K\", in that \"every frame of this movie looks like someone's last-known photograph\". The \"MST3K\" episode featuring \"Manos\" was considered one of its most popular and best episodes, and brought \"Manos\" into the public light as one of the worst films ever produced. The film gained a cult following, and an effort was made to restore the film to high-definition quality from its original film reels. \"MST3K\" also riffed on three films directed by Coleman Francis: \"Red Zone Cuba\", \"The Skydivers\", and \"The Beast of Yucca Flats\", which brought awareness of Francis' poor direction and low-budget films, similar to that of Ed Wood. \"MST3K\" also brought to the limelight lackluster works by Bert I. Gordon, primarily giant monster B-movies, that gained attention through the show, and many Japanese kaiju movies imported and dubbed through producer Sandy Frank (jokingly referred to as \"the source of all our pain\"), particularly those in the \"Gamera\" series.\n\"MST3K\"'s riffing style to poke fun at bad movies, films, and TV shows, have been used in other works. In 2003, the television series \"Deadly Cinema\", starring Jami Deadly, debuted, which featured the cast making fun of bad movies, \"MST3K\"-style. In 2004, the ESPN Classic series \"Cheap Seats\", debuted, which featured two brothers making fun of clips of old sporting events, \"MST3K\"-style, and is noteworthy for containing an episode in which Mike, Crow, and Tom Servo briefly appeared in a cameo to make fun of the hosts' own skits. In 2008, the internet and direct-to-DVD comedy series \"Incognito Cinema Warriors XP\", debuted, which used the same \"host segment-movie segment\" format the show established, while featuring completely original characters and plot. \"ICWXP\" gained a similar cult following, even earning the praises of former \"MST3K\" host Michael J. Nelson. In 2010, the television series \"This Movie Sucks!\" (and its predecessor \"Ed's Nite In\"), starring Ed the Sock and co-hosts Liana K and Ron Sparks, debuted. It features the cast making fun of bad movies. Creator Steven Kerzner, however, was quick to point out that \"MST3K\" was not \"the creator of this kind of format, they're just the most recent and most well-known\". In 2011, the theater silhouette motif was parodied by golf commentator and talk show host David Feherty in an episode of \"Feherty\". He is shown sitting in front of a large screen and \"riffing\" while viewing footage of golfer Johnny Miller and is joined in the theater by his stuffed rooster (Frank) and his gnome statue (Costas).\nFurther, the riffing style from \"MST3K\" is considered part of the influence for DVD commentaries and successful YouTube reviewers and Let's Play-style commentators. DVD releases for both \"Ghostbusters\" and \"Men in Black\" used a similar format to Shadowrama for an \"in-vision\" commentary features. The concept of social television, where social media is integrated into the television viewing experience, was significantly influenced by \"MST3K\". This social media practice of live-tweeting riffs and jokes on broadcast shows, such as for films like \"Sharknado\", has its roots in \"MST3K\". The \"MST3K\" approach has inspired Internet movie critics to create comedic movie reviews approaches, such as through RedLetterMedia and Screen Junkies which are considered more than just snarking on the movie but aim to help the viewer understand film and story techniques and their flawed use in poorly-received films.\nPublic performances of live riffing have been hosted by various groups in different cities across the U.S. and Canada, including Cineprov (Atlanta, Georgia), Master Pancake Theater (Austin, TX), The Gentlemen Hecklers (Vancouver, BC Canada), Counterclockwise Comedy (Kansas City, Missouri), FilmRoasters (Richmond, Virginia), Moxie Skinny Theatre 3000 (Springfield, Missouri), Riff Raff Theatre (Iowa City, Iowa), Twisted Flicks (Seattle, Washington), and Turkey Shoot (Metro Cinema at the Garneau, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada).\nThe Center for Puppetry Arts crowdfunded and successfully acquired Tom Servo and Crow T. Robot in 2019.\nFandom.\n\"MST3K\", broadcasting during the emergence of the Internet for public use, developed a large fan base during its initial broadcast; since the original broadcast, the show's fan base has continued to thrive. The show had already had its postal-based fan club, which people could write into and which some letters and drawings read on subsequent episodes, and the producers encouraged fans to share recordings of their episodes with others. At its peak, the \"MST3K Fan Club\" had over 50,000 members, and Best Brains were receiving over 500 letters each week. Fans of the show generally refer to themselves as \"MSTies\". Usenet newsgroups rec.arts.tv.mst3k.misc and rec.arts.tv.mst3k.announce were established in the mid-1990s for announcements and discussions related to the show. A type of fan fiction called MiSTings, in which fans would add humorous comments to other, typically bad, fan fiction works, was popular on these groups. The fan-run website \"Satellite News\" continues to track news and information about the show and related projects from its cast members. Another fan site, \"The Annotated MST\", attempts to catalog and describe all the obscure popular culture references used in a given episode.\nIn addition to the show's fandom, a number of celebrities have expressed their love for the show. One of the earliest known celebrity fans was Frank Zappa, who went so far as to telephone Best Brains, calling \"MST3K\" as \"the funniest fucking thing on TV\" (according to Beaulieu). Zappa became a friend of the show, and following his death, episode 523 was dedicated to him. Other known celebrities fans include Al Gore, Neil Patrick Harris, Penn Jillette, and Patton Oswalt (who would later become TV's Son of TV's Frank in the revival).\nFilmmaker Jordan Vogt-Roberts (\"\") also praised \"MST3K\":\n\"Mystery Science Theater built something artful, endearing and comedic on top of the foundation other people's work. It had merit to itself.\"\nThere were two official fan conventions in Minneapolis (run by the series' production company Best Brains) called \"ConventioCon ExpoFest-A-Rama\" (1994) and \"ConventioCon ExpoFest-A-Rama 2: Electric Boogaloo\" (1996). At least 2,500 people attended the first convention.\nRelated post-show projects.\nThe various cast and crew from the show's broadcast run have continued to produce comedy works following the show. Two separate projects were launched that specifically borrowed on the theme of riffing on bad movies. After the short-lived \"The Film Crew\" in 2006, Nelson started RiffTrax, providing downloadable audio files containing \"MST3K\"-style riffs that the viewer can synchronize to their personal copy of a given popular movie (such as \"\"); this was done to avoid copyright and licensing issues with such films. RiffTrax's cast expanded to include Murphy and Corbett along with occasional guest stars, and are able to use a wider range of films, including films and shorts in the public domain, and films for which they could get the license to distribute digitally and, sometimes, on DVD/Blu-ray. In addition, they launched production of \"RiffTrax Live\" shows for various films, where they perform their riffing in front of a live audience that is simultaneously broadcast to other movie theaters across the country and later made available as on-demand video. As of 2023[ [update]], RiffTrax continues to offer new material and shows. As part of a tribute to their roots, RiffTrax has performed some works that previously appeared on \"MST3K\", including \"Manos: the Hands of Fate\", \"Santa Claus\", and \"Time Chasers\".\nSimilarly, Hodgson, after some experimental creative works such as \"The TV Wheel\", started \"Cinematic Titanic\" with Beaulieu, Weinstein, Conniff, and Pehl in 2007. Like \"MST3K\", the five riffed on movies for which they were able to acquire the licenses (including \"Santa Claus Conquers the Martians\"), which then were distributed on DVD and, later, through on-demand video and streaming options. They later did a number of live shows across the United States, most of which were made available on DVD and digitally.\nIn 2015, Trace Beaulieu and Frank Conniff began performing together as \"The Mads\", riffing movies at live screenings across the U.S. Many of their stops included two nights of movies with a separate riff writing class the morning of the second film. Beginning in 2020, the Mads ceased in-person performances due to the COVID-19 pandemic, shifting, instead, to a livestream format for the shows, with digital downloads available afterwards.\nOther related projects by the \"MST3K\" crew following the show's end include:\nIn 2000, most of the cast of the Sci-Fi era of the show collaborated on a humor website, Timmy Big Hands, that closed in 2001.\nIn 2001, Mike Nelson, Patrick Brantseg, Bill Corbett, Kevin Murphy and Paul Chaplin created \"The Adventures of Edward the Less\", an animated parody of J. R. R. Tolkien's \"The Lord of the Rings\" and others in the fantasy genre, with additional vocals by Mary Jo Pehl and Mike Dodge, for the Sci Fi Channel website.\nIn 2008, Bill Corbett and fellow writer Rob Greenberg wrote the screenplay for \"Meet Dave\", a family comedy starring Eddie Murphy about a tiny \"Star Trek\"-like crew operating a spaceship that looks like a man. The captain of the crew and the spaceship were both played by Murphy. Originally conceived as a series called \"Starship Dave\" for SciFi.com, it was dropped in favor of \"Edward the Less\". The script (along with the title) were changed drastically by studio executives and other writers, although Corbett and Greenberg received sole screenwriter credit.\nIn 2010, Trace Beaulieu, Frank Conniff, Joel Hodgson, Mary Jo Pehl, Josh Weinstein, Beth McKeever and Clive Robertson voiced characters for \"\", a computer game created by J. Allen Williams.\nIn 2013, Frank Conniff and animation historian Jerry Beck debuted \"Cartoon Dump\", a series of classically bad cartoons, which are also occasionally performed live.\nTrace Beaulieu and Joel Hodgson were featured in the Yahoo! Screen series \"Other Space\" in 2015, with Beaulieu voicing a robot companion of Hodgson's character, a burned-out spaceship engineer. Series creator Paul Feig, a fan of \"Mystery Science Theater 3000\", said that he envisioned Hodgson and Beaulieu as their respective characters while writing them.\nReunions.\nIn 2008, to commemorate the show's 20th anniversary, the principal cast and writers from all eras of the show reunited for a panel discussion at San Diego Comic-Con, which was hosted by actor-comedian Patton Oswalt (who would later go on to star in the revived series). The event was recorded and included as a bonus feature on the 20th Anniversary DVD release via Shout! Factory. Also that year, original \"MST3K\" cast members Joel Hodgson, Trace Beaulieu and Frank Conniff reunited to shoot a brief sketch to be included on the DVD release of \"The Giant Gila Monster\". The new disc was added to Volume 10 of the \"MST3K Collection\" DVD boxed set series, replacing the \"Godzilla vs. Megalon\" disc which could no longer be sold due to licensing conflicts. The new package was sold under the name \"Volume 10.2\", and the sketch was presented as a seminar to instruct consumers on how to \"upgrade\" their DVD set, which merely consists of \"disposing\" of the old disc and inserting the new one.\nIn 2013, Joel Hodgson and Trace Beaulieu reprised their roles as Joel Robinson and Crow T. Robot for cameo appearances in the fourth season of \"Arrested Development\".\nAs part of its live show events for 2016, RiffTrax presented a \"MST3K\" reunion at a live show in Minneapolis in June 2016. Hodgson, Bridget Nelson, Pehl, Conniff, and Beaulieu all joined the three regulars along with Jonah Ray from the revived series. The gathered cast riffed on a variety of shorts as part of the event.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n "}
{"id": "20841", "revid": "28903366", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20841", "title": "Music radio", "text": "Music-dominated radio\nMusic radio is a radio format in which music is the main broadcast content. After television replaced old time radio's dramatic content, music formats became dominant in many countries. Radio drama and comedy continue, often on public radio.\nMusic drives radio technology, including wide-band FM, modern digital radio systems such as Digital Radio Mondiale, and even the rise of internet radio and music streaming services (such as Pandora and Spotify).\nWhen radio was the main form of entertainment, regular programming, mostly stories and variety shows, was the norm. If there was music, it was normally a live concert or part of a variety show. Backstage sound engineers who jockeyed discs (records) from one turntable to another to keep up with the live programming were often called disc jockeys.\nWith the mass production and popularity of records in the mid 1940s, as well as the birth of TV, it was discovered that a show was needed to simply play records and hire a disc jockey to host the program. One of the first disc jockeys (later called DJs) was Dick Clark. Others followed suit and today music radio is the most numerous format.\nFormat.\nThe radio station provides programming to attract listeners. Commercial radio stations make profits by selling advertising. Public and community radio stations are sustained by listener donations and grants. Young people are targeted by advertisers because their product preferences can be changed more easily. Therefore, the most commercially successful stations target young audiences.\nThe programming usually cycles from the least attractive item, to most attractive, followed by commercials. The purpose of this plan is to build listener interest during the programming. There are several standard ways of selecting the music, such as free-form, top-40, album-oriented rock, and Jack. These can be applied to all types of music.\nBecause dead air does not attract listeners, the station tries to fill its broadcast day with sound. Audiences will only tolerate a certain number of commercials before tuning away. In some regions, government regulators specify how many commercials can be played in a given hour.\nJingles are radio's equivalent of neon signs. Jingles are brief, bright pieces of choral music that promote the station's call letters, frequency and sometimes disc-jockey or program segment. Jingles are produced for radio stations by commercial specialty services such as JAM, in Texas. Jingles are often replaced by recorded voice-overs (called \"stingers\", also depending on region more often \"liners\").\nIn order to build station loyalty, the station announces time, station calls letters and frequency as often as six to twelve times per hour. Jingles and stingers (liners) help to give the station a branded sound in a pleasant, minimal amount of air-time. The legal requirement for station identification in the U.S. is once per hour, approximately at the top of the hour, or at the conclusion of a transmission.\nNews, time-checks, real-time travel advice and weather reports are often valuable to listeners. The news headlines and station identification are therefore given just before a commercial. Time, traffic and weather are given just after. The engineer typically sets the station clocks to standard local time each day, by listening to WWV or WWVH (see atomic clock). These segments are less valued by the most targeted market, young people, so many commercial stations shorten or omit these segments in favor of music.\nWhile most music stations that offer news reports simply \"tear and read\" news items (from the newswires or the Internet), larger stations (generally those affiliated with news/talk stations) may employ an editor to rewrite headlines, and provide summaries of local news. Summaries fit more news in less air-time. Some stations share news collection with TV or newspapers in the same media conglomerate. An emerging trend is to use the radio station's web site to provide in-depth coverage of news and advertisers headlined on the air. Many stations contract with agencies such as Smartraveler and AccuWeather for their weather and traffic reports instead of using in-house staff.\nFewer radio stations (except on medium and major market, depending on daypart) maintain a call-in telephone line for promotions and gags, or to take record requests. DJs of commercial stations do not generally answer the phone and edit the call during music plays in non-major markets, as the programming is either delivered via satellite, or voice-tracked using a computer. More and more stations take requests by e-mail and online chat only.\nThe value of a station's advertising is set by the number, age and wealth of its listeners. Arbitron, a commercial statistical service, historically used listener diaries to statistically measure the number of listeners. Arbitron diaries were collected on Thursdays, and for this reason, most radio stations have run special promotions on Thursdays, hoping to persuade last-minute Arbitron diarists to give them a larger market-share. Arbitron contractually prevents mention of its name on the air.\nPromotions are the on-air equivalent of lotteries for listeners. Promotional budgets usually run about $1 per listener per year. In a large market, a successful radio station can pay a full-time director of promotions, and run several lotteries per month of vacations, automobiles and other prizes. Lottery items are often bartered from advertisers, allowing both companies to charge full prices at wholesale costs. For example, cruising companies often have unused capacity, and when given the choice, prefer to pay their bills by bartering cruise vacations. Since the ship will sail in any case, bartered vacations cost the cruise company little or nothing. The promotion itself advertises the company providing the prize. The FCC has defined a lottery as \"any game, contest or promotion that combines the elements of prize, chance and consideration.\"\nProgramming by time.\nMost music stations have DJs who play music from a playlist determined by the program director, arranged by blocks of time. Though practices differ by region and format, what follows is a typical arrangement in a North American urban commercial radio station.\nThe first block of the day is the \"morning drive time\" block in the early morning. Arbitron defines this block between 6 a.m. and 10 a.m., though it can begin as early as 5 a.m. (though usually not later than 6), and end as early as 9 a.m. or as late as 11 a.m. This block usually includes news bulletins and traffic and weather advisories for commuters, as well as light comedy from the morning DJ team (many shock jocks started as or still work on drive-time radio). Some stations emphasize music, and reduce gags and call-ins in this period.\nThe midday block (defined by Arbitron as 10 a.m. to 3 p.m., though often extended later to about 5 p.m.) is mostly music, and in many places is at least partially voicetracked from another market. For a period around noon a station may play nonstop music or go to an all-request format for people eating lunch. This block is often occupied by a \"no-repeat workday;\" stations that offer this feature usually target captive audiences such as retail workers, who have to listen to the station for long periods of time and can become irritated by repetition.\nIn the early evening, or \"afternoon drive\" (defined by Arbitron as 3 to 7 p.m.), the evening rush-hour programming resembles the midday programming, but adds traffic and weather advisories for commuters. Some stations insert a short snippet of stand-up comedy (\"5 O'Clock Funnies\") around 5 o'clock when commuters leave work, or play specifically selected \"car tunes\" ideal for listening while driving.\nThe evening block (defined by Arbitron as 7 p.m. to midnight), if present, returns to music. Syndicated programs such as Tom Kent or Delilah are popular in this shift.\nThe overnight programming, from midnight to the beginning of drive time, is generally low-key music with quiet, if any, announcing. Some stations play documentaries or even infomercials, while some others play syndicated or voicetracked DJs. Complete automation, with no jock, is very common in this day part. It is not uncommon to play more adventurous selections during late night programming blocks, since late night is generally not considered significant for ratings, and are not subject to federal restrictions as stringently as during the daytime. Stations are permitted to sign off during this time; in areas where AM radio is still significant (especially in the United States), local stations may be required to either sign off or cut to low-power to protect clear-channel stations.\nWeekends, especially Sundays, often carry different programming. The countdown show, ranking the top songs of the previous week, has been a staple of weekend radio programming since 1970; current hosts of countdown shows in various formats include Rick Dees, Ryan Seacrest, Jeff Foxworthy, Kix Brooks, Bob Kingsley, Crook &amp; Chase, Randy Jackson, Walt Love, Al Gross, Dick Bartley, and (via reruns) Casey Kasem. Other types of weekend programming include niche programming, retrospective shows and world music such as the Putumayo World Music Hour. Stations may carry shows with different genres of music such as blues or jazz. Community affairs and religious programming is often on Sunday mornings, generally one of the least listened-to periods of the week. In addition, weekend evenings are particularly specialized; a dance station might have a sponsored dance party at a local club, or a classical station may play an opera. Saturday nights are also similar to this; request shows, both local and national (e.g. Dick Bartley), are very popular on Saturday night. The longest running radio program in the country, the \"Grand Ole Opry\", has aired on Saturday night since its inception in 1925.\nMany music stations in the United States perform news and timechecks only sparingly, preferring to put more music on the air. News is often restricted to the talk-heavy commuting hours, though weather updates are still very common throughout the day, even on these stations. ABC FM News is an example of an American news network that is designed for music radio stations. The BBC and ABC take a different approach, with all of its stations giving news updates (BBC Radio 1Xtra produces its own news segments under the name TX.)\nMusic formats.\nSome well-known music-radio formats are \"Top 40\", \"Freeform Rock\" and \"AOR (Album Oriented Rock)\". It turns out that most other stations (such as Rhythm &amp; Blues) use a variation of one of these formats with a different playlist. The way stations advertise themselves is not standardized. Some critical interpretation is needed to recognize classic formulas in the midst of the commercial glitz.\nSee List of music radio formats for further details, and note that there is a great deal of format evolution (or, to borrow a television term, channel drift) as music tastes and commercial conditions change. For example, the Beautiful music format that developed into today's Easy listening and Soft rock formats is nearly extinct due to a lack of interest from younger generations, whereas classic rock has become popular over the last 20 years or so and Jack FM has arisen only since 2000 or so.\nThe most popular format in the U.S. is country music, but rock music sells the most.\nTop 40.\nThe original formulaic radio format was Top 40 music, now known within the industry as contemporary hit radio or \"CHR\". In this radio format, disc-jockeys would select one of a set of the forty best-selling singles (usually in a rack) as rated by Billboard magazine or from the station's own chart of the local top selling songs. In general, the more aggressive \"Top 40\" stations could sometimes be better described as \"Top 20\" stations. They would aggressively skirt listener boredom to play only the most popular singles.\nTop 40 radio would punctuate the music with jingles, promotions, gags, call-ins, and requests, brief news, time and weather announcements and most importantly, advertising. The distinguishing mark of a traditional top-40 station was the use of a hyperexcited disc-jockey, and high tempo jingles. The format was invented in the US and today can be heard worldwide. Todd Storz and Gordon McLendon invented Top 40 radio. Bill Drake and Rick Sklar have had a lasting modern influence.\nVariants and hybrids include the freeform-like Jack FM (mentioned below under Freeform Rock) and the \"Mix\" formats mentioned below under Oldies. Top 40 music is heavily criticized by some music fans as being repetitive and of low quality, and is almost exclusively dominated by large media conglomerates such as iHeartMedia and CBS Corporation. Top 40 tends to be underrepresented on the Internet, being mostly the domain of commercial broadcasters such as Virgin Radio UK.\nSome of the most famous Top 40 stations have been Musicradio 77 WABC/New York City, Boss Radio 93 KHJ/Los Angeles, The Big 89 WLS/Chicago, 1050 CHUM/Toronto, Famous 56 WFIL/ Philadelphia, and The Big 68 WRKO/Boston. Today, there are popular Top 40 stations such as WHTZ-Z100/New York City, 102.7 KIIS-FM/, and KAMP-97.1 AMP Radio/ in Los Angeles, and Jovem Pan in Brazil\nFreeform and progressive rock.\nA later development was freeform radio, later commercially developed as progressive rock radio, and still later even more commercially developed as AOR (Album-Oriented Rock), in which selections from an album would be played together, with an appropriate introduction.\nTraditional free-form stations prided themselves on offering their disc jockeys freedom to play significant music and make significant social commentary and humor. This approach developed commercial problems because disc jockeys attracted to this freedom often had tastes substantially different from the audience, and lost audience share. Also, freeform stations could lack predictability, and listeners' loyalty could then be put at risk. Progressive rock radio (not to be confused with the progressive rock music genre) was freeform in style but constrained so that some kind of rock music was what was always or almost always played.\nResponsible jocks would realize their responsibility to the audience to produce a pleasant show, and try to keep the station sound predictable by listening to other jocks, and repeating some of their music selections. WNEW-FM in New York during the 1970s exemplified this approach to progressive rock radio.\nAt their best, free-form stations have never been equaled for their degree of social activism, programmatic freedom, and listener involvement. However, to succeed, the approach requires genius jocks, totally in-tune with their audience, who are also committed to the commercial success of the radio station. This is a rare combination of traits. Even if such people are available, they often command extremely high salaries. However, this may be an effective approach for a new station, if talented jocks can be recruited and motivated at low salaries.\nFreeform radio is particularly popular as a college radio format; offshoots include the recent (and somewhat controversial, due to its lack of on-air personalities) eclectic-pop format known as variety hits, which plays a wide assortment of mostly top-40 music from a span of several decades; and podcast radio, a mostly talk format pioneered by Infinity Broadcasting's KYOU station in California and Adam Curry's Podcast show on Sirius Satellite Radio.\nAOR (album-oriented rock).\nAOR (album-oriented rock) developed as a commercial compromise between top-forties-style formulas and progressive rock radio/freeform. A program director or music consultant would select some set of music \"standards\" and require the playlist to be followed, perhaps in an order selected by the jock. The jock would still introduce each selection, but the jock would have available a scripted introduction to use if he was not personally familiar with a particular piece of music and its artist. Obviously a computer helps a lot in this process.\nA useful, relatively safe compromise with the artistic freedom of the jocks is that a few times each hour, usually in the least commercially valuable slots of the hour, the disc-jockey can highlight new tracks that he or she thinks might interest the audience. The audience is encouraged to comment on the new tracks, allowing the station to track audience tastes. The freedom to introduce new artists can help a station develop its library.\nSignificant AOR offshoots include classic rock and adult album alternative.\nOldies, standards, and classic rock.\nClassic rock or oldies formats have been described as having the weakness of not playing new artists. This is true in a creative sense, but not a commercial one. Conventional wisdom in the radio industry is that stations will not get good ratings or revenue if they frequently play songs unfamiliar to their audience. This is why \"Top 40\" stations played only the biggest hits and why oldies and classic rock formats do the same for the eras they cover. An inherent danger to this philosophy is that closed-campus work environments, such as retail, foster an environment where listeners hear the station continuously for several hours, multiple days in a row, which can become unpleasant after a short amount of time. Oldies and related formats do have an inherent advantage in that they have a much broader time frame (up to 30 years, compared to the current hits of a top-40 station) from which to draw their playlist and can thus play a greater variety of songs than a station bound to devote the majority of its spins to a limited list. The ideal \"classic\" station (of whatever format) finds the balance between playing listener favorites frequently enough to develop a base while at the same time cultivating a playlist broad enough not to breed contempt. Nevertheless, there seems to be a cottage industry of Internet stations specializing in specific forms of classic rock and oldies, particularly psychedelic rock and progressive rock.\nThe oldies and classic rock formats have a strong niche market, but as the audience becomes older the station becomes less attractive to advertisers. Advertisers perceive older listeners as set in their brand choices and not as responsive to advertising as younger, more impulsive listeners. Oldies stations must occasionally change to more youthful music formats; as a result, the definition of what constitutes an \"oldies\" station has gradually changed over the years (and the phrase \"oldies\" itself is falling out of use except for the stations that still regularly play music from the 1960s and earlier). This is why many oldies stations, like WCBS-FM in New York City and WJMK in Chicago, have switched over to the younger-oriented Jack FM format in recent years\u2014although WCBS-FM adopted a Classic Hits format on July 12, 2007, and the \"Jack FM\" format was moved to its HD2 subchannel. Unlike WCBS-FM's pre-JACK format which was centered on the 1955\u20131979 era, the post-JACK station was based on the 1964-1989 era because of the aging listener demographics of the original format.\nThis preference for younger listeners caused the decline of the \"Big Band\" or \"Standards\" music formats that covered music from the 1930s to the 1950s. As the audience grew too old for advertisers, the radio stations that carried these formats saw a sharp loss of ratings and revenue. This left them with no choice but to adopt more youthful formats, though the Standards format (also known as the Great American Songbook from the series of albums produced by rocker Rod Stewart) has undergone something of an off-air revival, with artists such as Stewart, Tony Bennett and Queen Latifah putting their own interpretation on the music.\nDuring the mid-to-late-1990s, the \"Mix\" format\u2014a loosely defined mixture of Top-40 and classic rock with something of an emphasis on adult contemporary music\u2014began to appear across the country. While the format has no particular standard identity, most \"mix\" stations have rotations consisting largely of pop and rock music from the 1980s and 1990s (and often the 1970s), with some current material mixed in. In addition, stations devoted to the pop music of the 1970s, 1980s, and 1990s on their own have developed as the audiences that grew up with that music grew older and nostalgic for the sounds of their youth. The continued play of such songs on such stations has also exposed the music to younger generations that can take a renewed interest in the music, prolonging its shelf life beyond what conventional wisdom in the industry may suggest.\nThe full service format is a more freeform variant of this type of format. Full-service stations will often mix the oldies, classic rock, classic hits, and adult standards music, occasionally with music found in formats such as beautiful music, adult contemporary, or classic country. On weekends, specialty or niche programs focusing on formats such as Celtic music, polka and Italian music (depending on the ethnicity of the area) are common. In addition to music, a limited amount of local talk programming is heard on most full-service stations. Full service tends to be heard primarily on rural stations.\nClassical, pop, easy-listening, jazz, dance.\nThese formats all have small but very loyal audiences in the largest markets. Most follow formats similar to the above (Top 40s, Freeform, AOR and Oldies), except with a different playlist. Public service stations following these formats tend to be \"freeform\" stations.\nRegional Mexican.\nRegional Mexican is a Latin music radio format, typically including Banda, Conjunto, Corridos, Duranguense, Grupero, Huapango, Mariachi, New Mexico music, Norte\u00f1a, Ranchera, and Tejano music. It is the most popular radio format targeting Hispanic Americans in the United States.[2] The large number of immigrants from Northern Mexico can lead to an emphasis upon Norte\u00f1a on Regional Mexican radio stations,[1] though markets with larger Hispanic audiences can have multiple Regional Mexican stations, with variations in which region from which the music is taken and where it is popular.\nEasy listening.\nEasy listening and adult contemporary are related formats that play largely down-tempo pop music of various styles. The difference is mostly in the era and styles covered -- Easy Listening is mostly older music done in the style of standards from the early 20th century (typical artists include Johnny Mathis and Frank Sinatra) combined with Big Band music and more modern performers in the same style such as C\u00e9line Dion and Josh Groban, while Adult Contemporary focuses more on newer pop music from the 1970s on. An ancestor to the easy listening format is Beautiful Music, a now-rare format (though XM features one channel of it, called Sunny) focusing mostly on smooth jazz or classical arrangements of pop music and original compositions in a similar vein. Perhaps the best-known Adult Contemporary station currently in operation is WLTW in New York City, better known as 106.7 Lite FM. Hot adult contemporary is a hybrid format that crosses adult contemporary with top-40.\nJazz stations generally play either traditional jazz forms or smooth jazz. The jazz station, more than any other except the college station, is stereotyped as having a small listenership and a somewhat overly highbrow on-air personality, and many are college-run stations. California State University Long Beach sponsors KJAZZ 88.1, which has a fairly significant online listenership as well. Two very well known smooth jazz stations are WNUA in Chicago and 94.7 The Wave in Los Angeles, both of which were introduced in 1987, and still continue to enjoy tremendous success in the format today. Also, WUCF-FM in Orlando has been playing jazz music since 1978. Both traditional and smooth jazz stations have been in severe decline, both on commercial and noncommercial stations, since the 2000s, in part because of the formats' lower profitability compared to other formats (adult contemporary for commercial stations, NPR-driven news/talk for noncommercial ones).\nBlues programming is generally limited to niche programs on stations that primarily broadcast other formats. An exception to this is CIDG-FM, an all-blues station based in the Canadian city of Ottawa.\nDance music is a niche, and so-called \"rhythmic pop\" stations have had a fierce but not always commercially sustainable following. There was a wide spectrum of disco-format radio stations during the late 1970s, but virtually all of them died out during the disco backlash; WXKS in Boston is one of the few notable survivors, now a Clear Channel Communications-owned top-40 station of considerable influence. Nevertheless, there are a large number of dance music stations available both on the internet and on satellite radio, mostly specializing in various forms of electronica. Both major US satellite radio services include disco stations.\nAlternative and modern rock.\nRock music has a long and honorable radio tradition going back to DJs like Wolfman Jack and Alan Freed, and as a result variations on rock radio are fairly common. The classic rock and oldies formats are discussed above; in addition to those, however, there are several genres of music radio devoted to different aspects of modern rock music. Alternative rock grew out of the grunge scene of the late 1980s and early 1990s and is particularly favored by college radio and adult album alternative stations; there is a strong focus on songwriters and bands with an outsider sound or a more sophisticated sound than the \"three chord wonder\" clich\u00e9. Meanwhile, other stations focus on heavy metal, punk rock, or the various post-punk and pop-influenced sounds known collectively as \"modern rock\".\nNarrow-interest rock stations are particularly common on the Internet and satellite radio scenes, broken down into genres such as punk, metal, classic rock, indie music, and the like. There is a general feeling among radio connoisseurs that rock radio is becoming badly watered down by big corporate ownership, leading to a considerable do-it-yourself spirit.\nCountry.\nWhile stereotyped as rural music, the Country music format is common and popular throughout the United States and in some other countries (particularly Canada and Australia, both of which share much of the same Anglo-Saxon and Celtic roots as the United States). Country has been a popular radio format since the early days of music radio, dating back to the early days of radio itself when barn dance radio programs were widely popular; however, the format was indeed originally a predominantly rural phenomenon, especially on AM radio. Decades worth of efforts at mainstreaming the format eventually paid off when country radio became widely popular among a large number of FM radio stations that signed on in the suburban United States in the 1980s and early 1990s.\nFor most mainstream country stations, the emphasis is generally on current pop country, following the same process as top 40; the remaining music in a particular station's library generally uses music from the past fifteen years (shorter for \"hot country\" or \"new country\" stations), with the exact music used varying depending on the station and the style of music the listener wants to hear.\nClassic country is a variant of the country music format; it is effectively the country music analog to oldies. Classic country is generally preserved in the rural AM stations that country music aired on before its mainstream expansion. Depending on the music mix, it can play either relatively recent classic country tunes from the 1970s to the 1990s (generally more favorable to advertisers) or can span all the way back to the 1920s, thus playing music far older than almost any other radio format available.\nDue to increasing similarities between country music and some variants of rock music (such as southern rock, country rock and heartland rock), there have been efforts at combining country and rock formats together, most of which have been unsuccessful.\nAn alternative country format is Americana, which eschews the mainstream pop country songs in favor of classic-era, alt country and cult musicians. Like the music it plays, these stations can develop strong cult followings and listener loyalty, but they are also less commercially successful than pop country stations.\nUrban (hip-hop/R&amp;B).\nThe explosive rise in popularity during the 1980s of rap music has led to a large number of radio stations specializing in rap/hip-hop and R&amp;B music (with the exception of classic R&amp;B such as Motown, which is as often as not the province of Oldies stations). This format is popular among all ethnic groups and social classes.\nDance music radio.\nDance music radio focuses on live DJ sets and hit singles from genres of techno, house, electro, drum and bass, UK garage and big beat. While some stations play all kinds of electronic dance music, others (mainly pirate radio stations) focus on particular genres. This format is popular in England, Germany, Netherlands and some other countries, but less so in the United States (where dance is a niche format often exclusive to internet radio stations).\nHowever, the number of U.S. stations airing such content has grown; five terrestrial radio stations in the U.S. with a purely dance-oriented format (one of which airing it part-time during the night and early-morning hours) report their airplay to the Billboard Dance/Mix Show Airplay chart, while top 40 and rhythmic stations may also air EDM songs that have crossed over onto pop-oriented charts due to the recent growth in mainstream popularity of dance music.\nChristian and gospel music.\nChristian and gospel radio stations usually plays the popular Contemporary Christian music, others playing Gospel music and/or Praise and worship. K-Love and Air1 are among the most popular Christian radio stations. In the United States, Christian music stations (especially ostensibly noncommercial ones) often rely heavily on brokered programming: a Christian music station typically only carries music for part of the day, with the rest of the day filled by evangelists who pay to place recordings of their sermons on the station.\nPublic, commercial and community radio.\nPublic radio formats.\nSome music radio is broadcast by public service organizations, such as National Public Radio or the BBC. In the United States, public radio is typically confined to three formats: news/talk, classical music, or jazz, the last of which is declining rapidly as of the late 2000s. In other countries, where national broadcasters hold significantly more clout, formats can vary more widely.\nCommunity radio.\nCommunity radio often relies heavily on the music format because it is relatively cheap and generally makes for easy listening.\nCommercial radio.\nCommercial stations charge advertisers for the estimated number of listeners. The larger the audience, the higher the stations' rate card can be for commercial advertising.\nCommercial stations program the format of the station to gain as large a slice of the demographic audience as possible.\nA station's value is usually measured as a percentage of market share in a market of a certain size. The measurement in U.S. markets has historically been by Arbitron, a commercial statistical service that uses listener diaries. Arbitron diaries were historically collected on Thursdays, and for this reason, most radio stations have run special promotions on Thursdays, hoping to persuade last-minute Arbitron diarists to give them a larger market-share. Stations are contractually prohibited from mentioning Arbitron on the air.\nMarket share is not always a consideration, because not all radio stations are commercial. Public radio is funded by government and private donors. Since most public broadcasting operations do not have to make a profit, no commercials are necessary. (In fact, because most public broadcasting stations operate under noncommercial licenses from their country's broadcasting regulator, they may not be allowed to sell advertising at all.) Underwriting spots, which mention the name of a sponsor and some information but cannot include \"calls to action\" attempting to convince the listener to patronize the sponsor, may be allowed.\nAlso, satellite radio either charges subscribers or is operated by a public broadcasting service. Therefore, satellite radio rarely carries commercials or tries to raise money from donors. The lack of commercial interruptions in satellite radio is an important advantage. Often the only breaks in a satellite music station's programming are for station identification and DJ introductions.\nInternet radio stations exist that follow all of these plans.\nMuch early commercial radio was completely freeform; this changed drastically with the payola scandals of the 1950s. As a result, DJs seldom have complete programming freedom. Occasionally a special situation or highly respected, long established personality is given such freedom. Most programming is done by the program director. Program directors may work for the station or at a central location run by a corporate network. The DJ's function is generally reduced to introducing and playing songs. Many stations target younger listeners, because advertisers believe that advertising can change a younger person's product choice. Older people are thought to be less easy to change.\nMusic radio has several possible arrangements. Originally, it had blocks of sponsored airtime that played music from a live orchestra. In the 1930s, phonograph records, especially the single, let a disc jockey introduce individual songs, or introduce blocks of songs. Since then, the program has been arranged so that commercials are followed by the content that is most valuable to the audience.\nProgramming is different for non-traditional broadcasting. The Jack FM format eliminates DJs entirely, as do many internet radio stations. The music is simply played. If it is announced, it is by RDS (for FM broadcast) or ID3 tags (for Internet broadcast). Satellite radio usually uses DJs, but their programming blocks are longer and not distinguished much by the time of day. In addition, receivers usually display song titles, so announcing them is not needed.\nInternet and satellite broadcasting are not considered public media, so treaties and statutes concerning obscenity, transmission of ciphers and public order do not apply to those formats. So, satellite and internet radio are free to provide sexually explicit, coarse and political material. Typical providers include Playboy Radio, uncensored rap and hard rock stations, and \"outlaw\" country music stations.\nThe wide reach and selective, non-broadcast usage of the internet allows programmers access to special interest audiences. As a result, both mainstream and narrow-interest webcasts flourish; in particular, electronic music stations are much more common on the Internet than they are in satellite or broadcast media.\nRegional differences.\nOutside of English-speaking world, several radio formats built around local musical genres are popular. Examples include Portuguese Fado, Spanish-speaking Mexican Regional, Reggaeton and tejano, French Cajun (especially in French Louisiana), Russian Shanson, and (since the late 2000s) Korean K-pop.\nCost of programming.\nStations usually adopt a music format to gain the greatest number of listeners for the least expense. Since the content has already been produced, the station merely adds the low-cost on-air programming between records.\nMusic radio stations pay music-licensing fees to licensing agencies such as ASCAP and BMI in the United States or PRS in the UK. These fees or royalties are generally paid to the songwriters; the musicians themselves typically do not get a cut of radio royalties, even if they own a share of the performance rights, unless they wrote the song themselves. (Thus, a song that is in the public domain is free to play on the radio, regardless of who performs it or when it was performed.) For example, the industry-wide fees payable in 2004 to ASCAP was $176 million. Commercial stations often get their CDs free, but still pay royalties to play it on air. Some small neighborhood stations play unlisted locally produced music, and avoid these fees.\nLicensing issues nearly destroyed early Internet radio. In the U.S., Congress intervened with a royalty structure that was expensive to small independent operators, but easier than the RIAA's standard scale. Both XM and Sirius provide commercial packages allowing exclusive license-free use (though not rebroadcast) of their music programming by businesses. Most popular internet radio networks such as Pandora and Digitally Imported were paying royalty fees annually to SoundExchange.\nMusic radio and culture.\nMusic radio, particularly top 40, has often acted as both a barometer and an arbiter of musical taste, and radio airplay is one of the defining measures of success in the mainstream musical world. In fact, the rise of rock music to popularity is intimately tied to the history of music radio. Early forms of rock had languished in poor areas of the South. It was enjoyed mostly by rural blacks, with notable exposure in Memphis, Tennessee due to the all African American programming of WDIA. Rock music entered the mainstream during the 1950s because of controversial white DJs such as Dewey Phillips, Alan Freed, Dick Clark, and Wolfman Jack with an appreciation for black music. \nFor many years, many listeners have been dissatisfied with the content of radio programming since the decline of early free form-rock radio. The popularity of offshore pirate radio stations in the United Kingdom was an early symptom of frustration with the often overly safe and occasionally politicized playlists of commercial radio.\nThe growth of Internet radio from a small experimenter's toy in the mid-1990s to a huge phenomenon allowing both small do-it-yourselfers and large commercial stations to make their offerings available worldwide was seen as a threat to over-the-air music broadcasting, and was nearly shut down by onerous licensing demands made by the recording industry. Meanwhile, the rise of satellite radio services as a major competitor has brought many of the advantages of Internet radio to an increasingly mobile listening public, including lack of censorship, greater choice, a more eclectic approach to format programming, and static-free digital sound quality. Indeed, one-size-fits-all programming is no longer seen as tenable by some, as the diversity of musical tastes among the listening public has created a proliferation of radio formats in what some might call a form of narrowcasting.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20844", "revid": "50456177", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20844", "title": "Massively multiplayer online role-playing game", "text": "Video game genre\nA massively multiplayer online role-playing game (MMORPG) is a video game that combines aspects of a role-playing video game and a massively multiplayer online game.\nAs in role-playing games (RPGs), the player assumes the role of a character (often in a fantasy world or science-fiction world) and takes control over many of that character's actions. MMORPGs are distinguished from single-player or small multi-player online RPGs by the number of players able to interact together, and by the game's persistent world (usually hosted by the game's publisher), which continues to exist and evolve while the player is offline and away from the game.\nMMORPGs are played throughout the world. Global revenues for MMORPGs exceeded half a billion dollars in 2005, and the western world's revenues exceeded a billion dollars in 2006. In 2008, the spending on subscription MMORPGs by consumers in North America and Europe grew to $1.4 billion. \"World of Warcraft\", a popular MMORPG, had over 10 million subscribers as of November 2014. \"World of Warcraft\"'s total revenue was $1.04 billion US dollars in 2014. \"\", released in 2011, became the world's \"fastest-growing subscription MMO in history\" after gaining more than 1 million players within the first three days of its launch.\nCommon features.\nAlthough modern MMORPGs sometimes differ dramatically from their predecessors, many of them share the same basic characteristics. These include several common features:\nThemes.\nThe majority of popular MMORPGs are based on traditional fantasy themes, often occurring in an in-game universe comparable to that of \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\". Some employ hybrid themes that either merge or replace fantasy elements with those of science fiction, sword and sorcery, or crime fiction. Others draw thematic material from American comic books, the occult, and other genres. These elements are often developed using similar tasks and scenarios involving quests, monsters, and loot.\nProgression.\nIn nearly all MMORPGs, the development of the player's character is the primary goal. Nearly all MMORPGs feature a character progression system, in which players earn experience points for their actions and use those points to reach character \"levels\", which makes them better at whatever they do. Traditionally, combat with monsters and completing quests for non-player characters, either alone or in groups, are the primary ways to earn experience points. The accumulation of wealth (including combat-useful items) is also a way to progress in many MMORPGs. This is traditionally best accomplished via combat. The cycle produced by these conditions, combat leading to new items allowing for more combat with no change in gameplay, is sometimes pejoratively referred to as the level treadmill, or \"grinding\". The role-playing game \"Progress Quest\" was created as a parody of this trend. \"Eve Online\", a space-based MMORPG, uses an alternative method of progression where users train skills in real-time rather than using experience points as a measure of progression.\nIn some MMORPGs, there is no limit to a player's level, allowing the grinding experience to continue indefinitely. MMORPGs that use this model often glorify top ranked players by displaying their avatars on the game's website or posting their stats on a high score screen. Another common practice is to enforce a maximum reachable level for all players, often referred to as a level cap. Once reached, the definition of a player's progression changes. Instead of being awarded primarily with experience for completing quests and dungeons, the player's motivation to continue playing will be replaced with collecting money and equipment.\nOften, the widened range of equipment available at the maximum level will have increased aesthetic value to distinguish high ranking players in game between lower ranked players. Colloquially known as endgame gear, this set of empowered weapons and armor adds a competitive edge to both scripted boss encounters as well as player vs player combat. Player motivation to outperform others is fueled by acquiring such items and is a significant determining factor in their success or failure in combat-related situations.\nSocial interaction.\nMMORPGs almost always have tools to facilitate communication between players. Many MMORPGs offer support for in-game guilds or clans, though these will usually form whether the game supports them or not.\nIn addition, most MMOGs require some degree of teamwork in parts of the game. These tasks usually require players to take on roles in the group, such as protecting other players from damage (called tanking), \"healing\" damage done to other players or damaging enemies.\nMMORPGs generally have Game Moderators or Game Masters (frequently referred to as GMs or \"mods\"), who may be paid employees or unpaid volunteers who attempt to supervise the world. Some GMs may have additional access to features and information related to the game that are not available to other players and roles.\nRelationships formed in MMORPGs can often be just as intense as relationships formed between friends or partners met outside the game, and often involve elements of collaboration and trust between players.\nRoleplaying.\nMost MMORPGs provide different types of classes that players can choose. Among those classes, a small portion of players choose to roleplay their characters, and there are rules that provide functionality and content to those who do. Community resources such as forums and guides exist in support of this play style.\nFor example, if a player wants to play a priest role in his MMORPG world, that player might buy a cope from a shop and learn priestly skills, proceeding to speak, act, and interact with others as their character would. This may or may not include pursuing other goals such as wealth or experience. Guilds or similar groups with a focus on roleplaying may develop extended in-depth narratives using the setting and resources similar to those in the game world.\nCulture.\nOver time, the MMORPG community has developed a sub-culture with its own slang and metaphors, as well as an unwritten list of social rules and taboos. Players will often complain about 'grind' (a slang term for any repetitive, time-consuming activity in an MMORPG), or talk about 'buffs' and 'nerfs' (respectively an upgrade or downgrade of a particular game mechanic).\nAs with all such cultures, social rules exist for such things as invitations to join an adventuring party, the proper division of treasure, and how a player is expected to behave while grouped with other players.\nInfrastructure and Monetization.\nSystem architecture.\nMost MMORPGs are deployed using a client\u2013server system architecture. The server software generates a persistent instance of the virtual world that runs continuously, and players connect to it via a client software. The client software may provide access to the entire playing world, or further 'expansions' may be required to be purchased to allow access to certain areas of the game. \"EverQuest\" and \"Guild Wars\" are two examples of games that use such a format. Players generally must purchase the client software for a one-time fee, although an increasing trend is for MMORPGs to work using pre-existing \"thin\" clients, such as a web browser.\nDepending on the number of players and the system architecture, an MMORPG might be run on multiple separate servers, each representing an independent world, where players from one server cannot interact with those from another; \"World of Warcraft\" is a prominent example, with each separate server housing several thousand players. In many MMORPGs the number of players in one world is often limited to around a few thousand, but a notable example of the opposite is \"EVE Online\", which accommodates several hundred thousand players on the same server, with over 60,000 playing simultaneously (June 2010) at certain times. Some games allow characters to appear on any world, but not simultaneously (such as \"Seal Online: Evolution\" or Kolossium competition in \"Dofus\"); others limit each character to the world in which it was created. \"World of Warcraft\" has experimented with \"cross-realm\" (i.e. cross-server) interaction in player vs player \"battlegrounds\", using server clusters or \"battlegroups\" to co-ordinate players looking to participate in structured player vs player content such as the Warsong Gulch or Alterac Valley battlegrounds. Additionally, patch 3.3, released on December 8, 2009, introduced a cross-realm \"looking for group\" system to help players form groups for instanced content (though not for open-world questing) from a larger pool of characters than their home server can necessarily provide.\nBusiness models.\nMMORPGs today use a wide range of business models, from free of charge, free with microtransactions, advertise funded, to various kinds of payment plans. Some MMORPGs require payment or a monthly subscription to play. By definition, \"massively multiplayer\" games are always online, and most require some sort of continuous revenue (such as monthly subscriptions and advertisements) for maintenance and development purposes. Some games, such as \"Guild Wars\", have disposed of the 'monthly fee' model entirely, and recover costs directly through sales of the software and associated expansion packs. Still others adopt a micropayment model where the core content is free, but players are given the option to purchase additional content, such as equipment, aesthetic items, or pets. Games that make use of this model often have originated in Korea, such as \"Flyff\" and \"MapleStory\". This business model is alternately called \"pay for perks\" or \"freemium\", and games using it often describe themselves with the term \"free-to-play\".\nHistory.\nMMORPG is a term coined by Richard Garriott to refer to massive multiplayer online role-playing games and their social communities. Previous to this and related coinages, these games were generally called graphical MUDs; the history of MMORPGs traces back directly through the MUD genre. Through this connection, MMORPGs can be seen to have roots in the earliest multi-user games such as \"Mazewar\" (1974) and \"MUD1\" (1978). 1985 saw the release of a roguelike (pseudo-graphical) MUD called \"Island of Kesmai\" on CompuServe and Lucasfilm's graphical MUD Habitat. The first fully graphical multi-user RPG was \"Neverwinter Nights\", which was delivered through America Online in 1991 and was personally championed by AOL President Steve Case. Other early proprietary graphical online RPGs include three on The Sierra Network: \"The Shadow of Yserbius\" in 1992, \"The Fates of Twinion\" in 1993, and \"The Ruins of Cawdor\" in 1995. Another milestone came in 1995 as NSFNET restrictions were lifted, opening the Internet up for game developers, which allowed for the first truly \"massively\"-scoped titles. Finally, MMORPGs as defined today began with \"Meridian 59\" in 1996, innovative both in its scope and in offering first-person 3D graphics, with \"The Realm Online\" appearing nearly simultaneously. \"Ultima Online\", released in 1997, is often credited with first popularizing the genre, though more mainstream attention was garnered by 1999's \"EverQuest\" and \"Asheron's Call\" in the West and 1996's \"\" in South Korea.\nThe financial success of these early titles has ensured competition in the genre since that time. MMORPG titles now exist on consoles and in new settings. In 2008, the market for MMORPGs had Blizzard Entertainment's \"World of Warcraft\" dominating as the largest MMORPG, alongside other titles such as \"Final Fantasy XIV\" and \"Guild Wars 2\", though an additional market exists for free-to-play MMORPGs, which are supported by advertising and purchases of in-game items. This free-to-play model is particularly common in South Korea such as \"MapleStory\", \"\", \"Atlantica Online\" and \"Lost Ark\". Also, there are some free-to-play games, such as \"RuneScape\" and \"Tibia\", where the game is free, but one would have to pay monthly to play the game with more features. \"Guild Wars\" and its sequel avoid some degree of competition with other MMORPGs by only requiring the initial purchase of the game to play.\nDevelopment.\nThe cost of developing a competitive commercial MMORPG title often exceeded $10 million in 2003. These projects require multiple disciplines within game design and development such as 3D modeling, 2D art, animation, user interfaces, client/server engineering, database architecture, and network infrastructure.\nThe front-end (or client) component of a commercial, modern MMORPG features 3D graphics. As with other modern 3D games, the front-end requires expertise with implementing 3D engines, real-time shader techniques and physics simulation. The actual visual content (areas, creatures, characters, weapons, spaceships and so forth) is developed by artists who typically begin with two-dimensional concept art, and later convert these concepts into animated 3D scenes, models and texture maps.\nDeveloping an MMOG server requires expertise with client/server architecture, network protocols, security, and database design. MMORPGs include reliable systems for a number of vital tasks. The server must be able to handle and verify a large number of connections, prevent cheating, and apply changes (bug fixes or added content) to the game. A system for recording the games data at regular intervals, without stopping the game, is also important.\nMaintenance requires sufficient servers and bandwidth, and a dedicated support staff. Insufficient resources for maintenance lead to lag and frustration for the players, and can severely damage the reputation of a game, especially at launch. Care must also be taken to ensure that player population remains at an acceptable level by adding or removing servers. Peer-to-peer MMORPGs could theoretically work cheaply and efficiently in regulating server load, but practical issues such as asymmetrical network bandwidth, CPU-hungry rendering engines, unreliability of individual nodes, and inherent lack of security (opening fertile new grounds for cheating) can make them a difficult proposition. The hosted infrastructure for a commercial-grade MMORPG requires the deployment of hundreds (or even thousands) of servers. Developing an affordable infrastructure for an online game requires developers to scale large numbers of players with less hardware and network investment.\nIn addition, the development team will need to have expertise with the fundamentals of game design: world-building, lore and game mechanics, as well as what makes games fun.\nNon-corporate development.\nThough the vast majority of MMORPGs are produced by companies, many small teams of programmers and artists have contributed to the genre. As shown above, the average MMORPG development project requires enormous investments of time and money, and running the game can be a long-term commitment. As a result, non-corporate (or independent, or \"indie\") development of MMORPGs is less common compared to other genres. Still, many independent MMORPGs do exist, representing a wide spectrum of genres, gameplay types, and revenue systems.\nSome independent MMORPG projects are completely open source, while others feature proprietary content made with an open-source game engine. The WorldForge project has been active since 1998 and formed a community of independent developers who are working on creating framework for a number of open-source MMORPGs. The Multiverse Foundation has also created a platform specifically for independent MMOG developers.\nTrends.\nAs there are a number of wildly different titles within the genre, and since the genre develops so rapidly, it is difficult to definitively state that the genre is heading in one direction or another. Still, there are a few obvious developments. One of these developments is the raid group quest, or \"raid\", which is an adventure designed for large groups of players (often twenty or more).\nInstance dungeons.\nInstance dungeons, sometimes shortened to \"instances\", are game areas that are \"copied\" for individual players or groups, which keeps those in the instance separated from the rest of the game world. This reduces competition, and also reducing the amount of data that needs to be sent to and from the server, reducing lag. \"The Realm Online\" was the first MMORPG to begin to use a rudimentary form of this technique and \"Anarchy Online\" would develop it further, using instances as a key element of gameplay. Since then, instancing has become increasingly common. The \"raids\", as mentioned above, often involve instance dungeons. Examples of games which feature instances are \"World of Warcraft\", \"The Lord of the Rings Online\", \"EverQuest\", \"EverQuest II\", \"\", \"Final Fantasy XIV\", \"Guild Wars\", \"Rift\", \"RuneScape\", \"Star Trek Online, ,\" and \"DC Universe Online\".\nPlayer-created content.\nIncreased amounts of \"player-created content\" is another trend.\nUse of licenses.\nThe use of intellectual property licensing common in other video game genres has also appeared in MMORPGs. 2007 saw the release of \"The Lord of the Rings Online\", based on J. R. R. Tolkien's Middle-earth. Other licensed MMORPGs include \"The Matrix Online\", based on the \"Matrix\" trilogy of films, ', based on Games Workshop's table top game, \"Star Wars Galaxies\", ', \"Champions Online\" and \"Age of Conan\".\nAdditionally, several licenses from television have been optioned for MMORPGs, for example \"Star Trek Online\" and \"Stargate Worlds\" (which was later canceled).\nConsole-based MMORPGs.\nThe first console-based MMORPG was \"Phantasy Star Online\" for the Dreamcast. The first console-based open-world MMORPG was \"Final Fantasy XI\" for the PlayStation 2.\n\"EverQuest Online Adventures\", also on the PlayStation 2, was the first console MMORPG in North America.\nAlthough console-based MMORPGs are considered more difficult to produce, the platform is gaining more attention.\nBrowser-based MMORPGs.\nWith the popularization of Facebook and microtransactions came a wave of Flash and HTML5 based MMORPGs that use the free to play model. They require no download outside of a browser and usually have heavily integrated social media sharing features.\nSmartphone-based MMORPGs.\nSmartphones with their GPS capabilities (amongst others) enable augmented reality in games such as \"Ingress\" and \"Pok\u00e9mon Go\". The games are enhanced by location and distance based tracking, bench marking goals or facilitating trade between players.\nIn society and culture.\nPsychological effects.\nSince the interactions between MMORPG players are real, even if the environments are virtual, psychologists and sociologists are able to use MMORPGs as tools for academic research. Sherry Turkle has found that many people have expanded their emotional range by exploring the many different roles (including gender identities) that MMORPGs allow a person to explore.\nNick Yee has surveyed more than 35,000 MMORPG players over the past several years, focusing on psychological and sociological aspects of these games. Recent findings included that 15% of players become a guild-leader at one time or another, but most generally find the job tough and thankless; and that players spend a considerable amount of time (often a third of their total time investment) doing things that are external to gameplay but part of the metagame.\nMany players report that the emotions they feel while playing an MMORPG are very strong, to the extent that 8.7% of male and 23.2% of female players in a statistical study have had an online wedding. Other researchers have found that the enjoyment of a game is directly related to the social organization of a game, ranging from brief encounters between players to highly organized play in structured groups.\nIn a 2008 study by Zaheer Hussain and Mark D. Griffiths, it was found that just over one in five gamers (21%) said they preferred socializing online to offline. Significantly more male gamers than female gamers said that they found it easier to converse online than offline. It was also found that 57% of gamers had created a character of the opposite gender, and it is suggested that the online female persona has a number of positive social attributes.\nA German fMRT-study conducted by researchers of the Central Institute of Mental Health points towards impairments in social, emotional and physical aspects of the self-concept and a higher degree in avatar identification in addicted MMORPG players, compared to non-addicted and naive (nonexperienced) people. These findings generally support Davis' cognitive behavioral model of Internet addiction, which postulates that dysfunctional self-related cognitions represent central factors contributing towards the development and maintenance of MMORPG addiction. The high degree of avatar identification found by Lem\u00e9nager et al. in the addicted group of this study indicates that MMORPG playing may represent an attempt to compensate for impairments in self-concept. Psychotherapeutic interventions should therefore focus on the development of coping strategies for real-life situations in which addicted players tend to experience themselves as incompetent and inferior.\nRichard Bartle, author of \"Designing Virtual Worlds\", classified multiplayer RPG-players into four primary psychological groups. His classifications were then expanded upon by Erwin Andreasen, who developed the concept into the thirty-question Bartle Test that helps players determine which category they are associated with. With over 650,000 test responses as of 2011, this is perhaps the largest ongoing survey of multiplayer game players. Based on Bartle and Yee's research, Jon Radoff has published an updated model of player motivation that focuses on immersion, competition, cooperation and achievement. These elements may be found not only in MMORPGs, but many other types of games and within the emerging field of gamification.\nThere have been numerous discussions and evaluations by various scholarly institutions regarding the long-term effects of video game overuse. Many news agencies have criticized video games as promoting violent tendencies in its player base and encouraging anti-social behaviors. Ultimately this culminated in the World Health Organization classifying the overuse of video games as \"Technological Addiction\" in May 2019.\nDisease research.\nIn \"World of Warcraft\", a temporary design glitch attracted the attention of psychologists and epidemiologists across North America, when the \"Corrupted Blood\" disease of a monster began to spread unintentionally\u2014and uncontrollably\u2014into the wider game world. The Centers for Disease Control intended to use the incident as a research model to chart both the progression of a disease, and the potential human response to large-scale epidemic infection. However, due to Blizzard Entertainment's failure to keep statistical records of the event, the 2005 Corrupted Blood Outbreak ultimately failed to produce any results. Nevertheless, the CDC has continued to express interest in the use of MMORPGs for disease research.\nEducation.\nIt has been suggested by Springer University in Germany that MMORPGs encourage and provide opportunities to study and improve in economic theory by providing a controlled environment for the natural development of economic practices between players of including professions, trade, and services.\nResearch has shown that for the positive learner, game-based interaction could reduce inhibition as well as enhance the enjoyment and motivation of second language learning, but appears to be more suitable for learners of intermediate and higher levels of proficiency than language beginners.\nTherapeutic applications.\nThe Division of Autism and developmental disabilities published a significant report detailing the value of MMORPGs for the treatment of individuals with autism spectrum disorder. The report suggests that individuals with autism spectrum disorder could benefit from MMORPGs by being provided a space to freely develop social skills and communication skills without the stress of face-to-face contact. This in turn opens new pathways for social therapy for individuals with developmental disabilities.\nEconomics.\nMany MMORPGs feature living economies. Virtual items and currency have to be gained through play and have definite value for players. Such a virtual economy can be analyzed (using data logged by the game) and has value in economic research. More significantly, these \"virtual\" economies can affect the economies of the real world.\nOne of the early researchers of MMORPGs was Edward Castronova, who demonstrated that a supply-and-demand market exists for virtual items and that it crosses over with the real world. This crossover has some requirements of the game:\nThe idea of attaching real-world value to \"virtual\" items has had a profound effect on players and the game industry, and even the courts. The virtual currency selling pioneer IGE received a lawsuit from a \"World of Warcraft\" player for interfering in the economics and intended use of the game by selling WoW gold. Castronova's first study in 2002 found that a highly liquid (if illegal) currency market existed, with the value of \"Everquest\"'s in-game currency exceeding that of the Japanese yen. Some people even make a living by working these virtual economies; these people are often referred to as gold farmers, and may be employed in game sweatshops.\nGame publishers usually prohibit the exchange of real-world money for virtual goods, but others actively promote the idea of linking (and directly profiting from) an exchange. In \"Second Life\" and \"Entropia Universe\", the virtual economy and the real-world economy are directly linked. This means that real money can be deposited for game money and vice versa. Real-world items have also been sold for game money in \"Entropia\", and some players of \"Second Life\" have generated revenues in excess of $100,000.\nSome of the issues confronting online economies include:\nLinking real-world and virtual economies was rare in MMORPGs as of 2008, as it is generally believed to be detrimental to gameplay. If real-world wealth can be used to obtain greater, more immediate rewards than skillful gameplay, the incentive for strategic roleplay and real game involvement is diminished. It could also easily lead to a skewed hierarchy where richer players gain better items, allowing them to take on stronger opponents and level up more quickly than less wealthy but more committed players.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20845", "revid": "140154", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20845", "title": "Multiplication", "text": "Arithmetical operation\nMultiplication is one of the four elementary mathematical operations of arithmetic, with the other ones being addition, subtraction, and division. The result of a multiplication operation is called a \"product\". Multiplication is often denoted by the cross symbol, \u00d7, by the mid-line dot operator, \u22c5, by juxtaposition, or, in programming languages, by an asterisk, *.\nThe multiplication of whole numbers may be thought of as repeated addition; that is, the multiplication of two numbers is equivalent to adding as many copies of one of them, the multiplicand, as the quantity of the other one, the multiplier; both numbers can be referred to as factors. This is to be distinguished from \"terms\", which are added.\nformula_1\nWhether the first factor is the multiplier or the multiplicand may be ambiguous or depend upon context. For example, the expression formula_2 can be phrased as \"3 times 4\" and evaluated as formula_3, where 3 is the multiplier, but also as \"3 multiplied by 4\", in which case 3 becomes the multiplicand. One of the main properties of multiplication is the commutative property, which states in this case that adding 3 copies of 4 gives the same result as adding 4 copies of 3. Thus, the designation of multiplier and multiplicand does not affect the result of the multiplication.\n\\\\[1ex]\\scriptstyle\\frac{\\scriptstyle\\text{numerator}}{\\scriptstyle\\text{denominator}}\\end{matrix}\\right\\}\\,=\\,&lt;/math&gt;\nSystematic generalizations of this basic definition define the multiplication of integers (including negative numbers), rational numbers (fractions), and real numbers.\nMultiplication can also be visualized as counting objects arranged in a rectangle (for whole numbers) or as finding the area of a rectangle whose sides have some given lengths. The area of a rectangle does not depend on which side is measured first\u2014a consequence of the commutative property.\nThe product of two measurements (or physical quantities) is a new type of measurement (or new quantity), usually with a derived unit of measurement. For example, multiplying the lengths (in meters or feet) of the two sides of a rectangle gives its area (in square meters or square feet). Such a product is the subject of dimensional analysis.\nThe inverse operation of multiplication is \"division\". For example, since 4 multiplied by 3 equals 12, 12 divided by 3 equals 4. Indeed, multiplication by 3, followed by division by 3, yields the original number. The division of a number other than 0 by itself equals 1.\nSeveral mathematical concepts expand upon the fundamental idea of multiplication. The product of a sequence, vector multiplication, complex numbers, and matrices are all examples where this can be seen. These more advanced constructs tend to affect the basic properties in their own ways, such as becoming noncommutative in matrices and some forms of vector multiplication or changing the sign of complex numbers.\nNotation.\nIn arithmetic, multiplication is often written using the multiplication sign (either \u00d7 or formula_11) between the factors (that is, in infix notation). For example,\nformula_12 (\"two times three equals six\")\nformula_13\nformula_14\nformula_15\nThere are other mathematical notations for multiplication:\nIn computer programming, the asterisk (as in codice_1) is still the most common notation. This is because most computers historically were limited to small character sets (such as ASCII and EBCDIC) that lacked a multiplication sign (such as codice_2 or codice_3), while the asterisk appeared on every keyboard. This usage originated in the FORTRAN programming language.\nThe numbers to be multiplied are generally called the \"factors\" (as in factorization). The number to be multiplied is the \"multiplicand\", and the number by which it is multiplied is the \"multiplier\". Usually, the multiplier is placed first, and the multiplicand is placed second; however, sometimes the first factor is considered the multiplicand and the second the multiplier.\nAlso, as the result of multiplication does not depend on the order of the factors, the distinction between \"multiplicand\" and \"multiplier\" is useful only at a very elementary level and in some multiplication algorithms, such as the long multiplication. Therefore, in some sources, the term \"multiplicand\" is regarded as a synonym for \"factor\".\nIn algebra, a number that is the multiplier of a variable or expression (e.g., the 3 in formula_25) is called a coefficient.\nThe result of a multiplication is called a product. When one factor is an integer, the product is a \"multiple\" of the other or of the product of the others. Thus, formula_26 is a multiple of formula_27, as is formula_28. A product of integers is a multiple of each factor; for example, 15 is the product of 3 and 5 and is both a multiple of 3 and a multiple of 5.\nDefinitions.\nThe product of two numbers or the multiplication between two numbers can be defined for common special cases: natural numbers, integers, rational numbers, real numbers, complex numbers, and quaternions.\nProduct of two natural numbers.\nThe product of two natural numbers formula_29 is defined as:\nformula_30\nProduct of two integers.\nAn integer can be either zero, a nonzero natural number, or minus a nonzero natural number. The product of zero and another integer is always zero. The product of two nonzero integers is determined by the product of their positive amounts, combined with the sign derived from the following rule:\nIn words:\nProduct of two fractions.\nTwo fractions can be multiplied by multiplying their numerators and denominators:\nformula_31\nwhich is defined when formula_32.\nProduct of two real numbers.\nThere are several equivalent ways to define formally the real numbers; see Construction of the real numbers. The definition of multiplication is a part of all these definitions. \nA fundamental aspect of these definitions is that every real number can be approximated to any accuracy by rational numbers. A standard way for expressing this is that every real number is the least upper bound of a set of rational numbers. In particular, every positive real number is the least upper bound of the truncations of its infinite decimal representation; for example, formula_27 is the least upper bound of formula_34\nA fundamental property of real numbers is that rational approximations are compatible with arithmetic operations, and, in particular, with multiplication. This means that, if a and b are positive real numbers such that formula_35 and formula_36 then formula_37 In particular, the product of two positive real numbers is the least upper bound of the term-by-term products of the sequences of their decimal representations.\nAs changing the signs transforms least upper bounds into greatest lower bounds, the simplest way to deal with a multiplication involving one or two negative numbers, is to use the rule of signs described above in . The construction of the real numbers through Cauchy sequences is often preferred in order to avoid consideration of the four possible sign configurations.\nProduct of two complex numbers.\nTwo complex numbers can be multiplied by the distributive law and the fact that formula_38, as follows:\nformula_39\nThe geometric meaning of complex multiplication can be understood by rewriting complex numbers in polar coordinates:\nformula_40\nFurthermore,\nformula_41\nfrom which one obtains\nformula_42\nThe geometric meaning is that the magnitudes are multiplied and the arguments are added.\nProduct of two quaternions.\nThe product of two quaternions can be found in the article on quaternions. Note, in this case, that formula_43 and formula_44 are in general different.\nComputation.\nMany common methods for multiplying numbers using pencil and paper require a multiplication table of memorized or consulted products of small numbers (typically any two numbers from 0 to 9). However, one method, the peasant multiplication algorithm, does not. The example below illustrates \"long multiplication\" (the \"standard algorithm\", \"grade-school multiplication\"):\n 23958233\n \u00d7 5830\n 00000000 ( = 23,958,233 \u00d7 0)\n 71874699 ( = 23,958,233 \u00d7 30)\n 191665864 ( = 23,958,233 \u00d7 800)\n + 119791165 ( = 23,958,233 \u00d7 5,000)\n 139676498390 ( = 139,676,498,390 )\nIn some countries such as Germany, the multiplication above is depicted similarly but with the original problem written on a single line and computation starting with the first digit of the multiplier:\n 23958233 \u00b7 5830\n 119791165\n 191665864\n 71874699\n 00000000 \n 139676498390\nMultiplying numbers to more than a couple of decimal places by hand is tedious and error-prone. Common logarithms were invented to simplify such calculations, since adding logarithms is equivalent to multiplying. The slide rule allowed numbers to be quickly multiplied to about three places of accuracy. Beginning in the early 20th century, mechanical calculators, such as the Marchant, automated multiplication of up to 10-digit numbers. Modern electronic computers and calculators have greatly reduced the need for multiplication by hand.\nHistorical algorithms.\nMethods of multiplication were documented in the writings of ancient Egyptian, and Chinese civilizations.\nThe Ishango bone, dated to about 18,000 to 20,000\u00a0BC, may hint at a knowledge of multiplication in the Upper Paleolithic era in Central Africa, but this is speculative.\nEgyptians.\nThe Egyptian method of multiplication of integers and fractions, which is documented in the Rhind Mathematical Papyrus, was by successive additions and doubling. For instance, to find the product of 13 and 21 one had to double 21 three times, obtaining 2 \u00d7 21 = 42, 4 \u00d7 21 = 2 \u00d7 42 = 84, 8 \u00d7 21 = 2 \u00d7 84 = 168. The full product could then be found by adding the appropriate terms found in the doubling sequence:\n13 \u00d7 21 = (1 + 4 + 8) \u00d7 21 = (1 \u00d7 21) + (4 \u00d7 21) + (8 \u00d7 21) = 21 + 84 + 168 = 273.\nBabylonians.\nThe Babylonians used a sexagesimal positional number system, analogous to the modern-day decimal system. Thus, Babylonian multiplication was very similar to modern decimal multiplication. Because of the relative difficulty of remembering 60 \u00d7 60 different products, Babylonian mathematicians employed multiplication tables. These tables consisted of a list of the first twenty multiples of a certain \"principal number\" \"n\": \"n\", 2\"n\", ..., 20\"n\"; followed by the multiples of 10\"n\": 30\"n\" 40\"n\", and 50\"n\". Then to compute any sexagesimal product, say 53\"n\", one only needed to add 50\"n\" and 3\"n\" computed from the table.\nChinese.\nIn the mathematical text \"Zhoubi Suanjing\", dated prior to 300\u00a0BC, and the \"Nine Chapters on the Mathematical Art\", multiplication calculations were written out in words, although the early Chinese mathematicians employed Rod calculus involving place value addition, subtraction, multiplication, and division. The Chinese were already using a decimal multiplication table by the end of the Warring States period.\nModern methods.\nThe modern method of multiplication based on the Hindu\u2013Arabic numeral system was first described by Brahmagupta. Brahmagupta gave rules for addition, subtraction, multiplication, and division. Henry Burchard Fine, then a professor of mathematics at Princeton University, wrote the following:\n\"The Indians are the inventors not only of the positional decimal system itself, but of most of the processes involved in elementary reckoning with the system. Addition and subtraction they performed quite as they are performed nowadays; multiplication they effected in many ways, ours among them, but division they did cumbrously.\"\nThese place value decimal arithmetic algorithms were introduced to Arab countries by Al Khwarizmi in the early 9th\u00a0century and popularized in the Western world by Fibonacci in the 13th century.\nGrid method.\nGrid method multiplication, or the box method, is used in primary schools in England and Wales and in some areas of the United States to help teach an understanding of how multiple digit multiplication works. An example of multiplying 34 by 13 would be to lay the numbers out in a grid as follows:\nand then add the entries.\nComputer algorithms.\nThe classical method of multiplying two \"n\"-digit numbers requires \"n\"2 digit multiplications. Multiplication algorithms have been designed that reduce the computation time considerably when multiplying large numbers. Methods based on the discrete Fourier transform reduce the computational complexity to \"O\"(\"n\" log \"n\" log log \"n\"). In 2016, the factor log log \"n\" was replaced by a function that increases much slower, though still not constant. In March 2019, David Harvey and Joris van der Hoeven submitted a paper presenting an integer multiplication algorithm with a complexity of formula_45 The algorithm, also based on the fast Fourier transform, is conjectured to be asymptotically optimal. The algorithm is not practically useful, as it only becomes faster for multiplying extremely large numbers (having more than 2172912 bits).\nProducts of measurements.\nOne can only meaningfully add or subtract quantities of the same type, but quantities of different types can be multiplied or divided without problems. For example, four bags with three marbles each can be thought of as:\n[4 bags] \u00d7 [3 marbles per bag] = 12 marbles.\nWhen two measurements are multiplied together, the product is of a type depending on the types of measurements. The general theory is given by dimensional analysis. This analysis is routinely applied in physics, but it also has applications in finance and other applied fields.\nA common example in physics is the fact that multiplying speed by time gives distance. For example:\n50 kilometers per hour \u00d7 3 hours = 150 kilometers.\nIn this case, the hour units cancel out, leaving the product with only kilometer units.\nOther examples of multiplication involving units include:\n2.5 meters \u00d7 4.5 meters = 11.25 square meters\n11 meters/seconds \u00d7 9 seconds = 99 meters\n4.5 residents per house \u00d7 20 houses = 90 residents\nProduct of a sequence.\nCapital pi notation.\nThe product of a sequence of factors can be written with the product symbol formula_46, which derives from the capital letter \u03a0 (pi) in the Greek alphabet (much like the same way the summation symbol formula_47 is derived from the Greek letter \u03a3 (sigma)). The meaning of this notation is given by\nformula_48\nwhich results in\nformula_49\nIn such a notation, the variable i represents a varying integer, called the multiplication index, that runs from the lower value 1 indicated in the subscript to the upper value 4 given by the superscript. The product is obtained by multiplying together all factors obtained by substituting the multiplication index for an integer between the lower and the upper values (the bounds included) in the expression that follows the product operator.\nMore generally, the notation is defined as\nformula_50\nwhere \"m\" and \"n\" are integers or expressions that evaluate to integers. In the case where \"m\" = \"n\", the value of the product is the same as that of the single factor \"x\"\"m\"; if \"m\" &gt; \"n\", the product is an empty product whose value is\u00a01\u2014regardless of the expression for the factors.\nProperties of capital pi notation.\nBy definition, \nformula_51\nIf all factors are identical, a product of n factors is equivalent to exponentiation:\nformula_52\nAssociativity and commutativity of multiplication imply\nformula_53 and\nformula_54\nif a is a non-negative integer, or if all formula_55 are positive real numbers, and\nformula_56\nif all formula_57 are non-negative integers, or if x is a positive real number.\nInfinite products.\nOne may also consider products of infinitely many factors; these are called \"infinite products\". Notationally, this consists in replacing \"n\" above by the infinity symbol \u221e. The product of such an infinite sequence is defined as the limit of the product of the first \"n\" factors, as \"n\" grows without bound. That is,\nformula_58\nOne can similarly replace \"m\" with negative infinity, and define:\nformula_59\nprovided both limits exist.\nExponentiation.\nWhen multiplication is repeated, the resulting operation is known as \"exponentiation\". For instance, the product of three factors of two (2\u00d72\u00d72) is \"two raised to the third power\", and is denoted by 23, a two with a superscript three. In this example, the number two is the \"base\", and three is the \"exponent\". In general, the exponent (or superscript) indicates how many times the base appears in the expression, so that the expression\nformula_60\nindicates that \"n\" copies of the base \"a\" are to be multiplied together. This notation can be used whenever multiplication is known to be power associative.\nProperties.\nFor real and complex numbers, which includes, for example, natural numbers, integers, and fractions, multiplication has certain properties:\nThe order in which two numbers are multiplied does not matter:\nformula_61\nExpressions solely involving multiplication or addition are invariant with respect to the order of operations:\nformula_62\nHolds with respect to multiplication over addition. This identity is of prime importance in simplifying algebraic expressions:\nformula_63\nThe multiplicative identity is 1; anything multiplied by 1 is itself. This feature of 1 is known as the identity property:\nformula_64\nAny number multiplied by 0 is 0. This is known as the zero property of multiplication:\nformula_65\n\u22121 times any number is equal to the additive inverse of that number:\nformula_66, where formula_67\n\u22121 times \u22121 is 1:\nformula_68\nEvery number \"x\", except 0, has a multiplicative inverse, formula_69, such that formula_70.\nMultiplication by a positive number preserves the order:\nFor \"a\" &gt; 0, if \"b\" &gt; \"c\", then \"ab\" &gt; \"ac\".\nMultiplication by a negative number reverses the order:\nFor \"a\" &lt; 0, if \"b\" &gt; \"c\", then \"ab\" &lt; \"ac\".\nThe complex numbers do not have an ordering that is compatible with both addition and multiplication.\nOther mathematical systems that include a multiplication operation may not have all these properties. For example, multiplication is not, in general, commutative for matrices and quaternions. Hurwitz's theorem shows that for the hypercomplex numbers of dimension 8 or greater, including the octonions, sedenions, and trigintaduonions, multiplication is generally not associative.\nAxioms.\nIn the book \"Arithmetices principia, nova methodo exposita\", Giuseppe Peano proposed axioms for arithmetic based on his axioms for natural numbers. Peano arithmetic has two axioms for multiplication:\nformula_71\nformula_72\nHere \"S\"(\"y\") represents the successor of \"y\"; i.e., the natural number that follows \"y\". The various properties like associativity can be proved from these and the other axioms of Peano arithmetic, including induction. For instance, \"S\"(0), denoted by 1, is a multiplicative identity because\nformula_73\nThe axioms for integers typically define them as equivalence classes of ordered pairs of natural numbers. The model is based on treating (\"x\",\"y\") as equivalent to \"x\" \u2212 \"y\" when \"x\" and \"y\" are treated as integers. Thus both (0,1) and (1,2) are equivalent to \u22121. The multiplication axiom for integers defined this way is\nformula_74\nThe rule that \u22121 \u00d7 \u22121 = 1 can then be deduced from\nformula_75\nMultiplication is extended in a similar way to rational numbers and then to real numbers.\nMultiplication with set theory.\nThe product of non-negative integers can be defined with set theory using cardinal numbers or the Peano axioms. See below how to extend this to multiplying arbitrary integers, and then arbitrary rational numbers. The product of real numbers is defined in terms of products of rational numbers; see construction of the real numbers.\nMultiplication in group theory.\nThere are many sets that, under the operation of multiplication, satisfy the axioms that define group structure. These axioms are closure, associativity, and the inclusion of an identity element and inverses.\nA simple example is the set of non-zero rational numbers. Here identity 1 is had, as opposed to groups under addition where the identity is typically 0. Note that with the rationals, zero must be excluded because, under multiplication, it does not have an inverse: there is no rational number that can be multiplied by zero to result in 1. In this example, an abelian group is had, but that is not always the case.\nTo see this, consider the set of invertible square matrices of a given dimension over a given field. Here, it is straightforward to verify closure, associativity, and inclusion of identity (the identity matrix) and inverses. However, matrix multiplication is not commutative, which shows that this group is non-abelian.\nAnother fact worth noticing is that the integers under multiplication do not form a group\u2014even if zero is excluded. This is easily seen by the nonexistence of an inverse for all elements other than 1 and\u00a0\u22121.\nMultiplication in group theory is typically notated either by a dot or by juxtaposition (the omission of an operation symbol between elements). So multiplying element a by element b could be notated as a formula_76 b or ab. When referring to a group via the indication of the set and operation, the dot is used. For example, our first example could be indicated by formula_77.\nMultiplication of different kinds of numbers.\nNumbers can \"count\" (3\u00a0apples), \"order\" (the 3rd\u00a0apple), or \"measure\" (3.5\u00a0feet high); as the history of mathematics has progressed from counting on our fingers to modelling quantum mechanics, multiplication has been generalized to more complicated and abstract types of numbers, and to things that are not numbers (such as matrices) or do not look much like numbers (such as quaternions).\n formula_78 is the sum of \"N\" copies of \"M\" when \"N\" and \"M\" are positive whole numbers. This gives the number of things in an array \"N\" wide and \"M\" high. Generalization to negative numbers can be done by\n formula_79 and\n formula_80\n The same sign rules apply to rational and real numbers.\n Generalization to fractions formula_81 is by multiplying the numerators and denominators, respectively: formula_82. This gives the area of a rectangle formula_83 high and formula_84 wide, and is the same as the number of things in an array when the rational numbers happen to be whole numbers.\n Real numbers and their products can be defined in terms of sequences of rational numbers.\n Considering complex numbers formula_85 and formula_86 as ordered pairs of real numbers formula_87 and formula_88, the product formula_89 is formula_90. This is the same as for reals formula_91 when the \"imaginary parts\" formula_92 and formula_93 are zero.\n Equivalently, denoting formula_94 as formula_95, formula_96\n Alternatively, in trigonometric form, if formula_97, thenformula_98\n See Multiplication in group theory, above, and multiplicative group, which for example includes matrix multiplication. A very general, and abstract, concept of multiplication is as the \"multiplicatively denoted\" (second) binary operation in a ring. An example of a ring that is not any of the number systems above is a polynomial ring (polynomials can be added and multiplied, but polynomials are not numbers in any usual sense).\n Often division, formula_99, is the same as multiplication by an inverse, formula_100. Multiplication for some types of \"numbers\" may have corresponding division, without inverses; in an integral domain \"x\" may have no inverse \"formula_69\" but formula_99 may be defined. In a division ring there are inverses, but formula_99 may be ambiguous in non-commutative rings since formula_100 need not be the same as formula_105.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20852", "revid": "111703", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20852", "title": "MIPS Computer Systems, Inc.", "text": ""}
{"id": "20853", "revid": "39253661", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20853", "title": "Malt", "text": "Germinated cereal grains that have been dried\nMalt is any cereal grain that has been made to germinate by soaking in water and then stopped from germinating further by drying with hot air, a process known as \"malting\".\nMalted grain is used to make beer, whisky, malted milk, malt vinegar, confections such as Maltesers and Whoppers, flavored drinks such as Horlicks, Ovaltine, and Milo, and some baked goods, such as malt loaf, bagels, and Rich Tea biscuits. Malted grain that has been ground into a coarse meal is known as \"sweet meal\". \nMalting grain develops the enzymes (\u03b1-amylase, \u03b2-amylase) required for modifying the grains' starches into various types of sugar, including monosaccharide glucose, disaccharide maltose, trisaccharide maltotriose, and higher sugars called maltodextrines. It also develops other enzymes, such as proteases, that break down the proteins in the grain into forms that can be used by yeast. The point at which the malting process is stopped affects the starch-to-enzyme ratio, and partly converted starch becomes fermentable sugars.\nMalt also contains small amounts of other sugars, such as sucrose and fructose, which are not products of starch modification, but which are already in the grain. Further conversion to fermentable sugars is achieved during the mashing process.\nVarious cereals are malted, though barley is the most common. A high-protein form of malted barley is often a label-listed ingredient in blended flours typically used in the manufacture of yeast bread and other baked goods.\nThe term \"malt\" refers to several products of the process: the grains to which this process has been applied, for example, malted barley; the sugar, heavy in maltose, derived from such grains, such as the baker's malt used in various breakfast cereals; single malt whisky, often called simply \"single malt\"; or a product based on malted milk, similar to a malted milkshake (i.e. \"malts\").\nHistory and traditional usage.\nMalted grains have probably been used as an ingredient of beer since ancient times, for example, in Egypt (Ancient Egyptian cuisine), Sumer, and China.\nIn Persian countries, a sweet paste made entirely from germinated wheat is called \"saman\u016b\" () in Iran, \"samanak\" () in Afghanistan, (); () or \"s\u00fcm\u00f6l\u00f6k\" (), which is prepared for Nowruz (Persian new year celebration) in a large pot (like a \"kazan\"). A plate or bowl of \"samanu\" is a traditional component of the Haft sin table symbolising affluence. Traditionally, women have a special party to prepare it during the night, and cook it from late in the evening until daylight, singing related songs. In Tajikistan and Afghanistan, they sing: \"Samanak dar J\u016bsh u m\u0101 Kafcha zan\u0113m \u2013 D\u012bgar\u0101n dar Khw\u0101b u m\u0101 Dafcha zan\u0113m\" (meaning: \"Samanak is boiling and we are stirring it, others are asleep and we are playing daf\"). In modern times, making \"samanu\" can be a family gathering. It originally comes from the Great Persian Empire.\n\"M\u00e4mmi\", or Easter Porridge, is a traditional Finnish Lenten food. Cooked from rye malt and flour, \"m\u00e4mmi\" has a great resemblance (in the recipe, color, and taste) to \"saman\u016b\". Today, this product is available in shops from February until Easter. A (nonrepresentative) survey in 2013 showed that almost no one cooks\" m\u00e4mmi\" at home in modern-day Finland.\nMalting.\nMalting is the process of converting barley or other cereal grains into malt for use in brewing, distilling, or foods, and takes place in a maltings, sometimes called a malthouse, or a malting floor. The cereal is spread out on the malting floor in a layer of depth. \nThe malting process starts with drying the grains to a moisture content below 14% and then storing for around six weeks to overcome seed dormancy. \nWhen ready, the grain is immersed or steeped in water two or three times for two or three days to allow the grain to absorb moisture and to start to sprout. \nWhen the grain has a moisture content of around 46%, it is transferred to the malting or germination floor, where it is constantly turned over for about four to six days while it is air-dried. \nThe grain at this point, called \"green malt\", is then dried and toasted in an oven (or kiln) to the desired color and specification. Malts range in color from very pale through crystal and amber to chocolate or black malts.\nThe sprouted grain is then further dried and smoked by spreading it on a perforated wooden floor. Smoke coming from an oasting fireplace (via smoke channels) is then used to heat the wooden floor and the sprouted grains. The temperature is usually around . \nA \"maltings\" is typically a long, single-storey building with a floor that slopes slightly from one end of the building to the other. Floor maltings began to be phased out in the 1940s in favor of \"pneumatic plants\", where large industrial fans are used to blow air through the germinating grain beds and to pass hot air through the malt being kilned. Like floor maltings, these pneumatic plants use batch processes, but of considerably greater size, typically 100-ton batches compared with 20-ton batches floor maltings.\nAs of 2014[ [update]], the largest malting operation in the world was Malteurop, which operates in 14 countries.\nProduction.\nBarley is the most commonly malted grain, in part because of its high content of enzymes, though wheat, rye, oats, rice, and corn are also used. Also very important is the retention of the grain's husk, even after threshing, unlike the bare seeds of threshed wheat or rye. This protects the growing acrospire (developing plant embryo) from damage during malting, which can easily lead to mold growth; it also allows the mash of converted grain to create a filter bed during lautering.\nMalts.\nDiastatic and nondiastatic.\nAs all grains sprout, natural enzymes within the grain break down the starch of which the grain is composed into simpler sugars, which taste sweet and are easier for yeast to use as food. Malt with active enzymes is called \"diastatic malt\". Malt with inactive enzymes is called \"nondiastatic malt\". The enzymes are deactivated by heating the malt.\nBase and specialty.\nMalt is often divided into two categories by brewers: base malts and specialty malts.\nBase malts have enough diastatic power to convert their own starch and usually, that of some amount of starch from unmalted grain, called adjuncts.\nSpecialty malts have little diastatic power, but provide flavor, color, or \"body\" (viscosity) to the finished beer. Specialty caramel or crystal malts have been subjected to heat treatment to convert their starches to sugars nonenzymatically. Within these categories is a variety of types distinguished largely by the kilning temperature.\nTwo-row and six-row.\nIn addition, barley malts are distinguished by the two major cultivar types of barley used for malting, two-row, and six-row.\nMalt extract.\nMalt extract, also known as extract of malt, is a sweet, treacle-like substance used as a dietary supplement. It was popular in the first half of the 20th century as a nutritional enhancer for the children of the British urban working class, whose diet was often deficient in vitamins and minerals. Children were given cod liver oil for the same reason, but it proved so unpalatable that it was combined with extract of malt to produce \"Malt and Cod-Liver Oil.\"\nThe 1907 \"British Pharmaceutical Codex\"'s instructions for making a nutritional extract of malt do not include a mashout at the end of extraction and include the use of lower mash temperatures than is typical with modern beer-brewing practices. The \"Codex\" indicates that diastatic activity is to be preserved by the use of temperatures not exceeding .\nMalt extract production.\nMalt extract is frequently used in the brewing of beer. Its production begins by germinating barley grain in a process known as malting, which consists of immersing the barley in water to encourage it to sprout, then drying it to halt the progress when the sprouting begins. The drying step stops the sprouting, but the enzymes remain active due to the low temperatures used in base malt production. In one before-and-after comparison, malting decreased barley's extractable starch content by about 7% on a dry matter basis and turned that portion into various other carbohydrates.\nIn the next step, brewers use a process called mashing to extract the sugars. Brewers warm cracked malt in temperature-modulated water, activating the enzymes, which cleave more of the malt's remaining starch into various sugars, the largest percentage of which is maltose. Modern beer-mashing practices typically include high enough temperatures at mash-out to deactivate remaining enzymes, thus it is no longer diastatic. The liquid produced from this, wort, is then concentrated by using heat or a vacuum procedure to evaporate water from the mixture. The concentrated wort is called malt extract.\nMalt extract types.\nTwo forms of malt extract are used by brewers: liquid malt extract (LME), containing about 20% water, and dry malt extract (DME), dehydrated to 2% water. LME is a thick syrup that typically gives off more pleasant flavors than its counterpart, while DME provides better consistency in color. When using large amounts of extract, LME is typically used because its ability to dissolve in boiling temperatures, whereas DME can clump up and become difficult to liquefy. LME is also sold in jars as a consumer product.\nResearch.\nScientists aim to discover what happens inside barley grains as they become malted to help plant breeders produce better malting barley for food and beverage products. The United States Agricultural Research Service scientists are interested in specialized enzymes called serine-class proteases that digest beta-amylases, which convert carbohydrates into \"simple sugars\" during the sprouting process. The enzyme also breaks down stored proteins into their amino-acid derivatives. The balance of proteins and carbohydrates broken down by the enzyme affects the malt's flavor.\nEnzyme-rich malt extract.\nEnzyme-rich malt extract (ERME) is a specialised form of barley malt extract (marketed by Ateria Health), that has undergone preparation to activate the natural amylase and glucanase enzymes in the grain. Initially researched as an equine food supplement, pilot studies using ERME as a human food supplement have suggested that it could potentially improve the symptoms of Irritable Bowel Syndrome (IBS) and chronic constipation, due to the way it can break down carbohydrates in the small intestine that IBS has been found to hinder. However further research is ongoing to fully prove this link.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20857", "revid": "670947", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20857", "title": "Masonry", "text": "Building of structures from individual units of stone, bricks, or blocks\nMasonry is the craft of building a structure with brick, stone, or similar material, including mortar plastering which are often laid in, bound, and pasted together by mortar. The term \"masonry\" can also refer to the building units (stone, brick, etc.) themselves.\nThe common materials of masonry construction are bricks and building stone, rocks such as marble, granite, and limestone, cast stone, concrete blocks, glass blocks, and adobe. Masonry is generally a highly durable form of construction. However, the materials used, the quality of the mortar and workmanship, and the pattern in which the units are assembled can substantially affect the durability of the overall masonry construction.\nA person who constructs masonry is called a mason or bricklayer, or in some places colloquially a \"brickie\". These are both classified as construction trades.\nHistory.\nMasonry is one of the oldest building crafts, even predating written history. The construction of Egyptian pyramids, Roman aqueducts, and medieval cathedrals are all examples of masonry. Early structures used the weight of the masonry itself to stabilize the structure against lateral movements. The types and techniques of masonry used evolved with architectural needs and cultural norms. Since mid-20th century, masonry has often featured steel-reinforced elements to help carry the tension force present in modern thin, light, tall building systems.\nApplications.\nMasonry has both structural and non-structural applications. Structural applications include walls, columns, beams, foundations, load-bearing arches, and others. On the other hand, masonry is also used in non-structural applications such as fireplaces chimneys and veneer systems.\nBrick and concrete block are the most common types of masonry in use in industrialized nations and may be either load-bearing or non-load-bearing. Concrete blocks, especially those with hollow cores, offer various possibilities in masonry construction. They generally provide great compressive strength and are best suited to structures with light transverse loading when the cores remain unfilled. Filling some or all of the cores with concrete or concrete with steel reinforcement (typically rebar) offers much greater tensile and lateral strength to structures.\nStructural limitations.\nOne problem with masonry walls is that they rely mainly on their weight to keep them in place; each block or brick is only loosely connected to the next via a thin layer of mortar. This is why they do not perform well in earthquakes, when entire buildings are shaken horizontally. Many collapses during earthquakes occur in buildings that have load-bearing masonry walls. Besides, heavier buildings having masonry suffer more damage.\nDry set masonry.\nThe strength of a masonry wall is not entirely dependent on the bond between the building material and the mortar; the friction between the interlocking blocks of masonry is often strong enough to provide a great deal of strength on its own. The blocks sometimes have grooves or other surface features added to enhance this interlocking, and some \"dry set\" masonry structures forgo mortar altogether.\nStonework.\nStone blocks used in masonry can be dressed or rough, though in both examples corners, door and window jambs, and similar areas are usually dressed.\nStonemasonry utilizing dressed stones is known as ashlar masonry, whereas masonry using irregularly shaped stones is known as rubble masonry. Both rubble and ashlar masonry can be laid in coursed rows of even height through the careful selection or cutting of stones, but a great deal of stone masonry is uncoursed.\nBrick.\nSolid brickwork is made of two or more wythes of bricks with the units running horizontally (called \"stretcher\" bricks) bound together with bricks running transverse to the wall (called \"header\" bricks). Each row of bricks is known as a course. The pattern of headers and stretchers employed gives rise to different 'bonds' such as the common bond (with every sixth course composed of headers), the English bond, and the Flemish bond (with alternating stretcher and header bricks present on every course). Bonds can differ in strength and in insulating ability. Vertically staggered bonds tend to be somewhat stronger and less prone to major cracking than a non-staggered bond.\nUniformity and rusticity.\nThe wide selection of brick styles and types generally available in industrialized nations allow much variety in the appearance of the final product. In buildings built during the 1950s-1970s, a high degree of uniformity of brick and accuracy in masonry was typical. In the period since then this style was thought to be too sterile, so attempts were made to emulate older, rougher work. Some brick surfaces are made to look particularly rustic by including \"burnt\" bricks, which have a darker color or an irregular shape. Others may use antique salvage bricks, or new bricks may be artificially aged by applying various surface treatments, such as tumbling. The attempts at rusticity of the late 20th century have been carried forward by masons specializing in a free, artistic style, where the courses are intentionally \"not\" straight, instead weaving to form more organic impressions.\nSerpentine masonry.\nA crinkle-crankle wall is a brick wall that follows a serpentine path, rather than a straight line. This type of wall is more resistant to toppling than a straight wall; so much so that it may be made of a single wythe of unreinforced brick and so despite its longer length may be more economical than a straight wall.\nConcrete block.\nBlocks of cinder concrete (\"cinder blocks\" or \"breezeblocks\"), ordinary concrete (\"concrete blocks\"), or hollow tile are generically known as Concrete Masonry Units (CMUs). They usually are much larger than ordinary bricks and so are much faster to lay for a wall of a given size. Furthermore, cinder and concrete blocks typically have much lower water absorption rates than brick. They often are used as the structural core for veneered brick masonry or are used alone for the walls of factories, garages, and other industrial-style buildings where such appearance is acceptable or desirable. Such blocks often receive a stucco surface for decoration. Surface-bonding cement, which contains synthetic fibers for reinforcement, is sometimes used in this application and can impart extra strength to a block wall. Surface-bonding cement is often pre-colored and can be stained or painted thus resulting in a finished stucco-like surface.\nThe primary structural advantage of concrete blocks in comparison to smaller clay-based bricks is that a CMU wall can be reinforced by filling the block voids with concrete with or without steel rebar. Generally, certain voids are designated for filling and reinforcement, particularly at corners, wall-ends, and openings while other voids are left empty. This increases wall strength and stability more economically than filling and reinforcing all voids. Typically, structures made of CMUs will have the top course of blocks in the walls filled with concrete and tied together with steel reinforcement to form a bond beam. Bond beams are often a requirement of modern building codes and controls. Another type of steel reinforcement referred to as ladder-reinforcement, can also be embedded in horizontal mortar joints of concrete block walls. The introduction of steel reinforcement generally results in a CMU wall having much greater lateral and tensile strength than unreinforced walls.\n\"Architectural masonry is the evolvement of standard concrete masonry blocks into aesthetically pleasing concrete masonry units (CMUs)\". CMUs can be manufactured to provide a variety of surface appearances. They can be colored during manufacturing or stained or painted after installation. They can be split as part of the manufacturing process, giving the blocks a rough face replicating the appearance of natural stone, such as brownstone. CMUs may also be scored, ribbed, sandblasted, polished, striated (raked or brushed), include decorative aggregates, be allowed to slump in a controlled fashion during curing, or include several of these techniques in their manufacture to provide a decorative appearance.\n\"Glazed concrete masonry units are manufactured by bonding a permanent colored facing (typically composed of polyester resins, silica sand and various other chemicals) to a concrete masonry unit, providing a smooth impervious surface.\"\nGlass block.\nGlass block or glass brick are blocks made from glass and provide a translucent to clear vision through the block.\nVeneer masonry.\nA masonry veneer wall consists of masonry units, usually clay-based bricks, installed on one or both sides of a structurally independent wall usually constructed of wood or masonry. In this context, the brick masonry is primarily decorative, not structural. The brick veneer is generally connected to the structural wall by brick ties (metal strips that are attached to the structural wall, as well as the mortar joints of the brick veneer). There is typically an air gap between the brick veneer and the structural wall. As clay-based brick is usually not completely waterproof, the structural wall will often have a water-resistant surface (usually tar paper) and weep holes can be left at the base of the brick veneer to drain moisture that accumulates inside the air gap. Concrete blocks, real and cultured stones, and veneer adobe are sometimes used in a very similar veneer fashion.\nMost insulated buildings that use concrete block, brick, adobe, stone, veneers or some combination thereof feature interior insulation in the form of fiberglass batts between wooden wall studs or in the form of rigid insulation boards covered with plaster or drywall. In most climates this insulation is much more effective on the exterior of the wall, allowing the building interior to take advantage of the aforementioned thermal mass of the masonry. This technique does, however, require some sort of weather-resistant exterior surface over the insulation and, consequently, is generally more expensive.\nGabions.\nGabions are baskets, usually now of zinc-protected steel (galvanized steel) that are filled with fractured stone of medium size. These will act as a single unit and are stacked with setbacks to form a revetment or retaining wall. They have the advantage of being well drained, flexible, and resistant to flood, water flow from above, frost damage, and soil flow. Their expected useful life is only as long as the wire they are composed of and if used in severe climates (such as shore-side in a salt water environment) must be made of appropriate corrosion-resistant wire. Most modern gabions are rectangular. Earlier gabions were often cylindrical wicker baskets, open at both ends, used usually for temporary, often military, construction.\nSimilar work can be done with finer aggregates using cellular confinement.\nPassive fire protection (PFP).\nMasonry walls have an endothermic effect of its hydrates, as in chemically bound water, unbound moisture from the concrete block, and the poured concrete if the hollow cores inside the blocks are filled. Masonry can withstand temperatures up to and it can withstand direct exposure to fire for up to 4 hours. In addition to that, concrete masonry keeps fires contained to their room of origin 93% of the time. For those reasons, concrete and masonry units hold the highest flame spread index classification, Class A.\nFire cuts can be used to increase safety and reduce fire damage to masonry buildings.\nMechanical modeling of masonry structures.\nFrom the point of view of material modeling, masonry is a special material of extreme mechanical properties (with a very high ratio between strength in compression and in tension), so that the applied loads do not diffuse as they do in elastic bodies, but tend to percolate along lines of high stiffness.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20858", "revid": "4842600", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20858", "title": "Mortar", "text": "Mortar may refer to:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
