{"id": "22204", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22204", "title": "Oligopoly", "text": "Market dominated by a small number of sellers\nAn oligopoly (from grc \" ' ()\"\u00a0'few' and \" ' ()\"\u00a0'to sell') is a market in which pricing control lies in the hands of a few sellers.\nAs a result of their significant market power, firms in oligopolistic markets can influence prices through manipulating the supply function. Firms in an oligopoly are mutually interdependent, as any action by one firm is expected to affect other firms in the market and evoke a reaction or consequential action. As a result, firms in oligopolistic markets often resort to collusion as means of maximising profits.\nNonetheless, in the presence of fierce competition among market participants, oligopolies may develop without collusion. This is a situation similar to perfect competition, where oligopolists have their own market structure. In this situation, each company in the oligopoly has a large share in the industry and plays a pivotal, unique role.\nMany jurisdictions deem collusion to be illegal as it violates competition laws and is regarded as anti-competition behaviour. The EU competition law in Europe prohibits anti-competitive practices such as price-fixing and competitors manipulating market supply and trade. In the US, the United States Department of Justice Antitrust Division and the Federal Trade Commission are tasked with stopping collusion\".\" In Australia, the Federal Competition and Consumer Act 2010 details the prohibition and regulation of anti-competitive agreements and practices. Although aggressive, these laws typically only apply when firms engage in formal collusion, such as cartels. Corporations may often thus evade legal consequences through tacit collusion, as collusion can only be proven through direct communication between companies.\nWithin post-socialist economies, oligopolies may be particularly pronounced. For example in Armenia, where business elites enjoy oligopoly, 19% of the whole economy is monopolized, making it the most monopolized country in the region.\nMany industries have been cited as oligopolistic, including civil aviation, electricity providers, the telecommunications sector, rail freight markets, food processing, funeral services, sugar refining, beer making, pulp and paper making, and automobile manufacturing.\nTypes of oligopolies.\nPerfect and imperfect oligopolies.\nPerfect and imperfect oligopolies are often distinguished by the nature of the goods firms produce or trade in.\nA perfect (sometimes called a 'pure') oligopoly is where the commodities produced by the firms are homogenous (i.e., identical or materially the same in nature) and the elasticity of substitute commodities is near infinite. Generally, where there are two homogenous products, a rational consumer's preference between the products will be indifferent, assuming the products share common prices. Similarly, sellers will be relatively indifferent between purchase commitments in relation to homogenous products. In an oligopolistic market of a primary industry, such as agriculture or mining, commodities produced by oligopolistic enterprises will have strong homogeneity; as such, such markets are described as perfect oligopolies.\nImperfect (or 'differentiated') oligopolies, on the other hand, involve firms producing commodities which are heterogenous. Where companies in an industry need to offer a diverse range of products and services, such as in the manufacturing and service industries, such industries are subject to imperfect oligopoly.\nOpen and closed oligopolies.\nAn open oligopoly market structure occurs where barriers to entry do not exist, and firms can freely enter the oligopolistic market. In contrast, a closed oligopoly is where there are prominent barriers to market entry which preclude other firms from easily entering the market. Entry barriers include high investment requirements, strong consumer loyalty for existing brands, regulatory hurdles and economies of scale. These barriers allow existing firms in the oligopoly market to maintain a certain price on commodities and services in order to maximise profits.\nCollusive oligopolies.\nCollusion among firms in an oligopoly market structure occurs where there are express or tacit agreements between firms to follow a particular price structure in relation to particular products (for homogenous products) or particular transaction or product classes (for heterogeneous products). Colluding firms are able to maximise profits at a level above the normal market equilibrium.\nInterdependence in oligopolies is reduced when firms collude, because there is a lessened need for firms to anticipate the actions of other firms in relation to prices. Collusion closes the gap in the asymmetry of information typically present in a market of competing firms.\nOne form of collusive oligopoly is a cartel, a monopolistic organisation and relationship formed by manufacturers who produce or sell a certain kind of goods in order to monopolise the market and obtain high profits by reaching an agreement on commodity price, output and market share allocation. However, the stability and effectiveness of a cartel are limited, and members tend to break from the alliance in order to gain short-term benefits.\nPartial and full oligopoly.\nA full oligopoly is one in which a price leader is not present in the market, and where firms enjoy relatively similar market control. A partial oligopoly is one where a single firm dominates an industry through saturation of the market, producing a high percentage of total output and having large influence over market conditions. Partial oligopolies are able to price-make rather than price-take.\nTight and loose oligopoly.\nIn a tight oligopoly, only a few firms dominate the market, and there is limited competition. A loose oligopoly, on the other hand, has many interdependent firms which often collude to maximise profits. Markets can be classified into tight and loose oligopolies using the four-firm concentration ratio, which measures the percentage market share of the top four firms in the industry. The higher the four-firm concentration ratio is, the less competitive the market is. When the four-firm concentration ration is higher than 60, the market can be classified as a tight oligopoly. A loose oligopoly occurs when the four-firm concentration is in the range of 40-60.\nCharacteristics of oligopolies.\nSome characteristics of oligopolies include:\nSources of oligopoly power.\nEconomies of scale.\nEconomies of scale occur where a firm's average costs per unit of output decreases while the scale of the firm, or the output being produced by the firm, increases. Firms in an oligopoly who benefit from economies of scale have a distinct advantage over firms who do not. Their marginal costs are lower, such that the firm's equilibrium at formula_1 would be higher. Economies of scale are seen prevalently when two firms in oligopolistic market agree to a merger, as it allows the firm to not only diversify their market but also increase in size and output production, with negligible relative increases in output costs. These sorts of mergers are typically seen when companies expand into large business groups by appreciating and increasing capital to buy smaller companies in the same markets, which consequently increases the profit margins of the business.\nCollusion and price cutting.\nIn a market with low entry barriers, price collusion between established sellers makes new sellers vulnerable to undercutting. Recognising this vulnerability, established sellers will reach a tacit understanding to raise entry barriers to prevent new companies from entering the market. Even if this requires cutting prices, all companies benefit because they reduce the risk of loss created by new competition. In other words, firms will lose less for deviation and thus have more incentive to undercut collusion prices when more join the market. The rate at which firms interact with one another will also affect the incentives for undercutting other firms; short-term rewards for undercutting competitors are short lived where interaction is frequent, as a degree of punishment can expected swiftly by other firms, but longer-lived where interaction is infrequent. Greater market transparency, for instance, would decrease collusion, as oligopolistic companies expect retaliation sooner where changes in their prices and quantity of sales are clear to their rivals.\nBarriers to enter the market.\nLarge capital investments required for entry, including intellectual property laws, certain network effects, absolute cost advantages, reputation, advertisement dominance, product differentiation, brand reliance, and others, all contribute to keeping existing firms in the market and precluding new firms from entering.\nModeling oligopolies.\nThere is no single model that describes the operation of an oligopolistic market. The variety and complexity of the models exist because numerous firms can compete on the basis of price, quantity, technological innovations, marketing, and reputation. However, there are a series of simplified models that attempt to describe market behavior under certain circumstances. Some of the better-known models are the dominant firm model, the Cournot\u2013Nash model, the Bertrand model and the kinked demand model. As different industries have different characteristics, oligopoly models differ in their applicability within each industry.\nGame theoretical models.\nWith few sellers, each oligopolist is likely to be aware of the actions of their competition. According to game theory, the decisions of one firm influence, and are influenced by, the decisions of other firms. Strategic planning by oligopolists needs to take into account the likely responses of the other market participants. The following game-theoretical oligopoly models attempt to describe and predict the behaviour of oligopolies:\nOne major difference between varying industries is capacity constraints. Both Cournot model and Bertrand model consist of the two-stage game; the Cournot model is more suitable for firms in industries that face capacity constraints, where firms set their quantity of production first, then set their prices. The Bertrand model is more applicable for industries with low capacity constraints, such as banking and insurance.\n\"Cournot-Nash model\".\nThe Cournot\u2013Nash model is the simplest oligopoly model. The model assumes that there are two equally positioned firms; the firms compete on the basis of quantity rather than price, and each firm makes decisions on the assumption that the other firm's behaviour is unchanging. The market demand curve is assumed to be linear, and marginal costs constant.\nIn this model, the Nash equilibrium can be found by determining how each firm reacts to a change in the output of the other firm, and repeating this analysis until a point is reached where neither firm desires to act any differently, given their predictions of the other firm's responsive behaviour.\nThe equilibrium is the intersection of the two firm's \"reaction functions\", which show how one firm reacts to the quantity choice of the other firm. The reaction function can be derived by calculating the first-order condition (FOC) of the firms' optimal profits. The FOC can be calculated by setting the first derivative of the objective function to zero. For example, assume that the firm formula_2's demand function is formula_3, where formula_4 is the quantity produced by the other firm , formula_5 is the amount produced by firm formula_2, and formula_7 is the market. Assume that marginal cost is formula_8. By following the profit maximisation rule of equating marginal revenue to marginal costs, firm formula_2 can obtain a total revenue function of formula_10. The marginal revenue function is formula_11.\nformula_12\nformula_13\nformula_14\nformula_15 [1.1]\nformula_16 [1.2]\nEquation 1.1 is the reaction function for firm formula_2. Equation 1.2 is the reaction function for firm formula_18. The Nash equilibrium can thus be obtained by solving the equations simultaneously or graphically.\nReaction functions are not necessarily symmetric. Firms may face differing cost functions, in which case the reaction functions and equilibrium quantities would not be identical.\n\"Bertrand model\".\nThe Bertrand model is essentially the Cournot\u2013Nash model, except the strategic variable is price rather than quantity.\nBertrand's model assumes that firms are selling homogeneous products and therefore have the same marginal production costs, and firms will focus on competing in prices simultaneously. After competing in prices for a while, firms would eventually reach an equilibrium where prices would be the same as marginal costs of production. The mechanism behind this model is that even by undercutting just a small increment of its price, a firm would be able to capture the entire market share. Even though empirical studies suggest that firms can easily make much higher profits by agreeing on charging a price higher than marginal costs, highly rational firms would still not be able to stay at a price higher than marginal cost. Whilst Bertrand price competition is a useful abstraction of markets in many settings, due to its lack of ability to capture human behavioural patterns, the approach has been criticised for being inaccurate in predicting prices.\nThe model assumptions are:\nThe only Nash equilibrium is formula_22. In this situation, if a firm raises prices, it will lose all its customers. If a firm lowers price, formula_23, then it will lose money on every unit sold.\nThe Bertrand equilibrium is the same as the competitive result. Each firm produces where formula_24, resulting in zero profits. A generalization of the Bertrand model is the Bertrand\u2013Edgeworth model, which allows for capacity constraints and a more general cost function.\n\"Cournot-Bertrand model\".\nThe Cournot model and Bertrand model are the most well-known models in oligopoly theory, and have been studied and reviewed by numerous economists. The Cournot-Bertrand model is a hybrid of these two models and was first developed by Bylka and Komar in 1976. This model allows the market to be split into two groups of firms. The first group's aim is to optimally adjust their output to maximise profits, while the second group's aim is to optimally adjust their prices. This model is not accepted by some economists who believe that firms in the same industry cannot compete with different strategic variables. Nonetheless, this model has been applied and observed in both real-world examples and theoretical contexts.\nIn the Cournot model and Bertrand model, it is assumed that all the firms are competing with the same choice variable, either output or price. However, some economists have argued that this does not always apply in real world contexts. Economists Kreps and Scheinkman's research demonstrates that varying economic environments are required in order for firms to compete in the same industry while using different strategic variables. An example of the Cournot-Bertrand model in real life can be seen in the market of alcoholic beverages. The production times of alcoholic beverages differ greatly creating different economic environments within the market. The fermentation of distilled spirits takes a significant amount of time; therefore, output is set by producers, leaving the market conditions to determine price. Whereas, the production of brandy requires minimal time to age, thus the price is set by the producers and the supply is determined by the quantity demanded at that price.\nKinked demand curve model.\nIn an oligopoly, firms operate under imperfect competition. The fierce price competitiveness, created by a sticky-upward demand curve, causes firms to use non-price competition in order to accrue greater revenue and market share.\n\"Kinked\" demand curves appear similar to traditional demand curves but are distinguished by a hypothesised convex bend with a discontinuity at the bend\u2013\"kink\". Thus, the first derivative at that point is undefined and leads to a jump discontinuity in the marginal revenue curve. Because of this jump discontinuity in the marginal revenue curve, marginal cost could change without necessarily changing the price or quantity. The motivation behind the kink is that in an oligopolistic or monopolistic competitive market, firms will not raise their prices because even a small price increase will lose many customers. However, even a large price decrease will gain only a few customers because such an action will begin a price war with other firms. The curve is, therefore, more price-elastic for price increases and less so for price decreases. This model predicts that more firms will enter the industry in the long run, since market price for oligopolists is more stable.\nThe kinked demand curve for a joint profit-maximizing oligopoly industry can model the behaviors of oligopolists' pricing decisions other than that of the price leader.\n\"Assumptions\".\nAccording to the kinked-demand model, each firm faces a demand curve kinked at the existing price. The assumptions of the model are:\nIf the assumptions hold, then:\nThe gap in the marginal revenue curve means that marginal costs can fluctuate without changing equilibrium price and quantity Thus, prices tend to be rigid.\nOther descriptions.\nMarket power and market concentration can be estimated or quantified using several different tools and measurements, including the Lerner index, stochastic frontier analysis, New Empirical Industrial Organization (NEIO) modeling, as well as the Herfindahl-Hirschman index. As a quantitative description of oligopoly, the four-firm concentration ratio is often utilised and is the most preferable ratio for analyzing market concentration. This measure expresses, as a percentage, the market share of the four largest firms in any particular industry. For example, as of fourth quarter 2008, the combined total market share of Verizon Wireless, AT&amp;T, Sprint, and T-Mobile comprises 97% of the U.S. cellular telephone market.\nOligopolies and competition laws.\nOligopolies are assumed to be aware of competition laws as well as the repercussions that they could face if caught engaging in anti-competition behaviour. In lieu of explicit communication, firms may be observed as engaging in tacit collusion, which occurs through competitors collectively and implicitly understanding that by jointly raising prices, each competitor can achieve economic profits comparable to those achieved by a monopolist while avoiding breaches of market regulations.\nPolicing of anticompetitive behaviour.\nCompetition authorities have taken various measures to effectively discover and prosecute oligopolistic and anticompetitive behaviour. The leniency program and screening are currently two popular mechanisms.\nLeniency programs.\nLeniency programs encourage antitrust firms to be more proactive participants in confessing collusive behaviours by granting them immunity from fines, among other penal reductions. Leniency programs have been implemented by countries including the US, Japan and Canada. Nonetheless, leniency programs may be abused, their efficacy has been questioned, and they ultimately allow some colluding firms to experience less harsh penalties. It is currently unknown what the overall effect of leniency programs is.\nScreening\nThere are two screening methods that are currently available for competition authorities: structural screening and behavioural screening. Structural screening refers to the identification of industry traits or characteristics, such as homogeneous goods, stable demand, less existing participants, which are prone to cartel formation. Behavioural screening is typically implemented when a cartel formation or agreement has already been reached, with authorities subsequently looking into firms' data to determine if price variance is low or experiences significant price changes.\nPossible outcomes of oligopolies.\nFormation of cartels.\nParticular companies may employ restrictive trade practices in order to inflate prices and restrict production in much the same way that a monopoly does. Whenever there is a formal agreement for such collusion between companies that usually compete with one another, the practice is known as a cartel. An example of an economic cartel is OPEC, where oligopolistic countries control the worldwide oil supply, leaving a profound influence on the international price of oil.\nThere are legal restrictions on cartels in most countries, with regulations and enforcement against cartels having been enacted since the late 1990s. For example, EU competition law has prohibited some unreasonable anti-competitive practices, such as directly or indirectly fixing selling prices, manipulating market supplies and controlling trade among competitors. In the US, the \"Antitrust Division of the Justice Department and Federal Trade Commission\" was created to fight collusion among cartels\".\" Tacit collusion is becoming a more popular topic in the development of anti-trust law in most countries.\nPossibility of efficient outcomes.\nCompetition between sellers in an oligopoly can be fierce, with relatively low prices and high production. Hypothetically, this could lead to an efficient outcome approaching perfect competition.\nAs competition in an oligopoly can be greater when there are more competitors in an industry, it is theoretically harder to sustain cartels in an industry with a larger number of firms, as there will be less collusive profit for each firm. Consequently, existing firms may have more incentive to deviate. However, empirical evidence has shown this conclusion to be ambiguous. Thus, the welfare analysis of oligopolies is sensitive to the parameter values used to define the market's structure. In particular, the level of dead weight loss is hard to measure. The study of product differentiation indicates that oligopolies might also create excessive levels of differentiation in order to stifle competition, as they could gain certain marker power by offering somewhat differentiated products.\nPrice wars.\nOne possible outcome of oligopoly is the price war. A common aspect of oligopolies is the ability to engage in price competition selectively. Schendel and Balestra contend that at least some players in a price war can profit from participation.\nExamples.\nMany industries have been cited as oligopolistic, including oil extraction and refinement, civil aviation, agricultural pesticides, electricity, and platinum group metal mining. In most countries, the telecommunications sector is characterized by an oligopolistic market structure.\nEurope.\nIn the European Union, rail freight markets have an oligopolistic structure.\nUnited Kingdom.\nIn the United Kingdom, the 'Big Four' supermarket chains - Tesco, Asda, Sainsbury's and Morrisons - is an oligopoly. The development of this oligopoly is believed to have resulted in a reduction of competition in the retail sector, coincides with the decline of independent high street retailers, and may also be affecting suppliers and farmers through monopsony.\nNorth America.\nCanada.\nIn Canada, supermarkets have been identified as oligopolistic, largely falling under only three chains. Other industries identified as oligopolistic include banks, telecommunications, and airlines.\nUnited States.\nIn the United States, industries that have identified as oligopolistic include food processing, funeral services, sugar refining, beer making, pulp and paper making, and mobile network carriers.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "22205", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22205", "title": "Oasis", "text": "Fertile area in a desert environment\nIn ecology, an oasis (; pl.: oases ) is a fertile area of a desert or semi-desert environment that sustains plant life and provides habitat for animals. Surface water may be present, or water may only be accessible from wells or underground channels created by humans. In geography, an oasis may be a current or past rest stop on a transportation route, or less-than-verdant location that nonetheless provides access to underground water through deep wells created and maintained by humans. Although they depend on a natural condition, such as the presence of water that may be stored in reservoirs and used for irrigation, most oases, as we know them, are artificial.\nThe word \"oasis\" came into English from , from , , which in turn is a direct borrowing from Demotic Egyptian. The word for \"oasis\" in the latter-attested Coptic language (the descendant of Demotic Egyptian) is \"wahe\" or \"ouahe\" which means a \"dwelling place\". Oasis in Arabic is \"w\u0101\u1e25a\" ().\nDescription.\nOases develop in \"hydrologically favored\" locations that have attributes such as a high water table, seasonal lakes, or blockaded wadis. Oases are made when sources of freshwater, such as springs, underground rivers, or aquifers irrigate the surface naturally or via man-made wells. The presence of water on the surface or underground is necessary and the local or regional management of this essential resource is strategic, but not sufficient to create such areas: continuous human work and know-how (a technical and social culture) are essential to maintain such ecosystems. Some of the possible human contributions to maintaining an oasis include digging and maintaining wells, digging and maintaining canals, and continuously removing opportunistic plants that threaten to gorge themselves on water and fertility needed to maintain human and animal food supplies. Stereotypically, an oasis has a \"central pool of open water surrounded by a ring of water-dependent shrubs and trees\u2026which are in turn encircled by an outlying transition zone to desert plants.\"\nRain showers provide subterranean water to sustain natural oases, such as the Tuat. Substrata of impermeable rock and stone can trap water and retain it in pockets, or on long faulting subsurface ridges or volcanic dikes water can collect and percolate to the surface. Any incidence of water is then used by migrating birds, which also pass seeds with their droppings which will grow at the water's edge forming an oasis. It can also be used to plant crops.\nGeography.\nOases in the Middle East and North Africa cover about , however, they support the livelihood of about 10 million inhabitants. The stark ratio of oasis to desert land in the world means that the oasis ecosystem is \"relatively minute, rare and precious.\"\nThere are 90 \"major oases\" within the Sahara Desert. Some of their fertility may derive from irrigation systems called \"foggaras\", \"khettaras\", \"lkhttarts\", or a variety of other regional names\".\"\nIn some oases systems, there is \"a geometrical system of raised channels that release controlled amounts of the water into individual plots, soaking the soil.\"\nHistory.\nOases often have human histories that are measured in millennia. Archeological digs at Ein Gedi in the Dead Sea Valley have found evidence of settlement dating to 6,000 BC. Al-Ahsa on the Arabian Peninsula shows evidence of human residence dating to the Neolithic.\nAnthropologically, the oasis is \"an area of sedentary life, which associates the city [\"medina\"] or village [\"ksar\"] with its surrounding feeding source, the palm grove, within a relational and circulatory nomadic system.\"\nThe location of oases has been of critical importance for trade and transportation routes in desert areas; caravans must travel via oases so that supplies of water and food can be replenished. Thus, political or military control of an oasis has in many cases meant control of trade on a particular route. For example, the oases of Awjila, Ghadames and Kufra, situated in modern-day Libya, have at various times been vital to both north\u2013south and east\u2013west trade in the Sahara Desert. The location of oases also informed the Darb El Arba'\u012bn trade route from Sudan to Egypt, as well as the caravan route from the Niger River to Tangier, Morocco. The Silk Road \"traced its course from water hole to water hole, relying on oasis communities such as Turpan in China and Samarkand in Uzbekistan.\"\nAccording to the United Nations, \"Oases are at the very heart of the overall development of peri-Saharan countries due to their geographical location and the fact they are preferred migration routes in times of famine or insecurity in the region.\"\nOases in Oman, on the Arabian Peninsula near the Persian Gulf, vary somewhat from the Saharan form. While still located in an arid or semi-arid zone with a date palm overstory, these oases are usually located \"below plateaus\" and \"watered either by springs or by \"aflaj\", tunnel systems dug into the ground or carved into the rock to tap underground aquifers.\" This rainwater harvesting system \"never developed a serious salinity problem.\"\nPalm Oasis.\nIn the drylands of southwestern North America, there is a habitat form called Palm Oasis (alternately Palm Series or Oasis Scrub Woodland) that has the native California fan palm as the overstory species. These Palm Oases can be found in California, Arizona, Baja California, and Sonora.\nAgroforestry.\nPeople who live in an oasis must manage land and water use carefully. The most important plant in an oasis is the date palm (\"Phoenix dactylifera\" L.), which forms the upper layer. These palm trees provide shade for smaller understory trees like apricots, figs, olives, and peach trees, which form the middle layer. Market-garden vegetables, some cereals (such as sorghum, barley, millet, and wheat), and/or mixed animal fodder, are grown in the bottom layer where there is more moisture. The oasis is integrated into its desert environment through an often close association with nomadic transhumant livestock farming (very often pastoral and sedentary populations are clearly distinguished). The fertility of the oasis soil is restored by \"cyclic organic inputs of animal origin.\" In summary, an oasis palm grove is a highly anthropized and irrigated area that supports a traditionally intensive and polyculture-based agriculture.\nResponding to environmental constraints, the three strata create what is called the \"oasis effect\". The three layers and all their interaction points create a variety of combinations of \"horizontal wind speed, relative air temperature and relative air humidity.\" The plantings\u2014through a virtuous cycle of wind reduction, increased shade and evapotranspiration\u2014create a microclimate favorable to crops; \"measurements taken in different oases have showed that the potential evapotranspiration of the areas was reduced by 30 to 50 percent within the oasis.\"\nThe keystone date palm trees are \"a main income source and staple food for local populations in many countries in which they are cultivated, and have played significant roles in the economy, society, and environment of those countries.\" Challenges for date palm oasis polycultures include \"low rainfall, high temperatures, water resources often high in salt content, and high incidence of pests.\"\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The oases consist of almost unbroken forests of date palms, divided up into many gardens that are separated by mud walls and intersected by innumerable irrigation and drainage ditches\u2026 In the shade of the palms are grown many other kinds of fruit trees\u2014oranges, olives, figs, apricots, peaches, pomegranates, and jujubes\u2014interlaced with large grape vines that often hang in festoons from the palm trunks. Beneath the trees are small plots of garden vegetables, barley, and alfalfa. Neither date palms nor other trees are planted with any regularity, and the growth is often so dense that the garden resembles a tropical jungle. Very beautiful are these gardens in the spring, when the apricot and peach trees are in blossom here and there among the palms and the figs and vines are putting forth their leaves. In autumn, when the dates are ripening, the color effects, especially when the tops of the palms are lit up by the last rays of the setting sun, are something that once seen can never be forgotten. The great clusters of fruit, displaying every tint from bright yellow, through orange, vermilion, and maroon, to plum purple and chestnut brown, with their brilliant yellow or rich orange ivory-like stalks, contrast superbly with the dull bluish or gray green of the feathery crowns of foliage. It is small wonder that a whole folklore of poetic legends and proverbs has grown up around the date palm in the regions where it flourishes.\u2014\u200a\nDistressed systems.\nMany historic oases have struggled with drought and inadequate maintenance.\nAccording to a United Nations report on the future of oases in the Sahara and Sahel, \"Increasingly... oases are subject to various pressures, heavily influenced by the effects of climate change, decreasing groundwater levels and a gradual loss of cultural heritage due to a fading historical memory concerning traditional water management techniques. These natural pressures are compounded by demographic pressures and the introduction of modern water pumping techniques that can disrupt traditional resource management schemes, particularly in the North Saharan oases.\"\nFor example, five historic oases in the Western Desert of Egypt (Kharga, Dakhla, Farafra, Baharyia, and Siwa) once had \"flowing spring and wells\" but due to the decline of groundwater heads because of overuse for land reclamation projects those water sources are no more and the oases suffer as a result.\nMorocco has lost two-thirds of its oasis habitat over the last 100 years due to heat, drought, and water scarcity. The Ferkla Oases in Morocco once drew on water from the Ferkla, Sat and Tangarfa Rivers but they are now dry but for a few days a year.\nPractical matters.\nA 1920 USGS publication about watering holes in the deserts of California and Arizona gave this advice for travelers seeking oases:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The usual watering places are springs or wells. Springs are frequently clogged with gravel or rubbish or sometimes even with the bodies of dead animals, and it may be necessary to clean them out. For this work a shovel is needed. Wells may or may not be equipped with pumps. Frequently the pumps are broken and useless, and a rope and bucket are then necessary to obtain water. Most of the wells in this region are less than 100 feet deep, but some are deeper, and 100 feet of rope is not too much to provide. As a rule the rope and bucket at a well, if they were ever provided, soon disappear, and one should never trust the chance of finding them there. Open wells are sometimes contaminated in the same way as springs and need to be cleaned out, particularly in little-frequented places where they are unused for months at a time.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "22206", "revid": "45266726", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22206", "title": "Oboe", "text": "Double-reed woodwind instrument\nThe oboe ( ) is a type of double-reed woodwind instrument. Oboes are usually made of wood, but may also be made of synthetic materials, such as plastic, resin, or hybrid composites.\nThe most common type of oboe, the soprano oboe pitched in C, measures roughly long and has metal keys, a conical bore and a flared bell. Sound is produced by blowing into the reed at a sufficient air pressure, causing it to vibrate with the air column. The distinctive tone is versatile and has been described as \"bright\". When the word \"oboe\" is used alone, it is generally taken to mean the soprano member rather than other instruments of the family, such as the bass oboe, the cor anglais (English horn), or oboe d'amore.\nToday, the oboe is commonly used as orchestral or solo instrument in symphony orchestras, concert bands and chamber ensembles. The oboe is especially used in classical music, film music, some genres of folk music, and is occasionally heard in jazz, rock, pop, and popular music. The oboe is widely recognized as the instrument that tunes the orchestra with its distinctive 'A'.\nA musician who plays the oboe is called an oboist.\nSound.\nIn comparison to other modern woodwind instruments, the soprano oboe is sometimes referred to as having a \"bright and penetrating\" voice. \"The Sprightly Companion\", an instruction book published by Henry Playford in 1695, describes the oboe as \"Majestical and Stately, and not much Inferior to the Trumpet\". In the play \"Angels in America\" the sound is described as like \"that of a duck if the duck were a songbird\". The rich timbre is derived from its conical bore (as opposed to the generally cylindrical bore of flutes and clarinets). As a result, oboes are easier to hear over other instruments in large ensembles due to its penetrating sound. The highest note is a semitone lower than the nominally highest note of the B\u266d clarinet. Since the clarinet has a wider range, the lowest note of the B\u266d clarinet is significantly deeper (a minor sixth) than the lowest note of the oboe.\nMusic for the standard oboe is written in concert pitch (i.e., it is not a transposing instrument), and the instrument has a soprano range, usually from B\u266d3 to G6. Orchestras tune to a concert A played by the first oboe. According to the League of American Orchestras, this is done because the pitch is secure and its penetrating sound makes it ideal for tuning. The pitch of the oboe is affected by the way in which the reed is made. The reed has a significant effect on the sound. Variations in cane and other construction materials, the age of the reed, and differences in scrape and length all affect the pitch. German and French reeds, for instance, differ in many ways, causing the sound to vary accordingly. Weather conditions such as temperature and humidity also affect the pitch. Skilled oboists adjust their embouchure to compensate for these factors. Subtle manipulation of embouchure and air pressure allows the oboist to express timbre and dynamics.\nReeds.\nThe oboe uses a double reed, similar to that used for the bassoon. Most professional oboists make their reeds to suit their individual needs. By making their reeds, oboists can precisely control factors such as tone color, intonation, and responsiveness. They can also account for individual embouchure, oral cavity, oboe angle, and air support.\nNovice oboists rarely make their own reeds, as the process is difficult and time-consuming, and frequently purchase reeds from a music store instead. Commercially available cane reeds are available in several degrees of hardness; a medium reed is very popular, and most beginners use medium-soft reeds. These reeds, like clarinet, saxophone, and bassoon reeds, are made from \"Arundo donax\". As oboists gain more experience, they may start making their own reeds after the model of their teacher or buying handmade reeds (usually from a professional oboist) and using special tools including gougers, pre-gougers, guillotines, shaper tips, knives, and other tools to make and adjust reeds to their liking. The reed is considered the part of oboe that makes the instrument so difficult because the individual nature of each reed means that it is hard to achieve a consistent sound. Slight variations in temperature, humidity, altitude, weather, and climate can also have an effect on the sound of the reed, as well as minute changes in the physique of the reed.\nOboists often prepare several reeds to achieve a consistent sound, as well as to prepare for environmental factors such as chipping of a reed or other hazards. Oboists may have different preferred methods for soaking their reeds to produce optimal sounds; the most preferred method tends to be to soak the oboe reed in water before playing.\nPlastic oboe reeds are rarely used, and are less readily available than plastic reeds for other instruments, such as the clarinet. However, they do exist, and are produced by brands such as Legere.\nHistory.\nCenturies before the Spanish and Portuguese conquests in the New World, the early version of the \"chirim\u00eda\" arrived in Europe from the Middle East due to cultural exchanges. The Crusades brought Europeans into contact with the Turko-Arabic \"zurna\". However, the oboe\u2019s roots go back even further, linked to ancient reed instruments like those of Egypt and Mesopotamia, as well as the Greek \"aulos\" and Roman \"tibia\". Nearly lost in the West during the Dark Ages, the oboe reappeared with the Arabic \"zurna\" in the 13th century, evolving through European bagpipes and finally becoming the French hautbois in the 17th century, which is when modern oboe history truly began. In English, prior to 1770, the standard instrument was called a \"hautbois\", \"hoboy\", or \"French hoboy\" ( ). This was borrowed from the French name, , which is a compound word made up of \"haut\" (\"high\", \"loud\") and \"bois\" (\"wood\", \"woodwind\"). The French word means 'high-pitched woodwind' in English. The spelling of \"oboe\" was adopted into English c.\u20091770 from the Italian \"obo\u00e8\", a transliteration of the 17th-century pronunciation of the French name.\nThe regular oboe first appeared in the mid-17th century, when it was called a \"hautbois\". This name was also used for its predecessor, the shawm, from which the basic form of the \"hautbois\" was derived. Major differences between the two instruments include the division of the \"hautbois\" into three sections, or joints (which allowed for more precise manufacture), and the elimination of the \"pirouette\", the wooden ledge below the reed which allowed players to rest their lips.\nThe exact date and location of origin of the \"hautbois\" are obscure, as are the inventors. Circumstantial evidence, such as the statement by the flautist composer Michel de la Barre in his \"Memoire\", points to members of the Philidor (Filidor) and Hotteterre families. The instrument may in fact have had multiple inventors. The \"hautbois\" quickly spread throughout Europe, including Great Britain, where it was called \"hautboy\", \"hoboy\", \"hautboit\", \"howboye\", and similar variants of the French name. It was the main melody instrument in early military bands, until it was succeeded by the clarinet.\nThe standard Baroque oboe is generally made of boxwood and has three keys: a \"great\" key and two side keys (the side key is often doubled to facilitate use of either the right or left hand on the bottom holes). In order to produce higher pitches, the player has to \"overblow\", or increase the air stream to reach the next harmonic. Notable oboe-makers of the period are the Germans Jacob Denner and J.H. Eichentopf, and the English Thomas Stanesby (died 1734) and his son Thomas Jr (died 1754). The range for the Baroque oboe comfortably extends from C4 to D6. In the mid-20th century, with the resurgence of interest in early music, a few makers began producing copies to specifications taken from surviving historical instruments.\nClassical.\nThe Classical period brought a regular oboe whose bore was gradually narrowed, and the instrument became outfitted with several keys, among them those for the notes D\u266f, F, and G\u266f. A key similar to the modern octave key was also added called the \"slur key\", though it was at first used more like the \"flick\" keys on the modern German bassoon. Only later did French instrument makers redesign the octave key to be used in the manner of the modern key (i.e. held open for the upper register, closed for the lower). The narrower bore allows the higher notes to be more easily played, and composers began to use the oboe's upper register more often in their works. Because of this, the oboe's tessitura in the Classical era was somewhat broader than that found in Baroque works. The range for the Classical oboe extends from C4 to F6 (using the scientific pitch notation system), though some German and Austrian oboes are capable of playing one half-step lower.\nSeveral Classical-era composers wrote concertos for oboe. Mozart composed both the solo concerto in C major K. 314/285d and the lost original of Sinfonia Concertante in E\u266d major K. 297b, as well as a fragment of F major concerto K. 417f. Haydn wrote both the Sinfonia Concertante in B\u266d Hob. I:105 and the spurious concerto in C major Hob. VIIg:C1. Beethoven wrote the F major concerto, Hess 12, of which only sketches survive (though the second movement was reconstructed in the late 20th century). Numerous other composers including Johann Christian Bach, Johann Christian Fischer, Jan Anton\u00edn Ko\u017eeluh, and Ludwig August Lebrun also composed pieces for the oboe. Many solos exist for the regular oboe in chamber, symphonic, and operatic compositions from the Classical era.\nWiener oboe.\nThe Wiener oboe (Viennese oboe) is a type of modern oboe that retains the essential bore and tonal characteristics of the historical oboe. The Akademiemodel Wiener Oboe, first developed in the late 19th century by Josef Hajek from earlier instruments by C. T. Golde of Dresden (1803\u201373), is now made by several makers such as Andr\u00e9 Constantinides, Karl Rado, Guntram Wolf, Christian Rauch and Yamaha. It has a wider internal bore, a shorter and broader reed and the fingering-system is very different from the conservatoire oboe. In \"The Oboe\", Geoffrey Burgess and Bruce Haynes write \"The differences are most clearly marked in the middle register, which is reedier and more pungent, and the upper register, which is richer in harmonics on the Viennese oboe\". Guntram Wolf describes them: \"From the concept of the bore, the Viennese oboe is the last representative of the historical oboes, adapted for the louder, larger orchestra, and fitted with an extensive mechanism. Its great advantage is the ease of speaking, even in the lowest register. It can be played very expressively and blends well with other instruments.\" The Viennese oboe is, along with the Vienna horn, perhaps the most distinctive member of the Wiener Philharmoniker instrumentarium.\nConservatoire oboe.\nThis oboe was developed further in the 19th century by the Tri\u00e9bert family of Paris. Using the Boehm flute as a source of ideas for key work, Guillaume Tri\u00e9bert and his sons, Charles and Frederic, devised a series of increasingly complex yet functional key systems. A variant form using large tone holes, the Boehm system oboe, was never in common use, though it was used in some military bands in Europe into the 20th century. F. Lor\u00e9e of Paris made further developments to the modern instrument. Minor improvements to the bore and key work have continued through the 20th century, but there has been no fundamental change to the general characteristics of the instrument for several decades.\nModern oboe.\nThe modern standard oboe is most commonly made from grenadilla, also known as African blackwood, although some manufacturers also make oboes out of other species of the genus \"Dalbergia\", which includes cocobolo, rosewood, and violetwood (also known as kingwood). Ebony (genus Diospyros) has also been used. Student model oboes are often made from plastic resin to make the instrument cheaper and more durable.\nThe oboe has an extremely narrow conical bore. It is played with a double reed consisting of two thin blades of cane tied together on a small-diameter metal tube (staple) which is inserted into the reed socket at the top of the instrument. The commonly accepted range for the oboe extends from B\u266d3 to about G6, over two and a half octaves, though its common tessitura lies from C4 to E\u266d6. Some student oboes do not have a B\u266d key and only extend down to B3.\nA modern oboe with the \"full conservatoire\" (\"conservatory\" in the US) or Gillet key system has 45 pieces of keywork, with the possible additions of a third-octave key and alternate (left little finger) F- or C-key. The keys are usually made of nickel silver, and are silver- or occasionally gold-plated. Besides the full conservatoire system, oboes are also made using the British thumbplate system. Most have \"semi-automatic\" octave keys, in which the second-octave action closes the first, and some have a fully automatic octave key system, as used on saxophones. Some full-conservatory oboes have finger holes covered with rings rather than plates (\"open-holed\"), and most of the professional models have at least the right-hand third key open-holed. Professional oboes used in the UK and Iceland frequently feature conservatoire system combined with a thumb plate. Releasing the thumb plate has the same effect as pressing down the right-hand index-finger key. This produces alternate options which eliminate the necessity for most of the common cross-intervals (intervals where two or more keys need to be released and pressed down simultaneously), as cross-intervals are much more difficult to execute in such a way that the sound remains clear and continuous throughout the frequency change (a quality also called legato and often called for in the oboe repertoire).\nOther members of the oboe family.\nThe standard oboe has several siblings of various sizes and playing ranges. The most widely known and used today is the cor anglais (English horn), the alto member of the family. A transposing instrument; it is pitched in F, a perfect fifth lower than the oboe. The oboe d'amore, the mezzo-soprano member of the family, is pitched in A, a minor third lower than the oboe. J.S. Bach made extensive use of both the oboe d'amore as well as the \"taille\" and oboe da caccia, Baroque antecedents of the cor anglais.\nLess common is the bass oboe (also called baritone oboe), which sounds one octave lower than the oboe. Delius, Strauss and Holst scored for the instrument.\nSimilar to the bass oboe is the more powerful heckelphone, which has a wider bore and larger tone than the baritone oboe. Only 165 heckelphones have ever been made. Competent heckelphone players are difficult to find due to the extreme rarity of this particular instrument.\nThe least common of all are the musette (also called oboe musette or piccolo oboe), the sopranino member of the family (it is usually pitched in E\u266d or F above the oboe), and the contrabass oboe (typically pitched in C, two octaves deeper than the standard oboe).\nFolk versions of the oboe, sometimes equipped with extensive keywork, are found throughout Europe. These include the musette (France) and the piston oboe and bombarde (Brittany), the piffero and ciaramella (Italy), and the xirimia (also spelled chirimia) (Spain). Many of these are played in tandem with local forms of bagpipe, particularly with the Italian m\u00fcsa and zampogna or Breton biniou.\nDavid Stock's concerto \"Oborama\" features the Oboe and its other members as a soloist, the instrument changing in each movement. (ex. Oboe D'amore in movement 3 and Bass Oboe in movement 4)\nNotable classical works featuring the oboe.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nUnaccompanied pieces.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nUse in non-classical music.\nJazz.\nThe oboe remains uncommon in jazz music, but there have been notable uses of the instrument. Some early bands in the 1920s and 1930s, most notably that of Paul Whiteman, included it for coloristic purposes. Most often in this era it was used for dance band music, but occasionally oboists may be heard used in a similar manner to a saxophone for solos. Most of the time these oboists were already playing with the band or orchestra on a different woodwind instrument. The multi-instrumentalist Garvin Bushell (1902\u20131991) played the oboe in jazz bands as early as 1924 and used the instrument throughout his career, eventually recording with John Coltrane in 1961. Gil Evans featured oboe in sections of his famous \"Sketches of Spain\" collaboration with trumpeter Miles Davis. Though primarily a tenor saxophone and flute player, Yusef Lateef was among the first (in 1961) to use the oboe as a solo instrument in modern jazz performances and recordings. Composer and double bassist Charles Mingus gave the oboe a brief but prominent role (played by Dick Hafer) in his composition \"I.X. Love\" on the 1963 album \"Mingus Mingus Mingus Mingus Mingus\".\nWith the birth of jazz fusion in the late 1960s, and its continuous development through the following decade, the oboe became somewhat more prominent, replacing on some occasions the saxophone as the focal point. The oboe was used with great success by the Welsh multi-instrumentalist Karl Jenkins in his work with the groups Nucleus and Soft Machine, and by the American woodwind player Paul McCandless, co-founder of the Paul Winter Consort and later Oregon.\nThe 1980s saw an increasing number of oboists try their hand at non-classical work, and many players of note have recorded and performed alternative music on oboe. Some present-day jazz groups influenced by classical music, such as the Maria Schneider Orchestra, feature the oboe.\nRock and pop.\nIndie singer-songwriter and composer Sufjan Stevens, having studied the instrument in school, often includes the instrument in his arrangements and compositions, most frequently in his geographic tone-poems \"Illinois\", \"Michigan\".\nPeter Gabriel played the oboe while he was a member of Genesis, most prominently on \"The Musical Box\". Andy Mackay of Roxy Music plays oboe, sometimes with a Wah-Wah pedal.\n10cc's track 'Modern Man Blues' from the 1977 Deceptive Bends album features an echoed oboe motif during the song's intro, bridge and the guitar solo section. The part was played by Tony Spath, sound engineer and occasional musical collaborator of the band.\nA solo oboe, played by Deborah Workman, is featured prominently in the last third of R.E.M's \"Nightswimming\" (1993). First it plays a short solo, and then, in the outro of the song, gently riffs on the solo theme to guide us to the end of the tune.\nFilm music.\nThe oboe is frequently featured in film music, often to underscore a particularly poignant or emotional scene. An example is the 1989 film \"Born on the Fourth of July\". One of the most prominent uses of the oboe in a film score is Ennio Morricone's \"Gabriel's Oboe\" theme from the 1986 film \"The Mission\".\nIt is featured as a solo instrument in the theme \"Across the Stars\" from the John Williams score to the 2002 film \"\".\nThe oboe is also featured as a solo instrument in the \"Love Theme\" in Nino Rota's score to \"The Godfather\" (1972).\nManufacturers.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "22207", "revid": "846078", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22207", "title": "Other Logical Fallacies", "text": ""}
{"id": "22208", "revid": "44515959", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22208", "title": "Organic chemistry", "text": "Subdiscipline of chemistry, focusing on carbon compounds\nOrganic chemistry is a subdiscipline within chemistry involving the scientific study of the structure, properties, and reactions of organic compounds and organic materials, i.e., matter in its various forms that contain carbon atoms. Study of structure determines their structural formula. Study of properties includes physical and chemical properties, and evaluation of chemical reactivity to understand their behavior. The study of organic reactions includes the chemical synthesis of natural products, drugs, and polymers, and study of individual organic molecules in the laboratory and via theoretical (in silico) study.\nThe range of chemicals studied in organic chemistry includes hydrocarbons (compounds containing only carbon and hydrogen) as well as compounds based on carbon, but also containing other elements, especially oxygen, nitrogen, sulfur, phosphorus (included in many biochemicals) and the halogens. Organometallic chemistry is the study of compounds containing carbon\u2013metal bonds.\nOrganic compounds form the basis of all earthly life and constitute the majority of known chemicals. The bonding patterns of carbon, with its valence of four\u2014formal single, double, and triple bonds, plus structures with delocalized electrons\u2014make the array of organic compounds structurally diverse, and their range of applications enormous. They form the basis of, or are constituents of, many commercial products including pharmaceuticals; petrochemicals and agrichemicals, and products made from them including lubricants, solvents; plastics; fuels and explosives. The study of organic chemistry overlaps organometallic chemistry and biochemistry, but also with medicinal chemistry, polymer chemistry, and materials science.\nEducational aspects.\nOrganic chemistry is typically taught at the college or university level. It is considered a very challenging course but has also been made accessible to students.\nHistory.\nBefore the 18th century, chemists generally believed that compounds obtained from living organisms were endowed with a vital force that distinguished them from inorganic compounds. According to the concept of vitalism (vital force theory), organic matter was endowed with a \"vital force\". During the first half of the nineteenth century, some of the first systematic studies of organic compounds were reported. Around 1816 Michel Chevreul started a study of soaps made from various fats and alkalis. He separated the acids that, in combination with the alkali, produced the soap. Since these were all individual compounds, he demonstrated that it was possible to make a chemical change in various fats (which traditionally come from organic sources), producing new compounds, without \"vital force\". In 1828 Friedrich W\u00f6hler produced the \"organic\" chemical urea (carbamide), a constituent of urine, from \"inorganic\" starting materials (the salts potassium cyanate and ammonium sulfate), in what is now called the W\u00f6hler synthesis. Although W\u00f6hler himself was cautious about claiming he had disproved vitalism, this was the first time a substance thought to be organic was synthesized in the laboratory without biological (organic) starting materials. The event is now generally accepted as indeed disproving the doctrine of vitalism.\nAfter W\u00f6hler, Justus von Liebig worked on the organization of organic chemistry, being considered one of its principal founders.\nIn 1856, William Henry Perkin, while trying to manufacture quinine, accidentally produced the organic dye now known as Perkin's mauve. His discovery, made widely known through its financial success, greatly increased interest in organic chemistry.\nA crucial breakthrough for organic chemistry was the concept of chemical structure, developed independently in 1858 by both Friedrich August Kekul\u00e9 and Archibald Scott Couper. Both researchers suggested that tetravalent carbon atoms could link to each other to form a carbon lattice, and that the detailed patterns of atomic bonding could be discerned by skillful interpretations of appropriate chemical reactions.\nThe era of the pharmaceutical industry began in the last decade of the 19th century when the German company, Bayer, first manufactured acetylsalicylic acid\u2014more commonly known as aspirin. By 1910 Paul Ehrlich and his laboratory group began developing arsenic-based arsphenamine (Salvarsan) as the first effective medicinal treatment of syphilis, and thereby initiated the medical practice of chemotherapy. Ehrlich popularized the concepts of \"magic bullet\" drugs and of systematically improving drug therapies. His laboratory made decisive contributions to developing antiserum for diphtheria and standardizing therapeutic serums.\nEarly examples of organic reactions and applications were often found because of a combination of luck and preparation for unexpected observations. The latter half of the 19th century however witnessed systematic studies of organic compounds. The development of synthetic indigo is illustrative. The production of indigo from plant sources dropped from 19,000 tons in 1897 to 1,000 tons by 1914 thanks to the synthetic methods developed by Adolf von Baeyer. In 2002, 17,000 tons of synthetic indigo were produced from petrochemicals.\nIn the early part of the 20th century, polymers and enzymes were shown to be large organic molecules, and petroleum was shown to be of biological origin.\nThe multiple-step synthesis of complex organic compounds is called total synthesis. Total synthesis of complex natural compounds increased in complexity to glucose and terpineol. For example, cholesterol-related compounds have opened ways to synthesize complex human hormones and their modified derivatives. Since the start of the 20th century, complexity of total syntheses has been increased to include molecules of high complexity such as lysergic acid and vitamin B12.\nThe discovery of petroleum and the development of the petrochemical industry spurred the development of organic chemistry. Converting individual petroleum compounds into \"types\" of compounds by various chemical processes led to organic reactions enabling a broad range of industrial and commercial products including, among (many) others: plastics, synthetic rubber, organic adhesives, and various property-modifying petroleum additives and catalysts.\nThe majority of chemical compounds occurring in biological organisms are carbon compounds, so the association between organic chemistry and biochemistry is so close that biochemistry might be regarded as in essence a branch of organic chemistry. Although the history of biochemistry might be taken to span some four centuries, fundamental understanding of the field only began to develop in the late 19th century and the actual term \"biochemistry\" was coined around the start of 20th century. Research in the field increased throughout the twentieth century, without any indication of slackening in the rate of increase, as may be verified by inspection of abstraction and indexing services such as BIOSIS Previews and Biological Abstracts, which began in the 1920s as a single annual volume, but has grown so drastically that by the end of the 20th century it was only available to the everyday user as an online electronic database.\nCharacterization.\nSince organic compounds often exist as mixtures, a variety of techniques have also been developed to assess purity; chromatography techniques are especially important for this application, and include HPLC and gas chromatography. Traditional methods of separation include distillation, crystallization, evaporation, magnetic separation and solvent extraction.\nOrganic compounds were traditionally characterized by a variety of chemical tests, called \"wet methods\", but such tests have been largely displaced by spectroscopic or other computer-intensive methods of analysis. Listed in approximate order of utility, the chief analytical methods are:\nTraditional spectroscopic methods such as infrared spectroscopy, optical rotation, and UV/VIS spectroscopy provide relatively nonspecific structural information but remain in use for specific applications. Refractive index and density can also be important for substance identification.\nProperties.\nThe physical properties of organic compounds typically of interest include both quantitative and qualitative features. Quantitative information includes a melting point, boiling point, solubility, and index of refraction. Qualitative properties include odor, consistency, and color.\nMelting and boiling properties.\nOrganic compounds typically melt and many boil. In contrast, while inorganic materials generally can be melted, many do not boil, and instead tend to degrade. In earlier times, the melting point (m.p.) and boiling point (b.p.) provided crucial information on the purity and identity of organic compounds. The melting and boiling points correlate with the polarity of the molecules and their molecular weight. Some organic compounds, especially symmetrical ones, sublime. A well-known example of a sublimable organic compound is \"para\"-dichlorobenzene, the odiferous constituent of modern mothballs. Organic compounds are usually not very stable at temperatures above 300\u00a0\u00b0C, although some exceptions exist.\nSolubility.\nNeutral organic compounds tend to be hydrophobic; that is, they are less soluble in water than in organic solvents. Exceptions include organic compounds that contain ionizable groups as well as low molecular weight alcohols, amines, and carboxylic acids where hydrogen bonding occurs. Otherwise, organic compounds tend to dissolve in organic solvents. Solubility varies widely with the organic solute and with the organic solvent.\nSolid state properties.\nVarious specialized properties of molecular crystals and organic polymers with conjugated systems are of interest depending on applications, e.g. thermo-mechanical and electro-mechanical such as piezoelectricity, electrical conductivity (see conductive polymers and organic semiconductors), and electro-optical (e.g. non-linear optics) properties. For historical reasons, such properties are mainly the subjects of the areas of polymer science and materials science.\nNomenclature.\nThe names of organic compounds are either systematic, following logically from a set of rules, or nonsystematic, following various traditions. Systematic nomenclature is stipulated by specifications from IUPAC (International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry). Systematic nomenclature starts with the name for a parent structure within the molecule of interest. This parent name is then modified by prefixes, suffixes, and numbers to unambiguously convey the structure. Given that millions of organic compounds are known, rigorous use of systematic names can be cumbersome. Thus, IUPAC recommendations are more closely followed for simple compounds, but not complex molecules. To use the systematic naming, one must know the structures and names of the parent structures. Parent structures include unsubstituted hydrocarbons, heterocycles, and mono functionalized derivatives thereof.\nNonsystematic nomenclature is simpler and unambiguous, at least to organic chemists. Nonsystematic names do not indicate the structure of the compound. They are common for complex molecules, which include most natural products. Thus, the informally named lysergic acid diethylamide is systematically named\n(6a\"R\",9\"R\")-\"N\",\"N\"-diethyl-7-methyl-4,6,6a,7,8,9-hexahydroindolo-[4,3-\"fg\"] quinoline-9-carboxamide.\nWith the increased use of computing, other naming methods have evolved that are intended to be interpreted by machines. Two popular formats are SMILES and InChI.\nStructural drawings.\nOrganic molecules are described more commonly by drawings or structural formulas, combinations of drawings and chemical symbols. The line-angle formula is simple and unambiguous. In this system, the endpoints and intersections of each line represent one carbon, and hydrogen atoms can either be notated explicitly or assumed to be present as implied by tetravalent carbon.\nHistory.\nBy 1880 an explosion in the number of chemical compounds being discovered occurred assisted by new synthetic and analytical techniques. Grignard described the situation as \"chaos le plus complet\" (complete chaos) due to the lack of convention it was possible to have multiple names for the same compound. This led to the creation of the Geneva rules in 1892.\nClassification of organic compounds.\nFunctional groups.\nThe concept of functional groups is central in organic chemistry, both as a means to classify structures and for predicting properties. A functional group is a molecular module, and the reactivity of that functional group is assumed, within limits, to be the same in a variety of molecules. Functional groups can have a decisive influence on the chemical and physical properties of organic compounds. Molecules are classified based on their functional groups. Alcohols, for example, all have the subunit C-O-H. All alcohols tend to be somewhat hydrophilic, usually form esters, and usually can be converted to the corresponding halides. Most functional groups feature heteroatoms (atoms other than C and H). Organic compounds are classified according to functional groups, alcohols, carboxylic acids, amines, etc. Functional groups make the molecule more acidic or basic due to their electronic influence on surrounding parts of the molecule.\nAs the p\"Ka\" (aka basicity) of the molecular addition/functional group increases, there is a corresponding dipole, when measured, increases in strength. A dipole directed towards the functional group (higher p\"Ka\" therefore basic nature of group) points towards it and decreases in strength with increasing distance. Dipole distance (measured in Angstroms) and steric hindrance towards the functional group have an intermolecular and intramolecular effect on the surrounding environment and pH level.\nDifferent functional groups have different p\"Ka\" values and bond strengths (single, double, triple) leading to increased electrophilicity with lower p\"Ka\" and increased nucleophile strength with higher p\"Ka\". More basic/nucleophilic functional groups desire to attack an electrophilic functional group with a lower p\"Ka\" on another molecule (intermolecular) or within the same molecule (intramolecular). Any group with a net acidic p\"Ka\" that gets within range, such as an acyl or carbonyl group is fair game. Since the likelihood of being attacked decreases with an increase in p\"Ka\", acyl chloride components with the lowest measured p\"Ka\" values are most likely to be attacked, followed by carboxylic acids (p\"Ka\" = 4), thiols (13), malonates (13), alcohols (17), aldehydes (20), nitriles (25), esters (25), then amines (35). Amines are very basic, and are great nucleophiles/attackers.\nAliphatic compounds.\nThe aliphatic hydrocarbons are subdivided into three groups of homologous series according to their state of saturation:\nThe rest of the group is classified according to the functional groups present. Such compounds can be \"straight-chain\", branched-chain or cyclic. The degree of branching affects characteristics, such as the octane number or cetane number in petroleum chemistry.\nBoth saturated (alicyclic) compounds and unsaturated compounds exist as cyclic derivatives. The most stable rings contain five or six carbon atoms, but large rings (macrocycles) and smaller rings are common. The smallest cycloalkane family is the three-membered cyclopropane ((CH2)3). Saturated cyclic compounds contain single bonds only, whereas aromatic rings have an alternating (or conjugated) double bond. Cycloalkanes do not contain multiple bonds, whereas the cycloalkenes and the cycloalkynes do.\nAromatic compounds.\nAromatic hydrocarbons contain conjugated double bonds. This means that every carbon atom in the ring is sp2 hybridized, allowing for added stability. The most important example is benzene, the structure of which was formulated by Kekul\u00e9 who first proposed the delocalization or resonance principle for explaining its structure. For \"conventional\" cyclic compounds, aromaticity is conferred by the presence of 4n + 2 delocalized pi electrons, where n is an integer. Particular instability (antiaromaticity) is conferred by the presence of 4n conjugated pi electrons.\nHeterocyclic compounds.\nThe characteristics of the cyclic hydrocarbons are again altered if heteroatoms are present, which can exist as either substituents attached externally to the ring (exocyclic) or as a member of the ring itself (endocyclic). In the case of the latter, the ring is termed a heterocycle. Pyridine and furan are examples of aromatic heterocycles while piperidine and tetrahydrofuran are the corresponding alicyclic heterocycles. The heteroatom of heterocyclic molecules is generally oxygen, sulfur, or nitrogen, with the latter being particularly common in biochemical systems.\nHeterocycles are commonly found in a wide range of products including aniline dyes and medicines. Additionally, they are prevalent in a wide range of biochemical compounds such as alkaloids, vitamins, steroids, and nucleic acids (e.g. DNA, RNA).\nRings can fuse with other rings on an edge to give polycyclic compounds. The purine nucleoside bases are notable polycyclic aromatic heterocycles. Rings can also fuse on a \"corner\" such that one atom (almost always carbon) has two bonds going to one ring and two to another. Such compounds are termed \"spiro\" and are important in several natural products.\nPolymers.\nOne important property of carbon is that it readily forms chains, or networks, that are linked by carbon-carbon (carbon-to-carbon) bonds. The linking process is called polymerization, while the chains, or networks, are called polymers. The source compound is called a monomer.\nTwo main groups of polymers exist: synthetic polymers and biopolymers. Synthetic polymers are artificially manufactured, and are commonly referred to as industrial polymers. Biopolymers occur within a respectfully natural environment, or without human intervention.\nBiomolecules.\nBiomolecular chemistry is a major category within organic chemistry which is frequently studied by biochemists. Many complex multi-functional group molecules are important in living organisms. Some are long-chain biopolymers, and these include peptides, DNA, RNA and the polysaccharides such as starches in animals and celluloses in plants. The other main classes are amino acids (monomer building blocks of peptides and proteins), carbohydrates (which includes the polysaccharides), the nucleic acids (which include DNA and RNA as polymers), and the lipids. Besides, animal biochemistry contains many small molecule intermediates which assist in energy production through the Krebs cycle, and produces isoprene, the most common hydrocarbon in animals. Isoprenes in animals form the important steroid structural (cholesterol) and steroid hormone compounds; and in plants form terpenes, terpenoids, some alkaloids, and a class of hydrocarbons called biopolymer polyisoprenoids present in the latex of various species of plants, which is the basis for making rubber. Biologists usually classify the above-mentioned biomolecules into four main groups, i.e., proteins, lipids, carbohydrates, and nucleic acids. Petroleum and its derivatives are considered organic molecules, which is consistent with the fact that this oil comes from the fossilization of living beings, i.e., biomolecules.\nSee also: peptide synthesis, oligonucleotide synthesis and carbohydrate synthesis.\nSmall molecules.\nIn pharmacology, an important group of organic compounds is small molecules, also referred to as \"small organic compounds\". In this context, a small molecule is a small organic compound that is biologically active but is not a polymer. In practice, small molecules have a molar mass less than approximately 1000 g/mol.\nFullerenes.\nFullerenes and carbon nanotubes, carbon compounds with spheroidal and tubular structures, have stimulated much research into the related field of materials science. The first fullerene was discovered in 1985 by Sir Harold W. Kroto of the United Kingdom and by Richard E. Smalley and Robert F. Curl Jr., of the United States. Using a laser to vaporize graphite rods in an atmosphere of helium gas, these chemists and their assistants obtained cagelike molecules composed of 60 carbon atoms (C60) joined by single and double bonds to form a hollow sphere with 12 pentagonal and 20 hexagonal faces\u2014a design that resembles a football, or soccer ball. In 1996 the trio was awarded the Nobel Prize for their pioneering efforts. The C60 molecule was named buckminsterfullerene (or, more simply, the buckyball) after the American architect R. Buckminster Fuller, whose geodesic dome is constructed on the same structural principles.\nOthers.\nOrganic compounds containing bonds of carbon to nitrogen, oxygen and the halogens are not normally grouped separately. Others are sometimes put into major groups within organic chemistry and discussed under titles such as organosulfur chemistry, organometallic chemistry, organophosphorus chemistry and organosilicon chemistry.\nOrganic reactions.\nOrganic reactions are chemical reactions involving organic compounds. Many of these reactions are associated with functional groups. The general theory of these reactions involves careful analysis of such properties as the electron affinity of key atoms, bond strengths and steric hindrance. These factors can determine the relative stability of short-lived reactive intermediates, which usually directly determine the path of the reaction.\nThe basic reaction types are: addition reactions, elimination reactions, substitution reactions, pericyclic reactions, rearrangement reactions and redox reactions. An example of a common reaction is a substitution reaction written as:\nwhere X is some functional group and Nu is a nucleophile.\nThe number of possible organic reactions is infinite. However, certain general patterns are observed that can be used to describe many common or useful reactions. Each reaction has a stepwise reaction mechanism that explains how it happens in sequence\u2014although the detailed description of steps is not always clear from a list of reactants alone.\nThe stepwise course of any given reaction mechanism can be represented using arrow pushing techniques in which curved arrows are used to track the movement of electrons as starting materials transition through intermediates to final products.\nOrganic synthesis.\nSynthetic organic chemistry is an applied science as it borders engineering, the \"design, analysis, and/or construction of works for practical purposes\". Organic synthesis of a novel compound is a problem-solving task, where a synthesis is designed for a target molecule by selecting optimal reactions from optimal starting materials. Complex compounds can have tens of reaction steps that sequentially build the desired molecule. The synthesis proceeds by utilizing the reactivity of the functional groups in the molecule. For example, a carbonyl compound can be used as a nucleophile by converting it into an enolate, or as an electrophile; the combination of the two is called the aldol reaction. Designing practically useful syntheses always requires conducting the actual synthesis in the laboratory. The scientific practice of creating novel synthetic routes for complex molecules is called total synthesis.\nStrategies to design a synthesis include retrosynthesis, popularized by E.J. Corey, which starts with the target molecule and splices it to pieces according to known reactions. The pieces, or the proposed precursors, receive the same treatment, until available and ideally inexpensive starting materials are reached. Then, the retrosynthesis is written in the opposite direction to give the synthesis. A \"synthetic tree\" can be constructed because each compound and also each precursor has multiple syntheses.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "22209", "revid": "37507540", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22209", "title": "Orthography", "text": "Set of conventions for written language\nAn orthography is a set of conventions for writing a language, including norms of spelling, punctuation, word boundaries, capitalization, hyphenation, and emphasis.\nMost national and international languages have an established writing system that has undergone substantial standardization, thus exhibiting less dialect variation than the spoken language. These processes can fossilize pronunciation patterns that are no longer routinely observed in speech (e.g. \"would\" and \"should\"); they can also reflect deliberate efforts to introduce variability for the sake of national identity, as seen in Noah Webster's efforts to introduce easily noticeable differences between American and British spelling (e.g. \"honor\" and \"honour\").\nOrthographic norms develop through social and political influence at various levels, such as encounters with print in education, the workplace, and the state. Some nations have established language academies in an attempt to regulate aspects of the national language, including its orthography\u2014such as the Acad\u00e9mie Fran\u00e7aise in France and the Royal Spanish Academy in Spain. No such authority exists for most languages, including English. Some non-state organizations, such as newspapers of record and academic journals, choose greater orthographic homogeneity by enforcing a particular style guide or spelling standard such as Oxford spelling.\nTerminology.\nThe English word \"orthography\" is first attested in the 15th century, ultimately from ( 'correct') and ( 'to write').\nOrthography in phonetic writing systems is often concerned with matters of spelling, i.e. the correspondence between written graphemes and the phonemes found in speech. Other elements that may be considered part of orthography include hyphenation, capitalization, word boundaries, emphasis, and punctuation. Thus, \"orthography\" describes or defines the symbols used in writing, and the conventions that regulate their use.\nMost natural languages developed as oral languages and writing systems have usually been crafted or adapted as ways of representing the spoken language. The rules for doing this tend to become standardized for a given language, leading to the development of an orthography that is generally considered \"correct\". In linguistics, \"orthography\" often refers to any method of writing a language without judgement as to right and wrong, with a scientific understanding that orthographic standardization exists on a spectrum of strength of convention. The original sense of the word, though, implies a dichotomy of correct and incorrect, and the word is still most often used to refer specifically to a standardized prescriptive manner of writing. A distinction is made between emic and etic viewpoints, with the emic approach taking account of perceptions of correctness among language users, and the etic approach being purely descriptive, considering only the empirical qualities of any system as used.\nUnits and notation.\nOrthographic units, such as letters of an alphabet, are conceptualized as graphemes. These are a type of abstraction, analogous to the phonemes of spoken languages; different physical forms of written symbols are considered to represent the same grapheme if the differences between them are not significant for meaning. Thus, a grapheme can be regarded as an abstraction of a collection of glyphs that are all functionally equivalent. For example, in written English (or other languages using the Latin alphabet), there are two different physical representations (glyphs) of the lowercase Latin letter \"a\": \u27e8a\u27e9 and \u27e8\u0251\u27e9. Since the substitution of either of them for the other cannot change the meaning of a word, they are considered to be allographs of the same grapheme, which can be written |a|. The italic and boldface forms are also allographic.\nGraphemes or sequences of them are sometimes placed between angle brackets, as in |b| or |back|. This distinguishes them from phonemic transcription, which is placed between slashes (, ), and from phonetic transcription, which is placed between square brackets (, ).\nTypes.\nThe writing systems on which orthographies are based can be divided into a number of types, depending on what type of unit each symbol serves to represent. The principal types are \"logographic\" (with symbols representing words or morphemes), \"syllabic\" (with symbols representing syllables), and \"alphabetic\" (with symbols roughly representing phonemes). Many writing systems combine features of more than one of these types, and a number of detailed classifications have been proposed. Japanese is an example of a writing system that can be written using a combination of logographic kanji characters and syllabic hiragana and katakana characters; as with many non-alphabetic languages, alphabetic romaji characters may also be used as needed.\nCorrespondence with pronunciation.\nOrthographies that use alphabets and syllabaries are based on the principle that written graphemes correspond to units of sound of the spoken language: phonemes in the former case, and syllables in the latter. In virtually all cases, this correspondence is not exact. Different languages' orthographies offer different degrees of correspondence between spelling and pronunciation. An orthography in which the correspondences between spelling and pronunciation are highly complex or inconsistent is called a \"deep orthography\" (or less formally, the language is said to have \"irregular spelling\"). An orthography with relatively simple, consistent correspondences (i.e. more bijective, or one-to-one) between spelling and pronunciation is called \"shallow\" (and the language has \"regular spelling\").\nThe Navajo alphabet is a deep orthography. The Navajo language is a complex language system that relies on relatively subtle phonetics, including distinct tones and nasalization. The script likewise exhibits complexities representing the language, which presents challenges for people trying to acquire literacy.\nSpanish is an alphabet with shallow orthography; there is clear one-to-one correspondence between phonemes and graphemes. Another is the Hawaiian alphabet, which only includes eight vowel letters and five consonant letters, for a total of thirteen. This allows literacy to be acquired quickly compared to deeper orthographies.\nDeveloping literacy.\nAccording to studies, children learn to read and write more quickly in shallow orthographies, such as Spanish, compared to deeper orthographies, like English. Orthographic mapping is the process of associating phonemes with graphemes. By establishing these strong connections, children can easily decode unfamiliar words with what they already know. Orthographic mapping also helps with vocabulary development and reading fluency. Although shallow orthography is easier to grasp, researchers have argued that deeper orthographies make it challenging for individuals with dyslexia to learn.\nDefective orthographies.\nAn orthography based on a correspondence to phonemes may sometimes lack characters to represent all the phonemic distinctions in the language. This is called a defective orthography. An example in English is the lack of any indication of stress. Another is the digraph |th|, which represents two different phonemes (as in \"then\" and \"thin\") and replaced the old letters |\u00f0| and |\u00fe|. A more systematic example is that of abjads like the Arabic and Hebrew alphabets, in which the short vowels are normally left unwritten and must be inferred by the reader.\nWhen an alphabet is borrowed from its original language for use with a new language\u2014as has been done with the Latin alphabet for many languages, or Japanese katakana for non-Japanese words\u2014it often proves defective in representing the new language's phonemes. Sometimes this problem is addressed by the use of such devices as digraphs (such as |sh| and |ch| in English, where pairs of letters represent single sounds), diacritics (like the caron on the letters |\u0161| and |\u010d|, which represent those same sounds in Czech), or the addition of completely new symbols (as some languages have introduced the letter |w| to the Latin alphabet) or of symbols from another alphabet, such as the rune |\u00fe| in Icelandic.\nAfter the classical period, Greek developed a lowercase letter system with diacritics to enable foreigners to learn pronunciation and grammatical features. As pronunciation of letters changed over time, the diacritics were reduced to representing the stressed syllable. In Modern Greek typesetting, this system has been simplified to have only a single accent to indicate which syllable is stressed.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWorks cited.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "22210", "revid": "49566734", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22210", "title": "One-time pad", "text": "Encryption technique\nThe one-time pad (OTP) is an encryption technique that cannot be cracked in cryptography. It requires the use of a single-use pre-shared key that is larger than or equal to the size of the message being sent. In this technique, a plaintext is paired with a random secret key (also referred to as a \"one-time pad\"). Then, each bit or character of the plaintext is encrypted by combining it with the corresponding bit or character from the pad using modular addition.\nThe resulting ciphertext is impossible to decrypt or break if the following four conditions are met:\nThese requirements make the OTP the only known encryption system that is mathematically proven to be unbreakable under the principles of information theory.\nDigital versions of one-time pad ciphers have been used by nations for critical diplomatic and military communication, but the problems of secure key distribution make them impractical for many applications.\nFirst described by Frank Miller in 1882, the one-time pad was re-invented in 1917. On July 22, 1919, U.S. Patent 1,310,719 was issued to Gilbert Vernam for the XOR operation used for the encryption of a one-time pad. One-time use came later, when Joseph Mauborgne recognized that if the key tape were totally random, then cryptanalysis would be impossible.\nTo increase security, one-time pads were sometimes printed onto sheets of highly flammable nitrocellulose, so that they could easily be burned after use.\nHistory.\nFrank Miller in 1882 was the first to describe the one-time pad system for securing telegraphy.\nThe next one-time pad system was electrical. In 1917, Gilbert Vernam (of AT&amp;T Corporation) invented and later patented in 1919 (https://) a cipher based on teleprinter technology. Each character in a message was electrically combined with a character on a punched paper tape key. Joseph Mauborgne (then a captain in the U.S. Army and later chief of the Signal Corps) recognized that the character sequence on the key tape could be completely random and that, if so, cryptanalysis would be more difficult. Together they invented the first one-time tape system.\nThe next development was the paper pad system. Diplomats had long used codes and ciphers for confidentiality and to minimize telegraph costs. For the codes, words and phrases were converted to groups of numbers (typically 4 or 5 digits) using a dictionary-like codebook. For added security, secret numbers could be combined with (usually modular addition) each code group before transmission, with the secret numbers being changed periodically (this was called superencryption). In the early 1920s, three German cryptographers (Werner Kunze, Rudolf Schauffler, and Erich Langlotz), who were involved in breaking such systems, realized that they could never be broken if a separate randomly chosen additive number was used for every code group. They had duplicate paper pads printed with lines of random number groups. Each page had a serial number and eight lines. Each line had six 5-digit numbers. A page would be used as a work sheet to encode a message and then destroyed. The serial number of the page would be sent with the encoded message. The recipient would reverse the procedure and then destroy his copy of the page. The German foreign office put this system into operation by 1923.\nA separate notion was the use of a one-time pad of letters to encode plaintext directly as in the example below. Leo Marks describes inventing such a system for the British Special Operations Executive during World War\u00a0II, though he suspected at the time that it was already known in the highly compartmentalized world of cryptography, as for instance at Bletchley Park.\nThe final discovery was made by information theorist Claude Shannon in the 1940s who recognized and proved the theoretical significance of the one-time pad system. Shannon delivered his results in a classified report in 1945 and published them openly in 1949. At the same time, Soviet information theorist Vladimir Kotelnikov had independently proved the absolute security of the one-time pad; his results were delivered in 1941 in a report that apparently remains classified.\nThere also exists a quantum analogue of the one time pad, which can be used to exchange quantum states along a one-way quantum channel with perfect secrecy, which is sometimes used in quantum computing. It can be shown that a shared secret of at least 2n classical bits is required to exchange an n-qubit quantum state along a one-way quantum channel (by analogue with the result that a key of n bits is required to exchange an n bit message with perfect secrecy). A scheme proposed in 2000 achieves this bound. One way to implement this quantum one-time pad is by dividing the 2n bit key into n pairs of bits. To encrypt the state, for each pair of bits i in the key, one would apply an X gate to qubit i of the state if and only if the first bit of the pair is 1, and apply a Z gate to qubit i of the state if and only if the second bit of the pair is 1. Decryption involves applying this transformation again, since X and Z are their own inverses. This can be shown to be perfectly secret in a quantum setting.\nExample.\nSuppose Alice wishes to send the message codice_1 to Bob. Assume two pads of paper containing identical random sequences of letters were somehow previously produced and securely issued to both. Alice chooses the appropriate unused page from the pad. The way to do this is normally arranged for in advance, as for instance \"use the 12th sheet on 1 May\", or \"use the next available sheet for the next message\".\nThe material on the selected sheet is the \"key\" for this message. Each letter from the pad will be combined in a predetermined way with one letter of the message. (It is common, but not required, to assign each letter a numerical value, e.g., codice_2 is 0, codice_3 is 1, and so on.)\nIn this example, the technique is to combine the key and the message using modular addition, not unlike the Vigen\u00e8re cipher. The numerical values of corresponding message and key letters are added together, modulo 26. So, if key material begins with codice_4 and the message is codice_1, then the coding would be done as follows:\n h e l l o message\n 7 (h) 4 (e) 11 (l) 11 (l) 14 (o) message\n + 23 (X) 12 (M) 2 (C) 10 (K) 11 (L) key\n = 30 16 13 21 25 message + key\n = 4 (E) 16 (Q) 13 (N) 21 (V) 25 (Z) (message + key) mod 26\n E Q N V Z \u2192 ciphertext\nIf a number is larger than 25, then the remainder after subtraction of 26 is taken in modular arithmetic fashion. This simply means that if the computations \"go past\" Z, the sequence starts again at A.\nThe ciphertext to be sent to Bob is thus codice_6. Bob uses the matching key page and the same process, but in reverse, to obtain the plaintext. Here the key is \"subtracted\" from the ciphertext, again using modular arithmetic:\n E Q N V Z ciphertext\n 4 (E) 16 (Q) 13 (N) 21 (V) 25 (Z) ciphertext\n \u2212 23 (X) 12 (M) 2 (C) 10 (K) 11 (L) key\n = \u221219 4 11 11 14 ciphertext\u00a0\u2013 key\n = 7 (h) 4 (e) 11 (l) 11 (l) 14 (o) ciphertext\u00a0\u2013 key (mod 26)\n h e l l o \u2192 message\nSimilar to the above, if a number is negative, then 26 is added to make the number zero or higher.\nThus Bob recovers Alice's plaintext, the message codice_1. Both Alice and Bob destroy the key sheet immediately after use, thus preventing reuse and an attack against the cipher. The KGB often issued its agents one-time pads printed on tiny sheets of flash paper, paper chemically converted to nitrocellulose, which burns almost instantly and leaves no ash.\nThe classical one-time pad of espionage used actual pads of minuscule, easily concealed paper, a sharp pencil, and some mental arithmetic. The method can be implemented now as a software program, using data files as input (plaintext), output (ciphertext) and key material (the required random sequence). The exclusive or (XOR) operation is often used to combine the plaintext and the key elements, and is especially attractive on computers since it is usually a native machine instruction and is therefore very fast. It is, however, difficult to ensure that the key material is actually random, is used only once, never becomes known to the opposition, and is completely destroyed after use. The auxiliary parts of a software one-time pad implementation present real challenges: secure handling/transmission of plaintext, truly random keys, and one-time-only use of the key.\nAttempt at cryptanalysis.\nTo continue the example from above, suppose Eve intercepts Alice's ciphertext: codice_6. If Eve tried every possible key, she would find that the key codice_4 would produce the plaintext codice_1, but she would also find that the key codice_11 would produce the plaintext codice_12, an equally plausible message:\n 4 (E) 16 (Q) 13 (N) 21 (V) 25 (Z) ciphertext\n \u2212 19 (T) 16 (Q) 20 (U) 17 (R) 8 (I) possible key\n = \u221215 0 \u22127 4 17 ciphertext-key\n = 11 (l) 0 (a) 19 (t) 4 (e) 17 (r) ciphertext-key (mod 26)\nIn fact, it is possible to \"decrypt\" out of the ciphertext any message whatsoever with the same number of characters, simply by using a different key, and there is no information in the ciphertext that will allow Eve to choose among the various possible readings of the ciphertext.\nIf the key is not truly random, it is possible to use statistical analysis to determine which of the plausible keys is the \"least\" random and therefore more likely to be the correct one. If a key is reused, it will noticeably be the only key that produces sensible plaintexts from both ciphertexts (the chances of some random \"incorrect\" key also producing two sensible plaintexts are very slim).\nPerfect secrecy.\nOne-time pads are \"information-theoretically secure\" in that the encrypted message (i.e., the ciphertext) provides no information about the original message to a cryptanalyst (except the maximum possible length of the message). This is a very strong notion of security first developed during WWII by Claude Shannon and proved, mathematically, to be true for the one-time pad by Shannon at about the same time. His result was published in the \"Bell System Technical Journal\" in 1949. If properly used, one-time pads are secure in this sense even against adversaries with infinite computational power.\nShannon proved, using information theoretic considerations, that the one-time pad has a property he termed \"perfect secrecy\"; that is, the ciphertext \"C\" gives absolutely no additional information about the plaintext. This is because (intuitively), given a truly uniformly random key that is used only once, a ciphertext can be translated into \"any\" plaintext of the same length, and all are equally likely. Thus, the \"a priori\" probability of a plaintext message \"M\" is the same as the \"a posteriori\" probability of a plaintext message \"M\" given the corresponding ciphertext.\nConventional symmetric encryption algorithms use complex patterns of substitution and transpositions. For the best of these currently in use, it is not known whether there can be a cryptanalytic procedure that can efficiently reverse (or even partially reverse) these transformations without knowing the key used during encryption. Asymmetric encryption algorithms depend on mathematical problems that are thought to be difficult to solve, such as integer factorization or the discrete logarithm. However, there is no proof that these problems are hard, and a mathematical breakthrough could make existing systems vulnerable to attack.\nGiven perfect secrecy, in contrast to conventional symmetric encryption, the one-time pad is immune even to brute-force attacks. Trying all keys simply yields all plaintexts, all equally likely to be the actual plaintext. Even with a partially known plaintext, brute-force attacks cannot be used, since an attacker is unable to gain any information about the parts of the key needed to decrypt the rest of the message. The parts of the plaintext that are known will reveal \"only\" the parts of the key corresponding to them, and they correspond on a strictly one-to-one basis; a uniformly random key's bits will be independent.\nQuantum cryptography and post-quantum cryptography involve studying the impact of quantum computers on information security.\nQuantum computers have been shown by Peter Shor and others to be much faster at solving some problems that the security of traditional asymmetric encryption algorithms depends on. The cryptographic algorithms that depend on these problems' difficulty would be rendered obsolete with a powerful enough quantum computer.\nOne-time pads, however, would remain secure, as perfect secrecy does not depend on assumptions about the computational resources of an attacker.\nProblems.\nDespite Shannon's proof of its security, the one-time pad has serious drawbacks in practice because it requires:\nOne-time pads solve few current practical problems in cryptography. High-quality ciphers are widely available and their security is not currently considered a major worry. Such ciphers are almost always easier to employ than one-time pads because the amount of key material that must be properly and securely generated, distributed and stored is far smaller. Additionally, public key cryptography overcomes the problem of key distribution.\nTrue randomness.\nHigh-quality random numbers are difficult to generate. The random number generation functions in most programming language libraries are not suitable for cryptographic use. Even those generators that are suitable for normal cryptographic use, including /dev/random and many hardware random number generators, may make some use of cryptographic functions whose security has not been proven. An example of a technique for generating pure randomness is measuring radioactive emissions.\nIn particular, one-time use is absolutely necessary. For example, if formula_1 and formula_2 represent two distinct plaintext messages and they are each encrypted by a common key formula_3, then the respective ciphertexts are given by:\nformula_4\nformula_5\nwhere formula_6 means XOR. If an attacker were to have both ciphertexts formula_7 and formula_8, then simply taking the XOR of formula_7 and formula_8 yields the XOR of the two plaintexts formula_11. (This is because every bitstream XORed with itself gives 0, the identity element of XOR) formula_11 is then the equivalent of a running key cipher.\nIf both plaintexts are in a natural language (e.g., English or Russian), each stands a very high chance of being recovered by heuristic cryptanalysis, with possibly a few ambiguities. Of course, a longer message can only be broken for the portion that overlaps a shorter message, plus perhaps a little more by completing a word or phrase. The most famous exploit of this vulnerability occurred with the Venona project.\nKey distribution.\nBecause the pad, like all shared secrets, must be passed and kept secure, and the pad has to be at least as long as the message, there is often no point in using a one-time pad, as one can simply send the plain text instead of the pad (as both can be the same size and have to be sent securely). However, once a very long pad has been securely sent (e.g., a computer disk full of random data), it can be used for numerous future messages, until the sum of the messages' sizes equals the size of the pad. Quantum key distribution also proposes a solution to this problem, assuming fault-tolerant quantum computers.\nDistributing very long one-time pad keys is inconvenient and usually poses a significant security risk. The pad is essentially the encryption key, but unlike keys for modern ciphers, it must be extremely long and is far too difficult for humans to remember. Storage media such as thumb drives, DVD-Rs or personal digital audio players can be used to carry a very large one-time-pad from place to place in a non-suspicious way, but the need to transport the pad physically is a burden compared to the key negotiation protocols of a modern public-key cryptosystem. Such media cannot reliably be erased securely by any means short of physical destruction (e.g., incineration). A 4.7\u00a0GB DVD-R full of one-time-pad data, if shredded into particles in size, leaves over 4 megabits of data on each particle. In addition, the risk of compromise during transit (for example, a pickpocket swiping, copying and replacing the pad) is likely to be much greater in practice than the likelihood of compromise for a cipher such as AES. Finally, the effort needed to manage one-time pad key material scales very badly for large networks of communicants\u2014the number of pads required goes up as the square of the number of users freely exchanging messages. For communication between only two persons, or a star network topology, this is less of a problem.\nThe key material must be securely disposed of after use, to ensure the key material is never reused and to protect the messages sent. Because the key material must be transported from one endpoint to another, and persist until the message is sent or received, it can be more vulnerable to forensic recovery than the transient plaintext it protects (because of possible data remanence).\nAuthentication.\nAs traditionally used, one-time pads provide no message authentication, the lack of which can pose a security threat in real-world systems. For example, an attacker who knows that the message contains \"meet jane and me tomorrow at three thirty pm\" can derive the corresponding codes of the pad directly from the two known elements (the encrypted text and the known plaintext). The attacker can then replace that text by any other text of exactly the same length, such as \"three thirty meeting is cancelled, stay home\". The attacker's knowledge of the one-time pad is limited to this byte length, which must be maintained for any other content of the message to remain valid. This is different from malleability where the plaintext is not necessarily known. Without knowing the message, the attacker can also flip bits in a message sent with a one-time pad, without the recipient being able to detect it. Because of their similarities, attacks on one-time pads are similar to attacks on stream ciphers.\nStandard techniques to prevent this, such as the use of a message authentication code can be used along with a one-time pad system to prevent such attacks, as can classical methods such as variable length padding and Russian copulation, but they all lack the perfect security the OTP itself has. Universal hashing provides a way to authenticate messages up to an arbitrary security bound (i.e., for any \"p\" &gt; 0, a large enough hash ensures that even a computationally unbounded attacker's likelihood of successful forgery is less than \"p\"), but this uses additional random data from the pad, and some of these techniques remove the possibility of implementing the system without a computer.\nCommon implementation errors.\nDue to its relative simplicity of implementation, and due to its promise of perfect secrecy, one-time-pad enjoys high popularity among students learning about cryptography, especially as it is often the first algorithm to be presented and implemented during a course. Such \"first\" implementations often break the requirements for information theoretical security in one or more ways:\nUses.\nApplicability.\nDespite its problems, the one-time-pad retains some practical interest. In some hypothetical espionage situations, the one-time pad might be useful because encryption and decryption can be computed by hand with only pencil and paper. Nearly all other high quality ciphers are entirely impractical without computers. In the modern world, however, computers (such as those embedded in mobile phones) are so ubiquitous that possessing a computer suitable for performing conventional encryption (for example, a phone that can run concealed cryptographic software) will usually not attract suspicion.\nQuantum and post-quantum cryptography.\nA common use of the one-time pad in quantum cryptography is being used in association with quantum key distribution (QKD). QKD is typically associated with the one-time pad because it provides a way of distributing a long shared secret key securely and efficiently (assuming the existence of practical quantum networking hardware). A QKD algorithm uses properties of quantum mechanical systems to let two parties agree on a shared, uniformly random string. Algorithms for QKD, such as BB84, are also able to determine whether an adversarial party has been attempting to intercept key material, and allow for a shared secret key to be agreed upon with relatively few messages exchanged and relatively low computational overhead. At a high level, the schemes work by taking advantage of the destructive way quantum states are measured to exchange a secret and detect tampering. In the original BB84 paper, it was proven that the one-time pad, with keys distributed via QKD, is a perfectly secure encryption scheme. However, this result depends on the QKD scheme being implemented correctly in practice. Attacks on real-world QKD systems exist. For instance, many systems do not send a single photon (or other object in the desired quantum state) per bit of the key because of practical limitations, and an attacker could intercept and measure some of the photons associated with a message, gaining information about the key (i.e. leaking information about the pad), while passing along unmeasured photons corresponding to the same bit of the key. Combining QKD with a one-time pad can also loosen the requirements for key reuse. In 1982, Bennett and Brassard showed that if a QKD protocol does not detect that an adversary was trying to intercept an exchanged key, then the key can safely be reused while preserving perfect secrecy.\nThe one-time pad is an example of post-quantum cryptography, because perfect secrecy is a definition of security that does not depend on the computational resources of the adversary. Consequently, an adversary with a quantum computer would still not be able to gain any more information about a message encrypted with a one time pad than an adversary with just a classical computer.\nHistorical uses.\nOne-time pads have been used in special circumstances since the early 1900s. In 1923, they were employed for diplomatic communications by the German diplomatic establishment. The Weimar Republic Diplomatic Service began using the method in about 1920. The breaking of poor Soviet cryptography by the British, with messages made public for political reasons in two instances in the 1920s (ARCOS case), appear to have caused the Soviet Union to adopt one-time pads for some purposes by around 1930. KGB spies are also known to have used pencil and paper one-time pads more recently. Examples include Colonel Rudolf Abel, who was arrested and convicted in New York City in the 1950s, and the 'Krogers' (i.e., Morris and Lona Cohen), who were arrested and convicted of espionage in the United Kingdom in the early 1960s. Both were found with physical one-time pads in their possession.\nA number of nations have used one-time pad systems for their sensitive traffic. Leo Marks reports that the British Special Operations Executive used one-time pads in World War II to encode traffic between its offices. One-time pads for use with its overseas agents were introduced late in the war. A few British one-time tape cipher machines include the Rockex and Noreen. The German Stasi Sprach Machine was also capable of using one time tape that East Germany, Russia, and even Cuba used to send encrypted messages to their agents.\nThe World War II voice scrambler SIGSALY was also a form of one-time system. It added noise to the signal at one end and removed it at the other end. The noise was distributed to the channel ends in the form of large shellac records that were manufactured in unique pairs. There were both starting synchronization and longer-term phase drift problems that arose and had to be solved before the system could be used.\nThe hotline between Moscow and Washington, D.C., established in 1963 after the 1962 Cuban Missile Crisis, used teleprinters protected by a commercial one-time tape system. Each country prepared the keying tapes used to encode its messages and delivered them via their embassy in the other country. A unique advantage of the OTP in this case was that neither country had to reveal more sensitive encryption methods to the other.\nU.S. Army Special Forces used one-time pads in Vietnam. By using Morse code with one-time pads and continuous wave radio transmission (the carrier for Morse code), they achieved both secrecy and reliable communications.\nStarting in 1988, the African National Congress (ANC) used disk-based one-time pads as part of a secure communication system between ANC leaders outside South Africa and in-country operatives as part of Operation Vula, a successful effort to build a resistance network inside South Africa. Random numbers on the disk were erased after use. A Belgian flight attendant acted as courier to bring in the pad disks. A regular resupply of new disks was needed as they were used up fairly quickly. One problem with the system was that it could not be used for secure data storage. Later Vula added a stream cipher keyed by book codes to solve this problem.\nA related notion is the one-time code\u2014a signal, used only once; e.g., \"Alpha\" for \"mission completed\", \"Bravo\" for \"mission failed\" or even \"Torch\" for \"Allied invasion of French Northern Africa\" cannot be \"decrypted\" in any reasonable sense of the word. Understanding the message will require additional information, often 'depth' of repetition, or some traffic analysis. However, such strategies (though often used by real operatives, and baseball coaches) are not a cryptographic one-time pad in any significant sense.\nNSA.\nAt least into the 1970s, the U.S. National Security Agency (NSA) produced a variety of manual one-time pads, both general purpose and specialized, with 86,000 one-time pads produced in fiscal year 1972. Special purpose pads were produced for what the NSA called \"pro forma\" systems, where \"the basic framework, form or format of every message text is identical or nearly so; the same kind of information, message after message, is to be presented in the same order, and only specific values, like numbers, change with each message.\" Examples included nuclear launch messages and radio direction finding reports (COMUS).\nGeneral purpose pads were produced in several formats, a simple list of random letters (DIANA) or just numbers (CALYPSO), tiny pads for covert agents (MICKEY MOUSE), and pads designed for more rapid encoding of short messages, at the cost of lower density. One example, ORION, had 50 rows of plaintext alphabets on one side and the corresponding random cipher text letters on the other side. By placing a sheet on top of a piece of carbon paper with the carbon face up, one could circle one letter in each row on one side and the corresponding letter on the other side would be circled by the carbon paper. Thus one ORION sheet could quickly encode or decode a message up to 50 characters long. Production of ORION pads required printing both sides in exact registration, a difficult process, so NSA switched to another pad format, MEDEA, with 25 rows of paired alphabets and random characters. (\"See\" for illustrations.)\nThe NSA also built automated systems for the \"centralized headquarters of CIA and Special Forces units so that they can efficiently process the many separate one-time pad messages to and from individual pad holders in the field\".\nDuring World War II and into the 1950s, the U.S. made extensive use of one-time tape systems. In addition to providing confidentiality, circuits secured by one-time tape ran continually, even when there was no traffic, thus protecting against traffic analysis. In 1955, NSA produced some 1,660,000 rolls of one time tape. Each roll was 8 inches in diameter, contained 100,000 characters, lasted 166 minutes and cost $4.55 to produce. By 1972, only 55,000 rolls were produced, as one-time tapes were replaced by rotor machines such as SIGTOT, and later by electronic devices based on shift registers. The NSA describes one-time tape systems like 5-UCO and SIGTOT as being used for intelligence traffic until the introduction of the electronic cipher based KW-26 in 1957.\nExploits.\nWhile one-time pads provide perfect secrecy if generated and used properly, small mistakes can lead to successful cryptanalysis:\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "22211", "revid": "32860082", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22211", "title": "Oelde", "text": "Oelde (; ) is a town in the district of Warendorf, in North Rhine-Westphalia, Germany. It is located near Beckum.\nGeography.\nDivision of the town.\nOelde consists of 5 districts:\nNeighbouring places.\nThe neighboring municipalities and cities are clockwise, starting in the north:\nInternational relations.\nOelde is (not officially) twinned with:\nHistory.\nThe name Oelde was first mentioned in a document around 890 as \"Ulithi im Dreingau\" in the Urbar of the Werden monastery.\nIn 1457 a conflagration destroyed the city. In 1498, after the reconstruction, Oelde had 750 citizens. Another fire raged in 1605 and destroyed a total of 18 houses, barns and the town hall.\nIn 1939, Oelde was given its own exit when the motorway A\u00a02 was built.\nIn the 1950s and 1960s, a high number of visitors came to Oelde when diplomats accepted the invitation of the Federal Presidents Heuss and L\u00fcbke to hunt small game in the state forest \"Geisterholz\". These events were commonly known as \"diplomatic hunts.\"\nIn 2001 Oelde hosted one of the most important flower shows ever organized in Westphalia with more than 2.2 million visitors. Since then, the city garden, included in the exhibition grounds and embellished for the occasion, has been commercially exploited under the name \"Park of the four seasons\" (Vier-Jahreszeiten-Park).\nEconomy.\nOelde is a centre of metal and lumber production, publishing, and also higher education through its nursing college.\nIt is also home to the headquarters of GEA (Westfalia Separator), a manufacturer of centrifuges and dairy machines and the headquarters of Haver\u00a0&amp;\u00a0Boecker, a manufacturer of wire weaving.\nTransport.\nRoads.\nOelde is connected to the Bundesautobahn 2.\nRailways.\nThe Hamm\u2013Minden railway connects Oelde station to the German rail network. The line is served by the Rhein-Weser-Express and the Ems-B\u00f6rde-Bahn every hour.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "22213", "revid": "45406993", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22213", "title": "Operator (mathematics)", "text": "Function acting on function spaces\nIn mathematics, an operator is generally a mapping or function that acts on elements of a space to produce elements of another space (possibly and sometimes required to be the same space). There is no general definition of an \"operator\", but the term is often used in place of \"function\" when the domain is a set of functions or other structured objects. Also, the domain of an operator is often difficult to characterize explicitly (for example in the case of an integral operator), and may be extended so as to act on related objects (an operator that acts on functions may act also on differential equations whose solutions are functions that satisfy the equation). (see Operator (physics) for other examples)\nThe most basic operators are linear maps, which act on vector spaces. Linear operators refer to linear maps whose domain and range are the same space, for example from formula_1 to formula_2.\nSuch operators often preserve properties, such as continuity. For example, differentiation and indefinite integration are linear operators; operators that are built from them are called differential operators, integral operators or integro-differential operators.\nOperator is also used for denoting the symbol of a mathematical operation. This is related with the meaning of \"operator\" in computer programming (see Operator (computer programming)).\nLinear operators.\nThe most common kind of operators encountered are \"linear operators\". Let U and V be vector spaces over some field K. A \"mapping\" formula_3 is \"linear\" if formula_4 for all x and y in U, and for all \"\u03b1\", \"\u03b2\" in K.\nThis means that a linear operator preserves vector space operations, in the sense that it does not matter whether you apply the linear operator before or after the operations of addition and scalar multiplication. In more technical words, linear operators are morphisms between vector spaces.\nIn the finite-dimensional case linear operators can be represented by matrices in the following way. Let K be a field, and formula_5 and V be finite-dimensional vector spaces over K. Let us select a basis formula_6 in U and formula_7 in V. Then let formula_8 be an arbitrary vector in formula_5 (assuming Einstein convention), and formula_10 be a linear operator. Thenformula_11 Then formula_12, with all formula_13, is the matrix form of the operator formula_14 in the fixed basis formula_15. The tensor formula_16 does not depend on the choice of formula_17, and formula_18 if formula_19. Thus in fixed bases n-by-m matrices are in bijective correspondence to linear operators from formula_20 to formula_21. \nThe important concepts directly related to operators between finite-dimensional vector spaces are the ones of rank, determinant, inverse operator, and eigenspace.\nLinear operators also play a great role in the infinite-dimensional case. The concepts of rank and determinant cannot be extended to infinite-dimensional matrices. This is why very different techniques are employed when studying linear operators (and operators in general) in the infinite-dimensional case. The study of linear operators in the infinite-dimensional case is known as functional analysis (so called because various classes of functions form interesting examples of infinite-dimensional vector spaces).\nThe space of sequences of real numbers, or more generally sequences of vectors in any vector space, themselves form an infinite-dimensional vector space. The most important cases are sequences of real or complex numbers, and these spaces, together with linear subspaces, are known as sequence spaces. Operators on these spaces are known as sequence transformations.\nBounded linear operators over a Banach space form a Banach algebra in respect to the standard operator norm. The theory of Banach algebras develops a very general concept of spectra that elegantly generalizes the theory of eigenspaces.\nBounded operators.\nLet U and V be two vector spaces over the same ordered field (for example; formula_22), and they are equipped with norms. Then a linear operator from U to V is called bounded if there exists \"c\" &gt; 0 such that formula_23 for every x in U.\nBounded operators form a vector space. On this vector space we can introduce a norm that is compatible with the norms of U and V: formula_24\nIn case of operators from U to itself it can be shown that\n formula_25. \nAny unital normed algebra with this property is called a Banach algebra. It is possible to generalize spectral theory to such algebras. C*-algebras, which are Banach algebras with some additional structure, play an important role in quantum mechanics.\nExamples.\nAnalysis (calculus).\nFrom the point of view of functional analysis, calculus is the study of two linear operators: the differential operator formula_26, and the \"Volterra operator\" formula_27. \nFundamental analysis operators on scalar and vector fields.\nThree operators are key to vector calculus:\nAs an extension of vector calculus operators to physics, engineering and tensor spaces, grad, div and curl operators also are often associated with tensor calculus as well as vector calculus.\nGeometry.\nIn geometry, additional structures on vector spaces are sometimes studied. Operators that map such vector spaces to themselves bijectively are very useful in these studies, they naturally form groups by composition.\nFor example, bijective operators preserving the structure of a vector space are precisely the invertible linear operators. They form the general linear group under composition. However, they \"do not\" form a vector space under operator addition; since, for example, both the identity and \u2212identity are invertible (bijective), but their sum, 0, is not.\nOperators preserving the Euclidean metric on such a space form the isometry group, and those that fix the origin form a subgroup known as the orthogonal group. Operators in the orthogonal group that also preserve the orientation of vector tuples form the special orthogonal group, or the group of rotations.\nProbability theory.\nOperators are also involved in probability theory, such as expectation, variance, and covariance, which are used to name both number statistics and the operators which produce them. Indeed, every covariance is basically a dot product: Every variance is a dot product of a vector with itself, and thus is a quadratic norm; every standard deviation is a norm (square root of the quadratic norm); the corresponding cosine to this dot product is the Pearson correlation coefficient; expected value is basically an integral operator (used to measure weighted shapes in the space).\nFourier series and Fourier transform.\nThe Fourier transform is useful in applied mathematics, particularly physics and signal processing. It is another integral operator; it is useful mainly because it converts a function on one (temporal) domain to a function on another (frequency) domain, in a way effectively invertible. No information is lost, as there is an inverse transform operator. In the simple case of periodic functions, this result is based on the theorem that any continuous periodic function can be represented as the sum of a series of sine waves and cosine waves:formula_31 The tuple ( \"a\"0, \"a\"1, \"b\"1, \"a\"2, \"b\"2, ... ) is in fact an element of an infinite-dimensional vector space \"\u2113\"2, and thus Fourier series is a linear operator.\nWhen dealing with general function formula_32, the transform takes on an integral form:\nformula_33\nLaplace transform.\nThe \"Laplace transform\" is another integral operator and is involved in simplifying the process of solving differential equations.\nGiven , it is defined by:formula_34\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "22214", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22214", "title": "Oelde, Germany", "text": ""}
{"id": "22215", "revid": "41044949", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22215", "title": "Oceans", "text": ""}
{"id": "22216", "revid": "51009764", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22216", "title": "O Brother, Where Art Thou?", "text": "2000 film by Ethan and Joel Coen\nO Brother, Where Art Thou? is a 2000 satirical comedy-drama musical film written, produced, co-edited, and directed by Joel and Ethan Coen. It stars George Clooney, John Turturro, and Tim Blake Nelson, with Charles Durning, Michael Badalucco, John Goodman and Holly Hunter in supporting roles.\nThe film is set in rural Mississippi in the summer of 1937. It follows three escaped convicts searching for hidden treasure while a sheriff relentlessly pursues them. Its story is a modern satire which, while incorporating social features of the American South, is loosely based on Homer's epic Greek poem \"The Odyssey\". Some examples of this include Sirens, a Cyclops, and the main character's name, \"Ulysses\", which is the Roman name for \"Odysseus\". The title of the film is a reference to the 1941 Preston Sturges film \"Sullivan's Travels\", in which the protagonist is a director who wants to film \"O Brother, Where Art Thou?\", a fictitious book about the Great Depression.\nMuch of the music used in the film is period folk music. The movie was one of the first to extensively use digital color correction to give the film an autumnal sepia-tinted look. It was released by Buena Vista Pictures in North America, while Universal Pictures, through United International Pictures, released it in other countries. The film was met with a positive critical reception, and the soundtrack won a Grammy Award for Album of the Year in 2002. The country and folk musicians who were dubbed into the film include John Hartford, Alison Krauss, Dan Tyminski, Emmylou Harris, Gillian Welch, Ralph Stanley, Chris Sharp, and Patty Loveless. They joined to perform the music from the film on the \"Down from the Mountain\" concert tour. One of the performances was filmed and released as a documentary.\nPlot.\nThree convicts, Pete, Delmar and leader Ulysses Everett McGill, escape from a chain gang to retrieve a buried treasure before the area is flooded to make a lake. The three get a lift from a blind man driving a handcar on a railroad. He tells them they will find a fortune, but not the one they seek. The trio make their way to the house of Wash, Pete's cousin, who breaks off their shackles and feeds them. They sleep in the barn, but Wash reports them to Sheriff Cooley, who, along with his men, torches the barn. Wash's son helps them escape. The next day, Pete and Delmar get baptized in a river, but Everett refuses to join them.\nThey pick up Tommy Johnson, a young black man who claims he sold his soul to the devil in exchange for the ability to play guitar. In need of money, the four stop at a radio station where they record a song as the Soggy Bottom Boys. That night, the trio part ways with Tommy after their car is discovered by the police, and they briefly fall in with outlaw Baby Face Nelson. Unbeknownst to them, the recording becomes a major hit.\nNear a river, the group hears singing and finds three sultry women washing clothes. The women give them corn whiskey and they lose consciousness. Upon waking, Delmar finds Pete's clothes lying next to him, empty except for a toad. Delmar is convinced the women were Sirens who transformed Pete into the toad. Later, one-eyed Bible salesman Big Dan invites them for a picnic lunch, then mugs them and kills the toad.\nOn their way to Everett's hometown, Everett and Delmar see Pete working on a chain gang. Upon arriving Everett confronts his wife Penny, who has changed her last name and told his daughters he was dead. He gets into a fight with Vernon, her new \"suitor\". Later that night, they sneak into Pete's holding cell and free him. As it turns out, the women had dragged Pete away and turned him in to the authorities. Under torture, Pete gave away the treasure's location to the police. Everett then confesses that there is no treasure. He made it up to persuade the men with whom he was chained to escape with him in order to stop his wife from getting remarried. Pete is enraged at Everett, because he had two weeks left on his original sentence, and will likely face fifty more years for the escape.\nThe trio stumble upon a Ku Klux Klan rally, who are planning to lynch Tommy. The trio disguise themselves as Klansmen and move to rescue Tommy. However, Big Dan, a Klan member, reveals their identities. Chaos ensues, and the Grand Wizard reveals himself as Homer Stokes, a candidate in the upcoming gubernatorial election. The trio rush Tommy away and cut the supports of a large burning cross, immolating Big Dan.\nEverett persuades Pete, Delmar and Tommy to help him win his wife back. They sneak into a Stokes campaign gala dinner she is attending, disguised as hillbilly musicians. The group begins a performance of their radio hit. The crowd recognizes the song and goes wild. Homer recognizes them as the group who humiliated his mob. When he demands the group be arrested and reveals his white supremacist views, the crowd runs him out of town on a rail. Pappy O'Daniel, the incumbent candidate, seizes the opportunity, endorses the Soggy Bottom Boys and grants them full pardons. Penny agrees to remarry Everett with the condition that he find her original ring.\nThe next morning, the group sets out to retrieve the ring, which is at a cabin in the valley which Everett had earlier claimed was the location of his treasure. The police, having learned of the place from Pete, arrest the group. Dismissing their claims of having received pardons, Sheriff Cooley orders them hanged. As Everett prays to God, the valley is flooded and they are saved. Tommy finds the ring in a desk that floats by, and they return to town. However, when Everett presents the ring to Penny, it turns out it was her aunt's ring. She declares that she will not marry him with that ring, but only her wedding ring, which is still lost. As the film ends, the blind man on the handcar is seen once more.\nCast.\nGillian Welch and Dan Tyminski also appear as a record store customer and a mandolinist respectively. Del Pentecost, JR Horne, and Brian Reddy appear as members of Pappy O'Daniel's staff. Ed Gale appears as Homer Stokes' ceremonial \"little man\". John McConnell cameos as the Woolworths manager. Royce D. Applegate cameos as a member of Sheriff Cooley's posse. Three members of the Fairfield Four (Isaac Freeman, Wilson Waters Jr, and Robert Hamlett) cameo as gravediggers. The Cox Family and The Whites appear as fictionalized versions of themselves.\nProduction.\nThe idea of \"O Brother, Where Art Thou?\" arose spontaneously. Work on the script began in December 1997, long before the start of production, and it was at least half-written by May 1998. Despite the fact that Ethan Coen described the \"Odyssey\" as \"one of my favorite storyline schemes\", neither of the brothers had read the epic, and they were only familiar with its content through adaptations and numerous references to the \"Odyssey\" in popular culture. According to the brothers, Tim Blake Nelson (who has a degree in classics from Brown University) was the only person on the set who had read the \"Odyssey\".\nThe title of the film is a reference to the 1941 Preston Sturges film \"Sullivan's Travels\", in which the protagonist (a director) wants to direct a film about the Great Depression called \"O Brother, Where Art Thou?\" that will be a \"commentary on modern conditions, stark realism, and the problems that confront the average man\". Lacking any experience in this area, the director sets out on a journey to experience the human suffering of the average man but is sabotaged by his anxious studio. The film has some similarity in tone to Sturges's film, including scenes with prison gangs and a black church choir. The prisoners at the picture show scene is also a direct homage to a nearly identical scene in Sturges's film.\nJoel Coen revealed in a 2000 interview that he traveled to Phoenix to offer the lead role to Clooney. Clooney agreed to do the role immediately, without reading the script. He stated that he liked even the Coens' least successful films. Clooney did not immediately understand his character and sent the script to his uncle Jack, who lived in Kentucky, asking him to read the entire script into a tape recorder. Unknown to Clooney, in his recording, Jack, a devout Baptist, omitted all instances of the words \"damn\" and \"hell\" from the Coens' script, which only became known to Clooney after the directors pointed this out to him during shooting.\nThis was the fourth film of the brothers in which John Turturro has starred. Other actors in \"O Brother, Where Art Thou?\" who had worked previously with the Coens include John Goodman (three films), Holly Hunter (two), Charles Durning (two) and Michael Badalucco (one).\nThe Coens used digital color correction to give the film a sepia-tinted look. Joel stated this was because the actual set was \"greener than Ireland\". Cinematographer Roger Deakins said, \"Ethan and Joel favored a dry, dusty Delta look with golden sunsets. They wanted it to look like an old hand-tinted picture, with the intensity of colors dictated by the scene and natural skin tones that were all shades of the rainbow.\" Initially the crew tried to perform the color correction using a physical process, but after several tries with various chemical processes proved unsatisfactory the process was performed digitally.\nThis was the fifth film collaboration between the Coen Brothers and Deakins, and it was slated to be shot in Mississippi at a time of year when the foliage, grass, trees, and bushes would be a lush green. It was filmed near locations in Canton, Mississippi, and Florence, South Carolina, in the summer of 1999. After shooting tests, including film bipack and bleach bypass techniques, Deakins suggested digital mastering be used. Deakins spent 11 weeks fine-tuning the look, mainly targeting the greens, making them a burnt yellow and desaturating the overall image in the digital files. This made it the first feature film to be entirely color corrected by digital means, narrowly beating Nick Park's \"Chicken Run\". \"O Brother, Where Art Thou?\" was the first time a digital intermediate was used on the entirety of a first-run Hollywood film that otherwise had very few visual effects. The work was done in Los Angeles by Cinesite using a Spirit DataCine for scanning at 2K resolution, a Pandora MegaDef to adjust the color, and a Kodak Lightning II recorder to put out to film.\nA major theme of the film is the connection between old-time music and political campaigning in the American South. It makes reference to the traditions, institutions, and campaign practices of bossism and political reform that defined Southern politics in the first half of the 20th century.\nThe Ku Klux Klan, at the time a political force of white populism, is depicted burning crosses and engaging in ceremonial dance. The character Menelaus \"Pappy\" O'Daniel, the governor of Mississippi and host of the radio show \"The Flour Hour\", is similar in name and demeanor to W.\u00a0Lee \"Pappy\" O'Daniel, one-time Governor of Texas and later U.S. Senator from that state. O'Daniel was in the flour business and used a backing band called the Light Crust Doughboys on his radio show. In one campaign, O'Daniel carried a broom, an oft-used campaign device in the reform era, promising to sweep away patronage and corruption. His theme song had the hook, \"Please pass the biscuits, Pappy\", emphasizing his connection with flour.\nWhile the film borrows from historical politics, there are clear differences between the characters in the film and historical political figures. The O'Daniel of the movie used \"You Are My Sunshine\" as his theme song (which was originally recorded by singer and Governor of Louisiana James Houston \"Jimmie\" Davis), and Homer Stokes, as the challenger to the incumbent O'Daniel, portrays himself as the \"reform candidate\", using a broom as a prop.\nMusic.\nThe music was originally conceived as a major component of the film, not merely as a background or a support. Producer and musician T Bone Burnett worked with the Coens while the script was still in its working phases and the soundtrack was recorded before filming commenced.\nMuch of the music used in the film is period-specific folk music. The selection also includes religious music such Primitive Baptist and traditional African American gospel, most notably the Fairfield Four, an \"a cappella\" quartet with a career extending back to 1921. The quartet appears in the soundtrack and as gravediggers towards the film's end. Selected songs in the film reflect the possible spectrum of musical styles typical of the old culture of the American South: gospel, delta blues, country, swing, and bluegrass.\nThe use of dirges and other macabre songs is a theme that often recurs in Appalachian music (\"O Death\", \"Lonesome Valley\", \"Angel Band\", \"I Am Weary\") in contrast to bright and cheerful songs (\"Keep On the Sunny Side\", \"In the Highways\") in other parts of the film.\nThe voices of the Soggy Bottom Boys were provided by Dan Tyminski (lead vocal on \"Man of Constant Sorrow\"), Nashville songwriter Harley Allen, and the Nashville Bluegrass Band's Pat Enright. The three won a CMA Award for Single of the Year and a Grammy Award for Best Country Collaboration with Vocals, both for the song \"Man of Constant Sorrow\". Tim Blake Nelson sang the lead vocal on \"In the Jailhouse Now\". During a cast reunion at the 2020 Nashville Film Festival, George Clooney recalled being called into the recording studio and singing despite his lack of talent. It was assumed that he could sing because he was the nephew of Rosemary Clooney. Despite the relation, he could not.\n\"Man of Constant Sorrow\" has five variations: two are used in the film, one in the music video, and two in the soundtrack album. Two of the variations feature the verses being sung back-to-back, and the other three variations feature additional music between each verse. Though the song received little significant radio airplay, it reached #35 on the U.S. \"Billboard\" Hot Country Singles &amp; Tracks chart in 2002. The version of \"I'll Fly Away\" heard in the film is performed not by Krauss and Welch (as it is on the CD and concert tour), but by the Kossoy Sisters with Erik Darling accompanying on long-neck five-string banjo, recorded in 1956 for the album \"Bowling Green\" on Tradition Records.\nRelease and reception.\nThe film premiered at the Cannes Film Festival on May 13, 2000, the United Kingdom on September 15, 2000, and the United States on December 22, 2000. It grossed $71,868,327 worldwide on a $26 million budget.\nCritical response.\nThe review aggregation website Rotten Tomatoes reports that 78% of reviews critics are positive based on 158 reviews with an average rating of 7.3/10. The site's critics consensus reads: \"Though not as good as Coen brothers' classics, the delightfully loopy \"O Brother, Where Art Thou?\" is still a lot of fun.\" Metacritic, which assigns a weighted average, gave it a score of 69 out of 100 based on 30 critics, indicating \"generally favorable reviews\". Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of \"B-\" on an A+ to F scale.\nRoger Ebert gave two and a half out of four stars to the film, saying all the scenes in the film were \"wonderful in their different ways, and yet I left the movie uncertain and unsatisfied.\"\nIn 2025, it ranked number 76 on \"The New York Times\"' list of \"The 100 Best Movies of the 21st Century\" and number 66 on the \"Readers' Choice\" edition of the list.\nAccolades.\nThe film was selected to be part of the main competition of the 2000 Cannes Film Festival.\nSoggy Bottom Boys.\nThe Soggy Bottom Boys are the fictional musical group that the main characters form as part of the plot; their songs also serve as accompaniment for the film. It has been suggested that the name is in homage to the Foggy Mountain Boys, a bluegrass band led by Lester Flatt and Earl Scruggs. In the film, the actors lip-synched the songs credited to the band, except for Tim Blake Nelson's own voice on \"In the Jailhouse Now\".\nThe band's hit single is Dick Burnett's \"Man of Constant Sorrow\", a song that had enjoyed much success prior to the movie's release. After the film's release, the fictitious band became so popular that the country and folk musicians whose performances are heard on the film got together for a concert tour called Down from the Mountain, which was filmed for TV and DVD. They included Ralph Stanley, John Hartford, Alison Krauss and Union Station, Emmylou Harris, Gillian Welch, Chris Sharp, Stun Seymour, Dan Tyminski and others.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "22217", "revid": "19376353", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22217", "title": "Ohio State University", "text": "Public university in Columbus, Ohio, US\nThe Ohio State University (Ohio State or OSU) is a public land-grant research university in Columbus, Ohio, United States. A member of the University System of Ohio, it was founded in 1870. It is one of the largest universities by enrollment in the United States, with nearly 50,000 undergraduate students and nearly 15,000 graduate students. The university consists of sixteen colleges and offers over 400 degree programs at the undergraduate and graduate levels.\nIt is classified among \"R1: Doctoral Universities \u2013 Very high research activity\". As of 2025,[ [update]] the university has an endowment of $8.6 billion. Its athletic teams compete in NCAA Division I as the Ohio State Buckeyes as a member of the Big Ten Conference for the majority of fielded sports.\nIt is a member of the Association of American Universities. Past and present alumni and faculty include 6 Nobel Prize laureates, 9 Rhodes Scholars, 7 Churchill Scholars, 1 Fields Medalist, 7 Pulitzer Prize winners, 64 Goldwater scholars, 1 Costa Rican president, 1 U.S. vice president, 7 U.S. senators, 15 U.S. representatives, and 104 Olympic medalists.\nHistory.\nOverview.\n1870\u20131899 Foundational era.\nThe proposal of a manufacturing and agriculture university in central Ohio was initially met in the 1870s with hostility from the state's agricultural interests, and with competition for resources from Ohio University, which was chartered by the Northwest Ordinance and Miami University. Championed by the Republican governor Rutherford B. Hayes, the Ohio State University was founded in 1870 as a land-grant university under the Morrill Act of 1862 as the Ohio Agricultural and Mechanical College.\nThe university opened its doors to 24 students on September 17, 1873. In 1878, the first class of six men graduated. The first woman graduated the following year. Also in 1878, the Ohio legislature recognized an expanded scope for the university by changing its name to \"the Ohio State University\".\n1900\u20131980 Middle era.\nIn 1906, Ohio State segregationist president William Oxley Thompson, along with the university's supporters in the state legislature, put forth the Lybarger Bill with the aim of shifting virtually all higher education support to the continued development of Ohio State while funding only the \"normal school\" functions of the state's other public universities. Although the Lybarger Bill failed narrowly to gain passage, in its place the Eagleson Bill was passed as a compromise, which determined that all doctoral education and research functions would be the role of Ohio State, and that Miami University and Ohio University would not offer instruction beyond the master's degree level \u2013 an agreement that would remain in place until the 1950s. In 1916, Ohio State was elected into membership in the Association of American Universities.\nIn 1911, president Thompson wrote in a letter, \"the race problem is growing in intensity every year, and I am disposed to doubt the wisdom on the part of the colored people of taking any move that practically forces the doctrine of social equality.\" At the same time, Ohio State \"practiced racial segregation\" that was widespread across the country at the time against Black students, and \"there is no known evidence [Thompson] saw benefits in addressing it\". In 2024, after attempts were made to remove Thompson's statue from the Oval, university spokesperson Ben Johnson stated \"the naming review process is thoughtful and thorough and therefore could take several years\", but the statue has not been removed.\nWith the onset of the Great Depression, Ohio State would face many of the challenges affecting universities throughout America as budget support was slashed, and students without the means of paying tuition returned home to support families. By the mid-1930s, however, enrollment had stabilized due in large part to the role of the Federal Emergency Relief Administration and later the National Youth Administration. By the end of the decade, enrollment had still managed to grow to over 17,500. In 1934, the Ohio State Research Foundation was founded to bring in outside funding for faculty research projects. In 1938, a development office was opened to begin raising funds privately to offset reductions in state support.\nIn 1952, Ohio State founded the interdisciplinary Mershon Center for International Security Studies, which it still houses. The work of this program led to the United States Department of Homeland Security basing the National Academic Consortium for Homeland Security at the university in 2003.\n1980\u2013present Modern era.\nOhio State had an open admissions policy until the late 1980s. Since the early 2000s, the college has raised standards for admission, and been increasingly cited as one of the best public universities in the United States. The main campus in Columbus has grown into the fifth-largest university campus in the United States.\nOn January 12, 2015, OSU claimed the first-ever College Football Playoff National Championship by defeating Oregon 42\u201320.\nOn June 22, 2022, the United States Patent and Trademark Office granted the university a trademark on the word \"the\" in relation to clothing, such as T-shirts, baseball caps and hats distributed and/or sold through athletic or collegiate channels. In recent years, Ohio State and its fans, in particular those of its athletics program, have frequently emphasized the word \"THE\" when referring to the school.\nMichael V. Drake became the 15th president of Ohio State in 2014. In 2020, Kristina M. Johnson took office as the 16th president. And in 2023, Walter E. Carter Jr. took office as the 17th president.\nSignificant events.\n1969\u20131970 Vietnam War protests.\nThroughout 1969, anti-Vietnam War protest tensions grew on Ohio State's campus. What is now Bricker Hall was occupied by students, but after being told they had \"five minutes to leave, or they'd be arrested\", students departed from the building. In late April 1970, anti-war riots ensued on Ohio State campus, leading to nearly 300 arrests, over 60 injuries, and seven gunshot wounds. Students began \"boycotting classes with a student strike, protesting the university's rejection of a list of demands presented the week before. Specific demands included adding black and women's studies to the university's courses.\" On April 29, 1970, five days before the Kent State shootings, students picketed buildings, but this initially peaceful protest \"started to spiral out of control\" after Ohio State Highway Patrol troopers arrived in riot gear. When a man was assaulted by three students, tear gas was deployed, in response to which protesters threw rocks at the National Guard. Seven students were struck with a shotgun blast near the Student Union. There were no casualties, and the shooter was not identified.\nCampus.\nOhio State's main campus is about north of Columbus' downtown. The historical center of campus is the Oval, a quad of about . The original campus was laid out in the English country style with University Hall overlooking what would become the Oval. From 1905 to 1913, the Olmsted brothers, who had designed New York City's Central Park, were contracted as architectural consultants. Under their leadership, a more formal landscape plan was created with its center axis through the Oval. This axis shifted the university's street grid 12.25 degrees from the City of Columbus' street grid. Construction of the main library in 1915 reinforced this grid shift.\nOhio State's research library system has a combined collection of over 5.8 million volumes. Along with 21 libraries on its Columbus campus, the university has eight branches at off-campus research facilities and regional campuses, and a book storage depository near campus. In all, the Ohio State library system encompasses 55 branches and specialty collections. Some more significant collections include the Byrd Polar Research Center Archival Program, which has the archives of Admiral Richard E. Byrd and other polar research materials; the Hilandar Research Library, which has the world's largest collection of medieval Slavic manuscripts on microform; the Ohio State Cartoon Library &amp; Museum, the world's largest repository of original cartoons; the Lawrence and Lee Theatre Research Institute; and the archives of Senator John Glenn.\nAnchoring the traditional campus gateway at the eastern end of the Oval is the 1989 Wexner Center for the Arts. Designed by architects Peter Eisenman of New York and Richard Trott of Columbus, the center was funded in large part by Ohio State alumnus Les Wexner's gift of $25 million in the 1980s. The center was founded to encompass all aspects of visual and performing arts with a focus on new commissions and artist residencies. Part of its design was to pay tribute to the armory that formerly had the same location. Its groundbreaking deconstructivist architecture has resulted in it being lauded as one of the most important buildings of its generation. Its design has also been criticized as proving less than ideal for many of the art installations it has attempted to display. The centerpiece of the Wexner Center's permanent collection is Picasso's \"Nude on a Black Armchair\", which was purchased by Wexner at auction for $45 million.\nTo the south of the Oval is another, somewhat smaller expanse of green space commonly referred to as the South Oval. At its eastern end, it is anchored by the Ohio Union. To the west are Hale Hall, the Kuhn Honors House, Browning Amphitheatre (a traditional stone Greek theatre) and Mirror Lake.\nKnowlton Hall, dedicated in October 2004, is at the corner of West Woodruff Avenue and Tuttle Park Place, next to Ohio Stadium. Knowlton Hall along with the Fisher College of Business and Hitchcock Hall form an academic nucleus in the northwestern corner of North campus. Knowlton Hall was designed by Atlanta-based Mack Scogin Merrill Elam along with WSA Studio from Columbus. The Hall is home to the KSA Caf\u00e9, the disciplines of architecture, landscape architecture, city and regional planning, and about 550 undergraduate and graduate students. Knowlton Hall stands out from the general reddish-brown brick of Ohio State's campus with distinctive white marble tiles that cover the building's exterior. This unique wall cladding was requested by Austin E. Knowlton, the namesake of and main patron to the creation of Knowlton Hall. Knowlton also requested that five white marble columns be erected on the site, each column representing one of the classical orders of architecture.\nThe Ohio State College of Medicine is on the southern edge of the central campus. It is home to the James Cancer Hospital, a cancer research institute and one of the National Cancer Institute's 41 comprehensive cancer centers, along with the Richard M. Ross Heart Hospital, a research institute for cardiovascular disease.\nThe campus is served by the Campus Area Bus Service.\nRegional campuses.\nThe university also operates regional campuses in five areas:\nAcademics.\nUndergraduate admissions.\nOhio State is considered a selective public university. Undergraduate admissions selectivity to Ohio State is rated as 91/99 by \"The Princeton Review\" (meaning \"highly selective\") and \"more selective\" by \"U.S. News &amp; World Report\"; according to the data, it is the most selective for any public university in the state of Ohio. \"The New York Times\" classifies Ohio State as a \"highly selective public college\".\nFor the Class of 2025 (enrolled fall 2021), Ohio State received 58,180 applications and accepted 33,269 (57.2%). Of those accepted, 8,423 enrolled, a yield rate (the percentage of accepted students who choose to attend the university) of 25.3%. OSU's freshman retention rate is 93.9%, with 88% going on to graduate within six years.\nOf the 21% of the incoming freshman class who submitted SAT scores; the middle 50 percent Composite scores were 1260\u20131420. Of the 64% of enrolled freshmen in 2021 who submitted ACT scores, the middle 50 percent Composite score was between 26 and 32. In the 2020\u20132021 academic year, 26 freshman students were National Merit Scholars.\nRankings and recognition.\n\"The Public Ivies: America's Flagship Public Universities\" (2000) by Howard and Matthew Greene listed Ohio State as one of a select number of public universities offering the highest educational quality. In its 2023 edition, \"U.S. News &amp; World Report\" ranked Ohio State as tied for 43rd among all national universities. They ranked the college's political science, audiology, sociology, speech\u2013language pathology, finance, accounting, public affairs, nursing, social work, healthcare administration and pharmacy programs as among the top 20 programs in the country. The \"Academic Ranking of World Universities\" placed Ohio State 39-51 nationally and 101\u2013150 globally for 2023. In its 2024 rankings, \"Times Higher Education World University Rankings\" ranked it tied for 99th in the world. In 2024, \"QS World University Rankings\" ranked the university 151st in the world. The \"Washington Monthly\" college rankings, which seek to evaluate colleges' contributions to American society based on factors of social mobility, research and service to the country by their graduates, placed Ohio State 61st among national universities in 2023.\nIn 1916, Ohio State became the first university in Ohio to be extended membership into the Association of American Universities, and remains the only public university in Ohio among the organization's 60 members. Ohio State is also the only public university in Ohio to be classified among \"R1: Doctoral Universities \u2013 Highest Research Activity\" and have its undergraduate admissions classified as \"more selective\".\nOhio State's political science program is ranked among the top programs globally. Considered to be one of the leading departments in the United States, it has played a particularly significant role in the construction and development of the constructivist and realist schools of international relations. In 2004, it was ranked as first among public institutions and fourth overall in the world by British political scientist Simon Hix at the London School of Economics and Political Science, while a 2007 study in the academic journal \"PS: Political Science &amp; Politics\" ranked it ninth in the United States. It is a leading producer of Fulbright Scholars.\n\"Bloomberg Businessweek\" ranked the undergraduate business program at Ohio State's Fisher College of Business as the 14th best in the nation in its 2016 rankings.\nThe Ohio State linguistics department was recently ranked among the top 10 programs nationally, and top 20 internationally by \"QS World University Rankings\".\nThe college is the only school in North America that offers an ABET-accredited welding engineering undergraduate degree.\nResearch.\nThe National Science Foundation ranked Ohio State University 12th among American universities for research and development expenditures in 2021 with $1.23 billion.\nIn a 2007 report released by the National Science Foundation, Ohio State's research expenditures for 2006 were $652 million, placing it seventh among public universities and 11th overall, also ranking third among all American universities for private industry-sponsored research. Research expenditures at Ohio State were $864 million in 2017. In 2006, Ohio State announced it would designate at least $110 million of its research efforts toward what it termed \"fundamental concerns\" such as research toward a cure for cancer, renewable energy sources and sustainable drinking water supplies. In 2021, President Kristina M. Johnson announced the university would invest at least $750 million over the next 10 years toward research and researchers. This was announced in conjunction with Ohio State's new Innovation District, which will be an interdisciplinary research facility and act as a hub for healthcare and technology research, serving Ohio State faculty and students as well as public and private partners. Construction of the facility was completed in 2023, as one of the first buildings in the District.\nResearch facilities include Aeronautical/Astronautical Research Laboratory, Byrd Polar Research Center, Center for Automotive Research, (OSU CAR), Chadwick Arboretum, Biomedical Research Tower, Biological Sciences Building, CDME, Comprehensive Cancer Center, David Heart and Lung Research Institute, Electroscience Laboratory, Large Binocular Telescope (\"LBT\", originally named the Columbus Project), Mershon Center for International Security Studies, Museum of Biological Diversity, National Center for the Middle Market, Stone Laboratory on Gibraltar Island, Center for Urban and Regional Analysis and Ohio Agricultural Research and Development Center.\nEndowment and fundraising.\nOhio State was among the first group of four public universities to raise a $1 billion endowment when it passed the $1 billion mark in 1999. At the end of 2005, Ohio State's endowment stood at $1.73 billion, ranking it seventh among public universities and 27th among all American universities. In June 2006, the endowment passed the $2 billion mark.\nIn recent decades, and in response to continually shrinking state funding, Ohio State has conducted two significant multi-year fundraising campaigns. The first concluded in 1987 and raised $460 million, a record at the time for a public university. The \"Affirm Thy Friendship Campaign\" took place between 1995 and 2000. With an initial goal of raising $850 million, the campaign's final tally was $1.23 billion, placing Ohio State among the small group of public universities to have successfully conducted a $1 billion campaign. At his welcoming ceremony, returning President E. Gordon Gee announced in the fall of 2007 that Ohio State would launch a $2.5 billion fundraising campaign. In 2019, celebrating the university's 150th year, President Michael V. Drake announced the \"Time and Change Campaign\" with a goal of raising $4.5 billion from 1 million individual donors.\nStudent life.\nThe Office of Student Life has partnership affiliations with the Schottenstein Center, the Blackwell Inn and the Drake Events Center. Services supporting student wellness include the Wilce Student Health Center, named for university physician John Wilce, the Mary A. Daniels Student Wellness Center and the Counseling and Consultation Service.\nThe RPAC is the main recreational facility on campus. The Wellness Center within the RPAC offers services such as nutrition counseling, financial coaching, HIV and STI testing, sexual assault services, and alcohol and other drug education.\nOhio State's \"Buckeye Bullet\" electric car broke the world record for the fastest speed by an electric vehicle on October 3, 2004, with a maximum speed of at the Bonneville Salt Flats in Utah. The vehicle also holds the U.S. record for fastest electric vehicle with a speed of , and peak timed mile speed of . A team of engineering students from the university's \"Center for Automotive Research-Intelligent Transportation\" (CAR-IT) designed, built and managed the vehicle. In 2007, Buckeye Bullet 2 was launched. This follow-up effort was a collaboration between Ohio State engineering students and engineers from the Ford Motor Company and will seek to break the land speed record for hydrogen cell powered vehicles.\nSexual harassment handling.\nIn June 2018, Ohio State dissolved its Sexual Civility and Empowerment unit and eliminated four positions in the unit due to concerns about mismanagement and a lack of support for survivors of sexual assault. This occurred after the unit was suspended in February 2018 and following an external review. \"The Columbus Dispatch\" and the school newspaper, \"The Lantern\", reported that \"[SCE] failed to properly report students' sexual-assault complaints\" and that some victims were told that they were \"'lying', 'delusional', 'suffering from mental illness', 'have an active imagination', that they 'didn't understand their own experience', and also 'fabricated their story'\". With help from the Philadelphia law firm Cozen O'Connor, the university will be creating a new framework to handle sexual assault cases and reevaluating its Title IX program.\nOn July 20, 2018, \"BBC News\" reported that over 100 male students, including athletes from 14 sports, had reported sexual misconduct by a deceased university team physician, Richard Strauss. The reports dated back to 1978, and included claims that he groped and took nude photographs of his patients. Four former wrestlers filed a lawsuit against Ohio State for ignoring complaints of \"rampant sexual misconduct\" by Strauss. U.S. representative Jim Jordan was named in the lawsuit and has since denied the former wrestlers' claims that he knew about the abuse while he was an assistant coach for eight years at the university. In May 2020, the university entered into a settlement and agreed to pay $40.9 million to the sexual abuse survivors.\nActivities and organizations.\nThe Ohio Union was the first student union built by an American public university. It is dedicated to the enrichment of the student experience, on and off the university campus. The first Ohio Union, on the south edge of the South Oval, was constructed in 1909 and was later renamed Enarson Hall. The second Ohio Union was completed in 1950 and was prominently along High Street, southeast of the Oval. It was a center of student life for more than 50 years, providing facilities for student activities, organizations and events, and serving as an important meeting place for campus and community interaction. The union also housed many student services and programs, along with dining and recreational facilities. The second Ohio Union was demolished in February 2007 to make way for the new Ohio Union, which was finished in 2010. During this time, student activities were relocated to Ohio Stadium and other academic buildings.\nThe university has over 1,000 student organizations; intercollegiate, club and recreational sports programs; student media organizations and publications, fraternities and sororities; and three student governments.\nStudent organizations.\nStudent organizations at Ohio State provide students with opportunities to get involved in a wide variety of interest areas including academic, social, religious, artistic, service-based, diversity and many more.\nThere are over 1,000 registered student organizations that involve many thousands of students. The university's forensics team has won the state National Forensics Association tournament several times.\nBlock \"O\" is currently the largest student-run organization on the campus of Ohio State. With over 2,400 annual members, Block \"O\" serves as the official student cheering section at athletic events for the university. According to the Student Organization Office in the Ohio Union, Agricultural Education Society is the oldest student organization on campus. The Men's Glee Club often disputes the claim, but after consultation with Ohio Union Staff, Agricultural Education Society was named as the university's oldest organization.\nEach year, students may sign up to participate in BuckeyeThon, Ohio State's student-led philanthropy. The organization hosts events throughout the year to support the hematology/oncology/bone marrow transplant unit at Nationwide Children's Hospital in Columbus. Each February, thousands of students and community members attend BuckeyeThon's signature event, a Dance Marathon consisting of two separate 12-hour shifts. In the past 15 years, students have raised over $5 million to support treatment, research, and various therapies at the hospital. Unique to BuckeyeThon is the use of an operational fund separate from the main philanthropic cancer fund. As a registered non-profit, BuckeyeThon is subject to university audit and issues gift receipts through the Foundation.\nOhio State has several student-managed publications and media outlets. \"The Makio\" is the official yearbook. \"The Makio's\" sales plummeted by 60% during the early 1970s; the organization went bankrupt and stopped publication during the late 1970s. The book was revived from 1985 to 1994 and again in 2000, thanks to several student organizations. \"The Lantern\" is the school's daily newspaper and has operated as a laboratory newspaper in the School of Communication (formerly the School of Journalism) since 1881. \"Mosaic\" is a literary magazine published by Ohio State, which features undergraduate fiction, poetry and art. \"The Sundial\" is a student-written and -published humor magazine. Founded in 1911, it is one of the oldest humor magazines in the country, but has not been published without large interruptions. Ohio State has two improvisational comedy groups that regularly perform around campus and across the U.S. There are two student-run radio stations: AROUSE, the music station, is home to over 100 student DJs, streaming music and independent content, and Scarlet and Gray Sports Radio. Students also operate a local cable TV channel known as Buckeye TV, which airs primarily on the campus closed cable system operated by the Office of the Chief Information Officer (OCIO).\nStudent government.\nAt the Ohio State University, three recognized student governments represent their constituents.\nResidential life.\nOhio State operates 41 on-campus residence halls divided into three geographic clusters: South Campus (site of the university's original dormitories), North Campus (largely constructed during the post-war enrollment boom) and West Campus (\"The Towers\"). The residence hall system has 40 smaller living and learning environments defined by social or academic considerations.\nSeparate housing for graduate and professional students is maintained on the Southern tier of campus within the Gateway Residential Complex and the William H. Hall Student Residential Complex. Family housing is maintained at Buckeye Village at the far northern edge of campus beyond the athletic complex.\nStudent Life University Housing also administers student residential housing on the OSU Newark, OSU Mansfield and OSU Agricultural Technical Institute (ATI) campuses.\nThe Residence Hall Advisory Council (RHAC), which is a representative body of all students living in the university's residence halls, helps evaluate and improve the living conditions of the residence halls.\nAthletics.\nOhio State's intercollegiate sports teams are called the \"Buckeyes\" (derived from the colloquial term for people from the state of Ohio and after the state tree, the Ohio Buckeye, \"Aesculus glabra\"), and participate in the NCAA's Division I in all sports (Division I FBS in football) and the Big Ten Conference in most sports. (The women's hockey program competes in the Western Collegiate Hockey Association.) The school colors are scarlet and gray. Brutus Buckeye is the mascot. Ohio State currently has 36 varsity teams. As of 2017, the football program is valued at $1.5 billion, the highest valuation of any such program in the country. The team's rivalry against the University of Michigan has been termed as one of the greatest in North American sports.\nOhio State is one of six universities \u2013 the University of Michigan, the University of Florida, Stanford University, UCLA and the University of California at Berkeley being the others \u2013 to have won national championships in all three major men's sports (baseball, basketball and football). Ohio State is also one of only two universities to appear in the national championship games in both football and men's basketball in the same calendar year (the other being the University of Florida). Ohio State has also won national championships in wrestling, men's volleyball, men's swimming and diving, men's outdoor track and field, men's golf, men's gymnastics, men's fencing, women's rowing, co-ed fencing and multiple synchronized swimming championships. The Ohio State equestrian team has won eight Intercollegiate Horse Show Association national championships. Since the inception of the Athletic Director's Cup, Ohio State has finished in the top 25 each year, including top-six finishes in three of the last five years. During the 2005\u20132006 school year, Ohio State became the first Big Ten team to win conference championships in football, men's basketball and women's basketball. Ohio State repeated the feat during the 2006\u20132007 school year, winning solo championships in all three sports. In 2007, \"Sports Illustrated\" nicknamed Ohio State's athletic program as being \"The Program\" due to the unsurpassed facilities, an unparalleled number of men's and women's sports teams and their success, and the financial support of an impressive fan base.\nTraditions.\nThe Ohio State University Marching Band is famous for \"Script Ohio\", during which the band marches single-file through the curves of the word \"Ohio\", much like a pen writes the word, all while playing the French march \"Le Regiment de Sambre et Meuse\".\n\"Across the Field\", a fight song used by teams of all sports, has been played at events since 1915. \"Buckeye Battle Cry\", the second fight song which was first performed in 1928, is played as the marching band enters via the Ohio Stadium ramp.\nAffiliated media.\nOhio State operates a public television station, WOSU-TV (virtual channel 34/DT 16, a local PBS TV station), as well as two public radio stations, WOSU-FM 89.7(NPR/BBC news/talk) and WOSA-FM 101.1 (classical, \"Classical 101\") in Columbus.\nNotable people.\nAlumni.\nOhio State has 580,000 living alumni around the world. Past and present students and faculty include 5 Nobel Prize laureates, nine Rhodes Scholars, seven Churchill Scholars, 64 Goldwater scholars, one Fields Medalist and seven Pulitzer Prize winners, as well as current Vice President of the United States JD Vance, seven U.S. Senators, 15 U.S. Representatives and 104 Olympic medalists. Also included are UFC champions, Medal of Honor recipients, ambassadors, Fortune 500 CEOs and members of the Forbes 400 list of the world's wealthiest individuals.\nOhio State alumni have appeared on the cover of \"Time\" magazine 12 times, with the artwork of alumnus Roy Lichtenstein featured on an additional two \"Time\" covers. George Steinbrenner, former owner of the New York Yankees who won seven World Series with the team, earned his master's degree from Ohio State. Larry Sanger, one of the founders of Wikipedia, and Steve May, chief technology officer at Pixar, both graduated from Ohio State. Roboticist James S. Albus was named a \"Hero of US Manufacturing\" by \"Fortune\" magazine in 1997. Howard Tucker, who as of April 2023 was the world's oldest living practicing doctor at 100, attended for both his undergraduate work and medical school.\nOhio State alumni have been inducted into the Baseball Hall of Fame in Cooperstown, New York, the NFL Hall of Fame and the Basketball Hall of Fame. Its athletes have won a combined 83 Olympic medals and three times have received the Sullivan Award as the nation's top amateur athlete.\nOhio State Alumna include Gertrude Moskowitz, foreign language teacher educator credited with influencing generations of students with her humanistic approach.\nFaculty.\nAs of 2008, Ohio State's faculty included 21 members of the National Academy of Sciences or National Academy of Engineering, four members of the Institute of Medicine and 177 elected fellows of the American Association for the Advancement of Science. In 2009, 17 Ohio State faculty members were elected as AAAS Fellows. Each year since 2002, Ohio State has either led or been second among all American universities in the number of their faculty members elected as fellows to the AAAS.\nIn surveys conducted in 2005 and 2006 by the Collaborative on Academic Careers in Higher Education (COACHE), Ohio State was rated as \"exemplary\" in four of the seven measured aspects of workplace satisfaction for junior faculty members at 31 universities: overall tenure practices, policy effectiveness, compensation and work-family balance.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "22218", "revid": "173030", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22218", "title": "Ontario", "text": "Province of Canada\nOntario is the southernmost province of Canada. Located in Central Canada, Ontario is the country's most populous province. As of the 2021 Canadian census, it is home to 38.5% of the country's population, and is the second-largest province by total area (after Quebec). Ontario is Canada's fourth-largest jurisdiction in total area of all the Canadian provinces and territories. It is home to the nation's capital, Ottawa, and its most populous city, Toronto, which is Ontario's provincial capital.\nOntario is bordered by the province of Manitoba to the west, Hudson Bay and James Bay to the north, and Quebec to the east and northeast. To the south, it is bordered by the U.S. states of (from west to east) Minnesota, Michigan, Ohio, Pennsylvania (through Lake Erie), and New York. Almost all of Ontario's border with the United States follows rivers and lakes: from the westerly Lake of the Woods, eastward along the major rivers and lakes of the Great Lakes/Saint Lawrence River drainage system. There is only about of actual land border, made up of portages including Height of Land Portage on the Minnesota border.\nThe great majority of Ontario's population and arable land are in Southern Ontario, and while agriculture remains a significant industry, the region's economy depends highly on manufacturing. In contrast, Northern Ontario is sparsely populated with cold winters and heavy forestation, with mining and forestry making up the region's major industries.\nEtymology.\nOntario is a term thought to have Indigenous origins, either , a Huron (Wyandot) word meaning \"great lake\", or possibly , which means \"beautiful water\" or \"sparkling water\" in the Iroquoian languages. Ontario has about 250,000 freshwater lakes. The first mention of the name Ontario was in 1641, when \"Ontario\" was used to describe the land on the north shore of the easternmost part of the Great Lakes. It was adopted as the official name of the new province at Confederation in 1867.\nGeography.\nThe thinly populated Canadian Shield, which dominates the northwestern and central portions of the province, comprises over half the land area of Ontario. Although this area mostly does not support agriculture, it is rich in minerals, partly covered by the Central and Midwestern Canadian Shield forests, and studded with lakes and rivers. Northern Ontario is subdivided into two sub-regions: Northwestern Ontario and Northeastern Ontario.\nThe virtually unpopulated Hudson Bay Lowlands in the extreme north and northeast are mainly swampy and sparsely forested.\nSouthern Ontario is further sub-divided into four sub-regions: Central Ontario (although not actually the province's geographic centre), Eastern Ontario, Golden Horseshoe and Southwestern Ontario (parts of which were formerly referred to as Western Ontario).\nDespite the rarity of mountainous terrain in the province, there are large areas of uplands, particularly within the Canadian Shield, which traverses the province from northwest to southeast and also above the Niagara Escarpment, which crosses the south. The highest point is Ishpatina Ridge at above sea level in Temagami, Northeastern Ontario. In the south, elevations of over are surpassed near Collingwood, above the Blue Mountains in the Dundalk Highlands and in hilltops near the Madawaska River in Renfrew County.\nThe Carolinian forest zone covers most of the southwestern region of the province. The temperate and fertile Great Lakes-Saint Lawrence Valley in the south is part of the Eastern Great Lakes lowland forests ecoregion where the forest has now been largely replaced by agriculture, industrial and urban development. A well-known geographic feature is Niagara Falls, part of the Niagara Escarpment. The Saint Lawrence Seaway allows navigation to and from the Atlantic Ocean as far inland as Thunder Bay in Northwestern Ontario. Northern Ontario covers approximately 87% of the province's surface area; conversely, Southern Ontario contains 94% of the population.\nPoint Pelee is a peninsula of Lake Erie in southwestern Ontario (near Windsor and Detroit, Michigan) that is the southernmost extent of Canada's mainland. Pelee Island and Middle Island in Lake Erie extend slightly farther. All are south of 42\u00b0N\u00a0\u2013 slightly farther south than the northern border of California.\nClimate.\nOntario's climate varies by season and location. Three air sources affect it: cold, dry, arctic air from the north (dominant factor during the winter months, and for a longer part of the year in far northern Ontario); Pacific polar air crossing in from the western Canadian Prairies/US Northern Plains; and warm, moist air from the Gulf of Mexico and the Atlantic Ocean. The effects of these major air masses on temperature and precipitation depend mainly on latitude, proximity to major bodies of water and to a small extent, terrain relief. In general, most of Ontario's climate is classified as humid continental.\nOntario has three main climatic regions:\nIn the northeastern parts of Ontario, extending south as far as Kirkland Lake, the cold waters of Hudson Bay depress summer temperatures, making it cooler than other locations at similar latitudes. The same is true on the northern shore of Lake Superior, which cools hot, humid air from the south, leading to cooler summer temperatures. Along the eastern shores of Lake Superior and Lake Huron winter temperatures are slightly moderated but come with frequent heavy lake-effect snow squalls that increase seasonal snowfall totals to upwards of in some places. These regions have higher annual precipitation, in some places over .\nSevere thunderstorms peak in summer. Windsor, in Southwestern Ontario, has the most lightning strikes per year in Canada, averaging 33 days of thunderstorm activity per year. In a typical year, Ontario averages 11 confirmed tornado touchdowns. Ontario had a record 29 tornadoes in both 2006 and 2009. Tropical depression remnants occasionally bring heavy rains and winds in the south, but are rarely deadly. A notable exception was Hurricane Hazel, which struck Southern Ontario centred on Toronto, in October 1954.\nHistory.\nIndigenous habitation (pre\u20131610).\nPaleo-Indians were the first people to settle on the lands of Ontario, about 11,000 years ago, after crossing the Bering land bridge from Asia to North America between 25,000 and 50,000 years ago. During the Archaic period, which lasted from 8000 to 1000 BC, the population slowly increased, with a generally egalitarian hunter-gatherer society and a warmer climate. Trading routes also began emerging along the St. Lawrence River and around the Great Lakes. Hunting and gathering remained predominant throughout the early Woodland period, and social structures and trade continued to develop. Around 500 AD, corn cultivation began, later expanding to include beans and squash around 1100 AD. Increased agriculture enabled more permanent, fortified, and significantly larger settlements. In southern Ontario during the 1400s, the population of some villages numbered in the thousands, with longhouses that could house over a hundred people. Around this time, large-scale warfare began in southern Ontario, leading to the emergence of Iroquoian groups, including the Neutral Confederacy, Erie and Wendat (Huron). Groups in northern Ontario were primarily Algonquian and included the Ojibwe, who traded with the Iroquois.\nMany ethnocultural groups emerged and came to exist on the lands of Ontario: the Algonquins, Mississaugas, Ojibway, Cree, Odawa, Pottowatomi, and Iroquois.\nPays d'en Haut (1610\u20131763).\nIn 1608, Samuel de Champlain established France's first colonial settlement in New France, the Habitation de Qu\u00e9bec (now Quebec City). French explorers continued to travel west, establishing new villages along the coasts of the Saint Lawrence River. French explorers, the first of which was \u00c9tienne Br\u00fbl\u00e9 who explored the Georgian Bay area in 1610\u20131612, mapped Southern Ontario and called the region the Pays d'en Haut (\"Upper Country\"), in reference to the region being upstream of the Saint Lawrence River. The colony of the Pays d'en Haut was formally established in 1610 as an administrative dependency of Canada, and was for defence and business rather than a settlement colony. The territory of the Pays-d'en-Haut was quite large and would today include the province of Ontario, as well as, in whole or in part, the American states of Minnesota, Wisconsin, Illinois, Indiana, Michigan, Ohio, Pennsylvania and New York. Indigenous peoples were the vast majority of the Pays d'en Haut population.\nAs for Northern Ontario, the English explorer Henry Hudson sailed into Hudson Bay in 1611 and claimed its drainage basin for England. The area would become known as Rupert's Land.\nDe Champlain reached Lake Huron in 1615, and French missionaries, such as the J\u00e9suites and Supliciens, began to establish posts along the Great Lakes. The French allied with most Indigenous groups of Ontario, all for the fur trade and for defence against Iroquois attacks (which would later be called the Iroquois Wars). The French would declare their Indigenous allies to be subjects of the King of France and would often act as mediators between different groups. The Iroquois later allied themselves with the British.\nFrom 1634 to 1640, the Huron were devastated by European infectious diseases, such as measles and smallpox, to which they had no immunity. By 1700, the Iroquois had been driven out or left the area that would become Ontario and the Mississaugas of the Ojibwa had settled the north shore of Lake Ontario. The remaining Huron settled north of Quebec City.\nDuring the French and Indian War, the North American theatre of the Seven Years' War of 1754 to 1763, the British defeated the armies of New France and its Indigenous allies. In the Treaty of Paris 1763 France ceded most of its possessions in North America to Britain. Using the Quebec Act, Britain re-organised the territory into the Province of Quebec.\nProvince of Quebec (1763\u20131791).\nIn 1782\u20131784, 5,000 United Empire Loyalists entered what is now Ontario following the American Revolution. The Kingdom of Great Britain granted them land and other items with which to rebuild their lives. The British also set up reserves in Ontario for the Mohawks who had fought for the British and had lost their land in New York state. Other Iroquois, also displaced from New York were resettled in 1784 at the Six Nations reserve at the west end of Lake Ontario. The Mississaugas, displaced by European settlements, would later move to Six Nations also.\nAfter the American War of Independence, the first reserves for First Nations were established. These are situated at Six Nations (1784), Tyendinaga (1793) and Akwesasne (1795). Six Nations and Tyendinaga were established by the British for those Indigenous groups who had fought on the side of the British, and were expelled from the new United States. Akwesasne was a pre-existing Mohawk community and its borders were formalized under the 1795 Jay Treaty.\nIn 1788, while part of the province of Quebec, southern Ontario was divided into four districts: Hesse, Lunenburg, Mecklenburg, and Nassau. In 1792, the four districts were renamed: Hesse became the Western District, Lunenburg became the Eastern District, Mecklenburg became the Midland District, and Nassau became the Home District. Counties were created within the districts.\nThe population of Canada west of the St. Lawrence-Ottawa River confluence substantially increased during this period, a fact recognized by the \"Constitutional Act\" of 1791, which split Quebec into the Canadas: Upper Canada southwest of the St. Lawrence-Ottawa River confluence, and Lower Canada east of it.\nUpper Canada (1791\u20131841).\nJohn Graves Simcoe was appointed Upper Canada's first Lieutenant governor in 1793. A second wave of Americans, not all of them necessarily loyalists moved to Upper Canada after 1790 until the pre-war of 1812, many seeking available cheap land, and at the time, lower taxation.\nBy 1798, there were eight districts: Eastern, Home, Johnstown, London, Midland, Newcastle, Niagara, and Western. By 1826, there were eleven districts: Bathurst, Eastern, Gore, Home, Johnstown, London, Midland, Newcastle, Niagara, Ottawa, and Western. By 1838, there were twenty districts: Bathurst, Brock, Colbourne, Dalhousie, Eastern, Gore, Home, Huron, Johnstown, London, Midland, Newcastle, Niagara, Ottawa, Prince Edward, Simcoe, Talbot, Victoria, Wellington, and Western.\nAmerican troops in the War of 1812 invaded Upper Canada across the Niagara River and the Detroit River, but were defeated and pushed back by the British, Canadian fencibles and militias, and First Nations warriors. However, the Americans eventually gained control of Lake Erie and Lake Ontario. The 1813 Battle of York saw American troops defeat the garrison at the Upper Canada capital of York. The Americans looted the town and burned the Upper Canada Parliament Buildings during their brief occupation. The British would burn the American capital of Washington, D.C. in 1814.\nAfter the War of 1812, relative stability allowed for increasing numbers of immigrants to arrive from Europe rather than from the United States. As was the case in the previous decades, this immigration shift was encouraged by the colonial leaders. Despite affordable and often free land, many arriving newcomers, mostly from Britain and Ireland, found frontier life with the harsh climate difficult, and some of those with the means eventually returned home or went south. However, population growth far exceeded emigration in the following decades. It was a mostly agrarian-based society, but canal projects and a new network of plank roads spurred greater trade within the colony and with the United States, thereby improving previously damaged relations over time.\nMeanwhile, Ontario's numerous waterways aided travel and transportation into the interior and supplied water power for development. As the population increased, so did the industries and transportation networks, which in turn led to further development. By the end of the century, Ontario vied with Quebec as the nation's leader in terms of growth in population, industry, arts and communications.\nUnrest in the colony began to chafe against the aristocratic Family Compact, who governed while benefiting economically from the region's resources, and who did not allow elected bodies power. This resentment spurred republican ideals and sowed the seeds for early Canadian nationalism. Accordingly, rebellion in favour of responsible government rose in both regions; Louis-Joseph Papineau led the Lower Canada Rebellion and William Lyon Mackenzie, the first mayor of Toronto, led the Upper Canada Rebellion. In Upper Canada, the rebellion was quickly a failure. Mackenzie escaped to the United States, where he declared the Republic of Canada on Navy Island on the Niagara River.\nCanada West (1841\u20131867).\nAlthough both rebellions were put down in short order, the British government sent Lord Durham to investigate the causes. He recommended responsible government be granted, and Lower and Upper Canada be re-joined in an attempt to assimilate the French Canadians. Accordingly, the two colonies were merged into the Province of Canada by the \"Act of Union 1840\", with the capital initially at Kingston, and Upper Canada becoming known as Canada West. Responsible government was achieved in 1848. There were heavy waves of immigration in the 1840s, and the population of Canada West more than doubled by 1851 over the previous decade. As a result, for the first time, the English-speaking population of Canada West surpassed the French-speaking population of Canada East, tilting the representative balance of power.\nIn 1849, the districts of southern Ontario were formed into the Province of Canada, and county governments took over certain municipal responsibilities. The Province of Canada also began creating \"districts\" in sparsely populated Northern Ontario with the establishment of Algoma District and Nipissing District in 1858.\nAn economic boom in the 1850s coincided with railway expansion across the province, further increasing the economic strength of Central Canada. With the repeal of the Corn Laws and a reciprocity agreement in place with the United States, various industries such as timber, mining, farming and alcohol distilling benefited tremendously.\nA political stalemate developed in the 1850s, between finely balanced political groups: conservative and reform groups from Canada West and Canada East aligned against reform and liberal groups from Canada East each group having some support from French-Canadian and English-Canadian legislators. There was also a fear of aggression from the United States during and immediately after the American Civil War. These factors led to the formation of the Great Coalition in the elected Legislative Assembly, which initiated a series of conferences in the 1860s to effect a broader federal union of all British North American colonies. The \"British North America Act\" took effect on July 1, 1867, establishing the Dominion of Canada, initially with the four provinces of Nova Scotia, New Brunswick, Quebec, and Ontario. The Province of Canada was divided into Ontario and Quebec so that each linguistic group would have its own province. Both Quebec and Ontario were required by section 93 of the \"British North America Act\" to safeguard existing educational rights and privileges of the Protestant and Catholic minorities. Thus, separate Catholic schools and school boards were permitted in Ontario. However, neither province had a constitutional requirement to protect its French- or English-speaking minority. Toronto was formally established as Ontario's provincial capital.\nCanadian province (1867\u2013present).\nThe borders of Ontario, its new name in 1867, were provisionally expanded north and west. When the Province of Canada was formed, its borders were not entirely clear, and Ontario claimed eventually to reach all the way to the Rocky Mountains and Arctic Ocean. With Canada's acquisition of Rupert's Land, Ontario was interested in clearly defining its borders, especially since some of the new areas in which it was interested were rapidly growing. After the federal government asked Ontario to pay for construction in the new disputed area, the province asked for an elaboration on its limits, and its boundary was moved north to the 51st parallel north.\nOnce constituted as a province, Ontario proceeded to assert its economic and legislative power. In 1872, the lawyer Oliver Mowat became Premier of Ontario and remained as premier until 1896. He fought for provincial rights, weakening the power of the federal government in provincial matters, usually through well-argued appeals to the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council. His battles with the federal government greatly decentralized Canada, giving the provinces far more power than John A. Macdonald had intended. He consolidated and expanded Ontario's educational and provincial institutions, created districts in Northern Ontario, and fought to ensure that those parts of Northwestern Ontario not historically part of Upper Canada (the vast areas north and west of the Lake Superior-Hudson Bay watershed, known as the District of Keewatin) would become part of Ontario, a victory embodied in the \"Canada (Ontario Boundary) Act, 1889\". He also presided over the emergence of the province into the economic powerhouse of Canada. Mowat was the creator of what is often called \"Empire Ontario\".\nBeginning with Macdonald's National Policy (1879) and the construction of the Canadian Pacific Railway (1875\u20131885) through Northern Ontario and the Canadian Prairies to British Columbia, Ontario manufacturing and industry flourished. However, population increases slowed after a large recession hit the province in 1893, thus slowing growth drastically but for only a few years. Many newly arrived immigrants and others moved west along the railway to the Prairie Provinces and British Columbia, sparsely settling Northern Ontario.\nThe northern and western boundaries of Ontario were in dispute after Canadian Confederation. Ontario's right to northwestern Ontario was determined by the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council in 1884 and confirmed by the \"Canada (Ontario Boundary) Act, 1889\" of the Parliament of the United Kingdom. By 1899, there were seven northern districts: Algoma, Manitoulin, Muskoka, Nipissing, Parry Sound, Rainy River, and Thunder Bay. Four more northern districts were created between 1907 and 1912: Cochrane, Kenora, Sudbury and Timiskaming.\nMineral exploitation accelerated in the late 19th century, leading to the rise of important mining centres in the northeast, such as Sudbury, Cobalt and Timmins. The province harnessed its water power to generate hydro-electric power and created the state-controlled Hydro-Electric Power Commission of Ontario, later Ontario Hydro. The availability of cheap electric power further facilitated the development of industry. The Ford Motor Company of Canada was established in 1904 and the McLaughlin Motor Car Company (later General Motors Canada) was founded in 1907. The motor vehicle industry became the most lucrative industry for the Ontario economy during the 20th century.\nIn July 1912, the Conservative government of James Whitney issued Regulation 17 which severely limited the availability of French-language schooling to the province's French-speaking minority. French Canadians reacted with outrage, journalist Henri Bourassa denouncing the \"Prussians of Ontario\". The regulation was eventually repealed in 1927.\nInfluenced by events in the United States, the government of William Hearst introduced prohibition of alcoholic drinks in 1916 with the passing of the \"Ontario Temperance Act\". However, residents could distil and retain their own personal supply, and liquor producers could continue distillation and export for sale, allowing this already sizeable industry to strengthen further. Ontario became a hotbed for the illegal smuggling of liquor and the biggest supplier into the United States, which was under complete prohibition. Prohibition in Ontario came to an end in 1927 with the establishment of the Liquor Control Board of Ontario under the government of Howard Ferguson. The sale and consumption of liquor, wine, and beer are still controlled by some of the most extreme laws in North America to ensure strict community standards and revenue generation from the alcohol retail monopoly are upheld.\nThe post-World War II period was one of exceptional prosperity and growth. Ontario has been the recipients of most immigration to Canada, largely immigrants from war-torn Europe in the 1950s and 1960s and following changes in federal immigration law, a massive influx of non-Europeans since the 1970s. From a largely ethnically British province, Ontario has rapidly become culturally very diverse.\nThe nationalist movement in Quebec, particularly after the election of the \"Parti Qu\u00e9b\u00e9cois\" in 1976, contributed to driving many businesses and English-speaking people out of Quebec to Ontario, and as a result, Toronto surpassed Montreal as the largest city and economic centre of Canada. Depressed economic conditions in the Maritime Provinces have also resulted in de-population of those provinces in the 20th century, with heavy migration into Ontario.\nOntario's official language is English, although there exists a number of French-speaking communities across Ontario. French-language services are made available for communities with a sizeable French-speaking population; a service that is ensured under the \"French Language Services Act\" of 1989.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nPopulation.\nIn the 2021 census, Ontario had a population of 14,223,942 living in 5,491,201 of its 5,929,250 total dwellings, a 5.8 percent change from its 2016 population of 13,448,494. With a land area of , it had a population density of in 2021. The largest population centres in Ontario are Toronto, Ottawa, Hamilton, Kitchener, London and Oshawa, which all have more than 300,000 inhabitants.\nEthnicity.\nThe percentages given below add to more than 100% because of dual responses (e.g., \"French and Canadian\" response generates an entry both in the category \"French Canadian\" and in the category \"Canadian\").\nThe majority of Ontarians are of English or other European descent including large Scottish, Irish and Italian communities. Slightly less than 5% of the population of Ontario is Franco-Ontarian, that is those whose native tongue is French, although those with French ancestry account for 11% of the population. Compared to natural increase or interprovincial migration, immigration is a huge population growth force in Ontario, as it has been over the last two centuries. More recent sources of immigrants with large or growing communities in Ontario include East Asians, South Asians, Caribbeans, Latin Americans, Europeans, and Africans. Most populations have settled in the larger urban centres.\nVisible minorities and Indigenous peoples.\nIn 2021, 34.3% of the population consisted of visible minorities and 2.9% of the population was Indigenous, mostly of First Nations and M\u00e9tis descent. There was also a small number of Inuit in the province. The number of Indigenous people and visible minorities has been increasing at a faster rate than the general population of Ontario.\nReligion.\nIn 2021, 52.1% of the population was Christian, with the largest religious denominations being the Roman Catholic Church (with 26.0% of the population) and the United Church of Canada with (4.1%). Other religions included Islam (6.7%), Hinduism (4.1%). 31.6% of Ontarians had no religious affiliation.\nThe major religious groups in Ontario in 2021 were:\nIn Ontario, Catholics are represented by the Assembly of Catholic Bishops of Ontario and the Anglican Protestants by the Ecclesiastical Province of Ontario.\nLanguage.\nAs of the 2021 Canadian Census, the ten most spoken languages in the province included English (13,650,230 or 97.28%), French (1,550,545 or 11.05%), Mandarin (467,420 or 3.33%), Hindi (436,125 or 3.11%), Spanish (401,205 or 2.86%), Punjabi (397,865 or 2.84%), Cantonese (352,135 or 2.51%), Arabic (342,860 or 2.44%), Italian (312,800 or 2.23%), and Urdu (295,175 or 2.1%).\nThe principal language of Ontario is English, the province's \"de facto\" official language, with approximately 97.2% of Ontarians having proficiency in the language, although only 69.5% of Ontarians reported English as their mother tongue in the 2016 Census. English is one of two official languages of Canada, with the other being French. English and French are the official languages of the courts in Ontario. Approximately 4.6% of the population identified as francophone, and a total of 11.5% of Ontarians reported having proficiency in French. Approximately 11.2% of Ontarians reported being bilingual in both English and French. Approximately 2.5% of Ontarians have no proficiency in either English or French.\nFranco-Ontarians are concentrated in the northeastern, eastern, and extreme southern parts of the province, where under the \"French Language Services Act\", provincial government services are required to be available in French if at least 10% of a designated area's population report French as their native language or if an urban centre has at least 5,000 francophones.\nOther languages spoken by residents include Arabic, Bengali, Cantonese, Dutch, German, Greek, Gujarati, Hindi, Hebrew, Italian, Korean, Malayalam, Mandarin, Marathi, Persian, Polish, Portuguese, Punjabi, Russian, Sinhalese, Somali, Spanish, Tagalog, Telugu, Tamil, Tibetan, Ukrainian, Urdu, and Vietnamese.\nEconomy.\nOntario is Canada's leading manufacturing province, accounting for 52% of the total national manufacturing shipments in 2004. Ontario's largest trading partner is the American state of Michigan. In April 2012, Moody's bond-rating agency rated Ontario debt at AA2/stable, while S&amp;P rated it AA\u2212. Dominion Bond Rating Service rated it AA(low) in January 2013. Long known as a bastion of Canadian manufacturing and financial solvency, Ontario's public debt-to-GDP ratio is projected to be 38.4% in fiscal year 2023\u20132024.\nMining and the forest products industry, notably pulp and paper, are vital to the economy of Northern Ontario. As of 2011, roughly 200,000 ha are clearcut each year; herbicides for hardwood suppression are applied to a third of the total. There has been controversy over the Ring of Fire mineral deposit, and whether the province can afford to spend CAD$2.25\u00a0billion on a road from the Trans-Canada Highway near Kenora to the deposit, currently valued at CAD$60 billion.\nAn abundance of natural resources, excellent transportation links to the North American heartland and the inland Great Lakes making ocean access possible via container ships, have all contributed to making manufacturing the principal industry of the province, found mainly in the Golden Horseshoe region, which is the largest industrialized area in Canada, the southern end of the region being part of the North American Rust Belt. Important products include motor vehicles, iron, steel, food, electrical appliances, machinery, chemicals, and paper.\nHamilton is the largest steel manufacturing city in Canada followed closely by Sault Ste. Marie, and Sarnia is the centre for petrochemical production. Construction employed more than 6.5% of the province's work force in June 2011. Ontario's steel industry was once centred in Hamilton. Hamilton harbour, which can be seen from the QEW Skyway bridge, is an industrial wasteland; U.S. Steel-owned Stelco announced in the autumn of 2013 that it would close in 2014, with the loss of 875 jobs. The move flummoxed a union representative, who seemed puzzled why a plant with capacity of 2 million tonnes per annum would be shut while Canada imported 8\u00a0million tonnes of steel the previous year. Algoma Steel maintains a plant in Sault Ste Marie.\nOntario surpassed Michigan in car production, assembling more than 2,696,000 vehicles in 2004. Ontario has Chrysler plants in Windsor and Bramalea, two General Motor (GM) plants in Oshawa and one in Ingersoll, a Honda assembly plant in Alliston, Ford Motor Company (Ford) plants in Oakville and St. Thomas and Toyota assembly plants in Cambridge and Woodstock. However, as a result of steeply declining sales, in 2005, GM announced massive layoffs at production facilities across North America, including two large GM plants in Oshawa and a drive train facility in St. Catharines, that resulted in 8,000 job losses in Ontario alone. In 2006, Ford announced between 25,000 and 30,000 layoffs phased until 2012; Ontario was spared the worst, but job losses were announced for the St Thomas facility and the Windsor Casting plant. However, these losses will be offset by Ford's recent announcement of a hybrid vehicle facility slated to begin production in 2007 at its Oakville plant and GM's re-introduction of the Camaro which will be produced in Oshawa. In December 2008, Toyota announced the grand opening of the Toyota RAV4 plant in Woodstock, and Honda also plans to add an engine plant at its facility in Alliston. Despite these new plants coming online, Ontario has not yet fully recovered following massive layoffs during the Great Recession; its unemployment rate was 7.3% in May 2013, compared to 8.7% in January 2010 and approximately 6% in 2007. In September 2013, the Ontario government committed CA$\u00a0million to the Ford plant in Oakville, while the federal government committed CAD$71.1mn, to secure 2,800 jobs. The province has lost 300,000 manufacturing jobs in the decade from 2003, and the Bank of Canada noted that \"while the energy and mining industries have benefitted from these movements, the pressure on the manufacturing sector has intensified, since many firms in this sector were already dealing with growing competition from low-cost economies such as China.\"\nToronto and more broadly the Greater Toronto Area is a commercial, distribution, financial and industrial centre. It is the centre of Canada's financial sector, including insurance and banking services. Neighbouring cities are home to product distribution, IT centres, and manufacturing industries. Canada's Federal Government is the largest single employer in the National Capital Region, which centres on the border cities of Ontario's Ottawa and Quebec's Gatineau.\nThe information technology sector is important, particularly in the \"Silicon Valley North\" section of Ottawa, home to Canada's largest technology park. IT is also important in the Waterloo Region, where the headquarters of BlackBerry is located.\nTourism contributes heavily to the economy of Central Ontario, peaking during the summer months owing to the abundance of fresh water recreation and wilderness found there in reasonable proximity to the major urban centres. At other times of the year, hunting, skiing and snowmobiling are popular. This region has some of the most vibrant fall colour displays anywhere on the continent, and tours directed at overseas visitors are organized to see them. Tourism also plays a key role in border cities with large casinos, among them Windsor, Cornwall, Sarnia and Niagara Falls, the latter of which attracts millions of US and other international visitors.\nAgriculture.\nOnce the dominant industry, agriculture now uses a small percentage of the workforce. Massey Ferguson, a farm-implement manufacturer, was originally founded in the province in 1847, before eventually expanding internationally. As the following table shows, while the number of individual farms has steadily decreased and their overall size has shrunk at a lower rate, greater mechanization has supported increased supply to satisfy the ever-increasing demands of a growing population base; this has also meant a gradual increase in the total amount of land used for growing crops.\nCommon types of farms reported in the 2001 census include those for cattle, small grains and dairy. The fruit- and wine industry is primarily on the Niagara Peninsula, Prince Edward County, and along the northern shore of Lake Erie, where tobacco farms are also situated. Market vegetables grow in the rich soils of the Holland Marsh near Newmarket. The area near Windsor is also very fertile.\nThe area defined as the Corn Belt covers much of the southwestern area of the province, extending as far north as close to Goderich, but corn and soy are grown throughout the southern portion of the province. Apple orchards are a common sight along the southern shore of Nottawasaga Bay (part of Georgian Bay) near Collingwood and along the northern shore of Lake Ontario near Cobourg. Tobacco production, centred in Norfolk County, has decreased, allowing an increase in alternative crops such as hazelnuts and ginseng. Southern Ontario's limited supply of agricultural land is going out of production at an increasing rate. Urban sprawl and farmland severances contribute to the loss of thousands of acres of productive agricultural land in Ontario each year. Over 2,000 farms and of farmland in the GTA alone were lost to production in the two decades between 1976 and 1996. This loss represented approximately 18%\". of Ontario's Class 1 farmland being converted to urban purposes. In addition, increasing rural severances provide ever-greater interference with agricultural production. In an effort to protect the farmland and green spaces of the National Capital Region, and Greater Toronto Area, the Federal and Provincial Governments introduced greenbelts around Ottawa and the Golden Horseshoe, limiting urban development in these areas.\nEnergy.\nOntario's rivers make it rich in hydroelectric energy. In 2009, Ontario Power Generation generated 70% of the province's electricity, of which 51% is nuclear, 39% is hydroelectric and 10% is fossil-fuel derived. By 2025, nuclear power is projected to supply 42%, while fossil-fuel-derived generation is projected to decrease slightly over the next 20 years. Much of the newer power generation coming online in the last few years is natural gas or combined-cycle natural gas plants. OPG is not, however, responsible for the transmission of power, which is under the control of Hydro One.\nDespite its diverse range of power options, problems related to increasing consumption, lack of energy efficiency and ageing nuclear reactors, Ontario has been forced in recent years to purchase power from its neighbours Quebec and Michigan to supplement its power needs during peak consumption periods. Ontario's basic domestic rate in 2010 was 11.17 cents per kWh; by contrast. Quebec's was 6.81. In December 2013, the government projected a 42% hike by 2018, and 68% by 2033. Industrial rates are projected to rise by 33% by 2018, and 55% in 2033.\nThe \"Green Energy and Green Economy Act\", 2009 (GEA), takes a two-pronged approach to commercializing renewable energy; first, it aims to bring more renewable energy sources to the province; and secondly, it aims to adopt more energy-efficiency measures to help conserve energy. The bill envisaged appointing a Renewable Energy Facilitator to provide \"one-window\" assistance and support to project developers to facilitate project approvals.\nThe approvals process for transmission projects would also be streamlined and (for the first time in Ontario) the bill would enact standards for renewable energy projects. Homeowners would have access to incentives to develop small-scale renewables such as low- or no-interest loans to finance the capital cost of renewable energy generating facilities like solar panels.\nMuch of Ontario's electricity is generated in Niagara Falls. The Bruce Nuclear Generating Station, the second largest operational nuclear power plant in the world, is also in Ontario and uses eight CANDU reactors to generate electricity for the province.\nOntario had the most wind energy capacity of the country with 4,900 MW of power (41% of Canada's capacity).\nGovernment, law and politics.\nThe \"British North America Act 1867\" section 69 stipulated \"There shall be a Legislature for Ontario consisting of the Lieutenant Governor and of One House, styled the Legislative Assembly of Ontario.\" The assembly currently has 124 seats (increased from 107 as of the 42nd Ontario general election) representing ridings elected in a first-past-the-post system across the province.\nThe legislative buildings at Queen's Park are the seat of government. Following the Westminster system, the leader of the party holding the most seats in the assembly is known as the \"Premier and President of the Council\" (Executive Council Act R.S.O. 1990). The Premier chooses the cabinet or Executive Council whose members are deemed ministers of the Crown.\nAlthough the \"Legislative Assembly Act\" (R.S.O. 1990) refers to \"members of the assembly\" in English and in French, the legislators are now commonly called MPPs (Members of the Provincial Parliament) in English, but they have also been called MLAs (Members of the Legislative Assembly); both are acceptable but the latter is uncommon. The title of Prime Minister of Ontario, correct in French (), is permissible in English but now generally avoided in favour of the title \"Premier\" to avoid confusion with the Prime Minister of Canada.\nLaw.\nOntario has grown, from its roots in Upper Canada, into a modern jurisdiction. The old titles of the chief law officers, the Attorney-General and the Solicitor-General, remain in use. They both are responsible to the Legislature. The Attorney-General draughts the laws and is responsible for criminal prosecutions and the administration of justice, while the Solicitor-General is responsible for law enforcement and the police services of the province. The \"Municipal Act\" is the main statute governing the creation, administration and government of municipalities in the Canadian province of Ontario, other than the City of Toronto. After being passed in 2001, it came into force on January 1, 2003, replacing the previous \"Municipal Act\". Effective January 1, 2007, the \"Municipal Act\" (the Act) was significantly amended by the \"Municipal Statute Law Amendment Act, 2006\" (Bill 130).\nPolitics.\nOntario has numerous political parties which run for election. The four main parties are the centre-right Progressive Conservative Party of Ontario, the social democratic Ontario New Democratic Party (NDP), the centre to centre-left Ontario Liberal Party, and Green Party of Ontario. The Progressive Conservatives, Liberals and New Democrats have each governed the province, while the Greens elected their first member to the Legislative Assembly in the 2018 Ontario general election.\nThe 2018 Ontario general election resulted in a Progressive Conservative majority government under party leader Doug Ford, who was sworn in as Premier on June 29. Ontario NDP leader Andrea Horwath was sworn in as the leader of her Majesty's Loyal Opposition. The PC party under Ford has won two further successive majority governments in 2022 and 2025.\nAdministrative divisions.\nOntario has three types of first-level administrative divisions. They include single-tier municipalities, upper-tier municipalities (which may be in the form of either regional municipalities or counties), and districts. Upper-tier municipalities and districts are made up of smaller municipalities and other types of administrative divisions.\nAdministrative divisions differ primarily in the services that they provide to their residents, with the differing structures of these administrative regions resulting in disparities among Ontario's different regions. The administrative regions of Ontario are roughly coterminous with the census divisions used by Statistics Canada, although some exceptions do exist.\nUrban areas.\nStatistics Canada's measure of a \"metro area\", the Census Metropolitan Area (CMA), roughly bundles together population figures from the core municipality with those from \"commuter\" municipalities.\nEducation.\nOntario operates four publicly funded school systems, with there being both English and French equivalents of the public school system and the Catholic school system. About half of Ontario's government-funded District School Boards are Catholic (37 out of 72). There are some publicly funded schools with non-Catholic religious affiliation: these include Eden High School (under the District School Board of Niagara) and the Burkevale Protestant Separate School (under the Penetanguishene Protestant Separate School Board). Legislation regarding primary and secondary level education in Ontario is outlined in the \"Education Act\". In 2021, two million children were enrolled as students within the province. Elementary schools teach children enrolled in kindergarten and grades 1\u20138, while secondary schools teach adolescents in grades 9\u201312. Four and five year olds may enter kindergarten programs but are not required by law to do so until they turn six that calendar year.\nHigher education.\nHigher education in Ontario includes postsecondary education and skills training regulated by the Ministry of Colleges and Universities, whose current minister is Jill Dunlop. Recognized institutions include universities, colleges of applied arts and technology, and private career colleges. While there is some overlap between the purpose of universities and colleges in Canada, they generally serve different purposes. Universities place greater emphasis on academics while colleges place greater emphasis on work-integrated learning. Both colleges and universities can offer undergraduate degree programs. There are also programs that involve a partnership between a college and a university. Some students choose to attend college over university because it is the more affordable option.\nCulture.\nOutdoor recreation is popular in Ontario and the region is home to numerous cultural events and festivals. There is no single regional dish in Ontario. Local fish and wild game, such as walleye and moose, are sometimes consumed. Poutine, a dish that originated in Quebec, is also popular in Ontario.\nIn 2019, the government of Ontario passed legislation that established the Poet Laureate of Ontario.\nMuseums.\nThe largest museum in both Ontario and Canada is the Royal Ontario Museum, located in Toronto and founded in 1912. Receiving over one million visitors each year, it is also Canada's most popular museum. It features 40 exhibits containing \"art, culture and nature from around the world.\" Iconic objects include: the world's largest faceted cerussite gem, Light of the Desert; four large totem poles, Nisga'a and Haida; and a Neo-Babylonian wall relief, Striding Lion. \nOntario is also home to a number of national museums, due to the location of Ottawa within Ontario. These include, among others, the Canadian War Museum, dedicated to Canada's military history, the Canadian Museum of Nature, dedicated to natural history and the Canada Science and Technology Museum, dedicated to the history of science and technology in Canada. \nThere are also numerous other smaller, regional museums located in Ontario.\nMusic and arts.\nOntario has a particularly prominent role in Canadian music, notably Toronto, Canada's largest municipality. In classical music, the Toronto Symphony Orchestra, and the National Arts Centre Orchestra are renowned internationally. Many smaller Ontario cities have orchestras of their own as well. The Canadian Opera Company, also based in Toronto, is the country's largest and most influential producer of opera productions. Other institutions in the province include the Royal Conservatory of Music, MuchMusic, National Ballet of Canada and concert venues such as Roy Thomson Hall, Massey Hall, the National Arts Centre, and the Four Seasons Centre.\nMedia.\nIn 2022, Ontario had 357 newspapers, 32 of which are daily, the highest in any province. Ontario is home to the largest newspaper in Canada, the \"Toronto Star\", and Canada's newspaper of record, The Globe and Mail. There are also numerous weekly newspapers for individual communities, though print publications for these papers have been on a downwards trend due to local news being shared on sites like Facebook.\nSongs and slogans.\nIn 1973, the first slogan to appear on licence plates in Ontario was \"Keep It Beautiful\". This was replaced by \"Yours to Discover\" in 1982, which was originally used as a tourism slogan beginning in 1980. Plates with the French equivalent, , were made available to the public beginning in May 2008. (From 1988 to 1990, \"Ontario Incredible\" gave \"Yours to Discover\" a brief respite.) In 2020, as part of a licence plate redesign, the slogan was changed to \"A Place to Grow,\" inspired by the song A Place to Stand, a Place to Grow. This decision was reversed in the same year, due to visibility concerns. The slogan on licence plates remains \"Yours to Discover\".\nA Place to Stand, a Place to Grow was originally commissioned by the government of Ontario for its pavilion in Expo 67, and it became an unofficial anthem of the province. As a part of the Canada 150 celebrations in 2017, the provincial government released an updated rendition. In 2007, the provincial tourism agency commissioned a new song, \"There's No Place Like This\" is featured in television advertising, performed by Ontario artists including Molly Johnson, Brian Byrne, Keshia Chant\u00e9, as well as Tomi Swick and Arkells.\nProfessional sports.\nThe province has professional sports teams in baseball, basketball, Canadian football, ice hockey, lacrosse, rugby league, rugby union and soccer.\nTransportation.\nTransportation in Ontario is under the purview of the Ministry of Transportation of Ontario and Transport Canada. Infrastructure and laws relating to road transport is the responsibility of the Ministry of Transportation, while infrastructure and laws relating to air, rail and marine transport is the responsibility of Transport Canada.\nAir travel.\nThere are two Transport Canada designated international airports in Ontario They are Toronto Pearson International Airport, the busiest airport in Canada, handling 44 million passengers in 2023 and Ottawa Macdonald\u2013Cartier International Airport, Ontario's second largest airport, handling over 4 million passengers in 2023. In addition to airports in Ottawa, and Toronto, the province also operates 11 other airports of entry.\nA number of Ontario cities also have regional airports, many of which have scheduled commuter flights from Jazz Aviation or smaller airlines and charter companies\u00a0\u2013 flights from mid-size cities such as Sudbury and Sault Ste. Marie, to larger airports in Toronto and Ottawa. Bearskin Airlines also runs flights along the northerly east\u2013west route, connecting North Bay, Sudbury, Sault Ste. Marie, and Thunder Bay directly.\nRemote and isolated towns and settlements in the northern areas of the province rely partly or entirely on air service for travel, goods, and even ambulance services (MEDIVAC), since much of the far northern area of the province cannot be reached by road (or by year-round road) or rail.\nRailways.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Routemap/styles.css\"/&gt;\nVia Rail operates the inter-regional passenger train service on the Quebec City\u2013Windsor Corridor, along with \"The Canadian\", a transcontinental rail service from Southern Ontario to Vancouver, and the Sudbury\u2013White River train. Additionally, Amtrak rail connects Ontario with key New York cities including Buffalo, Albany, and New York City. Ontario Northland provides rail service to destinations as far north as Moosonee near James Bay, connecting them with the south. Regional commuter rail is limited to the provincially owned GO Transit, and serves a train-bus network spanning the Golden Horseshoe region, with Union Station in Toronto serving as the transport hub.\nFreight rail is dominated by the founding cross-country Canadian National Railway and Canadian Pacific Kansas City (formerly CP Rail) companies. As of 2021, there are 19,979\u00a0km of railways in operation.\nThere are several city rail-transit systems in the Province. The Toronto Transit Commission operates subways, as well as streetcars (being one of the busiest streetcar systems in North America). OC Transpo operates a light rail metro system in Ottawa. In addition, Waterloo region operates a surface light rail system called Ion. Construction on light rail lines, such as the Hurontario LRT, are also underway in the Regional Municipality of Peel, and are expected to be completed by late 2024.\nRoads.\n400-series highways make up the primary vehicular network in the south of province, and they connect at a number of points to border crossings to the United States, and Quebec, the busiest being the Detroit\u2013Windsor Tunnel and Ambassador Bridge and the Blue Water Bridge (via Highway 402). Some of the primary highways along the southern route are Highway 401, Highway 417, and Highway 400, Highway 401 being the busiest highway in North America. Other provincial highways and regional roads inter-connect the remainder of the province, and the Trans-Canada Highway connects the province to the rest of the country.\nWaterways.\nThe Saint Lawrence Seaway, which extends across most of the southern portion of the province and connects to the Atlantic Ocean, is the primary water transportation route for cargo, particularly iron ore and grain. In the past, the Great Lakes and St. Lawrence River were also a major passenger transportation route, including with the early 20th century growth of Canada Steamship Lines, but in the 1930s, passenger traffic greatly declined, and though some cruise lines still exist, as of 2022 less than 20% of traffic were non-cargo or passenger ships. Ontario's three largest ports are the Port of Hamilton, Port of Thunder Bay and the Port of Nanticoke. Ontario's only saltwater port is located in the town of Moosonee on James Bay.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "22219", "revid": "49031152", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22219", "title": "Ottawa", "text": "Capital city of Canada\nOttawa is the capital city of Canada. It is located in the southern portion of the province of Ontario, at the confluence of the Ottawa River and the Rideau River. Ottawa borders Gatineau, Quebec, and forms the core of the Ottawa\u2013Gatineau census metropolitan area (CMA) and the National Capital Region (NCR). As of 2021,[ [update]] Ottawa had a city population of 1,017,449 and a metropolitan population of 1,488,307, making it the fourth-largest city and fourth-largest metropolitan area in Canada.\nOttawa is the political centre of Canada and the headquarters of the federal government. The city houses numerous foreign embassies, key buildings, organizations, and institutions of Canada's government; these include the Parliament of Canada, the Supreme Court, the residence of Canada's viceroy, and the Office of the Prime Minister.\nFounded in 1826 as Bytown, and incorporated as Ottawa in 1855, its original boundaries were expanded through numerous annexations and were ultimately replaced by a new city incorporation and amalgamation in 2001. The municipal government of Ottawa is established and governed by the City of Ottawa Act of the Government of Ontario. It has an elected city council across 24 wards and a mayor elected city-wide, each elected using the first-past-the-post voting election system.\nOttawa has the highest proportion of university-educated residents among Canadian cities and is home to several colleges, universities, and research and cultural institutions, including the University of Ottawa, Carleton University, Algonquin College, Coll\u00e8ge La Cit\u00e9, the National Arts Centre, and the National Gallery of Canada, as well as numerous national museums, monuments, and historic sites. It is one of the most visited cities in Canada, with over 11\u00a0million visitors annually.\nEtymology.\nThe city name \"Ottawa\" was chosen in 1855 in reference to the Ottawa River, whose name is itself derived from the Algonquin , meaning \"to trade.\" In modern Algonquin, the city is known as .\nHistory.\nEarly history.\nThe Ottawa Valley became habitable around 10,000 years ago, following the natural draining of the Champlain Sea. Archaeological findings of arrowheads, tools and pottery indicate that Indigenous populations first settled in the area about 6,500 years ago. These findings suggest that these Algonquin people were engaged in foraging, hunting and fishing, but also trade and travel. Three major rivers meet within Ottawa, making it an important trade and travel area for thousands of years. The Algonquins are a broad Indigenous people who are closely related to the Odawa and Ojibwe peoples. This period ended with the arrival of settlers and colonization of North America by Europeans during and after the 15th century.\nEuropean exploration and early development.\nIn 1610, \u00c9tienne Br\u00fbl\u00e9 became the first documented European to navigate the Ottawa River, passing what would become Ottawa on his way to the Great Lakes. Three years later, Samuel de Champlain wrote about the waterfalls in the area and about his encounters with the Algonquin people.\nThe first non-Indigenous settlement in the area was created by Philemon Wright, a New Englander. Wright founded a lumber town in the area on 7 March 1800 on the north side of the river, across from the present-day city of Ottawa in Hull. He, with five other families and twenty-five labourers, also created an agricultural community, which was named Wright's Town. Wright pioneered the Ottawa Valley timber trade (soon to be the area's most significant economic activity) by transporting timber by river from the Ottawa Valley to Quebec City.\nIn 1826, news of the British military's impending construction of the Rideau Canal led to land speculators founding a community on the south side of the Ottawa River. The following year, the town was named after British military engineer Colonel John By who was responsible for the entire Rideau Waterway construction project. The Rideau canal provided a secure route between Montreal and Kingston on Lake Ontario. It bypassed a vulnerable stretch of the St. Lawrence River bordering the state of New York that had left re-supply ships bound for southwestern Ontario easily exposed to enemy fire during the War of 1812.\nColonel By set up military barracks on the site of today's Parliament Hill. He also laid out the streets of the town and created two distinct neighbourhoods named \"Upper Town\" west of the canal and \"Lower Town\" east of the canal. Similar to its Upper Canada and Lower Canada namesakes, historically, \"Upper Town\" was predominantly English-speaking and Protestant, whereas \"Lower Town\" was mostly French, Irish and Catholic.\nBytown's population grew to 1,000 as the Rideau Canal was completed in 1832. Bytown's early pioneer period saw Irish labour unrest during the Shiners' War from 1835 to 1845 and political dissension that was evident in the 1849 Stony Monday Riot, when Tories objected to consideration of Bytown as the capital of the Province of Canada. In 1855, Bytown was renamed \"Ottawa\" and incorporated as a city. William Pittman Lett was installed as the first city clerk, serving from 1844 to 1891, guiding Ottawa through 36 years of development, leading the hiring of key municipal roles, founding civic organizations, and proposing a set of by-laws for the city.\nSelection as capital.\nThe selection of Ottawa as a capital city predates Confederation. The choice was contentious and not straightforward, with the parliament of the United Province of Canada holding more than 200 votes over several decades to attempt to settle on a legislative solution to the location of its capital.\nThe governor-general of the province designated Kingston as the capital in 1841. However, the major population centres of Toronto and Montreal, as well as the former capital of Lower Canada, Quebec City, all had legislators dissatisfied with Kingston as the capital. Anglophone merchants in Quebec were the leading group supportive of the Kingston arrangement. In 1842, a vote rejected Kingston as the capital, and study of potential candidates included the then-named Bytown, but that option proved less popular than Toronto or Montreal. In 1843, a report of the Executive Council recommended Montreal as the capital as a more fortifiable location and commercial centre; however, the governor-general refused to execute a move without a parliamentary vote. In 1844, the Queen's acceptance of a parliamentary vote moved the capital to Montreal.\nIn 1849, after an Orange mob burned the Parliament building in Montreal, several votes were held on a permanent location. Kingston and Bytown were again considered potential capitals. However, the winning proposal was for two cities to share capital status and the legislature to alternate sitting in each: Quebec City and Toronto, in a policy known as perambulation. Logistical difficulties made this an unpopular arrangement, and an 1856 vote passed for the lower house of parliament to relocate permanently to Quebec City. However the upper house refused to approve funding.\nThe funding impasse led to the ending of the legislature's role in determining the seat of government. The legislature requested the Queen determine the seat of government. The Queen then acted on the advice of her governor general Edmund Head, who, after reviewing proposals from various cities, selected the recently renamed Ottawa. The Queen sent a letter to colonial authorities selecting Ottawa as the capital, effective 31 December 1857. George Brown, briefly a co-premier of the Province of Canada, attempted to reverse this decision but was unsuccessful. The Parliament ratified the Queen's choice in 1859, with Quebec serving as interim capital from 1859 to 1865. The relocation process began in 1865, with the first session of Parliament held in the new buildings in 1866. The buildings were generally well received by legislators.\nOttawa was chosen as the capital in 1857 for two primary reasons. First, Ottawa's isolated location, surrounded by dense forest far from the Canada\u2013US border and situated on a cliff face, would make it more defensible from attack. Second, Ottawa was on the border between Canada West and Canada East, making the selection an important political compromise.\nOther minor considerations also favoured Ottawa. Despite the city's regional isolation, there was water transportation access from spring to fall, both to Montreal via the Ottawa River, and to Kingston via the Rideau Waterway. Additionally, by 1854 it also had a modern all-season railway (the Bytown and Prescott Railway) that carried passengers, lumber and supplies the 82 kilometres (50 miles) to Prescott on the Saint Lawrence River and beyond. Ottawa's small size was also thought to be less prone to politically motivated mob violence, as had happened in the previous Canadian capitals. Finally, the government already owned the land that eventually became Parliament Hill, which it thought would be an ideal location for the Parliament buildings.\nThe original Parliament buildings, which included the Centre, East and West Blocks, were constructed between 1859 and 1866 in the Gothic Revival style. At the time, this was the largest North American construction project ever attempted and Public Works Canada and its architects were not initially well prepared for the relatively shallow-lying bedrock and had to redesign architectural drawings, leading to delays. The Library of Parliament and Parliament Hill landscaping were completed in 1876.\nPost-Confederation.\nStarting in the 1850s, entrepreneurs known as lumber barons began to build large sawmills, which became some of the largest mills in the world. Rail lines built in 1854 connected Ottawa to areas south and, from 1886 to the transcontinental rail network via Hull and Lachute, Quebec. By 1885 Ottawa was the only city in Canada whose downtown street-lights were powered entirely by electricity. In 1889, the Government developed and distributed 60 \"water leases\" (still in use) to mainly local industrialists which gave them permission to generate electricity and operate hydroelectric generators at Chaudi\u00e8re Falls. Public transportation began in 1870 with a horsecar system, overtaken in the 1890s by a vast electric streetcar system that operated until 1959.\nThe Hull\u2013Ottawa fire of 1900 destroyed two-thirds of Hull, including 40 percent of its residential buildings and most of the buildings of its largest employers along the waterfront. It began as a chimney fire in Hull on the north side of the river, but due to wind, spread rapidly throughout the widespread wooden buildings. In Ottawa, it destroyed about one-fifth of the buildings from the Lebreton Flats south to Booth Street and down to Dow's Lake. The fire had a disproportionate effect on west-end lower-income neighbourhoods. It had also spread among many lumber yards, a major part of Ottawa's economy. The fire destroyed approximately 3200 buildings and caused an estimated $300 million in damage (in 2020 Canadian dollars). An estimated 14% of Ottawans were left homeless.\nOn 1 June 1912, the Grand Trunk Railway opened both the Ch\u00e2teau Laurier hotel and its neighbouring downtown Union Station. On 3 February 1916, the Centre Block of the Parliament buildings was destroyed by a fire. The House of Commons and Senate was temporarily relocated to the recently constructed Victoria Memorial Museum, now the Canadian Museum of Nature until the completion of the new Centre Block in 1922. The centrepiece of the new Parliament Buildings is a dominant Gothic Revival-styled structure known as the Peace Tower.\nThe location of what is now Confederation Square was a former commercial district centrally located in a triangular area downtown surrounded by historically significant heritage buildings, including the Parliament buildings. It was redeveloped as a ceremonial centre in 1938 as part of the City Beautiful Movement. It became the site of the National War Memorial in 1939 and was designated a National Historic Site in 1984. A new Central Post Office (now the Privy Council of Canada) was constructed in 1939 beside the War Memorial because the original post office building on the proposed Confederation Square grounds had to be demolished.\nPost\u2013Second World War.\nOttawa's former industrial appearance was vastly altered by the 1950 Greber Plan. Prime Minister Mackenzie King hired French architect-planner Jacques Greber to design an urban plan for managing development in the National Capital Region, to make it more aesthetically pleasing and a location more befitting for Canada's political centre. Greber's plan included the creation of the National Capital Greenbelt, the Kichi Zibi Mikan and the Queensway highway system. His plan also called for changes in institutions such as moving downtown Union Station (now the Senate of Canada Building) to the suburbs, the removal of the street car system, the decentralization of selected government offices, the relocation of industries and removal of substandard housing from the downtown. The plan also recommended the creation of the Rideau Canal and Ottawa River pathways.\nIn 1958, the National Capital Commission was established as a Crown Corporation through the National Capital Act. The commission's original mission was to implement the Greber Plan recommendations conducted during the 1960s and 1970s. This marked the creation of a permanent political infrastructure for managing the capital region. Prior attempts to do so in the previous 50 years had been temporary. These included plans from the 1899 Ottawa Improvement Commission (OIC), the Todd Plan in 1903, the Holt Report in 1915 and the Federal District Commission (FDC) established in 1927 with a 16-year mandate.\nFrom 1931 to 1958, City Hall had been at the Transportation Building adjacent to Union Station (now part of the Rideau Centre). In 1958, a new City Hall opened on Green Island near Rideau Falls, where urban renewal had recently transformed this industrial location into a green space. In 2001, Ottawa City Hall returned downtown to a 1990 building on 110 Laurier Avenue West, the home of the now-defunct Regional Municipality of Ottawa-Carleton. This new location was close to Ottawa's first (1849\u20131877) and second (1877\u20131931) City Halls. This new city hall complex also contained an adjacent 19th-century restored heritage building formerly known as the Ottawa Normal School.\nFrom the 1960s to the 1980s, there was a large increase in construction in the National Capital Region, which was followed by large growth in the high-tech industry during the 1990s and 2000s. Ottawa became one of Canada's largest high-tech cities and was nicknamed Silicon Valley North. By the 1980s, Bell Northern Research (later Nortel) employed thousands, and large federally assisted research facilities such as the National Research Council contributed to an eventual technology boom. The early companies led to newer firms such as Newbridge Networks, Mitel and Corel.\nIn 1991, provincial and federal governments responded to a land claim submitted by the Algonquins of Ontario regarding the unceded status of the land on which Ottawa is situated. Negotiations have been ongoing, with an eventual goal to sign a treaty that would release Canada from claims for misuse of land under Algonquin title, affirm rights of the Algonquins, and negotiate conditions of the title transfer.\nOttawa's city limits have expanded over time, including a large expansion effective 1 January 2001, when the province of Ontario amalgamated all the constituent municipalities of the Regional Municipality of Ottawa\u2013Carleton into a single city. Regional Chair Bob Chiarelli was elected as the new city's first mayor in the 2000 municipal election, defeating Gloucester mayor Claudette Cain. The city's growth led to strains on the public transit system and road bridges. On 15 October 2001, a diesel-powered light rail transit (LRT) line was introduced on an experimental basis. Known today as O-Train Line 2, it was dubbed the O-Train and connected downtown Ottawa to the southern suburbs via Carleton University. The decision to extend the O-Train, and to replace it with an electric light rail system, was a major issue in the 2006 municipal elections, where Chiarelli was defeated by businessman Larry O'Brien. After O'Brien's election, transit plans were changed to establish a series of light rail stations from the east side of the city into downtown, and for using a tunnel through the downtown core. Jim Watson, the last mayor of Ottawa before amalgamation, was re-elected in the 2010 election.\nIn October 2012, the City Council approved the final Lansdowne Park plan, an agreement with the Ottawa Sports and Entertainment Group that saw a new stadium, increased green space and housing and retail added to the site. In December 2012, City Council voted unanimously to move forward with the Confederation Line, a light rail transit line, which was opened on 14 September 2019.\nGeography.\nDistricts and neighbourhoods.\nThe present-day city of Ottawa consists of the historic main urban area, as well as other urban, suburban and rural areas within the city's post-amalgamation limits.\nOld Ottawa.\nOld Ottawa refers to the former pre-amalgamation city, as well as the former city of Vanier, a densely populated, historically francophone, working class enclave, and the former village of Rockcliffe Park, a wealthy residential neighbourhood adjacent to the Prime Minister's official residence at 24 Sussex and the Governor General's residence. The old city includes the downtown core and older neighbourhoods to the east, west, and south. These vibrant neighbourhoods include the bustling commercial and cultural areas of Old Ottawa South,\nCentretown, Lower Town, and Sandy Hill, the affluent tree-lined neighbourhoods of The Glebe, Westboro, and New Edinburgh, and the historically blue-collar communities of Hintonburg, Mechanicsville, Carlington, and LeBreton Flats, with a mixture of housing types, artist lofts, and industrial uses. The old city also includes the ethnic enclaves of Chinatown and Little Italy.\nSuburbs and outlying communities.\nModern Ottawa is made up of eleven historic townships, ten of which are from the former Carleton County and one from the former Russell County. Ottawa city limits are bounded on the east by the United Counties of Prescott and Russell; by Renfrew County and Lanark County in the west; on the south by the United Counties of Leeds and Grenville and the United Counties of Stormont, Dundas and Glengarry; and on the north by the Regional County Municipality of Les Collines-de-l'Outaouais and the City of Gatineau.\nThe main suburban areas extend a considerable distance to the east, west and south of the inner-city. These areas also include the former cities of Cumberland, Gloucester (with the large suburban district of Orleans outside the greenbelt split between them), Kanata, and Nepean. The towns of Stittsville and Richmond within the former Goulbourn Township are to the southwest. Nepean as a suburb also includes Barrhaven. The communities of Manotick and Riverside South are on the other side of the Rideau River, and Greely, southeast of Riverside South.\nA number of rural communities (villages and hamlets) are also part of the City of Ottawa. Some of these communities are Burritts Rapids; Ashton; Fallowfield; Kars; Fitzroy Harbour; Munster; Carp; North Gower; Metcalfe; Constance Bay and Osgoode. Several towns are within the federally defined National Capital Region but outside of Ottawa's municipal boundaries; these include communities of Almonte, Carleton Place, Embrun, Kemptville, Rockland, and Russell.\nArchitecture.\nInfluenced by government structures, much of the city's architecture tends to be formal and functional; the city is also marked by Romantic and Picturesque styles of architecture such as the Parliament Buildings' gothic revival architecture. Ottawa's domestic architecture contains single-family homes, but also includes smaller numbers of semi-detached houses, rowhouses, and apartment buildings. Many domestic buildings in Centretown are clad in red brick, with trim in wood, stone, or metal; variations are common, depending on the cultural heritage of the neighbourhoods and the time they were built.\nThe skyline has been controlled by building height restrictions originally implemented to keep Parliament Hill and the Peace Tower at visible from most parts of the city. Today, several buildings are slightly taller than the Peace Tower, with the tallest being the Claridge Icon at . Many federal buildings in the National Capital Region are managed by Public Works Canada, which leads to heritage conservation in its renovations and management of buildings, such as the renovation of the Senate Building. Most of the federal land in the region is managed by the National Capital Commission; its control of much undeveloped land and appropriations powers gives the NCC a great deal of influence over the city's development.\nClimate.\nOttawa has a warm-summer humid continental climate (K\u00f6ppen: \"Dfb\", Trewartha \"Dcbo/Dcbc\") with four distinct seasons and is between Zones 5a and 5b on the Canadian Plant Hardiness Scale. The average July maximum temperature is . The average January minimum temperature is . The highest temperature ever recorded in Ottawa was on 4 July 1913, 1 August 1917 and 11 August 1944.\nSummers are generally warm and humid in Ottawa. On average, there are 13.4 days across the three summer months of June, July and August that have temperatures exceeding . Periods of hotter weather are normally accompanied by high humidity levels.\nSnow and ice are dominant during the winter season. On average, almost every day of January, February and March has more than 5\u00a0cm of snowpack (29, 28, and 23 days, respectively), and on average, approximately 13 days a year see 5\u00a0cm or more of snowfall, with 5 of those having over 10\u00a0cm.\nAn average of 15 days of the year experience temperatures below . Spring and fall are variable, prone to extreme changes in temperature and conditions. The month of May, for example, on average gets a day below freezing at night every other year, conversely a day surpassing 30\u00a0\u00b0C \nAnnual rainfall averages around 772mm per year, total precipitation 938mm spread throughout the year, with some variation. May through November are the months more likely to see significant precipitation events, with each month having an average of 3 days of over 10\u00a0mm of precipitation, with December through April seeing on average 1\u20132 days. May through November have, on average, over 80\u00a0mm of rainfall per month, with peaks of approximately 90\u00a0mm in June and July. December through April have less than 80\u00a0mm, with February being the driest month at an average of 5\u00a0cm of precipitation.\nOttawa experiences about 2,080 hours of average sunshine annually (45% of possible). Predominate wind direction in Ottawa is from the West, Easterly air flow is more common during periods of wet weather as well as localized river/lake-effect cells on summer afternoons. Windspeed is on average higher during the winter, with northerly winds predominating during cold waves.\nPhysical geography.\nOttawa is situated on the south bank of the Ottawa River and contains the mouths of the Rideau River and Rideau Canal. The Rideau Canal (Rideau Waterway) first opened in 1832 and is long. It connects the Saint Lawrence River on Lake Ontario at Kingston to the Ottawa River near Parliament Hill. It was able to bypass the unnavigable sections of the Cataraqui and Rideau rivers and various small lakes along the waterway due to flooding techniques and the construction of 47 water transport locks.\nOttawa is situated in a lowland on top of Paleozoic carbonate and shale and is surrounded by more craggy Precambrian igneous and metamorphic formations. Ottawa has had fluvial deposition of till and sands, leading to the widespread formation of eskers. There are limited distinct features arising from glacial deposits, but Ottawa was affected by the Late Wisconsian advance. Before the draining of the Champlain Sea, the area had high salinity. After the draining of the sea, the area had pine-dominated forests. Ottawa is located within the Western Quebec Seismic Zone, and while relatively inactive, the city does occasionally experience earthquakes.\nBuilt environment.\nDuring part of the winter season the Ottawa section of the canal forms the world's largest skating rink, thereby providing both a recreational venue and a transportation path to downtown for ice skaters (from Carleton University and Dow's Lake to the Rideau Centre and National Arts Centre). On 29 June 2007, the Rideau Canal was recognized as a UNESCO World Heritage Site.\nThe older part of the city (including what remains of Bytown) is known as Lower Town, and occupies an area between the canal and the rivers. Across the canal to the west lie both Centretown and Downtown Ottawa, which share a border along Gloucester Street. These core neighbourhoods contain streets such as Elgin and Bank, which fill the role of commercial main streets in the region.\nCentretown is next to downtown, which includes a substantial economic and architectural government presence across multiple branches of government. The legislature's work takes place in the parliamentary precinct, which includes buildings on Parliament Hill and others downtown, such as the Senate of Canada Building. Important buildings in the executive branch include the Office of the Prime Minister and Privy Council as well as many civil service buildings. The Supreme Court of Canada building can also be found in this area.\nAcross the Ottawa River, which forms the border between Ontario and Quebec, lies the city of Gatineau, itself the result of amalgamation of the former Quebec cities of Hull and Aylmer. Although formally and administratively separate cities in two different provinces, Ottawa and Gatineau (along with several nearby municipalities) collectively constitute the National Capital Region, which is considered a single metropolitan area. One federal Crown corporation, the National Capital Commission, or NCC, has significant land holdings in both cities, including sites of historical and touristic importance. The NCC, through its responsibility for planning and development of these lands, has a crucial role in shaping the development of the city. Around the main urban area is an extensive greenbelt, administered by the NCC for conservation and leisure, and comprising mostly forest, farmland and marshland.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nIn the 2021 Census of Population conducted by Statistics Canada, Ottawa had a population of living in of its total private dwellings, a change of from its 2016 population of . With a land area of , it had a population density of in 2021.\nAs of 2021 the Ottawa-Gatineau census metropolitan area (CMA) had a population of living in of its total private dwellings, a change of from its 2016 population of . With a land area of , it had a population density of in 2021.\nOttawa's median age of 40.1 is below the provincial and national averages as of 2016. Youths under 15 constituted 16.7% of the total population in 2016, while those of retirement age (65 years and older) made up 15.4%.\nThe 2021 census reported that immigrants (individuals born outside Canada) comprise 259,215 persons or 25.9% of the total population of Ottawa. Of the total immigrant population, the top countries of origin were China (20,320 persons or 7.8%), India (16,200 persons or 6.2%), United Kingdom (14,760 persons or 5.7%), Lebanon (11,900 persons or 4.6%), Philippines (10,505 persons or 4.1%), United States of America (8,795 persons or 3.4%), Haiti (6,710 persons or 2.6%), Syria (6,370 persons or 2.5%), Vietnam (6,155 persons or 2.4%), and Iran (6,000 persons or 2.3%).\nRace and ethnicity.\nAs of 2021, approximately 64.9% of Ottawa's population were white or European, while 2.6% were Indigenous, and 32.5% were visible minorities (higher than the national percentage of 26.5%).\nReligion.\nAccording to the 2021 census, religious groups in Ottawa included:\nIn 2011[ [update]], around 65% of Ottawa residents described themselves as Christian, with Catholics accounting for 38.5% of the population and members of Protestant churches 25%. Other religions were also present in Ottawa, the most prominent being Islam (6.7%), Hinduism (1.4%), Buddhism (1.3%), and Judaism (1.2%). Those with no religious affiliation represented 22.8%.\nLanguage.\nThose who identify their mother tongue as English constitute 62.4 percent, while those with French as their mother tongue make up 14.2 percent of the population. Regarding respondents' knowledge of one or both official languages, 59.9 percent and 1.5 percent of the population know English and French only, respectively, while 37.2 percent know both official languages. Bilingualism became official policy for the conduct of municipal business in 2002, making it the largest city in Canada with both English and French as co-official languages.\nThe overall Ottawa\u2013Gatineau census metropolitan area (CMA) has a larger proportion of French speakers than Ottawa since Gatineau's population's first language is mostly French. However, Gatineau is also the most bilingual city in Canada, making the region one of the most bilingual. An additional 20.4 percent of the population list languages other than English and French as their mother tongue. These include Arabic (3.2%), Chinese (3.0%), Spanish (1.2%), Italian (1.1%), and many others.\nEconomy.\nAs of 2015, the region of Ottawa-Gatineau has the sixth-highest total household income of all Canadian metropolitan areas ($82,053), and the Ontario portion more directly overlapping the City of Ottawa has a higher household income ($86,451). The median household income after taxes in the City of Ottawa is $73,745 in 2016 was higher than the national median of $61,348. Ottawa's unemployment rate has remained below the national and provincial unemployment rates since 2006, with a rate of 5.2% in April 2022, low compared to the decade preceding. In 2019 Mercer ranks Ottawa with the third highest quality of living of any Canadian city, and 19th highest in the world. It is also rated the second cleanest city in Canada, and third cleanest city in the world.\nOttawa's primary employers are the Public Service of Canada and the high-tech industry, although tourism and healthcare also represent increasingly sizeable economic activities. The federal government is the city's largest employer, employing over 116,000 individuals from the National Capital Region. The national headquarters for many federal departments are in Ottawa, particularly throughout Centretown and in the Terrasses de la Chaudi\u00e8re and Place du Portage complexes in Hull. The National Defence Headquarters in Ottawa is the main command centre for the Canadian Armed Forces. It hosts the Department of National Defence. During the summer, the city hosts the Ceremonial Guard, which performs functions such as the Changing the Guard.\nAs Canada's national capital, tourism is an important part of Ottawa's economy, particularly after the 150th anniversary of Canada, centred in Ottawa. The lead-up to the festivities saw much investment in civic infrastructure, upgrades to tourist infrastructure and increases in national cultural attractions. The National Capital Region annually attracts an estimated 22 million tourists, who spend about 2.2 billion dollars and support 30,600 jobs directly.\nIn addition to the economic activities that come with being the national capital, Ottawa is an important technology centre; in 2015, its 1800 companies employed approximately 63,400 people. The concentration of companies in this industry earned the city the nickname of \"Silicon Valley North.\" Most of these companies specialize in telecommunications, software development and environmental technology. Large technology companies such as Nortel, Corel, Mitel, Cognos, Halogen Software, Shopify and JDS Uniphase were founded in the city. Ottawa also has regional locations for Nokia, 3M, Adobe Systems, Bell Canada, IBM and Hewlett-Packard. Many of the telecommunications and new technology are in the western part of the city (formerly Kanata). The \"tech sector\" was doing particularly well in 2015/2016.\nNordion, i-Stat and the National Research Council of Canada and OHRI are part of the growing life science sector.\nThe health sector is another major employer, which employs over 18,000 people in the city. Business, finance, administration, and sales and service rank high among types of occupations. Approximately ten percent of Ottawa's GDP is derived from finance, insurance and real estate whereas employment in goods-producing industries is only half the national average. The City of Ottawa is the second largest employer with approximately 2,100 people employed by the Ottawa Police service, and 13,300 full-time equivalent non-police employees.\nIn 2016, Ottawa experienced an increase of 10,000 jobs over the 2012 average growth, which was relatively slower than in the late 1990s. All major clusters tracked by the city saw increases in employment between 2014 and 2019. Major areas of growth in the 2010s included local and federal administration, finance and accommodation. Between 2008 and 2020, there was growth in the number of government employees and a reduction in high-tech jobs, a reversal of previous trends from 2003 to 2008.\nOttawa already has the largest rural economy among Canada's major cities. In Ottawa, the rural economy contributes over $1 billion to the GDP. Agriculture alone accounts for $400 million, $136.7 million of which is farm-gate sales. Rural economic activity includes agriculture, retail sales, construction, forestry and mining (aggregates), tourism, manufacturing, personal and business services, and transportation, to name a few. Rural employment expanded by a healthy 18% from 1996 to 2001.\nMedia.\nThree main daily local newspapers are printed in Ottawa: two English newspapers, the \"Ottawa Citizen\" established as \"the Bytown Packet\" in 1845 and the \"Ottawa Sun\", and one French newspaper, \"Le Droit\". The city is also home to local stations of the television broadcast networks and systems CBC and CTV, as well as English and French radio stations.\nIn addition to the market's local media services, Ottawa is home to several national media operations, including CPAC (Canada's national legislature broadcaster) and the parliamentary bureau staff of virtually all of Canada's major newsgathering organizations in television, radio and print. The city is also home to the head office of the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation.\nEducation.\nPrimary and secondary education.\nOttawa has four main public school boards: English, English-Catholic, French, and French-Catholic. The English-language Ottawa-Carleton District School Board (OCDSB) is the largest board with 147 schools, followed by the English-Catholic Ottawa Catholic School Board with 85 schools. The two French-language boards are the French-Catholic \"Conseil des \u00e9coles catholiques du Centre-Est\" with 49 schools, and the French \"Conseil des \u00e9coles publiques de l'Est de l'Ontario\" with 37 schools. Ottawa also has numerous private schools which are not part of a board.\nThe Ottawa Public Library was created in 1906 as part of the Carnegie library system. as of 2008[ [update]] the library system had 2.3\u00a0million items at its 34 branches and two mobile libraries. Approximately 9.5 million loans were conducted in 2020, approximately 6.7 million physical loans and the remainder digital items.\nHigher education and research.\nOttawa is known as the most educated city in Canada, with over half the population having graduated from college and/or university. Ottawa has the highest per capita concentration of engineers, scientists, and residents with PhDs in Canada. The city has two main public universities and two main public colleges.\nOther colleges and universities in the metropolitan area are located in the neighbouring suburb of Gatineau, including the University of Quebec in Outaouais, C\u00e9gep de l'Outaouais, and Heritage College.\nPublic health\nThere are six active general medical hospitals in the city of Ottawa: The Queensway Carleton Hospital, The Ottawa Hospital (Civic Hospital, General Hospital, Riverside Hospital), Montfort Hospital, and Children's Hospital of Eastern Ontario. Several specialized hospital facilities are also present, such as the world-renowned University of Ottawa Heart Institute, the Royal Ottawa Mental Health Centre, and \u00c9lisabeth Bruy\u00e8re Hospital. There are also several hospitals and major medical centres in neighbouring suburban communities and commuter towns. The University of Ottawa Faculty of Medicine operates teaching hospitals in conjunction with partners throughout the city.\nOttawa is the headquarters of numerous major medical organizations and institutions such as Canadian Red Cross, Canadian Blood Services, Health Canada, Canadian Medical Association, Royal College of Physicians and Surgeons of Canada, Canadian Nurses Association, and the Medical Council of Canada.\nCulture and contemporary life.\nTraditionally, the ByWard Market (in Lower Town), Parliament Hill and the Golden Triangle (both in Centretown \u2013 Downtown) have been the focal points of the cultural scenes in Ottawa. Modern thoroughfares such as Wellington Street, Rideau Street, Sussex Drive, Elgin Street, Bank Street, Somerset Street, Preston Street, Richmond Road in Westboro, and Sparks Street are home to many boutiques, museums, theatres, galleries, landmarks and memorials in addition to eating establishments, cafes, bars and nightclubs.\nAs Canada's capital, Ottawa has played host to many significant cultural events in Canadian history, including the first visit of the reigning Canadian sovereign\u2014King George VI, with his consort, Queen Elizabeth\u2014to his parliament, on 19 May 1939. VE Day was marked with a large celebration on 8 May 1945, the first raising of the country's new national flag took place on 15 February 1965, and the centennial of Confederation was celebrated on 1 July 1967. Queen Elizabeth II was in Ottawa on 17 April 1982, to issue a royal proclamation of the enactment of the Constitution Act. In 1983, Prince Charles and Diana Princess of Wales came to Ottawa for a state dinner hosted by then Prime Minister Pierre Trudeau. In 2011, Ottawa was selected as the first city to receive Prince William, Duke of Cambridge, and Catherine, Duchess of Cambridge during their tour of Canada.\nOttawa was featured in the short story collection \"For Your Eyes Only\", by Ian Fleming.\nLandmarks.\nThere is one World Heritage Site in Ottawa, the Rideau Canal, along with 25 National Historic Sites of Canada in Ottawa, including the Ch\u00e2teau Laurier, the Parliament of Canada, Confederation Square, the former Ottawa Teachers' College and Laurier House. Many other properties of cultural value have been designated as having \"heritage elements\" by the City of Ottawa under Part IV of the \"Ontario Heritage Act\".\nArts.\nPerforming and visual arts.\nThe Ottawa Little Theatre, founded in 1913 as the Ottawa Drama League, is Ottawa's longest-running community theatre company. Since 1969, Ottawa has been the home of the National Arts Centre, a major performing arts venue that houses four stages and is home to the National Arts Centre Orchestra, the Ottawa Symphony Orchestra and Opera Lyra Ottawa.\nEstablished in 1975, the Great Canadian Theatre Company specializes in the production of Canadian plays at a local level. The cities museum landscape is notable for containing six of Canada's nine national museums, the Canada Agriculture and Food Museum, the Canada Aviation and Space Museum, the Canada Science and Technology Museum, Canadian Museum of Nature, Canadian War Museum and National Gallery of Canada. The National Gallery of Canada; designed by famous architect Moshe Safdie, it is a permanent home to the \"Maman\" sculpture. The Canadian War Museum houses over 3.75\u00a0million artifacts and was moved to an expanded facility in 2005. The Canadian Museum of Nature was built in 1905, and underwent a major renovation between 2004 and 2010, leading to a centrepiece Blue Whale skeleton, and the creation of a monthly nightclub experience, \"Nature Nocturne\".\nCuisine.\nOttawa is home to several regional dishes. As a city with traditional French-Canadian roots, staples such as poutine are served throughout the city. However, many consider shawarma Ottawa's official dish; the city contains more shawarma restaurants than anywhere else in Canada. The city is also home to \"Ottawa-style\" pizza, consisting usually of a thicker doughy crust and slightly spicy pizza sauce, with the toppings baked under a heavy layer of cheese, keeping the toppings soft. Beaver tails, a fried dough pastry, were first created in Ottawa in the 1970s. Le Cordon Bleu has a long-established culinary arts institute in the central Ottawa neighbourhood of Sandy Hill, the only Le Cordon Bleu campus in North America.\nFestivals.\nOttawa hosts a variety of annual seasonal activities\u2014such as Winterlude, the largest festival in Canada, and Canada Day celebrations on Parliament Hill and surrounding downtown area, as well as Bluesfest, Canadian Tulip Festival, Ottawa Dragon Boat Festival, Ottawa International Jazz Festival, Fringe Festival, Capital Pride, and CityFolk Festival, that have grown to become some of the largest festivals of their kind in the world. In 2010, Ottawa's Festival industry received the IFEA \"World Festival and Event City Award\" for the category of North American cities with a population between 500,000 and 1,000,000.\nSports.\nProfessional sports.\nSport in Ottawa has a history dating back to the 19th century. The city is currently home to six professional sports teams. The Ottawa Senators are a professional ice hockey team playing in the National Hockey League. The Senators history in Ottawa dates back to 1883; the franchise would go on to win the Stanley Cup eleven times by 1927. The team is currently a member of the Atlantic Division and play their home games at the Canadian Tire Centre. In 2023, the Ottawa Charge became one of the six charter franchises of the Professional Women's Hockey League (PWHL). The Charge play home games at TD Place Arena.\nThe Ottawa Redblacks are a professional Canadian Football team playing in the Canadian Football League. Formerly the Ottawa Rough Riders represented the city until 1996. With a history dating back to 1876, the team was one of the oldest and longest-lived professional sports teams in North America. The professional soccer club, Atl\u00e9tico Ottawa, plays in the Canadian Premier League. The team was founded in by Spanish club Atl\u00e9tico Madrid, and along with the Redblacks, play their home games at TD Place Stadium. Ottawa Rapid FC of the Northern Super League also play at TD Place Stadium. The Ottawa Black Bears, founded in 2024, compete in the National Lacrosse League and play at the Canadian Tire Centre in Kanata. The Ottawa Blackjacks are a professional basketball team, playing in the Canadian Elite Basketball League, out of the TD Place Arena. The Ottawa Titans play professional baseball in the Frontier League at Raymond Chabot Grant Thornton Park. Ottawa was previously home to the Ottawa Lynx, a Triple-A club, as well as the Ottawa Champions, an independent baseball team in the Can-Am League.\nCollegiate sports.\nThe University of Ottawa and Carleton University varsity teams compete in U Sports in various sports. Algonquin College and Coll\u00e8ge La Cit\u00e9 teams compete in the OCAA.\nThe Carleton Ravens are nationally ranked in basketball and soccer. Carleton's men's basketball program is regarded as the greatest of all time, having won 17 of the last 20 national championships. The Ottawa Gee-Gees are nationally ranked in basketball and soccer.\nNon-professional and amateur sports.\nSeveral non-professional teams also play in Ottawa, including the Ottawa 67's junior ice hockey team.\nThe city is home to an assortment of amateur organized team sports such as soccer, basketball, baseball, curling, rowing, ultimate, and horse racing. Casual recreational activities, such as skating, cycling, tennis, hiking, sailing, golfing, skiing, and fishing/ice fishing are also popular.\nIronman Triathlon began in Ottawa in 2025.\nGovernment and politics.\nThe City of Ottawa is a single-tier municipality, meaning it is in itself a census division and has no county or regional municipality government above it, and has no subsidiary municipalities to provide municipal services. Ottawa is governed by the 25-member Ottawa City Council consisting of 24 councillors each representing one ward and the mayor, Mark Sutcliffe as of the 2022 Ottawa municipal election, is elected in a citywide vote.\nAlong with being the capital of Canada, Ottawa is politically diverse in local politics. Most of the city has traditionally supported the Liberal Party in federal elections. The safest areas for the Liberals are the ones dominated by Francophones, especially in Vanier and central Gloucester. Central Ottawa is usually more left-leaning, and the New Democratic Party have won ridings there. Some of Ottawa's suburbs are swing areas, such as central Nepean. Another example of a swing area is Orleans, despite its often Liberal Party-aligned francophone population. Ridings further outside the city centre, such as those including Kanata, Barrhaven and rural areas, tend to be more conservative, fiscally and socially. This is especially true in the former Townships of West Carleton, Goulbourn, Rideau and Osgoode, which are more in line with the conservative areas in the surrounding counties. Rural parts of the former township of Cumberland, with a large number of Francophones, traditionally support the Liberal Party, though their support has recently weakened.\nAt present, Ottawa is host to about 130 embassies. A further 49 countries accredit their embassies and missions in the United States to Canada.\nTransportation.\nPublic transportation.\nOttawa's public transit system is managed by OC Transpo. OC Transpo operates an integrated, multi-modal rapid transit system which includes:\nAirports.\nThe Ottawa Macdonald\u2013Cartier International Airport is the city's principal airport. There are also three main regional airports Gatineau-Ottawa Executive Airport, Ottawa/Carp Airport, and Ottawa/Rockcliffe Airport.\nInter-city transportation.\nOttawa station is the main inter-city train station operated by Via Rail. It is located to the east of downtown in Eastway Gardens (adjacent to O-Train Tremblay station) and serves Via Rail's Corridor Route. The city is also served by inter-city passenger rail service at Fallowfield station in the southwestern suburban community of Barrhaven.\nIntercity bus services are currently provided by several carriers at various stops throughout the city, following the closure of the former Ottawa Central Station bus terminal on 1 June 2021. Major carriers include: Megabus, Ontario Northland, Autobus Gatineau, and Orl\u00e9ans Express.\nStreets and highways.\nThe City of Ottawa has over lane-kilometres of road and a series of freeways. The primary freeways are the east\u2013west provincial Highway 417 (designated as the Queensway and part of the Trans-Canada Highway), Ottawa-Carleton Highway 174 (formerly Provincial Highway 17), Highway 7, and the north\u2013south provincial Highway 416 (designated as Veterans' Memorial Highway), which connects to other 400-Series highways via the 401. From downtown there are also freeway connections to Autoroute 5 and Autoroute 50, in neighbouring Gatineau.\nThe city also has several scenic parkways and promenades, such as the Kichi Zibi Mikan (formerly the Macdonald Parkway), Colonel By Drive, Queen Elizabeth Driveway, the Sir George-\u00c9tienne Cartier Parkway (formerly the Rockcliffe Parkway), and the Aviation Parkway. The National Capital Commission manages ceremonial routes linking key attractions on both sides of the Ottawa River, including Confederation Boulevard.\nCycling and pedestrian network.\nNumerous paved multi-use trails, mostly operated by the National Capital Commission and the city, wind their way through much of the capital, including along the Ottawa River, Rideau River, and Rideau Canal. These pathways are used for transportation, tourism, and recreation. Because many streets either have wide curb lanes or bicycle lanes, cycling is a mode of transportation used by up to 2.5% of citizens, including in winter. This is the largest percentage of any major Canadian city. As of 31 December 2015, over of cycling facilities are found in Ottawa, including of multi-use pathways, of cycle tracks, of on-road bicycle lanes, and of paved shoulders. of new cycling facilities were added between 2011 and 2014.\nThe entire length of Sparks Street was turned into a pedestrian mall in 1966. Since 1960, additional avenues, streets, and parkways, are reserved for pedestrian and bicycle use only on Saturdays, Sundays and on selected holidays and events. In 2021 city council unanimously approved the Byward Market Public Realm Plan to make the market area more car-free and pedestrian friendly. From 2009 to 2015 the NCC introduced the Capital Bixi bicycle-sharing system. This continued until the company VeloGo took over the program from 2015 to 2018 when the partnership ceased. Scooter-sharing systems have since been introduced in the downtown and inner-city areas.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "22220", "revid": "1754504", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22220", "title": "Over and under shotgun", "text": ""}
{"id": "22256", "revid": "48227547", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22256", "title": "Objectivism", "text": "Philosophical system developed by Ayn Rand\nObjectivism is a philosophical system named and developed by Russian-American writer and philosopher Ayn Rand. She described it as \"the concept of man as a heroic being, with his own happiness as the moral purpose of his life, with productive achievement as his noblest activity, and reason as his only absolute\".\nRand first expressed Objectivism in her fiction, most notably \"The Fountainhead\" (1943) and \"Atlas Shrugged\" (1957), and later in non-fiction essays and books. Leonard Peikoff, a professional philosopher and Rand's designated intellectual heir, later gave it a more formal structure. Peikoff characterizes Objectivism as a \"closed system\" insofar as its \"fundamental principles\" were set out by Rand and are not subject to change. However, he stated that \"new implications, applications and integrations can always be discovered\".\nObjectivism's main tenets are that reality exists independently of consciousness, that human beings have direct contact with reality through sense perception (see direct and indirect realism), that one can attain objective knowledge from perception through the process of concept formation and inductive logic, that the proper moral purpose of one's life is the pursuit of one's own happiness (see rational egoism), that the only social system consistent with this morality is one that displays full respect for individual rights embodied in \"laissez-faire\" capitalism, and that the role of art in human life is to transform humans' metaphysical ideas by selective reproduction of reality into a physical form\u2014a work of art\u2014that one can comprehend and to which one can respond emotionally.\nAcademic philosophers have mostly ignored or rejected Rand's philosophy. Nonetheless, Objectivism has been a persistent influence among right-libertarians and American conservatives. The Objectivist movement, which Rand founded, attempts to spread her ideas to the public and in academic settings.\nPhilosophy.\nRand originally expressed her ideas in her novels\u2014most notably, in both \"The Fountainhead\" and \"Atlas Shrugged\". She further elaborated on them in her periodicals \"The Objectivist Newsletter\", \"The Objectivist\", and \"The Ayn Rand Letter\", and in non-fiction books such as \"Introduction to Objectivist Epistemology\" and \"The Virtue of Selfishness\".\nThe name \"Objectivism\" derives from the idea that human knowledge and values are objective: they exist and are determined by the nature of reality, to be discovered by one's mind, and are not created by the thoughts one has. Rand stated that she chose the name because her preferred term for a philosophy based on the primacy of existence\u2014\"existentialism\"\u2014had already been taken.\nRand characterized Objectivism as \"a philosophy for living on earth\", based on reality, and intended as a method of defining human nature and the nature of the world in which we live.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;My philosophy, in essence, is the concept of man as a heroic being, with his own happiness as the moral purpose of his life, with productive achievement as his noblest activity, and reason as his only absolute.\u2014\u200a\nMetaphysics: objective reality.\nRand's philosophy begins with three axioms: existence, consciousness, and identity. Rand defined an axiom as \"a statement that identifies the base of knowledge and of any further statement pertaining to that knowledge, a statement necessarily contained in all others whether any particular speaker chooses to identify it or not. An axiom is a proposition that defeats its opponents by the fact that they have to accept it and use it in the process of any attempt to deny it.\" As Objectivist philosopher Leonard Peikoff argued, Rand's argument for axioms \"is not a proof that the axioms of existence, consciousness, and identity are true. It is proof that they are \"axioms\", that they are at the base of knowledge and thus inescapable.\"\nRand said that \"existence\" is the perceptually self-evident fact at the base of all other knowledge, i.e., that \"existence exists\". She further said that to be is to be \"something\", that \"existence \"is\" identity\". That is, to be is to be \"an entity of a specific nature made of specific attributes\". That which has no nature or attributes does not and cannot exist. The axiom of existence is conceptualized as differentiating something from nothing, while the law of identity is conceptualized as differentiating one thing from another, i.e., one's first awareness of the law of non-contradiction, another crucial base for the rest of knowledge. As Rand wrote, \"A leaf ... cannot be all red and green at the same time, it cannot freeze and burn at the same time... A is A.\" Objectivism rejects belief in anything alleged to transcend existence.\nRand argued that consciousness is \"the faculty of perceiving that which exists\". As she put it, \"to be conscious is to be conscious of \"something\"\", that is consciousness itself cannot be distinguished or conceptualized except in relation to an independent reality. \"It cannot be aware only of itself\u2014there is no 'itself' until it is aware of something.\" Thus, Objectivism posits that the mind does not create reality, but rather, it is a means of discovering reality. Expressed differently, existence has \"primacy\" over consciousness, which must conform to it. Any other type of argument Rand termed \"the primacy of consciousness\", including any variant of metaphysical subjectivism or theism.\nObjectivist philosophy derives its explanations of action and causation from the axiom of identity, referring to causation as \"the law of identity applied to action\". According to Rand, it is entities that act, and every action is the action of an entity. The way entities act is caused by the specific nature (or \"identity\") of those entities; if they were different, they would act differently. As with the other axioms, an implicit understanding of causation is derived from one's primary observations of causal connections among entities even before it is verbally identified and serves as the basis of further knowledge.\nEpistemology: reason.\nAccording to Rand, attaining knowledge beyond what is given by perception requires both volition (or the exercise of free will) and performing a specific method of validation by observation, concept-formation, and the application of inductive and deductive reasoning. For example, a belief in dragons, however sincere, does not mean that reality includes dragons. A process of proof identifying the basis in reality of a claimed item of knowledge is necessary to establish its truth.\nObjectivist epistemology begins with the principle that \"consciousness is identification\". This is understood to be a direct consequence of the metaphysical principle that \"existence is identity\". Rand defined \"reason\" as \"the faculty that identifies and integrates the material provided by man's senses\". Rand wrote \"The fundamental concept of method, the one on which all the others depend, is logic. The distinguishing characteristic of logic (the art of non-contradictory identification) indicates the nature of the actions (actions of consciousness required to achieve a correct identification) and their goal (knowledge)\u2014while omitting the length, complexity or specific steps of the process of logical inference, as well as the nature of the particular cognitive problem involved in any given instance of using logic.\"\nAccording to Rand, consciousness possesses a specific and finite identity, just like everything else that exists; therefore, it must operate by a specific method of validation. An item of knowledge cannot be \"disqualified\" by being arrived at by a specific process in a particular form. Thus, for Rand, the fact that consciousness must itself possess identity implies the rejection of both universal skepticism based on the \"limits\" of consciousness, as well as any claim to revelation, emotion or faith-based belief.\nObjectivist epistemology maintains that all knowledge is ultimately based on perception. \"Percepts, not sensations, are the given, the self-evident.\" Rand considered the validity of the senses to be axiomatic and said that purported arguments to the contrary all commit the fallacy of the \"stolen concept\" by presupposing the validity of concepts that, in turn, presuppose the validity of the senses. She said that perception, being determined physiologically, is incapable of error. For example, optical illusions are errors in the conceptual identification of what is seen, not errors of sight itself. The validity of sense perception, therefore, is not susceptible to proof (because it is presupposed by all proof as proof is only a matter of adducing sensory evidence) nor should its validity be denied (since the conceptual tools one would have to use to do this are derived from sensory data). Perceptual error, therefore, is not possible. Rand consequently rejected epistemological skepticism, as she said that the skeptics' claim to knowledge \"distorted\" by the form or the means of perception is impossible.\nThe Objectivist theory of perception distinguishes between the \"form\" and \"object.\" The form in which an organism perceives is determined by the physiology of its sensory systems. Whatever form the organism perceives it in, what it perceives\u2014the object of perception\u2014is reality. Rand consequently rejected the Kantian dichotomy between \"things as we perceive them\" and \"things as they are in themselves\". Rand wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The attack on man's consciousness and particularly on his conceptual faculty has rested on the unchallenged premise that any knowledge acquired by a \"process\" of consciousness is necessarily subjective and cannot correspond to the facts of reality, since it is \"processed\" knowledge \u2026 [but] all knowledge \"is\" processed knowledge\u2014whether on the sensory, perceptual or conceptual level. An \"unprocessed\" knowledge would be a knowledge acquired without means of cognition.\nThe aspect of epistemology given the most elaboration by Rand is the theory of concept-formation, which she presented in \"Introduction to Objectivist Epistemology\". She argued that concepts are formed by a process of measurement omission. Peikoff described this as follows:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;To form a concept, one mentally \"isolates\" a group of concretes (of distinct perceptual units), on the basis of observed similarities which distinguish them from all other known concretes (similarity is 'the relationship between two or more existents which possess the same characteristic(s), but in different measure or degree'); then, by a process of omitting the particular measurements of these concretes, one \"integrates\" them into a single new mental unit: the concept, which subsumes all concretes of this kind (a potentially unlimited number). The integration is completed and retained by the selection of a perceptual symbol (a word) to designate it.\n\"A concept is a mental integration of two or more units possessing the same distinguishing characteristic(s), with their particular measurements omitted.\"\nAccording to Rand, \"the term 'measurements omitted' does not mean, in this context, that measurements are regarded as non-existent; it means that \"measurements exist, but are not specified\". That measurements \"must\" exist is an essential part of the process. The principle is: the relevant measurements must exist in \"some\" quantity, but may exist in \"any\" quantity.\"\nRand argued that concepts are organized hierarchically. Concepts such as 'dog,' which bring together \"concretes\" available in perception, can be differentiated (into the concepts of 'dachshund,' 'poodle,' etc.) or integrated (along with 'cat,' etc., into the concept of 'animal'). Abstract concepts such as 'animal' can be further integrated, via \"abstraction from abstractions\", into such concepts as 'living thing.' Concepts are formed in the context of knowledge available. A young child differentiates dogs from cats and chickens but need not explicitly differentiate them from deep-sea tube worms, or from other types of animals not yet known to him, to form a concept 'dog'.\nBecause of its characterization of concepts as \"open-ended\" classifications that go well beyond the characteristics included in their past or current definitions, Objectivist epistemology rejects the analytic-synthetic distinction as a false dichotomy and denies the possibility of \"a priori\" knowledge.\nRand rejected \"feeling\" as sources of knowledge. Rand acknowledged the importance of emotion for human beings, but she maintained that emotions are a consequence of the conscious or subconscious ideas that a person already accepts, not a means of achieving awareness of reality. \"Emotions are not tools of cognition.\" Rand also rejected all forms of faith or mysticism, terms that she used synonymously. She defined faith as \"the acceptance of allegations without evidence or proof, either apart from or \"against\" the evidence of one's senses and reason... Mysticism is the claim to some non-sensory, non-rational, non-definable, non-identifiable means of knowledge, such as 'instinct,' 'intuition,' 'revelation,' or any form of 'just knowing.'\" Reliance on revelation is like reliance on a Ouija board; it bypasses the need to show how it connects its results to reality. Faith, for Rand, is not a \"short-cut\" to knowledge, but a \"short-circuit\" destroying it.\nObjectivism acknowledges the facts that human beings have limited knowledge, are vulnerable to error, and do not instantly understand all of the implications of their knowledge. According to Peikoff, one can be certain of a proposition if all of the available evidence verifies it, i.e., it can be logically integrated with the rest of one's knowledge; one is then certain within the context of the evidence.\nRand rejected the traditional rationalist/empiricist dichotomy, arguing that it embodies a false alternative: conceptually based knowledge independent of perception (rationalism) versus perceptually based knowledge independent of concepts (empiricism). Rand argued that neither is possible because the senses provide the material of knowledge while conceptual processing is also needed to establish knowable propositions.\nCriticism on epistemology.\nThe philosopher John Hospers, who was influenced by Rand and shared her moral and political opinions, disagreed with her concerning issues of epistemology. Some philosophers, such as Tibor Machan, have argued that the Objectivist epistemology is incomplete.\nPsychology professor Robert L. Campbell writes that the relationship between Objectivist epistemology and cognitive science remains unclear because Rand made claims about human cognition and its development which belong to psychology, yet Rand also argued that philosophy is logically prior to psychology and in no way dependent on it.\nThe philosophers Randall Dipert and Roderick Long have argued that Objectivist epistemology conflates the perceptual process by which judgments are formed with the way in which they are to be justified, thereby leaving it unclear how sensory data can validate judgments structured propositionally.\nEthics: self-interest.\nObjectivism includes an extensive treatment of ethical concerns. Rand wrote on morality in her works \"We the Living\" (1936), \"Atlas Shrugged\" (1957) and \"The Virtue of Selfishness\" (1964). Rand defines morality as \"a code of values to guide man's choices and actions\u2014the choices and actions that determine the purpose and the course of his life\". Rand maintained that the first question is not what should the code of values be, the first question is \"Does man need values at all\u2014and why?\" According to Rand, \"it is only the concept of 'Life' that makes the concept of 'Value' possible\", and \"the fact that a living entity \"is\", determines what it \"ought\" to do\". Rand writes: \"there is only one fundamental alternative in the universe: existence or non-existence\u2014and it pertains to a single class of entities: to living organisms. The existence of inanimate matter is unconditional, the existence of life is not: it depends on a specific course of action. [...] It is only a living organism that faces a constant alternative: the issue of life or death\".\nRand argued that the primary emphasis of man's free will is the choice: 'to think or not to think'. \"Thinking is not an automatic function. In any hour and issue of his life, man is free to think or to evade that effort. Thinking requires a state of full, focused awareness. The act of focusing one's consciousness is volitional. Man can focus his mind to a full, active, purposefully directed awareness of reality\u2014or he can unfocus it and let himself drift in a semiconscious daze, merely reacting to any chance stimulus of the immediate moment, at the mercy of his undirected sensory-perceptual mechanism and of any random, associational connections it might happen to make.\" According to Rand, therefore, possessing free will, human beings must \"choose\" their values: one does not \"automatically\" have one's own life as his ultimate value. Whether in fact a person's actions promote and fulfill his own life or not is a question of fact, as it is with all other organisms, but whether a person will act to promote his well-being is up to him, not hard-wired into his physiology. \"Man has the power to act as his own destroyer\u2014and that is the way he has acted through most of his history.\"\nIn \"Atlas Shrugged\", Rand wrote \"Man's mind is his basic tool of survival. Life is given to him, survival is not. His body is given to him, its sustenance is not. His mind is given to him, its content is not. To remain alive he must act and before he can act he must know the nature and purpose of his action. He cannot obtain his food without knowledge of food and of the way to obtain it. He cannot dig a ditch\u2014or build a cyclotron\u2014without a knowledge of his aim and the means to achieve it. To remain alive, he must think.\" In her novels, \"The Fountainhead\" and \"Atlas Shrugged\", she also emphasizes the importance of productive work, romantic love and art to human happiness, and dramatizes the ethical character of their pursuit. The primary virtue in Objectivist ethics is rationality, as Rand meant it \"the recognition and acceptance of reason as one's only source of knowledge, one's only judge of values and one's only guide to action\".\nThe purpose of a moral code, Rand said, is to provide the principles by reference to which man can achieve the values his survival requires. Rand summarizes:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;If [man] chooses to live, a rational ethics will tell him what principles of action are required to implement his choice. If he does not choose to live, nature will take its course. Reality confronts a man with a great many \"must's\", but all of them are conditional: the formula of realistic necessity is: \"you must, if\u00a0\u2013\" and the if stands for man's choice: \"if you want to achieve a certain goal\".\nRand's explanation of values presents the proposition that an individual's primary moral obligation is to achieve his own well-being\u2014it is for his life and his self-interest that an individual ought to obey a moral code. Ethical egoism is a corollary of setting man's life as the moral standard. Rand believed that rational egoism is the logical consequence of humans following evidence to its logical conclusion. The only alternative would be that they live without orientation to reality.\nA corollary to Rand's endorsement of self-interest is her rejection of the ethical doctrine of altruism\u2014which she defined in the sense of Auguste Comte's altruism (he popularized the term), as a moral obligation to live for the sake of others. Rand also rejected subjectivism. A \"whim-worshiper\" or \"hedonist\", according to Rand, is not motivated by a desire to live his own human life, but by a wish to live on a sub-human level. Instead of using \"that which promotes my (human) life\" as his standard of value, he mistakes \"that which I (mindlessly happen to) value\" for a standard of value, in contradiction of the fact that, existentially, he is a human and therefore rational organism. The \"I value\" in whim-worship or hedonism can be replaced with \"we value\", \"he values\", \"they value\", or \"God values\", and still, it would remain dissociated from reality. Rand repudiated the equation of rational selfishness with hedonistic or whim-worshiping \"selfishness-without-a-self\". She said that the former is good, and the latter bad, and that there is a fundamental difference between them.\nFor Rand, all of the principal virtues are applications of the role of reason as man's basic tool of survival: rationality, honesty, justice, independence, integrity, productiveness, and pride\u2014each of which she explains in some detail in \"The Objectivist Ethics\". The essence of Objectivist ethics is summarized by the oath her \"Atlas Shrugged\" character John Galt adhered to: \"I swear\u2014by my life and my love of it\u2014that I will never live for the sake of another man, nor ask another man to live for mine.\"\nCriticism on ethics.\nSome philosophers have criticized Objectivist ethics. The philosopher Robert Nozick argues that Rand's foundational argument in ethics is unsound because it does not explain why someone could not rationally prefer dying and having no values, in order to further some particular value. He argues that her attempt to defend the morality of selfishness is, therefore, an instance of begging the question. Nozick also argues that Rand's solution to David Hume's famous is-ought problem is unsatisfactory. In response, the philosophers Douglas B. Rasmussen and Douglas Den Uyl have argued that Nozick misstated Rand's case.\nCharles King criticized Rand's example of an indestructible robot to demonstrate the value of life as incorrect and confusing. In response, Paul St. F. Blair defended Rand's ethical conclusions, while maintaining that his arguments might not have been approved by Rand.\nPolitics: individual rights and capitalism.\nRand's defense of individual liberty integrates elements from her entire philosophy. Since reason is the means of human knowledge, it is therefore each person's most fundamental means of survival and is necessary to the achievement of values. The use or threat of force neutralizes the practical effect of an individual's reason, whether the force originates from the state or from a criminal. According to Rand, \"man's mind will not function at the point of a gun\". Therefore, the only type of organized human behavior consistent with the operation of reason is that of voluntary cooperation. Persuasion is the method of reason. By its nature, the overtly irrational cannot rely on the use of persuasion and must ultimately resort to force to prevail. Thus, Rand argued that reason and freedom are correlates, just as she argued that mysticism and force are corollaries. Based on this understanding of the role of reason, Objectivists claim that the initiation of physical force against the will of another is immoral, as are indirect initiations of force through threats, fraud, or breach of contract. The use of defensive or retaliatory force, on the other hand, is appropriate.\nObjectivism claims that because the opportunity to use reason without the initiation of force is necessary to achieve moral values, each individual has an inalienable moral right to act as his own judgment directs and to keep the product of his effort. Peikoff, explaining the basis of rights, stated, \"In content, as the founding fathers recognized, there is one fundamental right, which has several major derivatives. The fundamental right is the right to life. Its major derivatives are the right to liberty, property, and the pursuit of happiness.\" \"A 'right' is a moral principle defining and sanctioning a man's freedom of action in a social context.\" These rights are specifically understood to be rights to action, not to specific results or objects, and the obligations created by rights are negative in nature: each individual must refrain from violating the rights of others. Objectivists reject alternative notions of rights, such as positive rights, collective rights, or animal rights. Objectivism claims that the only social system which fully recognizes individual rights is capitalism, specifically what Rand described as \"full, pure, uncontrolled, unregulated laissez-faire capitalism\". Objectivism regards capitalism as the social system which is most beneficial to the poor, but does not consider this its primary justification. Rather, it is the only moral social system. Objectivism maintains that only societies seeking to establish freedom (or free nations) have a right to self-determination.\nObjectivism describes government as \"the means of placing the retaliatory use of physical force under objective control\u2014i.e., under objectively defined laws\"; thus, government is both legitimate and critically important in order to protect individual rights. Rand opposed anarchism because she considered that putting police and courts on the market is an inherent miscarriage of justice. Objectivism claims that the proper functions of a government are \"\"the police\", to protect men from criminals\u2014\"the armed services\", to protect men from foreign invaders\u2014\"the law courts\", to settle disputes among men according to objective laws\", the executive, and legislatures. Furthermore, in protecting individual rights, the government is acting as an agent of its citizens and \"has no rights except the rights \"delegated\" to it by the citizens\" and it must act in an impartial manner according to specific, objectively defined laws.\nRand argued that limited intellectual property monopolies being granted to certain inventors and artists on a first-to-file basis are moral because she considered all property as fundamentally intellectual. Furthermore, the value of a commercial product derives in part from the necessary work of its inventors. However, Rand considered limits on patents and copyrights as important and said that if they were granted in perpetuity, it would necessarily result in \"de facto\" collectivism.\nRand opposed racism and any legal application of racism. She considered affirmative action to be an example of legal racism. Rand advocated the right to legal abortion. Rand believed capital punishment is morally justified as retribution against a murderer, but dangerous due to the risk of mistakenly executing innocent people and facilitating state murder. She therefore said she opposed capital punishment \"on epistemological, not moral, grounds\". She opposed involuntary military conscription. She opposed any form of censorship, including legal restrictions on pornography, opinion or worship, famously quipping; \"In the transition to statism, every infringement of human rights has begun with a given right's least attractive practitioners\".\nObjectivists have also opposed a number of government activities commonly endorsed by both liberals and conservatives, including antitrust laws, the minimum wage, public education, and existing child labor laws. Objectivists have argued against faith-based initiatives, displaying religious symbols in government facilities, and the teaching of \"intelligent design\" in public schools. Rand opposed involuntary taxation and believed government could be financed voluntarily, although she thought this could only happen after other reforms of government were implemented.\nCriticism on politics.\nSome critics, including economists and political philosophers such as Murray Rothbard, David D. Friedman, Roy Childs, Norman P. Barry, and Chandran Kukathas, have argued that Objectivist ethics are consistent with anarcho-capitalism instead of minarchism.\nAesthetics: metaphysical value-judgments.\nThe Objectivist theory of art derives from its epistemology, by way of \"psycho-epistemology\" (Rand's term for an individual's characteristic mode of functioning in acquiring knowledge). Art, according to Objectivism, serves a human cognitive need: it allows human beings to understand concepts as though they were percepts. Objectivism defines \"art\" as a \"selective re-creation of reality according to an artist's metaphysical value-judgments\"\u2014that is, according to what the artist believes to be ultimately true and important about the nature of reality and humanity. In this respect Objectivism regards art as a way of presenting abstractions concretely, in perceptual form.\nThe human need for art, according to this idea, derives from the need for cognitive economy. A concept is already a sort of mental shorthand standing for a large number of concretes, allowing a human being to think indirectly or implicitly of many more such concretes than can be kept explicitly in mind. But a human being cannot keep indefinitely many concepts explicitly in mind either\u2014and yet, according to Objectivism, they need a comprehensive conceptual framework to provide guidance in life. Art offers a way out of this dilemma by providing a perceptual, easily grasped means of communicating and thinking about a wide range of abstractions, including one's metaphysical value-judgments. Objectivism regards art as an effective way to communicate a moral or ethical ideal. Objectivism does not, however, regard art as propagandistic: even though art involves moral values and ideals, its purpose is not to educate, only to show or project. Moreover, art need not be, and usually is not, the outcome of a full-blown, explicit philosophy. Usually, it stems from an artist's \"sense of life\" (which is preconceptual and largely emotional).\nThe end goal of Rand's own artistic endeavors was to portray the ideal man. \"The Fountainhead\" is the best example of this effort. Rand uses the character of Roark to embody the concept of the higher man which she believes is what great art should do\u2014embody the characteristics of the best of humanity. This symbolism should be represented in all art; artistic expression should be an extension of the greatness in humanity.\nRand said that Romanticism was the highest school of literary art, noting that Romanticism was \"based on the recognition of the principle that man possesses the faculty of volition\", absent which, Rand believed, literature is robbed of dramatic power, adding:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;What the Romanticists brought to art was the \"primacy of values\"... Values are the source of emotions: a great deal of emotional intensity was projected in the work of the Romanticists and in the reactions of their audiences, as well as a great deal of color, imagination, originality, excitement, and all the other consequences of a value-oriented view of life.\nThe term \"romanticism\", however, is often affiliated with emotionalism, to which Objectivism is completely opposed. Historically, many romantic artists were philosophically subjectivist. Most Objectivists who are also artists subscribe to what they term romantic realism, which is how Rand described her own work.\nDevelopment by other authors.\nSeveral authors have developed and applied Rand's ideas in their own work. Rand described Peikoff's \"The Ominous Parallels\" (1982), as \"the first book by an Objectivist philosopher other than myself\". During 1991, Peikoff published ', a comprehensive exposition of Rand's philosophy. Chris Matthew Sciabarra discusses Rand's ideas and theorizes about their intellectual origins in ' (1995). Surveys such as \"On Ayn Rand\" by Allan Gotthelf (1999), \"Ayn Rand\" by Tibor R. Machan (2000), and \"Objectivism in One Lesson\" by Andrew Bernstein (2009) provide briefer introductions to Rand's ideas.\nSome scholars have emphasized applying Objectivism to more specific areas. Machan has developed Rand's contextual conception of human knowledge (while also drawing on the insights of J. L. Austin and Gilbert Harman) in works such as \"Objectivity\" (2004), and David Kelley has explicated Rand's epistemological ideas in works such as \"The Evidence of the Senses\" (1986) and \"A Theory of Abstraction\" (2001). Regarding the topic of ethics, Kelley has argued in works such as \"Unrugged Individualism\" (1996) and \"The Contested Legacy of Ayn Rand\" (2000) that Objectivists should pay more attention to the virtue of benevolence and place less emphasis on issues of moral sanction. Kelley's claims have been controversial, and critics Peikoff and Peter Schwartz have argued that he contradicts important principles of Objectivism. Kelley has used the term \"Open Objectivism\" for a version of Objectivism that involves \"a commitment to reasoned, non-dogmatic discussion and debate\", \"the recognition that Objectivism is open to expansion, refinement, and revision\", and \"a policy of benevolence toward others, including fellow-travelers and critics\". Arguing against Kelley, Peikoff characterized Objectivism as a \"closed system\" that is not subject to change.\nAn author who emphasizes Rand's ethics, Tara Smith, retains more of Rand's original ideas in such works as \"Moral Rights and Political Freedom\" (1995), \"Viable Values\" (2000), and \"Ayn Rand's Normative Ethics\" (2006). In collaboration with Peikoff, David Harriman has developed a theory of scientific induction based upon Rand's theory of concepts in \"The Logical Leap: Induction in Physics\" (2010).\nThe political aspects of Rand's philosophy are discussed by Bernstein in \"The Capitalist Manifesto\" (2005). In \"Capitalism: A Treatise on Economics\" (1996), George Reisman attempts to integrate Objectivist methodology and insights with both Classical and Austrian economics. In psychology, Professor Edwin A. Locke and Ellen Kenner have explored Rand's ideas in the publication \"The Selfish Path to Romance: How to Love with Passion &amp; Reason\". Other writers have explored the application of Objectivism to fields ranging from art, as in \"What Art Is\" (2000) by Louis Torres and Michelle Marder Kamhi, to teleology, as in \"The Biological Basis of Teleological Concepts\" (1990) by Harry Binswanger.\nImpact.\nOne Rand biographer says most people who read Rand's works for the first time do it in their \"formative years\". Rand's former prot\u00e9g\u00e9 Nathaniel Branden referred to Rand's \"especially powerful appeal to the young\", while Onkar Ghate of the Ayn Rand Institute said Rand \"appeals to the idealism of youth\". This appeal has alarmed a number of critics of the philosophy. Many of these young people later abandon their positive opinion of Rand and are often said to have \"outgrown\" her ideas. Endorsers of Rand's work recognize the phenomenon, but attribute it to the loss of youthful idealism and inability to resist social pressures for intellectual conformity. In contrast, historian Jennifer Burns, writing in \"Goddess of the Market\" (2009), writes some critics \"dismiss Rand as a shallow thinker appealing only to adolescents\", although she thinks the critics \"miss her significance\" as a \"gateway drug\" to right-wing politics.\nAcademic philosophers have generally dismissed Objectivism since Rand first presented it. Objectivism has been termed \"fiercely anti-academic\" because of Rand's criticism of contemporary intellectuals. David Sidorsky, a professor of moral and political philosophy at Columbia University, writes that Rand's work is \"outside the mainstream\" and is more of an ideology than a comprehensive philosophy. British philosopher Ted Honderich notes that he deliberately excluded an article on Rand from \"The Oxford Companion to Philosophy\" (Rand is, however, mentioned in the article on popular philosophy by Anthony Quinton). Rand is the subject of entries in the \"Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy\", \"The Dictionary of Modern American Philosophers\", the \"Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy\", \"The Routledge Dictionary of Twentieth-Century Political Thinkers\", and \"The Penguin Dictionary of Philosophy\". Chandran Kukathas writes in an entry about Rand in the \"Routledge Encyclopedia of Philosophy\", \"The influence of Rand's ideas was strongest among college students in the USA but attracted little attention from academic philosophers.\" Kukathas also writes that her defenses of capitalism and selfishness \"kept her out of the intellectual mainstream\".\nDuring the 1990s, Rand's works were more likely to be encountered in American classrooms. The Ayn Rand Society, dedicated to fostering the scholarly study of Objectivism, is affiliated with the American Philosophical Association's Eastern Division. Aristotle scholar and Objectivist Allan Gotthelf, late chairman of the society, and his colleagues argued for more academic study of Objectivism, considering the philosophy as a unique and intellectually interesting defense of classical liberalism that is worth debating. In 1999, a refereed \"Journal of Ayn Rand Studies\" began. Programs and fellowships for the study of Objectivism have been supported at the University of Pittsburgh, University of Texas at Austin and University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWorks cited.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "22258", "revid": "50530567", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22258", "title": "Oath of office", "text": "Official promise by a person in a public office to lawfully fulfill its duties\nAn oath of office is an oath or affirmation a person takes before assuming the duties of an office, usually a position in government or within a religious body, although such oaths are sometimes required of officers of other organizations. Such oaths are often required by the laws of the state, religious body, or other organization before the person may actually exercise the powers of the office or organization. It may be administered at an inauguration, coronation, enthronement, or other ceremony connected with the taking up of office itself, or it may be administered privately. In some cases it may be administered privately and then repeated during a public ceremony.\nSome oaths of office are statements of allegiance and loyalty to a constitution or other legal text or to a person or office-holder (e.g., an oath to support the constitution of the state, or of loyalty to the king or queen) (see Oath of allegiance). Under the laws of a state, it may be considered treason or a high crime to betray a sworn oath of office. In many cases, the oath is performed using an oath book, typically religious scripture such as the Bible.\nThe word \"oath\" and the phrase \"I swear\" refer to a solemn vow. For those who choose not to, the alternative terms \"solemn promise\" or \"solemnly affirm\" and \"I promise\" or \"I affirm\" are sometimes used.\nAntigua and Barbuda.\nThe Governor-General of Antigua and Barbuda, before entering into his duties, must make an oath of allegiance and oath of office in the form specified in the Constitution of Antigua and Barbuda; the same is required of the Prime Minister, other Ministers and Parliamentary Secretaries, but they also take the oath of secrecy.\nMembers of the Public Service Commission for Antigua and Barbuda take the oath of allegiance and oath of office, while members of both Houses of Parliament are only required to make the oath of allegiance prior to participating in their respective House (save for the oath-taking itself). Any of these oaths may be taken as an affirmation; when doing so \"So help me God\" is omitted.\nThe oath of allegiance is set forth as follows:\nI, ___________, do swear (or solemnly affirm) that I will faithfully bear true allegiance to His Majesty King Charles the Third, His Heirs and Successors, according to law.\nSo help me God.\nThe oath of office is set forth as follows:\nI, ___________, do swear (or solemnly affirm) that I will honour, uphold and preserve the Constitution of Antigua and Barbuda and the law, that I will conscientiously, impartially and to the best of my ability discharge my duties as and do right to all manner of people without fear or favour, affection or ill-will.\nSo help me God.\nThe oath of secrecy is set forth as follows:\nI, ___________, do swear (or solemnly affirm) that I will not on any account, at any time whatsoever, disclose any counsel, advice, opinion or vote given by any Minister as a member of the Cabinet and that I will not, except with the authority of the Cabinet and to such extent as may be required for the proper conduct of the government of Antigua and Barbuda, directly or indirectly reveal the business or proceedings of the Cabinet or any matter coming to my knowledge as a member of (or Secretary to) the Cabinet.\nSo help me God.\nAustralia.\nAll members of the Australian Parliament are required to take before taking their seat in Parliament an Oath or Affirmation of Allegiance before the Governor-General of Australia or someone authorised by them. The requirement to take the oath is set out in section 42 of the Australian Constitution and the wording of the oath and affirmation are set out in a schedule to the Constitution. The oath is:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I, (name), do swear that I will be faithful and bear true allegiance to His Majesty King Charles the Third, His heirs and successors according to law. So help me God!\nThe affirmation is:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I, (name), do solemnly and sincerely affirm and declare that I will be faithful and bear true allegiance to His Majesty King Charles the Third, His heirs and successors according to law.\nUpon taking office, the Governor-General of Australia is required to take the above Oath of Allegiance as well as a second Oath of Office:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I, (name), do solemnly and sincerely swear (or affirm) and declare that I will well and truly serve His Majesty King Charles the Third, His heirs and successors according to law, in the office of Governor-General of the Commonwealth of Australia, and I will do right to all manner of people after the laws and usages of the Commonwealth of Australia, without fear or favour, affection or ill will. So help me God!\nIn case of affirmation, the phrase \u201cSo Help me God\u201d is hereby omitted.\nIn addition to swearing, the Oath of Allegiance upon becoming a Member of Parliament, the Prime Minister, Ministers and Parliamentary Secretaries also recite an Oath of Office upon entering office. The wording of this oath is not prescribed within the Constitution and is ultimately determined by the Prime Minister of the day. Traditionally the oath has repeated the swearing of allegiance to the Sovereign, although this is not required. The current Oath of Office is:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I, (name), do swear that I will well and truly serve the Commonwealth of Australia, her land and her people, in the office of (position). So Help me God.\nThe Prime Minister and Ministers shall required take the affirmation of office before the Governor General if in case of affirmation:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I, (name), do solemnly and sincerely affirm and declare that I will well and truly serve the Commonwealth of Australia, her land and her people, in the office of (position).\nThe Federal Executive Council members shall also required to take their oath:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I, (name), being chosen and summoned by the Governor General of the Commonwealth of Australia to be a member of the Federal Executive Council, do solemnly and sincerely swear/affirm and declare that I will when required the advice of the Governor General for the time being administering the Commonwealth of Australia, to the best of my judgement consistently with the good government of the Commonwealth of Australia, and that I will not disclose the confidential deliberations of the council. So Help me God.\nBangladesh.\nThe President, Prime Minister, Chief Justice, Speaker, Ministers take their oath of office. The oath is taken in the Bengali language.\nPresident.\nThe oath (or affirmation) of the President is administered by the Speaker:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\u0986\u09ae\u09bf, (\u09a8\u09be\u09ae) \u09b8\u09b6\u09cd\u09b0\u09a6\u09cd\u09a7\u099a\u09bf\u09a4\u09cd\u09a4\u09c7 \u09b6\u09aa\u09a5 (\u09ac\u09be \u09a6\u09c3\u09a2\u09bc\u09ad\u09be\u09ac\u09c7 \u0998\u09cb\u09b7\u09a3\u09be) \u0995\u09b0\u09bf\u09a4\u09c7\u099b\u09bf \u09af\u09c7, \u0986\u09ae\u09bf \u0986\u0987\u09a8-\u0985\u09a8\u09c1\u09af\u09be\u09af\u09bc\u09c0 \u09ac\u09be\u0982\u09b2\u09be\u09a6\u09c7\u09b6\u09c7\u09b0 \u09b0\u09be\u09b7\u09cd\u099f\u09cd\u09b0\u09aa\u09a4\u09bf-\u09aa\u09a6\u09c7\u09b0 \u0995\u09b0\u09cd\u09a4\u09ac\u09cd\u09af \u09ac\u09bf\u09b6\u09cd\u09ac\u09b8\u09cd\u09a4\u09a4\u09be\u09b0 \u09b8\u09b9\u09bf\u09a4 \u09aa\u09be\u09b2\u09a8 \u0995\u09b0\u09bf\u09ac; \u0986\u09ae\u09bf \u09ac\u09be\u0982\u09b2\u09be\u09a6\u09c7\u09b6\u09c7\u09b0 \u09aa\u09cd\u09b0\u09a4\u09bf \u0985\u0995\u09c3\u09a4\u09cd\u09b0\u09bf\u09ae \u09ac\u09bf\u09b6\u09cd\u09ac\u09be\u09b8 \u0993 \u0986\u09a8\u09c1\u0997\u09a4\u09cd\u09af \u09aa\u09cb\u09b7\u09a3 \u0995\u09b0\u09bf\u09ac\u0983 \u0986\u09ae\u09bf \u09b8\u0982\u09ac\u09bf\u09a7\u09be\u09a8\u09c7\u09b0 \u09b0\u0995\u09cd\u09b7\u09a3, \u09b8\u09ae\u09b0\u09cd\u09a5\u09a8 \u0993 \u09a8\u09bf\u09b0\u09be\u09aa\u09a4\u09cd\u09a4\u09be\u09ac\u09bf\u09a7\u09be\u09a8 \u0995\u09b0\u09bf\u09ac: \u098f\u09ac\u0982 \u0986\u09ae\u09bf \u09ad\u09c0\u09a4\u09bf \u09ac\u09be \u0985\u09a8\u09c1\u0997\u09cd\u09b0\u09b9, \u0985\u09a8\u09c1\u09b0\u09be\u0997 \u09ac\u09be \u09ac\u09bf\u09b0\u09be\u0997\u09c7\u09b0 \u09ac\u09b6\u09ac\u09b0\u09cd\u09a4\u09c0 \u09a8\u09be \u09b9\u0987\u09af\u09bc\u09be \u09b8\u0995\u09b2\u09c7\u09b0 \u09aa\u09cd\u09b0\u09a4\u09bf \u0986\u0987\u09a8-\u0985\u09a8\u09c1\u09af\u09be\u09af\u09bc\u09c0 \u09af\u09a5\u09be\u09ac\u09bf\u09b9\u09c0\u09a4 \u0986\u099a\u09b0\u09a3 \u0995\u09b0\u09bf\u09ac\u0964\u2014\u200a\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Third Schedule\u2014\u200a\nPrime Ministers and other Ministers.\nThe oath of office for the Prime Minister and other members of the cabinet is administered by the President:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\u0986\u09ae\u09bf, (\u09a8\u09be\u09ae), \u09b8\u09b6\u09cd\u09b0\u09a6\u09cd\u09a7\u099a\u09bf\u09a4\u09cd\u09a4\u09c7 \u09b6\u09aa\u09a5 (\u09ac\u09be \u09a6\u09c3\u09a2\u09bc\u09ad\u09be\u09ac\u09c7 \u0998\u09cb\u09b7\u09a3\u09be) \u0995\u09b0\u09bf\u09a4\u09c7\u099b\u09bf \u09af\u09c7, \u0986\u09ae\u09bf \u0986\u0987\u09a8-\u0985\u09a8\u09c1\u09af\u09be\u09af\u09bc\u09c0 \u09b8\u09b0\u0995\u09be\u09b0\u09c7\u09b0 \u09aa\u09cd\u09b0\u09a7\u09be\u09a8\u09ae\u09a8\u09cd\u09a4\u09cd\u09b0\u09c0 (\u0995\u09bf\u0982\u09ac\u09be \u0995\u09cd\u09b7\u09c7\u09a4\u09cd\u09b0\u09ae\u09a4 \u09ae\u09a8\u09cd\u09a4\u09cd\u09b0\u09c0, \u09aa\u09cd\u09b0\u09a4\u09bf-\u09ae\u09a8\u09cd\u09a4\u09cd\u09b0\u09c0, \u09ac\u09be \u0989\u09aa\u09ae\u09a8\u09cd\u09a4\u09cd\u09b0\u09c0)-\u09aa\u09a6\u09c7\u09b0 \u0995\u09b0\u09cd\u09a4\u09ac\u09cd\u09af \u09ac\u09bf\u09b6\u09cd\u09ac\u09b8\u09cd\u09a4\u09a4\u09be\u09b0 \u09b8\u09b9\u09bf\u09a4 \u09aa\u09be\u09b2\u09a8 \u0995\u09b0\u09bf\u09ac: \u0986\u09ae\u09bf \u09ac\u09be\u0982\u09b2\u09be\u09a6\u09c7\u09b6\u09c7\u09b0 \u09aa\u09cd\u09b0\u09a4\u09bf \u0985\u0995\u09c3\u09a4\u09cd\u09b0\u09bf\u09ae \u09ac\u09bf\u09b6\u09cd\u09ac\u09be\u09b8 \u0993 \u0986\u09a8\u09c1\u0997\u09a4\u09cd\u09af \u09aa\u09cb\u09b7\u09a3 \u0995\u09b0\u09bf\u09ac; \u0986\u09ae\u09bf \u09b8\u0982\u09ac\u09bf\u09a7\u09be\u09a8\u09c7\u09b0 \u09b0\u0995\u09cd\u09b7\u09a3, \u09b8\u09ae\u09b0\u09cd\u09a5\u09a8 \u0993 \u09a8\u09bf\u09b0\u09be\u09aa\u09a4\u09cd\u09a4\u09be\u09ac\u09bf\u09a7\u09be\u09a8 \u0995\u09b0\u09bf\u09ac; \u098f\u09ac\u0982 \u0986\u09ae\u09bf \u09ad\u09c0\u09a4\u09bf \u09ac\u09be \u0985\u09a8\u09c1\u0997\u09cd\u09b0\u09b9, \u0985\u09a8\u09c1\u09b0\u09be\u0997 \u09ac\u09be \u09ac\u09bf\u09b0\u09be\u0997\u09c7\u09b0 \u09ac\u09b6\u09ac\u09b0\u09cd\u09a4\u09c0 \u09a8\u09be \u09b9\u0987\u09af\u09bc\u09be \u09b8\u0995\u09b2\u09c7\u09b0 \u09aa\u09cd\u09b0\u09a4\u09bf \u0986\u0987\u09a8-\u0985\u09a8\u09c1\u09af\u09be\u09af\u09bc\u09c0 \u09af\u09a5\u09be\u09ac\u09bf\u09b9\u09c0\u09a4 \u0986\u099a\u09b0\u09a3 \u0995\u09b0\u09bf\u09ac\u0964\u2014\u200a\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I, (name), do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will faithfully discharge the duties of the office of Prime Minister (or as the case may be) according to law. That I will bear true faith and allegiance to Bangladesh; that I will preserve, protect and defend the Constitution and that I will do right to all manner of people according to law, without fear or favour, affection or ill-will.\u2014\u200a\nThe oath of secrecy is as follows:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\u0986\u09ae\u09bf,(\u09a8\u09be\u09ae), \u09b8\u09b6\u09cd\u09b0\u09a6\u09cd\u09a7\u099a\u09bf\u09a4\u09cd\u09a4\u09c7 \u09b6\u09aa\u09a5 (\u09ac\u09be \u09a6\u09c3\u09a2\u09bc\u09ad\u09be\u09ac\u09c7 \u0998\u09cb\u09b7\u09a3\u09be) \u0995\u09b0\u09bf\u09a4\u09c7\u099b\u09bf \u09af\u09c7, \u09b8\u09b0\u0995\u09be\u09b0\u09c7\u09b0 \u09aa\u09cd\u09b0\u09a7\u09be\u09a8\u09ae\u09a8\u09cd\u09a4\u09cd\u09b0\u09c0 (\u0995\u09bf\u0982\u09ac\u09be \u0995\u09cd\u09b7\u09c7\u09a4\u09cd\u09b0\u09ae\u09a4 \u09ae\u09a8\u09cd\u09a4\u09cd\u09b0\u09c0, \u09aa\u09cd\u09b0\u09a4\u09bf\u09ae\u09a8\u09cd\u09a4\u09cd\u09b0\u09c0, \u09ac\u09be \u0989\u09aa\u09ae\u09a8\u09cd\u09a4\u09cd\u09b0\u09c0)-\u09b0\u09c2\u09aa\u09c7 \u09af\u09c7 \u09b8\u0995\u09b2 \u09ac\u09bf\u09b7\u09af\u09bc \u0986\u09ae\u09be\u09b0 \u09ac\u09bf\u09ac\u09c7\u099a\u09a8\u09be\u09b0 \u099c\u09a8\u09cd\u09af \u0986\u09a8\u09c0\u09a4 \u09b9\u0987\u09ac\u09c7 \u09ac\u09be \u09af\u09c7 \u09b8\u0995\u09b2 \u09ac\u09bf\u09b7\u09af\u09bc \u0986\u09ae\u09bf \u0985\u09ac\u0997\u09a4 \u09b9\u0987\u09ac, \u09a4\u09be\u09b9\u09be \u09aa\u09cd\u09b0\u09a7\u09be\u09a8\u09ae\u09a8\u09cd\u09a4\u09cd\u09b0\u09c0 (\u0995\u09bf\u0982\u09ac\u09be \u0995\u09cd\u09b7\u09c7\u09a4\u09cd\u09b0\u09ae\u09a4 \u09ae\u09a8\u09cd\u09a4\u09cd\u09b0\u09c0, \u09aa\u09cd\u09b0\u09a4\u09bf-\u09ae\u09a8\u09cd\u09a4\u09cd\u09b0\u09c0, \u09ac\u09be \u0989\u09aa\u09ae\u09a8\u09cd\u09a4\u09cd\u09b0\u09c0)-\u09b0\u09c2\u09aa\u09c7 \u09af\u09a5\u09be\u09af\u09a5\u09ad\u09be\u09ac\u09c7 \u0986\u09ae\u09be\u09b0 \u0995\u09b0\u09cd\u09a4\u09ac\u09cd\u09af \u09aa\u09be\u09b2\u09a8\u09c7\u09b0 \u09aa\u09cd\u09b0\u09af\u09bc\u09cb\u099c\u09a8 \u09ac\u09cd\u09af\u09a4\u09c0\u09a4 \u09aa\u09cd\u09b0\u09a4\u09cd\u09af\u0995\u09cd\u09b7 \u09ac\u09be \u09aa\u09b0\u09cb\u0995\u09cd\u09b7\u09ad\u09be\u09ac\u09c7 \u0995\u09cb\u09a8 \u09ac\u09cd\u09af\u0995\u09cd\u09a4\u09bf\u0995\u09c7 \u099c\u09cd\u099e\u09be\u09aa\u09a8 \u0995\u09b0\u09bf\u09ac \u09a8\u09be \u09ac\u09be \u0995\u09cb\u09a8 \u09ac\u09cd\u09af\u0995\u09cd\u09a4\u09bf\u09b0 \u09a8\u09bf\u0995\u099f \u09aa\u09cd\u09b0\u0995\u09be\u09b6 \u0995\u09b0\u09bf\u09ac \u09a8\u09be\u0964\u2014\u200a\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I,(Name), do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will not directly or indirectly communicate or reveal to any person any matter that shall be brought under my consideration or shall become known to me as Prime Minister (or, as the case may be, Minister, Minister of State, or Deputy Minister), except as may be required for the due discharge of my duties as Prime Minister (or, as the case may be, Minister, Minister of State, or Deputy Minister)\u2014\u200a\nSpeaker.\nThe Speaker of the Jatiya Sangsad, takes the oath of his or her office as well as the presidential oath, since the acts of president is practiced by the Speaker, whenever necessary:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\u0986\u09ae\u09bf, (\u09a8\u09be\u09ae), \u09b8\u09b6\u09cd\u09b0\u09a6\u09cd\u09a7\u099a\u09bf\u09a4\u09cd\u09a4\u09c7 \u09b6\u09aa\u09a5 (\u09ac\u09be \u09a6\u09c3\u09a2\u09bc\u09ad\u09be\u09ac\u09c7 \u0998\u09cb\u09b7\u09a3\u09be) \u0995\u09b0\u09bf\u09a4\u09c7\u099b\u09bf \u09af\u09c7, \u0986\u09ae\u09bf \u0986\u0987\u09a8-\u0985\u09a8\u09c1\u09af\u09be\u09af\u09bc\u09c0 \u09b8\u0982\u09b8\u09a6\u09c7\u09b0 \u09b8\u09cd\u09aa\u09c0\u0995\u09be\u09b0\u09c7\u09b0 \u0995\u09b0\u09cd\u09a4\u09ac\u09cd\u09af (\u098f\u09ac\u0982 \u0995\u0996\u09a8\u0993 \u0986\u09b9\u09c1\u09a4 \u09b9\u0987\u09b2\u09c7 \u09b0\u09be\u09b7\u09cd\u099f\u09cd\u09b0\u09aa\u09a4\u09bf\u09b0 \u0995\u09b0\u09cd\u09a4\u09ac\u09cd\u09af) \u09ac\u09bf\u09b6\u09cd\u09ac\u09b8\u09cd\u09a4\u09a4\u09be\u09b0 \u09b8\u09b9\u09bf\u09a4 \u09aa\u09be\u09b2\u09a8 \u0995\u09b0\u09bf\u09ac; \u0986\u09ae\u09bf \u09ac\u09be\u0982\u09b2\u09be\u09a6\u09c7\u09b6\u09c7\u09b0 \u09aa\u09cd\u09b0\u09a4\u09bf \u0985\u0995\u09c3\u09a4\u09cd\u09b0\u09bf\u09ae \u09ac\u09bf\u09b6\u09cd\u09ac\u09be\u09b8 \u0993 \u0986\u09a8\u09c1\u0997\u09a4\u09cd\u09af \u09aa\u09cb\u09b7\u09a3 \u0995\u09b0\u09bf\u09ac\u0983 \u0986\u09ae\u09bf \u09b8\u0982\u09ac\u09bf\u09a7\u09be\u09a8\u09c7\u09b0 \u09b0\u0995\u09cd\u09b7\u09a3, \u09b8\u09ae\u09b0\u09cd\u09a5\u09a8 \u0993 \u09a8\u09bf\u09b0\u09be\u09aa\u09a4\u09cd\u09a4\u09be\u09ac\u09bf\u09a7\u09be\u09a8 \u0995\u09b0\u09bf\u09ac; \u098f\u09ac\u0982 \u0986\u09ae\u09bf \u09ad\u09c0\u09a4\u09bf \u09ac\u09be \u0985\u09a8\u09c1\u0997\u09cd\u09b0\u09b9, \u0985\u09a8\u09c1\u09b0\u09be\u0997 \u09ac\u09be \u09ac\u09bf\u09b0\u09be\u0997\u09c7\u09b0 \u09ac\u09b6\u09ac\u09b0\u09cd\u09a4\u09c0 \u09a8\u09be \u09b9\u0987\u09af\u09bc\u09be \u09b8\u0995\u09b2\u09c7\u09b0 \u09aa\u09cd\u09b0\u09a4\u09bf \u0986\u0987\u09a8-\u0985\u09a8\u09c1\u09af\u09be\u09af\u09bc\u09c0 \u09af\u09a5\u09be\u09ac\u09bf\u09b9\u09c0\u09a4 \u0986\u099a\u09b0\u09a3 \u0995\u09b0\u09bf\u09ac\u0964\u2014\u200a\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I, (name), do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will faithfully discharge the duties of the Speaker of Parliament and (whenever I am called upon so to do) of the President, according to law. That I will bear true faith and allegiance to Bangladesh; that I will preserve, protect and defend the Constitution and that I will do right to all manner of people according to law, without fear or favour, affection or ill-will.\u2014\u200a\nChief Justice.\nThe oath of office for the Chief Justice is administered by the President whereas the oath of office for other Judges is administered by the Chief Justice:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\u0986\u09ae\u09bf, (\u09a8\u09be\u09ae), \u09aa\u09cd\u09b0\u09a7\u09be\u09a8 \u09ac\u09bf\u099a\u09be\u09b0\u09aa\u09a4\u09bf (\u09ac\u09be \u0995\u09cd\u09b7\u09c7\u09a4\u09cd\u09b0\u09ae\u09a4 \u09b8\u09c1\u09aa\u09cd\u09b0\u09c0\u09ae \u0995\u09cb\u09b0\u09cd\u099f\u09c7\u09b0 \u0986\u09aa\u09c0\u09b2/\u09b9\u09be\u0987\u0995\u09cb\u09b0\u09cd\u099f \u09ac\u09bf\u09ad\u09be\u0997\u09c7\u09b0 \u09ac\u09bf\u099a\u09be\u09b0\u0995) \u09a8\u09bf\u09af\u09c1\u0995\u09cd\u09a4 \u09b9\u0987\u09af\u09bc\u09be \u09b8\u09b6\u09cd\u09b0\u09a6\u09cd\u09a7\u099a\u09bf\u09a4\u09cd\u09a4\u09c7 \u09b6\u09aa\u09a5 (\u09ac\u09be \u09a6\u09c3\u09a2\u09bc\u09ad\u09be\u09ac\u09c7 \u0998\u09cb\u09b7\u09a3\u09be) \u0995\u09b0\u09bf\u09a4\u09c7\u099b\u09bf \u09af\u09c7, \u0986\u09ae\u09bf \u0986\u0987\u09a8-\u0985\u09a8\u09c1\u09af\u09be\u09af\u09bc\u09c0 \u0993 \u09ac\u09bf\u09b6\u09cd\u09ac\u09b8\u09cd\u09a5\u09a4\u09be\u09b0 \u09b8\u09b9\u09bf\u09a4 \u0986\u09ae\u09be\u09b0 \u09aa\u09a6\u09c7\u09b0 \u0995\u09b0\u09cd\u09a4\u09ac\u09cd\u09af \u09aa\u09be\u09b2\u09a8 \u0995\u09b0\u09bf\u09ac; \u0997\u09a3\u09aa\u09cd\u09b0\u099c\u09be\u09a4\u09a8\u09cd\u09a4\u09cd\u09b0\u09c0 \u09ac\u09be\u0982\u09b2\u09be\u09a6\u09c7\u09b6\u09c7\u09b0 \u09b8\u0982\u09ac\u09bf\u09a7\u09be\u09a8 \u0986\u09ae\u09bf \u09ac\u09be\u0982\u09b2\u09be\u09a6\u09c7\u09b6\u09c7\u09b0 \u09aa\u09cd\u09b0\u09a4\u09bf \u0985\u0995\u09c3\u09a4\u09cd\u09b0\u09bf\u09ae \u09ac\u09bf\u09b6\u09cd\u09ac\u09be\u09b8 \u0993 \u0986\u09a8\u09c1\u0997\u09a4\u09cd\u09af \u09aa\u09cb\u09b7\u09a3 \u0995\u09b0\u09bf\u09ac\u0983 \u0986\u09ae\u09bf \u09ac\u09be\u0982\u09b2\u09be\u09a6\u09c7\u09b6\u09c7\u09b0 \u09b8\u0982\u09ac\u09bf\u09a7\u09be\u09a8 \u0993 \u0986\u0987\u09a8\u09c7\u09b0 \u09b0\u0995\u09cd\u09b7\u09a3, \u09b8\u09ae\u09b0\u09cd\u09a5\u09a8 \u0993 \u09a8\u09bf\u09b0\u09be\u09aa\u09a4\u09cd\u09a4\u09be\u09ac\u09bf\u09a7\u09be\u09a8 \u0995\u09b0\u09bf\u09ac; \u098f\u09ac\u0982 \u0986\u09ae\u09bf \u09ad\u09c0\u09a4\u09bf \u09ac\u09be \u0985\u09a8\u09c1\u0997\u09cd\u09b0\u09b9, \u0985\u09a8\u09c1\u09b0\u09be\u0997 \u09ac\u09be \u09ac\u09bf\u09b0\u09be\u0997\u09c7\u09b0 \u09ac\u09b6\u09ac\u09b0\u09cd\u09a4\u09c0 \u09a8\u09be \u09b9\u0987\u09af\u09bc\u09be \u09b8\u0995\u09b2\u09c7\u09b0 \u09aa\u09cd\u09b0\u09a4\u09bf \u0986\u0987\u09a8-\u0985\u09a8\u09c1\u09af\u09be\u09af\u09bc\u09c0 \u09af\u09a5\u09be\u09ac\u09bf\u09b9\u09bf\u09a4 \u0986\u099a\u09b0\u09a3 \u0995\u09b0\u09bf\u09ac\u0964\u2014\u200a\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I, (name), having been appointed Chief Justice of Bangladesh (or Judge of the Appellate/High Court Division of the Supreme Court) do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will faithfully discharge the duties of my office according to law. That I will bear true faith and allegiance to Bangladesh; that I will preserve, protect and defend the Constitution and the laws of Bangladesh and that I will do right to all manner of people according to law, without fear or favour, affection or ill-will.\u2014\u200a\nOthers.\nThe Election Commissioners, members of the Public Service Commission and the Comptroller and Auditor General takes a likely oath of office from the Chief Justice.\nThe representatives of the people in the local government takes oath from the Prime Minister or the minister in charge of the Local Government Division.\nBelarus.\nThe Constitution of Belarus requires the president-elect to recite the following oath before taking office:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Assuming the office of President of the Republic of Belarus, I solemnly swear to faithfully serve the people of the Republic of Belarus, to respect and safeguard the rights and liberties of man and citizen, to abide by and protect the Constitution of the Republic of Belarus, and to discharge strictly and conscientiously the lofty duties that have been bestowed upon me\nBelgium.\nKing.\nIn Belgium, the King is not crowned but swears the constitutional oath in front of both Chambers of the federal parliament in the Palace of the Nation in Brussels in the three official languages:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"Dutch\": Ik zweer dat ik de Grondwet en de wetten van het Belgische volk zal naleven, 's Lands onafhankelijkheid handhaven en het grondgebied ongeschonden bewaren.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"French\": Je jure d'observer la Constitution et les lois du peuple belge, de maintenir l'ind\u00e9pendance nationale et l'int\u00e9grit\u00e9 du territoire.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"German\": Ich schw\u00f6re, die Verfassung und die Gesetze des belgischen Volkes zu beachten, die Unabh\u00e4ngigkeit des Landes zu erhalten und die Unversehrtheit des Staatsgebietes zu wahren.\nIn English: I swear that I will observe the constitution and laws of the Belgian people, preserve the country's independence and protect its territorial integrity. (Article 91 of the Belgian Constitution)\nPrime minister, ministers and state secretaries.\nThe prime minister, the ministers and state secretaries of the Belgian federal government swear an oath in front of the Belgian King.\nAlso the minister-presidents of the Flemish government, of the Walloon government, of the government of the French community, of the government of the German-speaking community and of the Brussels-Capital region government swear the oath at the King. The other members of these governments do not take the oath at the King, but in front of their respective parliaments.\nThey may choose to take the oath in one or more of the country's languages.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"Dutch\": Ik zweer getrouwheid aan de Koning, gehoorzaamheid aan de Grondwet en aan de wetten van het Belgische volk.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"French\": Je jure fid\u00e9lit\u00e9 au Roi, ob\u00e9issance \u00e0 la Constitution et aux lois du Peuple belge.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"German\": Ich schw\u00f6re Treue dem K\u00f6nig, Gehorsam der Verfassung und den Gesetzen des belgischen Volkes.\nIn English: I swear fidelity to the King, obedience to the constitution and to the laws of the Belgian people.\nMembers of the Parliaments.\nThe members of the Chambers of Representatives, the Senate, the Flemish Parliament, the Walloon Parliament, the Parliament of the French Community, the Parliament of the German-speaking Community and the Parliament of the Brussels-Capital Region have to swear the following oath:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"Dutch\": Ik zweer de Grondwet na te leven.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"French\": Je jure d'observer la Constitution.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"German\": Ich schw\u00f6re, die Verfassung zu beachten.\nIn English: I swear obedience to the constitution.\nPublic servants.\nAll public servants in judiciary and administration, officers of the civil guards and the army and servants in general of any public office have to swear the same oath as ministers, but in front of their respective hierarchical authority rather than of the King.\nMayors and members of municipal executive and city council.\nFlemish mayors and the members of municipal executive and the city council in Flanders have following oath: \"Ik zweer de verplichtingen van mijn mandaat trouw na te komen\" (I swear to fulfill the duties of my office faithfully).\nIn Walloon the following version is used: \"Je jure fid\u00e9lit\u00e9 au Roi, ob\u00e9issance \u00e0 la Constitution et aux lois du peuple belge.\"\nBrazil.\nPresident and Vice President.\nThe affirmation required by the Constitution of Brazil to be taken by the president-elect and vice president-elect upon entering into office is as follows:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Prometo manter, defender e cumprir a Constitui\u00e7\u00e3o, observar as leis, promover o bem geral do povo brasileiro e sustentar a uni\u00e3o, a integridade e a independ\u00eancia do Brasil.\u2014\u200a\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I promise to preserve, defend and uphold the Constitution, observe the Laws, promote the general welfare of the Brazilian people, and to sustain the union, the integrity and the independence of Brazil.\u2014\u200a\nChamber of Deputies.\nThe affirmation of office for the members of the Chamber is administered by the President, who reads:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Prometo manter, defender e cumprir a Constitui\u00e7\u00e3o, observar as leis, promover o bem geral do povo brasileiro e sustentar a uni\u00e3o, a integridade e a independ\u00eancia do Brasil.\u2014\u200a\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I promise to preserve, defend and uphold the Constitution, observe the laws, promote the general welfare of the Brazilian people, and to sustain the union, the integrity and the independence of Brazil.\u2014\u200a\nThe Chamber members, after being called, answer the affirmation with \"So I promise\" (\"Assim o prometo\").\nFederal Senate.\nThe affirmation of office for Senators is administered by the President, who reads:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Prometo guardar a Constitui\u00e7\u00e3o Federal e as leis do pa\u00eds, desempenhar fiel e lealmente o mandato de Senador que o povo me conferiu e sustentar a uni\u00e3o, a integridade e a independ\u00eancia do Brasil.\u2014\u200a\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I promise to keep the country's Federal Constitution and laws, to perform faithfully and loyally the mandate of Senator that the people gave me and to sustain the union, the integrity and the independence of Brazil.\u2014\u200a\nThe Senate members, after being called, answer the affirmation with \"So I promise\" (\"Assim o prometo\").\nSupreme Federal Court.\nThe internal rules of the Supreme Federal Court set out the affirmation that must be taken by justices upon their investiture. Other judges make different affirmations, as provided for by law or in the internal rules of each Court.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Prometo, bem e fielmente, cumprir os deveres do cargo de Ministro do Supremo Tribunal Federal, em confirmidade com a Constitui\u00e7\u00e3o e as leis da Rep\u00fablica.\u2014\u200a\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I promise, well and faithfully, to discharge the duties of the office of Justice of the Supreme Federal Court, in accordance to the Constitution and the laws of the Republic.\u2014\u200a\nOthers.\nThe Constitution and laws of the several states and the organic laws of the municipalities also specify affirmations that must be made by the key officers of those entities.\nMinas Gerais.\nGovernor and Vice Governor.\nThe affirmation required by the https:// to be taken by the governor-elect and vice governor-elect upon entering into office is as follows:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Prometo manter, defender e cumprir a Constitui\u00e7\u00e3o da Rep\u00fablica e a do Estado, observar as leis, promover o bem geral do povo mineiro e sustentar a integridade e a autonomia de Minas Gerais.\u2014\u200a\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I promise to preserve, defend and uphold the Constitution of the Republic and of the State, observe the Laws, promote the general welfare of the Mineiro people, and to sustain the integrity and the autonomy of Minas Gerais.\u2014\u200a\nBrunei.\nIn Brunei, an oath must be taken by any person in the public services may require to take if the Sultan wishes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I, ...(name)..., swear by Almighty Allah [for Muslim] /OR/ solemnly and sincerely declare [for non Muslim], that I will be faithful and bear true allegiance to His Majesty the Sultan and Yang Di-Pertuan...(current king's name)... and His Successors according to law. That I will without fear or favour and to the best of my ability and judgment, serve as a true and faithful member of the public service of Brunei Darussalam.\nBulgaria.\nThe members of the Bulgarian parliament, the prime minister, government ministers, the president and vice president have to swear the following oath before entering office:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\u0417\u0430\u043a\u043b\u0435\u0432\u0430\u043c \u0441\u0435 \u0432 \u0438\u043c\u0435\u0442\u043e \u043d\u0430 \u0420\u0435\u043f\u0443\u0431\u043b\u0438\u043a\u0430 \u0411\u044a\u043b\u0433\u0430\u0440\u0438\u044f \u0434\u0430 \u0441\u043f\u0430\u0437\u0432\u0430\u043c \u041a\u043e\u043d\u0441\u0442\u0438\u0442\u0443\u0446\u0438\u044f\u0442\u0430 \u0438 \u0437\u0430\u043a\u043e\u043d\u0438\u0442\u0435 \u043d\u0430 \u0441\u0442\u0440\u0430\u043d\u0430\u0442\u0430 \u0438 \u0432\u044a\u0432 \u0432\u0441\u0438\u0447\u043a\u0438\u0442\u0435 \u0441\u0438 \u0434\u0435\u0439\u0441\u0442\u0432\u0438\u044f \u0434\u0430 \u0441\u0435 \u0440\u044a\u043a\u043e\u0432\u043e\u0434\u044f \u043e\u0442 \u0438\u043d\u0442\u0435\u0440\u0435\u0441\u0438\u0442\u0435 \u043d\u0430 \u043d\u0430\u0440\u043e\u0434\u0430. \u0417\u0430\u043a\u043b\u0435\u0445 \u0441\u0435.\nIn English, \"I swear in the name of the Republic of Bulgaria to observe the Constitution and the laws of the country and in all my actions to be guided by the interests of the people. This I have sworn.\"\nThe oath is dictated by the chairman of the National Assembly and a ceremony is held in the National Assembly building. When the president or the prime minister and cabinet ministers take the oath, the Constitution is also on display near the main dais during the inauguration.\nCanada.\nNo formal oath is required to be taken by the monarch.\nGovernor general.\nThe Governor General of Canada is required to take the \"Oath for the due execution of the Office of Our Governor General and Commander-in-Chief in and over Canada, and for the due impartial administration of justice\", which includes swearing allegiance to the reigning Canadian monarch the viceroy is to represent. This oath must be administered by the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court of Canada or a puisne justice and, though not demanded, this is usually done during a swearing-in ceremony in the Canadian Senate chamber.\nThe following was the oath taken by the Governor General:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Chief Justice: Do you (name) swear that you will be faithful and bear true allegiance to His/Her Majesty King/Queen (monarch), King/Queen of Canada, His/Her heirs and successors?\nGovernor General: I do.\nChief Justice: So help you God. Do you swear that you will well and truly serve His/Her Majesty King/Queen (monarch) in the Office of Governor General and Commander-in Chief of Canada and duly and impartially administer justice therein?\nGovernor General: I do.\nChief Justice: So help you God. Do you swear that you will well and truly serve His/Her Majesty King/Queen (monarch) in the Office of Keeper of the Great Seal of Canada?\nGovernor General: I do.\nChief Justice: So help you God.\nMinisters.\nAll Ministers of the Crown, including the Prime Minister of Canada, must be sworn members of the King's Privy Council for Canada before taking office. The Clerk of the Privy Council administers the necessary oaths at Rideau Hall in the presence of the Governor General. The first oath taken is always the Oath of Allegiance:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I, (name), do swear (declare) that I will be faithful and bear true allegiance to His Majesty King Charles the Third, King of Canada, his heirs and successors, so help me God.\nThe Oath of Allegiance is followed by the Privy Council Oath:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I, (name), do solemnly and sincerely swear (declare) that I shall be a true and faithful servant to His Majesty King Charles the Third, as a member of His Majesty\u2019s Privy Council for Canada. I will in all things to be treated, debated and resolved in Privy Council, faithfully, honestly and truly declare my mind and my opinion. I shall keep secret all matters committed and revealed to me in this capacity, or that shall be secretly treated of in Council. Generally, in all things I shall do as a faithful and true servant ought to do for His Majesty. So help me God.\nPrivy Councillors who are Ministers-designate, including the Prime Minister-designate, become Ministers by taking the Oath of Office, which is administered by the Clerk of the Privy Council at Rideau Hall:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I, (name), do solemnly and sincerely promise and swear (or declare) that I will truly and faithfully, and to the best of my skill and knowledge, execute the powers and trusts reposed in me as (office), so help me God.\nMinisters who choose to take the oath as an affirmation use \"declare\" instead of \"swear\" and omit \"so help me God\". After leaving Cabinet, former Ministers typically remain Privy Councillors for life, and as such retain the privilege of styling themselves \"The Honourable\" (or \"The Right Honourable,\" in the case of the Prime Minister), and may use the post-nominals \"P.C.\"\nChina.\nMainland China.\nOn July 1, 2015, the 15th Meeting of the 12th Standing Committee of the National People's Congress passed the Decision of the National People's Congress Standing Committee Regarding the Implementation of a Constitutional Oath System, with an effective date of January 1, 2016. The Decision requires state civil servants elected or appointed by the National People's Congress, its Standing Committee, the State Council, the Central Military Commission, the Supreme People's Court, the Supreme People's Procuratorate, and other central government organs, as well as equivalent local government organs at or above the county level, to publicly swear an oath to the constitution upon formally taking office.\nAs prescribed by the decision, the oath is as follows (as amended in 2018):\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\u6211\u5ba3\u8a93\uff1a\u5fe0\u4e8e\u4e2d\u534e\u4eba\u6c11\u5171\u548c\u56fd\u5baa\u6cd5\uff0c\u7ef4\u62a4\u5baa\u6cd5\u6743\u5a01\uff0c\u5c65\u884c\u6cd5\u5b9a\u804c\u8d23\uff0c\u5fe0\u4e8e\u7956\u56fd\u3001\u5fe0\u4e8e\u4eba\u6c11\uff0c\u606a\u5c3d\u804c\u5b88\u3001\u5ec9\u6d01\u5949\u516c\uff0c\u63a5\u53d7\u4eba\u6c11\u76d1\u7763\uff0c\u4e3a\u5efa\u8bbe\u5bcc\u5f3a\u6c11\u4e3b\u6587\u660e\u548c\u8c10\u7f8e\u4e3d\u7684\u793e\u4f1a\u4e3b\u4e49\u73b0\u4ee3\u5316\u5f3a\u56fd\u52aa\u529b\u594b\u6597\uff01\nUnofficial English translation:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I swear that I will be loyal to the Constitution of the People's Republic of China, defend the authority of the Constitution, and perform my legal duties, I will be loyal to the Motherland and the people, I will perform my duties with full dedication and honesty, I will accept the supervision of the people, I will strive hard for the construction of the modern and powerful socialist country which is prosperous, democratic, civilized, harmonious, and beautiful!\nHong Kong.\nThe oath of office for the Chief Executive is as follows:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I, (name), swear that, in the office of Chief Executive of the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region of the People's Republic of China, I will uphold the Basic Law of the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region of the People's Republic of China, bear allegiance to the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region of the People's Republic of China and serve the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region conscientiously, dutifully, in full accordance with the law, honestly and with integrity, and be held accountable to the Central People's Government of the People's Republic of China and the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe oath of office for the Principal Officials is as follows:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I swear that, in the office of (office) of the Government of the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region of the People's Republic of China, I will uphold the Basic Law of the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region of the People's Republic of China, bear allegiance to the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region of the People's Republic of China and serve the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region conscientiously, dutifully, in full accordance with the law, honestly and with integrity.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe oath of office for the unofficial members of the Executive Council is as follows:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I swear that, being appointed to the Executive Council of the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region of the People's Republic of China, I will uphold the Basic Law of the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region of the People's Republic of China, bear allegiance to the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region of the People's Republic of China and serve the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region conscientiously, dutifully, in full accordance with the law, honestly and with integrity.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe oath of office for the members of the Legislative Council is as follows:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I swear that, being a member of the Legislative Council of the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region of the People's Republic of China, I will uphold the Basic Law of the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region of the People's Republic of China, bear allegiance to the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region of the People's Republic of China and serve the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region conscientiously, dutifully, in full accordance with the law, honestly and with integrity.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe oath of office of judges is as follows:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I swear that, in the Office of a Judge of the Judiciary of the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region of the People's Republic of China, I will uphold the Basic Law of the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region of the People's Republic of China, bear allegiance to the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region of the People's Republic of China, serve the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region conscientiously, dutifully, in full accordance with the law, honestly and with integrity, safeguard the law and administer justice without fear or favour, self-interest or deceit.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nDuring the colonial era, the Governors of Hong Kong were required by Hong Kong Royal Instructions and Hong Kong Letters Patent to take the Oath of Allegiance, the Official Oath and the Judicial Oath of the United Kingdom before assuming the office.\nMacau.\nThe oath of office for the Chief Executive is as follows:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I, (name), hereby take the oath, and assume the office of the Chief Executive of the Macau Special Administrative Region of the People's Republic of China, I will uphold and Implement the Basic Law of Macau Special Administrative Region of the People\u2019s Republic of China, I will bear allegiance to the People's Republic of China and Macau Special Administrative Region, I will dedicate and abide the law, be honest, to make every effort to maintain and protect Macau\u2019s stability and development, and make myself accountable to the Macau Special Administrative Region and the Central Government. This is my solemn oath.\nCosta Rica.\nIn Costa Rica, the oath of office is administered to the President-elect on Inauguration Day, and to all other public officials on the day of the undertaking of their duties. The oath of office for the President of Costa Rica is administered to him, or her, by the President of the Asamblea Legislativa de Costa Rica. It is established in the Political Constitution of the Republic of Costa Rica (Article 194):\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"El juramento que deben prestar los funcionarios p\u00fablicos, seg\u00fan lo dispuesto en el art\u00edculo 11 de esta Constituci\u00f3n es el siguiente:\"\n\"-\u00bfJur\u00e1is a Dios y promet\u00e9is a la Patria, observar y defender la Constituci\u00f3n y las leyes de la Rep\u00fablica, y cumplir fielmente los deberes de vuestro destino?\"\n\"-S\u00ed, juro-.\"\n\"-Si as\u00ed lo hiciereis, Dios os ayude, y si no, \u00c9l y la Patria os lo demanden.\"\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;(Do you swear before God and promise the Country to observe and defend the Constitution and the laws of the Republic and faithfully fulfill the duties of your office?\nYes, I swear.\nIf you do, may God help you, and if you do not, may He and the Country call you to account.)\nCroatia.\nBefore assuming duty, the President-elect of the Republic takes oath of office before the judges of the Constitutional Court swearing loyalty to the Constitution:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I solemnly swear to perform the duty of the President of the Republic of Croatia conscientiously and responsibly, to the benefit of the Croatian people and all Croatian citizens. As a Head of the Croatian State, I will keep the Constitution and laws, care for the respect of the Constitutional order of the Republic of Croatia, cherish proper and fair action of all bodies of state authority and keep the independence, existence and unity of the Croatian State. So help me God!\nEgypt.\nBefore assuming duty, the President-elect of the Republic and the ministers takes oath of office :\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I swear by Almighty God to uphold the Republican system, to respect the Constitution and the law, to fully safeguard the interests of the people and to protect the independence of the nation and its territorial integrity\nFiji.\nIn Fiji, the oath of office for the President of Fiji and Vice-President of Fiji are set out in .\nIndividuals taking the oath proclaim to be \"faithful\" to the republic, and faithful \"according to law.\" The oath ends with the statement \"So help me God!\"\nOath of Allegiance.\nPresident.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I, (name), being appointed/elected President, do swear that I will be faithful and bear true allegiance to the Republic of Fiji, according to law. So Help me God.\nPrime Minister and other Officials.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I, (name), do swear that I will be faithful and bear true allegiance to the Republic of Fiji according to law, and that I will obey, observe, uphold, and maintain the constitution of the Republic of Fiji. So Help me God.\nOath of Execution.\nPresident.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I, (name), being appointed/elected President, do swear that I will well and truly serve the Republic of Fiji in the Office of the President. So Help me God.\nPrime Minister and other officials.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I, (name), being appointed/elected as (position), swear that I will be faithful and true allegiance to the Republic of Fiji, that I will obey, observe, uphold, and maintain the constitution of the Republic of Fiji and all other laws of Fiji, and I will solemnly and sincerely promise to hold my office with honor, dignity, and integrity; to be a true and faithful counselor, not to divulge any secret matter entrusted to me, and to perform the functions of my office consciously and to the best of my ability. So Help me God.\nFinland.\nGeneral oath of office..\nIn Finland, the oath of office is sworn by\nThe oath of office is:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I, (name), promise and swear before almighty and all-knowing God that I will, in the fulfilment of my office, follow the constitution and other laws, acting rightfully and impartially for the sake of the citizens and the society.\nThose who do not want to swear the religious oath may give an affirmation. In this case, the words \"promise and swear before almighty and all-knowing God\" are replaced by \"promise and affirm by my honor and by my conscience\".\nPolicemen and some other persons executing justice make a written affirmation of office instead of an oath. The text of the affirmation is\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I, (name), promise and affirm by my honour and by my conscience that I will, in the fulfillment of my office, follow the constitution and other laws, acting rightfully and impartially. I will fulfill my duties carefully and as well as I can. Furthermore, I will not divulge to third parties knowledge which I have gained in my office, and which must be kept secret.\nIn Finnish practice, the oaths of office are given only once. If the person who has given an oath or affirmation moves to another duty where such oath is required, the oath is not given anew.\nPresidential affirmation of office.\nThe President of Finland gives the following affirmation of office:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I, (name), elected by the people of Finland as the President of the Republic, hereby affirm that in my presidential duties I shall sincerely and conscientiously observe the Constitution and the laws of the Republic, and to the best of my ability promote the wellbeing of the people of Finland.\nOath of judges.\nFinnish judges and justices of all courts are required to give the following oath:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I, (name), do promise and swear by God and His Holy Gospels that to the best of my understanding and conscience I wish to and shall in all judgments render justice to poor and rich alike and render judgment in accordance with the laws and lawful rules of God and country: I shall never, under any pretext, pervert the law nor promote injustice because of kinship, relationship, friendship, envy, hatred or fear, or for the sake of gifts or presents or other reasons, nor shall I find an innocent person guilty or a guilty person innocent. Furthermore, I shall not, before pronouncing a judgment or thereafter, reveal to the parties or to anyone else anything about the deliberations that the Court has held behind closed doors. All of this I wish to and shall fulfil faithfully, honestly and as an earnest judge, without deceit and intrigue, so help me God, in body and mind.\nThose taking an affirmation do not use the parts involving God.\nAll Finnish cabinet ministers are required to give both the general oath or affirmation of office and the oath of judge, unless they have given these oaths and affirmations before. Like the general oath of office, the oath of judge is given only once.\nMilitary oath.\nAll Finnish conscripts are required to give the military oath or affirmation. The oath or affirmation is given in the end of the basic training using the formula:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I, (name), promise and affirm before the almighty and all-knowing God (\"in affirmation\": by my honour and by my conscience) that I am a trustworthy and faithful citizen of the realm of Finland. I want to serve my country honestly and, to my best ability, seek and pursue her edification and advantage. \nI want everywhere and in every situation, during the peace and during the war, defend the inviolability of my fatherland, her legal system of government and the legal authority of the realm. If I perceive or gain knowledge of activity to overthrow the legal authority or to subvert the system of government of the country, I want to report it to the authorities without delay. \nThe troop to which I belong and my place in it I will not desert in any situation, but so long as I have strength in me, I will completely fulfill the task I have received. \nI promise to act properly and uprightly, obey my superiors, comply with the laws and decrees and keep the service secrets trusted in me. \nI want to be forthright and helpful to my fellow servicemen. Never will I due to kinship, friendship, envy, hatred or fear nor because of gifts or any other reason act contrary to my duty in service. \nIf I be given a position of superiority, I want to be rightful to my subordinates, to take care of their wellbeing, acquire information on their wishes, to be their councillor and guide and, for my own self, set them a good and encouraging example. All this I want to fulfil according to my honour and my conscience.\nGermany.\nThe oath of office of the Federal President, Federal Chancellor, and other federal ministers in Germany is as follows:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Ich schw\u00f6re, da\u00df ich meine Kraft dem Wohle des deutschen Volkes widmen, seinen Nutzen mehren, Schaden von ihm wenden, das Grundgesetz und die Gesetze des Bundes wahren und verteidigen, meine Pflichten gewissenhaft erf\u00fcllen und Gerechtigkeit gegen jedermann \u00fcben werde. So wahr mir Gott helfe.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe religious affirmation may be omitted. The first chancellor to do this was Gerhard Schr\u00f6der in 1998, the second was Olaf Scholz in 2021.\nEach of the 16 L\u00e4nder (states) has its own oath of office for the Minister Presidents and other ministers, also for the L\u00e4nder employees.\nThe oath for soldiers in Germany reads as follows:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I swear to serve loyally the Federal Republic of Germany and to defend bravely the right and the freedom of the German people. So help me God.\nConscripts say \"vow\" instead of \"swear\", and the religious affirmation is not added for conscripts since the vow is not an actual oath.\nThe oath for federal \"Beamte\":I swear to protect the Basic Law for the Federal Republic of Germany and all valid laws within the Federal Republic and to fulfill my duties of the office faithfully, so help me God.The oath for federal judges according to \u00a7 38 DRiG is as follows: (State (L\u00e4nder) judges may have to add a commitment to the state constitution (Landesverfassung) to their oath)I swear to exercise judicial office in conformity with the Basic Law of the Federal Republic of Germany and with the law, to adjudicate to the best of my knowledge and belief, without distinction of person, and to serve the cause of truth and justice alone \u2013 so help me God.\nGhana.\nThe oath of office of the President of Ghana is as follows:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFor members of the Parliament of Ghana, the oath is:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nGreece.\nArticle 59 of the Constitution of Greece states that members of parliament must take the following oath:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;O\u03c1\u03ba\u03af\u03b6\u03bf\u03bc\u03b1\u03b9 \u03c3\u03c4\u03bf \u03cc\u03bd\u03bf\u03bc\u03b1 \u03c4\u03b7\u03c2 A\u03b3\u03af\u03b1\u03c2 \u03ba\u03b1\u03b9 O\u03bc\u03bf\u03bf\u03cd\u03c3\u03b9\u03b1\u03c2 \u03ba\u03b1\u03b9 A\u03b4\u03b9\u03b1\u03af\u03c1\u03b5\u03c4\u03b7\u03c2 \u03a4\u03c1\u03b9\u03ac\u03b4\u03b1\u03c2 \u03bd\u03b1 \u03b5\u03af\u03bc\u03b1\u03b9 \u03c0\u03b9\u03c3\u03c4\u03cc\u03c2 \u03c3\u03c4\u03b7\u03bd \u03a0\u03b1\u03c4\u03c1\u03af\u03b4\u03b1 \u03ba\u03b1\u03b9 \u03c4\u03bf \u03b4\u03b7\u03bc\u03bf\u03ba\u03c1\u03b1\u03c4\u03b9\u03ba\u03cc \u03c0\u03bf\u03bb\u03af\u03c4\u03b5\u03c5\u03bc\u03b1, \u03bd\u03b1 \u03c5\u03c0\u03b1\u03ba\u03bf\u03cd\u03c9 \u03c3\u03c4\u03bf \u03a3\u03cd\u03bd\u03c4\u03b1\u03b3\u03bc\u03b1 \u03ba\u03b1\u03b9 \u03c4\u03bf\u03c5\u03c2 \u03bd\u03cc\u03bc\u03bf\u03c5\u03c2 \u03ba\u03b1\u03b9 \u03bd\u03b1 \u03b5\u03ba\u03c0\u03bb\u03b7\u03c1\u03ce\u03bd\u03c9 \u03b5\u03c5\u03c3\u03c5\u03bd\u03b5\u03af\u03b4\u03b7\u03c4\u03b1 \u03c4\u03b1 \u03ba\u03b1\u03b8\u03ae\u03ba\u03bf\u03bd\u03c4\u03ac \u03bc\u03bf\u03c5.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I swear in the name of the Holy Consubstantial and Indivisible Trinity to keep faith in my Country and in the democratic form of government, obedience to the Constitution and the laws and to discharge conscientiously my duties.\nArticle 33 of the Constitution of Greece states that the President of the Hellenic Republic must take the following oath:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\u039f\u03c1\u03ba\u03af\u03b6\u03bf\u03bc\u03b1\u03b9 \u03c3\u03c4\u03bf \u03cc\u03bd\u03bf\u03bc\u03b1 \u03c4\u03b7\u03c2 A\u03b3\u03af\u03b1\u03c2 \u03ba\u03b1\u03b9 O\u03bc\u03bf\u03bf\u03cd\u03c3\u03b9\u03b1\u03c2 \u03ba\u03b1\u03b9 A\u03b4\u03b9\u03b1\u03af\u03c1\u03b5\u03c4\u03b7\u03c2 \u03a4\u03c1\u03b9\u03ac\u03b4\u03b1\u03c2 \u03bd\u03b1 \u03c6\u03c5\u03bb\u03ac\u03c3\u03c3\u03c9 \u03c4\u03bf \u03a3\u03cd\u03bd\u03c4\u03b1\u03b3\u03bc\u03b1 \u03ba\u03b1\u03b9 \u03c4\u03bf\u03c5\u03c2 \u03bd\u03cc\u03bc\u03bf\u03c5\u03c2, \u03bd\u03b1 \u03bc\u03b5\u03c1\u03b9\u03bc\u03bd\u03ce \u03b3\u03b9\u03b1 \u03c4\u03b7\u03bd \u03c0\u03b9\u03c3\u03c4\u03ae \u03c4\u03bf\u03c5\u03c2 \u03c4\u03ae\u03c1\u03b7\u03c3\u03b7, \u03bd\u03b1 \u03c5\u03c0\u03b5\u03c1\u03b1\u03c3\u03c0\u03af\u03b6\u03c9 \u03c4\u03b7\u03bd \u03b5\u03b8\u03bd\u03b9\u03ba\u03ae \u03b1\u03bd\u03b5\u03be\u03b1\u03c1\u03c4\u03b7\u03c3\u03af\u03b1 \u03ba\u03b1\u03b9 \u03c4\u03b7\u03bd \u03b1\u03ba\u03b5\u03c1\u03b1\u03b9\u03cc\u03c4\u03b7\u03c4\u03b1 \u03c4\u03b7\u03c2 X\u03ce\u03c1\u03b1\u03c2, \u03bd\u03b1 \u03c0\u03c1\u03bf\u03c3\u03c4\u03b1\u03c4\u03b5\u03cd\u03c9 \u03c4\u03b1 \u03b4\u03b9\u03ba\u03b1\u03b9\u03ce\u03bc\u03b1\u03c4\u03b1 \u03ba\u03b1\u03b9 \u03c4\u03b9\u03c2 \u03b5\u03bb\u03b5\u03c5\u03b8\u03b5\u03c1\u03af\u03b5\u03c2 \u03c4\u03c9\u03bd \u0395\u03bb\u03bb\u03ae\u03bd\u03c9\u03bd \u03ba\u03b1\u03b9 \u03bd\u03b1 \u03c5\u03c0\u03b7\u03c1\u03b5\u03c4\u03ce \u03c4\u03bf \u03b3\u03b5\u03bd\u03b9\u03ba\u03cc \u03c3\u03c5\u03bc\u03c6\u03ad\u03c1\u03bf\u03bd \u03ba\u03b1\u03b9 \u03c4\u03b7\u03bd \u03c0\u03c1\u03cc\u03bf\u03b4\u03bf \u03c4\u03bf\u03c5 \u0395\u03bb\u03bb\u03b7\u03bd\u03b9\u03ba\u03bf\u03cd \u039b\u03b1\u03bf\u03cd.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I swear in the name of the Holy, Consubstantial and Indivisible Trinity to safeguard the Constitution and the laws, to ensure their faithful observance, to defend the national independence and territorial integrity of the Country, to protect the rights and liberties of the Greeks and to serve the general interest and the progress of the Greek People.\nGuatemala.\nArticle 181 of the Guatemalan Constitution provides that the incoming president of Guatemala should raises his or her right arm up to shoulder-level before the President of the Congress of Guatemala and say the following oath of office in Spanish:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I promise to make and to keep the political constitution of the Republic Of Guatemala and the laws that came from it, and loyally and faithfully love to my country the position of President of the Republic that the public has given me legally and legitimate, looking above all for the good and the prosperity of the country so help me God; and if I don't do it as such that the nation should demand it from me.\nAfterwards, the outgoing President passes him the Guatemalan flag (the Banda Presidential), which is worn from the left shoulder to the right rib, to the new president along with the presidential pin and with the Constitutional Collar.\nIndia.\nPresident of India.\nThe oath of office for the President of India is as follows:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I,(name), do swear in the name of God (or, solemnly affirm) that I will faithfully execute the office of Presidentof India, and will do the best of my ability preserve, protect and defend the Constitution and the law, and that I will devote myself to the service and well-being of the people of Republic of India.\n\u2014\u200aOath of office of President of India in Hindi Version &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\u092e\u0948\u0902, (\u0905\u092e\u0941\u0915), \u0908\u0936\u094d\u0935\u0930 \u0915\u0940 \u0936\u092a\u0925 \u0932\u0947\u0924\u093e \u0939\u0942\u0901 (\u0938\u0924\u094d\u092f\u0928\u093f\u0937\u094d\u0920\u093e \u0938\u0947 \u092a\u094d\u0930\u0924\u093f\u091c\u094d\u091e\u093e\u0928 \u0915\u0930\u0924\u093e \u0939\u0942\u0901) \u0915\u093f \u092e\u0948\u0902 \u0936\u094d\u0930\u0926\u094d\u0927\u093e\u092a\u0942\u0930\u094d\u0935\u0915 \u092d\u093e\u0930\u0924 \u0915\u0947 \u0930\u093e\u0937\u094d\u091f\u094d\u0930\u092a\u0924\u093f \u0915\u0947 \u092a\u0926 \u0915\u093e \u0915\u093e\u0930\u094d\u092f\u092a\u093e\u0932\u0928 (\u0905\u0925\u0935\u093e \u0930\u093e\u0937\u094d\u091f\u094d\u0930\u092a\u0924\u093f \u0915\u0947 \u0915\u0943\u0924\u094d\u092f\u094b\u0902 \u0915\u093e \u0928\u093f\u0930\u094d\u0935\u0939\u0928) \u0915\u0930\u0942\u0901\u0917\u093e, \u0924\u0925\u093e \u0905\u092a\u0928\u0940 \u092a\u0942\u0930\u0940 \u092f\u094b\u0917\u094d\u092f\u0924\u093e \u0938\u0947 \u0938\u0902\u0935\u093f\u0927\u093e\u0928 \u0914\u0930 \u0935\u093f\u0927\u093f \u0915\u093e \u092a\u0930\u093f\u0930\u0915\u094d\u0937\u0923, \u0938\u0902\u0930\u0915\u094d\u0937\u0923 \u0914\u0930 \u092a\u094d\u0930\u0924\u093f\u0930\u0915\u094d\u0937\u0923 \u0915\u0930\u0942\u0901\u0917\u093e, \u0914\u0930 \u092e\u0948\u0902 \u092d\u093e\u0930\u0924 \u0915\u0940 \u091c\u0928\u0924\u093e \u0915\u0940 \u0938\u0947\u0935\u093e \u0914\u0930 \u0915\u0932\u094d\u092f\u093e\u0923 \u092e\u0947\u0902 \u0928\u093f\u0930\u0924 \u0930\u0939\u0942\u0901\u0917\u093e\u0964\u2014\u200a\nVice President of India.\nThe oath of office for the Vice President of India is as follows:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I, (name), do swear in the name of God (or, solemnly affirm) that I will bear true faith and allegiance to the Constitution of India as by law established, and that I will faithfully discharge the duty upon which I am about to enter.\u2014\u200aOath of office of Vice President of India in Hindi Version &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\u092e\u0948\u0902, (\u0905\u092e\u0941\u0915), \u0908\u0936\u094d\u0935\u0930 \u0915\u0940 \u0936\u092a\u0925 \u0932\u0947\u0924\u093e \u0939\u0942\u0901 (\u0938\u0924\u094d\u092f\u0928\u093f\u0937\u094d\u0920\u093e \u0938\u0947 \u092a\u094d\u0930\u0924\u093f\u091c\u094d\u091e\u093e\u0928 \u0915\u0930\u0924\u093e \u0939\u0942\u0901) \u0915\u093f \u092e\u0948\u0902 \u0935\u093f\u0927\u093f \u0926\u094d\u0935\u093e\u0930\u093e \u0938\u094d\u0925\u093e\u092a\u093f\u0924 \u092d\u093e\u0930\u0924 \u0915\u0947 \u0938\u0902\u0935\u093f\u0927\u093e\u0928 \u0915\u0947 \u092a\u094d\u0930\u0924\u093f \u0938\u091a\u094d\u091a\u0940 \u0936\u094d\u0930\u0926\u094d\u0927\u093e \u0914\u0930 \u0928\u093f\u0937\u094d\u0920\u093e \u0930\u0916\u0942\u0901\u0917\u093e, \u0924\u0925\u093e \u091c\u093f\u0938 \u092a\u0926 \u0915\u094b \u092e\u0948\u0902 \u0917\u094d\u0930\u0939\u0923 \u0915\u0930\u0928\u0947 \u0935\u093e\u0932\u093e \u0939\u0942\u0901 \u0909\u0938\u0915\u0947 \u0915\u0930\u094d\u0924\u0935\u094d\u092f\u094b\u0902 \u0915\u093e \u0936\u094d\u0930\u0926\u094d\u0927\u093e\u092a\u0942\u0930\u094d\u0935\u0915 \u0928\u093f\u0930\u094d\u0935\u0939\u0928 \u0915\u0930\u0942\u0901\u0917\u093e\u0964\u2014\u200a\nPrime Minister of India and the union ministers of India.\nThe oath of office for Prime Minister of India and other members of the Union Council of Ministers:\nThe oath of office is as follows: \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I, (name), do swear in the name of God (or, solemnly affirm) that I will bear true faith and allegiance to the Constitution of India as by law established, that I will uphold the sovereignty and integrity of India, that I will faithfully and conscientiously discharge my duties as a Prime Minister (or, Minister) for the Union and that I will do right to all manner of people in accordance with the Constitution and the law, without fear or favour, afection or ill-will.\u2014\u200aoath of office of Prime Minister of India and Union Council of Ministers In Hindi Version &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;'\u092e\u0948\u0902, (\u0905\u092e\u0941\u0915), \u0908\u0936\u094d\u0935\u0930 \u0915\u0940 \u0936\u092a\u0925 \u0932\u0947\u0924\u093e \u0939\u0942\u0901 (\u0938\u0924\u094d\u092f\u0928\u093f\u0937\u094d\u0920\u093e \u0938\u0947 \u092a\u094d\u0930\u0924\u093f\u091c\u094d\u091e\u093e\u0928 \u0915\u0930\u0924\u093e \u0939\u0942\u0901) \u0915\u093f \u092e\u0948\u0902 \u0935\u093f\u0927\u093f \u0926\u094d\u0935\u093e\u0930\u093e \u0938\u094d\u0925\u093e\u092a\u093f\u0924 \u092d\u093e\u0930\u0924 \u0915\u0947 \u0938\u0902\u0935\u093f\u0927\u093e\u0928 \u0915\u0947 \u092a\u094d\u0930\u0924\u093f \u0938\u091a\u094d\u091a\u0940 \u0936\u094d\u0930\u0926\u094d\u0927\u093e \u0914\u0930 \u0928\u093f\u0937\u094d\u0920\u093e \u0930\u0916\u0942\u0901\u0917\u093e, \u092e\u0948\u0902 \u092d\u093e\u0930\u0924 \u0915\u0940 \u092a\u094d\u0930\u092d\u0941\u0924\u093e \u0914\u0930 \u0905\u0916\u0902\u0921\u0924\u093e \u0905\u0915\u094d\u0937\u0941\u0923\u094d\u0923 \u0930\u0916\u0942\u0901\u0917\u093e, \u092e\u0948\u0902 \u0938\u0902\u0918 \u0915\u0947 \u092a\u094d\u0930\u0927\u093e\u0928\u092e\u0902\u0924\u094d\u0930\u0940 (\u092f\u093e, \u092e\u0902\u0924\u094d\u0930\u0940) \u0915\u0947 \u0930\u0942\u092a \u092e\u0947\u0902 \u0905\u092a\u0928\u0947 \u0915\u0930\u094d\u0924\u0935\u094d\u092f\u094b\u0902 \u0915\u093e \u0936\u094d\u0930\u0926\u094d\u0927\u093e\u092a\u0942\u0930\u094d\u0935\u0915 \u0914\u0930 \u0936\u0941\u0926\u094d\u0927 \u0905\u0902\u0924\u0903\u0915\u0930\u0923 \u0938\u0947 \u0928\u093f\u0930\u094d\u0935\u0939\u0928 \u0915\u0930\u0942\u0901\u0917\u093e \u0924\u0925\u093e \u092e\u0948\u0902 \u092d\u092f \u092f\u093e \u092a\u0915\u094d\u0937\u092a\u093e\u0924, \u0905\u0928\u0941\u0930\u093e\u0917 \u092f\u093e \u0926\u094d\u0935\u0947\u0937 \u0915\u0947 \u092c\u093f\u0928\u093e, \u0938\u092d\u0940 \u092a\u094d\u0930\u0915\u093e\u0930 \u0915\u0947 \u0932\u094b\u0917\u094b\u0902 \u0915\u0947 \u092a\u094d\u0930\u0924\u093f \u0938\u0902\u0935\u093f\u0927\u093e\u0928 \u0914\u0930 \u0935\u093f\u0927\u093f \u0915\u0947 \u0905\u0928\u0941\u0938\u093e\u0930 \u0928\u094d\u092f\u093e\u092f \u0915\u0930\u0942\u0901\u0917\u093e\u0964'\u2014\u200a\nThe oath of secrecy is as follows:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I, (name), do swear in the name of God (or, solemnly affirm) that I will not directly or indirectly communicate or reveal to any person or persons any matter which shall be brought under my consideration, or shall become known to me as a Prime Minister (or, Minister) for the Union, except as may be required for the due discharge of my duties as Prime Minister (or, Such Minister).\u2014\u200aOath of Secrecy in Hindi Version&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;'\u092e\u0948\u0902, (\u0905\u092e\u0941\u0915), \u0908\u0936\u094d\u0935\u0930 \u0915\u0940 \u0936\u092a\u0925 \u0932\u0947\u0924\u093e \u0939\u0942\u0901 (\u0938\u0924\u094d\u092f\u0928\u093f\u0937\u094d\u0920\u093e \u0938\u0947 \u092a\u094d\u0930\u0924\u093f\u091c\u094d\u091e\u093e\u0928 \u0915\u0930\u0924\u093e \u0939\u0942\u0901) \u0915\u093f \u091c\u094b \u0935\u093f\u0937\u092f \u0938\u0902\u0918 \u0915\u0947 \u092a\u094d\u0930\u0927\u093e\u0928\u092e\u0902\u0924\u094d\u0930\u0940 (\u092f\u093e, \u092e\u0902\u0924\u094d\u0930\u0940) \u0915\u0947 \u0930\u0942\u092a \u092e\u0947\u0902 \u092e\u0947\u0930\u0947 \u0935\u093f\u091a\u093e\u0930 \u0915\u0947 \u0932\u093f\u090f \u0932\u093e\u092f\u093e \u091c\u093e\u090f\u0917\u093e \u0905\u0925\u0935\u093e \u092e\u0941\u091d\u0947 \u091c\u094d\u091e\u093e\u0924 \u0939\u094b\u0917\u093e \u0909\u0938\u0947 \u0915\u093f\u0938\u0940 \u0935\u094d\u092f\u0915\u094d\u0924\u093f \u092f\u093e \u0935\u094d\u092f\u0915\u094d\u0924\u093f\u092f\u094b\u0902 \u0915\u094b, \u0924\u092c \u0915\u0947 \u0938\u093f\u0935\u093e\u092f \u091c\u092c\u0915\u093f \u092a\u094d\u0930\u0927\u093e\u0928\u092e\u0902\u0924\u094d\u0930\u0940 (\u092f\u093e, \u0910\u0938\u0947 \u092e\u0902\u0924\u094d\u0930\u0940) \u0915\u0947 \u0930\u0942\u092a \u092e\u0947\u0902 \u0905\u092a\u0928\u0947 \u0915\u0930\u094d\u0924\u0935\u094d\u092f\u094b\u0902 \u0915\u0947 \u0938\u092e\u094d\u092f\u0915\u094d\u200c \u0928\u093f\u0930\u094d\u0935\u0939\u0928 \u0915\u0947 \u0932\u093f\u090f \u0910\u0938\u093e \u0915\u0930\u0928\u093e \u0905\u092a\u0947\u0915\u094d\u0937\u093f\u0924 \u0939\u094b, \u092e\u0948\u0902 \u092a\u094d\u0930\u0924\u094d\u092f\u0915\u094d\u0937 \u0905\u0925\u0935\u093e \u0905\u092a\u094d\u0930\u0924\u094d\u092f\u0915\u094d\u0937 \u0930\u0942\u092a \u0938\u0947 \u0938\u0902\u0938\u0942\u091a\u093f\u0924 \u092f\u093e \u092a\u094d\u0930\u0915\u091f \u0928\u0939\u0940\u0902 \u0915\u0930\u0942\u0901\u0917\u093e\u0964'\u2014\u200a\nChief Justice of India and judges of the Supreme Court of India.\nThe oath of office for Chief Justice of India and the judges of Supreme Court of India is as follows:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I, (name), having been appointed Chief Justice (or, a Judge) of the Supreme Court of India, do swear in the name of God (or, affirm) that I will bear true faith and allegiance to the Constitution of India as by law established, that I will uphold the sovereignty and integrity of India, that I will duly and faithfully and to the best of my ability, knowledge and judgment perform the duties of my office without fear or favour, affection or ill-will and that I will uphold the Constitution and the laws.\u2014\u200aOath of office of Chief Justice of India and judges of Supreme court in Hindi Version &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;'\u092e\u0948\u0902, (\u0905\u092e\u0941\u0915), \u091c\u094b \u092d\u093e\u0930\u0924 \u0915\u0947 \u0909\u091a\u094d\u091a\u0924\u092e \u0928\u094d\u092f\u093e\u092f\u093e\u0932\u092f \u0915\u093e \u092e\u0941\u0916\u094d\u092f \u0928\u094d\u092f\u093e\u092f\u092e\u0942\u0930\u094d\u0924\u093f (\u092f\u093e, \u0928\u094d\u092f\u093e\u092f\u093e\u0927\u0940\u0936) \u0928\u093f\u092f\u0941\u0915\u094d\u0924 \u0939\u0941\u0906 \u0939\u0942\u0901, \u0908\u0936\u094d\u0935\u0930 \u0915\u0940 \u0936\u092a\u0925 \u0932\u0947\u0924\u093e \u0939\u0942\u0901 (\u0938\u0924\u094d\u092f\u0928\u093f\u0937\u094d\u0920\u093e \u0938\u0947 \u092a\u094d\u0930\u0924\u093f\u091c\u094d\u091e\u093e\u0928 \u0915\u0930\u0924\u093e \u0939\u0942\u0901) \u0915\u093f \u092e\u0948\u0902 \u0935\u093f\u0927\u093f \u0926\u094d\u0935\u093e\u0930\u093e \u0938\u094d\u0925\u093e\u092a\u093f\u0924 \u092d\u093e\u0930\u0924 \u0915\u0947 \u0938\u0902\u0935\u093f\u0927\u093e\u0928 \u0915\u0947 \u092a\u094d\u0930\u0924\u093f \u0938\u091a\u094d\u091a\u0940 \u0936\u094d\u0930\u0926\u094d\u0927\u093e \u0914\u0930 \u0928\u093f\u0937\u094d\u0920\u093e \u0930\u0916\u0942\u0901\u0917\u093e, \u092e\u0948\u0902 \u092d\u093e\u0930\u0924 \u0915\u0940 \u092a\u094d\u0930\u092d\u0941\u0924\u093e \u0914\u0930 \u0905\u0916\u0902\u0921\u0924\u093e \u0905\u0915\u094d\u0937\u0941\u0923\u094d\u0923 \u0930\u0916\u0942\u0901\u0917\u093e, \u0924\u0925\u093e \u092e\u0948\u0902 \u0938\u092e\u094d\u092f\u0915\u094d\u200c \u092a\u094d\u0930\u0915\u093e\u0930 \u0938\u0947 \u0914\u0930 \u0936\u094d\u0930\u0926\u094d\u0927\u093e\u092a\u0942\u0930\u094d\u0935\u0915 \u0924\u0925\u093e \u0905\u092a\u0928\u0940 \u092a\u0942\u0930\u0940 \u092f\u094b\u0917\u094d\u092f\u0924\u093e, \u091c\u094d\u091e\u093e\u0928 \u0914\u0930 \u0935\u093f\u0935\u0947\u0915 \u0938\u0947 \u0905\u092a\u0928\u0947 \u092a\u0926 \u0915\u0947 \u0915\u0930\u094d\u0924\u0935\u094d\u092f\u094b\u0902 \u0915\u093e \u092d\u092f \u092f\u093e \u092a\u0915\u094d\u0937\u092a\u093e\u0924, \u0905\u0928\u0941\u0930\u093e\u0917 \u092f\u093e \u0926\u094d\u0935\u0947\u0937 \u0915\u0947 \u092c\u093f\u0928\u093e \u092a\u093e\u0932\u0928 \u0915\u0930\u0942\u0901\u0917\u093e \u0924\u0925\u093e \u092e\u0948\u0902 \u0938\u0902\u0935\u093f\u0927\u093e\u0928 \u0914\u0930 \u0935\u093f\u0927\u093f\u092f\u094b\u0902 \u0915\u0940 \u092e\u0930\u094d\u092f\u093e\u0926\u093e \u092c\u0928\u093e\u090f \u0930\u0916\u0942\u0901\u0917\u093e\u0964'\u2014\u200a\nIndonesia.\nPresident and Vice President.\nBased on Article 9 of the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia about the Oath of Office and Promise of the President and Vice President:\nBefore assuming office, the President and the Vice-President shall take the oath of office according to their religions, or solemnly promise before the People's Consultative Assembly (MPR) or the People's Representative Council (DPR) session as follows:\nThe President's/Vice-President's Oath of Office (for Muslims):\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;In the name of Allah, I swear that I will perform the duties of the President (\"or\" Vice-President) of the Republic of Indonesia to the best of my ability and as justly as possible, and that I will strictly observe the Constitution and consistently implement the law and regulations in the service of the country and the people.\nThe President's/Vice-President's Promise:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I solemnly promise that I will perform the duties of the President (\"or\" Vice-President) of the Republic of Indonesia to the best of my ability and as justly as possible, and that I will strictly observe the constitution and consistently implement the law and regulations in the service of the country and the people.\nIn case any sessions can not be held, like one in 1998 when the protesters took control of the parliament building, the oath can be performed before the MPR chairperson and vice chairpersons, as well as the Chief Justice and his/her deputies with presence of the chairperson of every chambers.\nCabinet members and Presidential Work Units (UKP).\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;In the name of Allah (for Muslims) \"or\" Om Atah Paramawisesa (for Hindus) \"or\" In the name of Sanghyang Adi Buddha (for Buddhists) I swear (\"or\" in the name of God I promise in keeping with His Commandments (for Protestants and Catholics) \"or\" I swear to the Great God of Heaven with all my soul (for Confucians)) that I will be faithful to the Constitution of Indonesia, and will execute any laws consistently for my service to the nation and the country. That I, when executing the duties of this office, will highly honor office ethics, perform to the best of my ability, and with full responsibility. That I will maintain my integrity, never abuse my power, and avert myself from despicable actions. (\"for Protestants and Catholics:\" So help me God.) (\"for Hindus\": Om Shanti Shanti Shanti Om.) (\"for Buddhists:\" Sadhu Sadhu Sadhu.) (\"for Confucians\": May the God of Heaven help me fulfill this vow, and grant me His virtue. Shanzai.)\nIn the past, between the pronunciation of God according to each religions and \"so help me God\" expression, the oath was as follows (before the second and third sentence, they will be started with \"I swear\", regardless of the religions): \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;that I, being appointed to this office, directly or indirectly, by any name or excuse, will not grant or promise or give something to anyone. That I, for doing or not doing something, will never receive from anyone, directly or indirectly, any promise or givings. That I, will be faithful to the Constitution and will preserve any laws and rulings that valid for the state of the Republic of Indonesia. That I, with all my strength, will seek the welfare of the Republic of Indonesia. That I will be faithful to the people and the country, and will fulfill any obligations that were passed on me because of this office. That I will execute the duties and obligations with full responsibility to the people and the country.\nTo refer the god for Hindus, the oath used to use sentence \"In the name of Sang Hyang Widhi\", and later \"Om Swastiastu\". There was also a time when Protestant and Catholic ministers said \"I swear\" instead of promise at the beginning of the oath, only refer God in the last sentence. The verses \"to seek the welfare\" was removed since it reflected the dictatorial New Order era.\nArmed Forces/Police oath of commissioning/enlistment.\nFor officers:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;In the name of Allah (for Muslims) \"or\" Om Atah Paramawisesa (for Hindus) \"or\" In the name of Sanghyang Adi Buddha (for Buddhists) I swear (\"or\" in the name of God I promise (for Protestants and Catholics)) that with the best of my ability for the unitary nation and people of Indonesia, living the spirit of Pancasila and in obedience to the 1945 Constitution, serve the duties of an officer of the National Armed Forces/National Police. That I will uphold the dignity and honor of an officer and thus remain faithful to (\"for officers of the National Armed Forces\": the Armed Forces Pledge and our Oath of Service; \"for officers of the National Police\": the Police Pledge and our Constables' Oath) That I thus will be responsible for my subordinates by becoming an example, building morale and confidence, and making right and honest decisions, and that I will, for the sake of the nation and people, will be prepared to sacrifice my body and spirit. (\"for Christians and Catholics:\" So help me God.) (\"for Hindus\": Om Shanti Shanti Shanti Om.) (\"for Buddhists:\" Sadhu Sadhu Sadhu.)\nFor enlisted personnel of the Armed Forces and new cadets to the military academies and the Army Officer Candidate School:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;In the name of Allah (for Muslims) \"or\" Om Atah Paramawisesa (for Hindus) \"or\" In the name of Sanghyang Adi Buddha (for Buddhists) I swear (\"or\" in the name of God I promise (for Protestants and Catholics)) that with the best of my ability serve with loyalty the unitary nation and people of Indonesia on the basis of Pancasila and the 1945 Constitution. That I will be faithful to the laws and regulations placed upon me and to uphold military discipline. That I will do my best to obey any orders issued by our superiors. That I thus, to the nation and the National Armed Forces, will carry out all obligations with full responsibility. And that I will as long as I can do maintain the secrecy of the National Armed Forces. (\"for Christians and Catholics:\" So help me God.) (\"for Hindus\": Om Shanti Shanti Shanti Om.) (\"for Buddhists:\" Sadhu Sadhu Sadhu.)\nIran.\nThe oath of office for the President of Iran is as follows:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I, as the President, upon the Holy Qur'an and in the presence of the Iranian nation, do hereby swear in the name of Almighty God to safeguard the official Faith, the system of the Islamic republic and the Constitution of the country; to use all my talents and abilities in the discharge of responsibilities undertaken by me; to devote myself to the service of the people, glory of the country, promotion of religion and morality, support of right and propagation of justice; to refrain from being autocratic; to protect the freedom and dignity of individuals and the rights of the Nation recognized by the Constitution; to spare no efforts in safeguarding the frontiers and the political, economic and cultural freedoms of the country; to guard the power entrusted to me by the Nation as a sacred trust like an honest and faithful trustee, by seeking help from God and following the example of the Prophet of Islam and the sacred Imams, peace be upon them, and to entrust it to the one elected by the Nation after me.\u2014\u200a\nFor members of the Majlis of Iran, the oath is as follows:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;In the presence of the Holy Qur'an I swear to God Almighty and undertake upon my human dignity to protect the sanctity of Islam and safeguard the achievements of the Islamic Revolution of Iranian people and the essentials of the Islamic Republic, to uphold the trust placed in us by the Nation as a just trustee, to observe piety and honesty in the discharge of my functions as a representative of the people, to remain always faithful and true to the independence and dignity of the country, protection of rights of the Nation and service to people, to defend the Constitution, and to uphold the independence of the country and the freedom and interests of the people in words, writings and comments.\u2014\u200a\nAccording to the Iranian Constitution, MPs belonging to religious minorities may swear by the holy books of their respective faiths.\nOath of Judge.\nIranian judges of all courts are required to give the following oath:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;poem&gt;In the name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate\nOath letter\nI, as a judge, in the presence of the Holy Qur'an and before Iranian nation, swear to omnipotent God to follow the Prophet of Islam and the sacred Imams, peace be upon them, and seeking help of the spirits of the martyrs of Islam, guard justice and righteous, and undertake upon my human dignity to be diligent in seeking the truth and justice, administer Islamic justice to demand from oppressor and restore it to its owner and with sustained effort in Judicial position fulfill my obligation to Islamic republic with strengthening the foundations of the Islamic republic and supporting The Leader.\nName and surname\nSignature&lt;/poem&gt;\nIreland.\nThe Constitution of Ireland specifies, for each of three offices, a \"declaration\" which the holder must \"make and subscribe\" before taking office. \nThe declarations' references to God were criticised in a 1993 report of the United Nations Human Rights Committee. The 1996 Constitution Review Group proposed that the President and members of the Council of State should be permitted to substitute a non-religious affirmation. In contrast, it recommended a uniform non-religious oath for all judges, on the basis that impartiality was more central to the judicial function and would be compromised by providing a choice of words.\nThe \"solemn declaration\" for members of the Garda S\u00edoch\u00e1na was revised in 2005. Its reference to God may be omitted. Members pledge not to \"belong to or subscribe to, any political party or secret society whatsoever\". In the Defence Forces, the \"Oath or Declaration\" differs between permanent and reserve forces, and between commissioned officers and enlisted members. The wording makes no reference to God; it was changed in 1979 when women were first admitted.\nMembers of the Oireachtas and of the Government do not make any oath. From the foundation of the Irish Free State in 1922, both had to make an oath of allegiance to the Constitution and of fidelity to King George V. This controversial provision of the 1921 Anglo-Irish Treaty contributed to the Civil War of 1922\u201323. The Oath was abolished by Fianna F\u00e1il in 1932\u201333. Since then, Oireachtas members are required by standing orders to sign the roll before first taking their seats. The Governor-General of the Irish Free State took the same Oath of Allegiance and Oath of Office as the Governor General of Canada. This did not take place in public.\nIsrael.\nIn Israel, the Basic Laws specify oaths of office of high-ranking members of the government.\nFor the President of Israel, there is a \"Declaration of Loyalty\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I pledge to maintain loyalty to the State of Israel and to its laws and to faithfully fulfill my duties as President of the State.\nIn the Knesset, the oath of office (\"or\" \"declaration of allegiance\") is as follows:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Oldest member of Knesset \"or\" chairperson: I pledge myself to bear allegiance to the State of Israel and faithfully to discharge my mandate in the Knesset.\nEach other member of the Knesset, in turn: I pledge myself.\nThe Prime Minister of Israel has to make the following \"declaration of allegiance\" upon taking office:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nEach of the other Ministers has to swear:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFor judges, the oath of office (\"or\" \"declaration of allegiance\") is as follows:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I pledge myself to keep allegiance to the State of Israel and its laws, to administer justice fairly, to avoid subverting justice, and to avoid demonstrating favor.\nItaly.\nIn Italy, before taking office, the President is required by Article 91 of the Constitution to take an oath of allegiance to the Republic and swear to uphold the Constitution before Parliament in joint session. The oath of office of the President is the following:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Giuro di essere fedele alla Repubblica e di osservarne lealmente la Costituzione.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I swear to be faithful to the Republic and to loyally observe its Constitution.\nAlso, Article 54 of the Constitution requires public officials to fulfil their functions with discipline and honour, taking an oath to that effect in those cases established by the law. The Prime Minister and members of the Council are sworn in by the President with the following oath of office:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Giuro di essere fedele alla Repubblica, di osservarne lealmente la Costituzione e le leggi, e di esercitare le mie funzioni nell'interesse esclusivo della Nazione.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I swear to be faithful to the Republic, to loyally observe its Constitution and laws, and to exercise my functions in the exclusive interest of the Nation.\nSouth Korea.\nIn South Korea, before taking office, the President is required by Article 67 of the Constitution.\nAs prescribed by the decision, the oath is as follows:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\ub098\ub294 \ud5cc\ubc95\uc744 \uc900\uc218\ud558\uace0 \uad6d\uac00\ub97c \ubcf4\uc704\ud558\uba70 \uc870\uad6d\uc758 \ud3c9\ud654\uc801 \ud1b5\uc77c\uacfc \uad6d\ubbfc\uc758 \uc790\uc720\uc640 \ubcf5\ub9ac\uc758 \uc99d\uc9c4 \ubc0f \ubbfc\uc871\ubb38\ud654\uc758 \ucc3d\ub2ec\uc5d0 \ub178\ub825\ud558\uc5ec \ub300\ud1b5\ub839\uc73c\ub85c\uc11c\uc758 \uc9c1\ucc45\uc744 \uc131\uc2e4\ud788 \uc218\ud589\ud560 \uac83\uc744 \uad6d\ubbfc \uc55e\uc5d0 \uc5c4\uc219\ud788 \uc120\uc11c\ud569\ub2c8\ub2e4.\nUnofficial English translation:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I do solemnly swear before the people that I will faithfully execute the duties as President by observing the Constitution, defending the state, pursuing the peaceful unification of the homeland, promoting the freedom and welfare of the people, and endeavoring to develop the national culture. (Date) President (name).\nLebanon.\nIn Lebanon, the president must take the following oath before the Parliament:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I swear by Almighty God to observe the Constitution and the Laws of the Lebanese Nation and to maintain the independence of Lebanon and its territorial integrity.\nLuxembourg.\nArticles 57 through 59 of the Constitution of Luxembourg prescribe the following oath, to be pronounced before the Chamber of Deputies for a new Grand Duke, Regent or Lieutenant-Representant of the Grand Duke:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"French\": Je jure d\u2019observer la Constitution et les lois et de remplir fid\u00e8lement mes attributions constitutionnelles.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"German\": Ich schw\u00f6re, die Verfassung und die Gesetze zu beachten und meine verfassungsm\u00e4\u00dfigen Pflichten getreu zu erf\u00fcllen.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"Luxembourgish\": Ech schwieren d'Verfassung an d'Gesetzer ze beobachten a meng konstitutionell Flichte trei ze erf\u00ebllen.\nIn English: I swear to observe the Constitution and laws and to faithfully fulfill my constitutional attributions.\nMembers of the Chamber of Deputies and of the Government take the following oath upon taking office:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"French\": Je jure d\u2019observer la Constitution et les lois et de remplir ma fonction avec int\u00e9grit\u00e9, exactitude et impartialit\u00e9.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"German\": Ich schw\u00f6re, die Verfassung und die Gesetze zu beachten und meine Funktion mit Integrit\u00e4t, Genauigkeit und Unparteilichkeit zu erf\u00fcllen.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"Luxembourgish\": Ech schwieren d'Verfassung an d'Gesetzer ze beobachten a meng Funktioun mat Integrit\u00e9it, Genauegkeet an Onparteilechkeet ze erf\u00ebllen.\nIn English: I swear to observe the Constitution and laws and to fulfill my position with integrity, accuracy and impartiality.\nUntil the 2023 constitutional revision, this oath was:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"French\": Je jure fid\u00e9lit\u00e9 au Grand-Duc, ob\u00e9issance \u00e0 la Constitution et aux lois de l'\u00c9tat.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"German\": Ich schw\u00f6re dem Gro\u00dfherzog Treue und Gehorsam gegen\u00fcber der Verfassung und den Gesetzen des Staates. \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"Luxembourgish\": Ech schwieren dem Grand-Duc Loyalit\u00e9it, dem Gehorsam un der Verfassung an de Gesetzer vum Staat.\nIn English: I swear loyalty to the Grand Duke, obedience to the Constitution and to the laws of the State.\nMalaysia.\nYang di-Pertuan Agong and Deputy Yang di-Pertuan Agong.\nArticle 37 of the Federal Constitution requires the Yang di-Pertuan Agong (King) and his deputy to take the Oath of Office before the Conference of Rulers on the day of their assumption of office.\nThe Yang di-Pertuan Agong takes the oath of office as follows:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;We, (name), Yang di-Pertuan Agong of Malaysia do hereby swear \"Wallahi; Wabillahi; Watallahi\" (in Allah's name and his Mercy) and by virtue of that oath do solemnly and truly declare that we shall justify and faithfully perform/carry out our duties in the administration of Malaysia in accordance with its laws and Constitution which have been promulgated or which may be promulgated from time to time in the future. Further, we do solemnly and truly declare that we shall at all time protect the religion of Islam and uphold the rules of law and order in the Nation.\nNext, the Deputy Yang di-Pertuan Agong takes the oath of office as follows:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;We, (name), being elected to be Timbalan Yang di-Pertuan Agong (Deputy King) of Malaysia do hereby swear \"Wallahi; Wabillahi; Watallahi\" (in Allah's name) and by virtue of that oath do solemnly and truly declare that we shall faithfully perform/carry out our duties as Timbalan Yang di-Pertuan Agong as stated in law and as may from time to time be laid down by the laws and the Constitution of Malaysia.\nExecutive and legislative members.\nFederal Constitution requires the various executive and legislative members to take the Oath of Office and Allegiance as follows:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I, (name), having been elected/appointed to the office of (office) do solemnly swear/affirm that I will faithfully discharge the duties of that office to the best of my ability, that I will bear true faith and allegiance to Malaysia and will preserve, protect and defend the Constitution.\nThe oath is read according to the various section of the Constitution:\nThe Members of Parliament and Senators take the Oath based on Article 59 (1) of the Federal Constitution as follows:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I, (name), having been elected/appointed as a Member of the House of Representatives/the Senate do solemnly swear/affirm that I will faithfully discharge my duties as such to the best of my ability, that I will bear true faith and allegiance to Malaysia and will preserve, protect and defend the Constitution.\nOath of Secrecy:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I, (name), do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will not directly or indirectly communicate or reveal to any person any matter which shall be brought under my consideration or shall become known to me as (position) except as may be required for the due discharge of my duties as such or as may be specially permitted by the Yang di-Pertuan Agong/King of Malaysia.\nJudicial members.\nArticle 124 of the Federal Constitution requires the Chief Justice, the President of the Appeal Court, Chief Judge of the High Court, higher court justice and judicial commissioners to take the Oath of Office and Allegiance as follows:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I, (name), having been elected/appointed to the office of (office) do solemnly swear/affirm that I will faithfully discharge my judicial duties in that office to the best of my ability, that I will bear true faith and allegiance to Malaysia and will preserve, protect and defend the Constitution.\nMexico.\nArticle 87 of the Mexican Constitution provides that the incoming President of the Republic must take the following affirmation (called \"protesta\" by the Mexican legislation) before the Congress of the Union:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe incoming President takes this affirmation whilst standing and raising his/her right arm up to shoulder level. Afterwards, the outgoing President passes the Presidential Sash (\"Banda Presidential\") to the President of the Congress, who then gives it to the new president for him/her to wear it as a symbol of his office.\nMoldova.\nArticle 79 of the Constitution of Moldova provides that the President, no more than 45 days after his/her election, and before the Parliament and Constitutional Court, gives the following oath:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I solemnly swear to devote all my personal strength and abilities to the prosperity of the Republic of Moldova, to abide by the Constitution and the laws of the country, to defend democracy, fundamental human rights and freedoms, the sovereignty, independence, unity and territorial integrity of Moldova.\nMyanmar.\nThe Fourth Schedule of the 2008 Constitution of Myanmar has outlined the text of the legislative oath that freshly elected or military-appointed Members of Parliament must read aloud before joining parliament:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nNetherlands.\nMonarch.\nAs set out by the Swearing-in and Investiture Act, the oath of office for the monarch of the Netherlands, which in accordance with Article 32 of the Constitution is to be declared as soon as possible after the King or Queen takes office in a joint session of the States General in the capital of Amsterdam, is as follows:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAfter this declaration the president of the Senate, who presides over the joint session, makes the following declaration in the name of the States General, States of Aruba, States of Cura\u00e7ao and States of Sint Maarten:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe declaration shall then be sworn or confirmed by each of the members individually.\nMinisters, state secretaries and members of Parliament.\nThe oath of office for ministers and state secretaries, which shall be administered by the King, and for members of Parliament is as follows:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;poem&gt;\nI swear (or declare) that in order to be appointed minister / state secretary / member of the States General, I have not promised or given, directly or indirectly, any gifts or presents to any person under whatsoever name or pretext.\nI swear (or declare and affirm) that in order to do or refrain from doing anything whatsoever in this office, I have not accepted and will not accept, directly or indirectly, any promises or presents from anyone whomsoever.\nI swear (or affirm) allegiance to the King, to the Statute for the Kingdom and to the Constitution.\nI swear (or affirm) that I will faithfully perform all the duties which the office lays upon me.\nSo help me, God Almighty! (or, This I declare and affirm!)&lt;/poem&gt;\nCivil servants.\nThe oath of office for civil servants is as follows:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;poem&gt;\nI swear (or affirm) allegiance to the King and that I will respect the Constitution and all other laws of our country;\nI swear (or declare) that in relation to my appointment, I have not provided, directly or indirectly, any false information whatsoever;\nI swear (or declare) that in relation to my appointment, I have not given or promised and will not give or promise anything to any person whatsoever;\nI swear (or declare) that in relation to my appointment, I have not accepted or promised and will not accept or promise any gifts or presents whatsoever;\nI swear (or affirm) that I will faithfully perform all the duties which the office lays upon me and that I keep secret everything which, in relation to my office, is told me confidentially or in which I should see the confidential character, to others than whom I obliged to inform by virtue of my office;\nI swear (or affirm) that I will behave as a good civil servant should do, that I will be careful, honest and reliable and that I will do nothing that harms the prestige of the office.\nSo help me God Almighty! (or, This I declare and affirm!)&lt;/poem&gt;\nNew Zealand.\nGovernor-General.\nThe chief justice of New Zealand administers the oath of office at the swearing-in of new governors-general of New Zealand. The oath is as follows:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I, [name], swear that, as Governor-General and Commander-in-Chief of the Realm of New Zealand, comprising New Zealand; the self-governing states of the Cook Islands and Niue; Tokelau; and the Ross Dependency, I will faithfully and impartially serve His [or Her] Majesty [specify the name of the reigning Sovereign, as thus: King Charles the Third], King of New Zealand [or Queen of New Zealand], His [or Her] heirs and successors, and the people of the Realm of New Zealand, in accordance with their respective laws and customs. So help me God.\nAn affirmation may be used instead of this oath.\nPrime Minister, Ministers, and Members of the Parliament.\nThe oath of the Prime Minister, Ministers, and Members of the Parliament are required to recite the 2 oaths which are the Oath of Allegiance and of Execution.\nOath of Allegiance\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I, [name], swear that I will be faithful and bear true allegiance to His/Her Majesty (name of monarch), his heirs and successors according to law. So help me God.\nOath of Execution\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I, [name], being chosen and admitted to the Executive Council of New Zealand, swear that I will do honor to the best of my judgement at all times, when there to required, freely of my counsel of advice to the Governor-General to the time being, for the good management of the affairs of New Zealand; that I will not directly nor indirectly reveal such matters shall be debated in council and committed to my secrecy; that I will at all times be true and faithful counselor. So help me God.\nNorway.\nAs soon as the King, being of age, accedes to the Government, he shall take the following oath before the Storting (article 9 of the Constitution of Norway):\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I promise and swear that I will govern the Kingdom of Norway in accordance with its Constitution and Laws; so help me God, the Almighty and Omniscient.\nIf the Storting is not in session at the time, the oath shall be made in writing in the Council of State and be repeated solemnly by the King at the first subsequent Storting.\nPakistan.\nThe oath of office of the President of Pakistan is administered by the Chief Justice of Pakistan and is as follows:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I, (name), do solemnly swear that I am a Muslim and believe in the Unity and Oneness of Almighty Allah, the Books of Allah, the Holy Quran being the last of them, the Prophethood of Muhammad as the last of the Prophets and that there can be no Prophet after him, the Day of Judgement, and all the requirements and teachings of the Holy Quran and Sunnah:\nThat I will bear true faith and allegiance to Pakistan:\nThat, as President of Pakistan, I will discharge my duties, and perform my functions, honestly, to the best of my ability, faithfully in accordance with the Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan and the law, and always in the interest of the sovereignty, integrity, solidarity, well- being and prosperity of Pakistan:\nThat I will not allow my personal interest to influence my official conduct or my official decisions:\nThat I will preserve, protect and defend the Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan:\nThat, in all circumstances, I will do right to all manner of people, according to law, without fear or favor, affection or ill- will:\nAnd that I will not directly or indirectly communicate or reveal to any person any matter which shall be brought under my consideration or shall become known to me as President of Pakistan, except as may be required for the due discharge of my duties as President.\nMay Allah Almighty help and guide me (A'meen).\nThe oath of office of the Prime Minister of Pakistan is administered by the President of Pakistan and is as follows:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I, (name), do swear solemnly that I am a Muslim and believe in the Unity and Oneness of Almighty Allah, the Books of Allah, the Holy Quran being the last of them, the Prophethood of Muhammad as the last of the Prophets and that there can be no Prophet after him, the Day of Judgement, and all the requirements and teachings of the Holy Quran and Sunnah:\nThat I will bear true faith and allegiance to Pakistan:\nThat, as Prime Minister of Pakistan, I will discharge my duties, and perform my functions, honestly, to the best of my ability, faithfully in accordance with the Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan and the law, and always in the interest of the sovereignty, integrity, solidarity, well- being and prosperity of Pakistan:\nThat I will strive to preserve the Islamic Ideology which is the basis for the creation of Pakistan:\nThat I will not allow my personal interest to influence my official conduct or my official decisions:\nThat I will preserve, protect and defend the Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan:\nThat, in all circumstances, I will do right to all manner of people, according to law, without fear or favor, affection or ill- will:\nAnd that I will not directly or indirectly communicate or reveal to any person any matter which shall be brought under my consideration or shall become known to me as Prime Minister except as may be required for the due discharge of my duties as Prime Minister.\nMay Allah Almighty help and guide me (A'meen)\nPalestine.\nBefore assuming office, the President of Palestine take the following oath before the Legislative Council and in the presence of the Speaker of the Palestinian National Council and the President of the High Court:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"I (name), swear by God, the Almighty, to be faithful to the homeland and to its sacred places, to the people and its national heritage, to respect the constitutional system and the law, and to safeguard the interests of the Palestinian people completely, as God is my witness.\"\nPhilippines.\nThe oath of office of the President of the Philippines as written in the 1987 Constitution is as follows:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I, (name), do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will faithfully and conscientiously fulfill my duties as President (or Vice-President or Acting President) of the Philippines, preserve and defend its Constitution, execute its laws, do justice to every man, and consecrate myself to the service of the Nation. So help me God.\" [In case of affirmation, last sentence will be omitted].\nThe oath from the Filipino language version of the constitution was used for the inauguration of Presidents Fidel V. Ramos, Joseph Estrada, Benigno Aquino III, and Bongbong Marcos:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"Ako si (pangalan), ay taimtim kong pinanunumpaan (o pinatotohanan) na tutuparin ko nang buong katapatan at sigasig ang aking mga tungkulin bilang Pangulo (o Pangalawang Pangulo o Nanunungkulang Pangulo) ng Pilipinas, pangangalagaan at ipagtatanggol ang kanyang Konstitusyon, ipatutupad ang mga batas nito, magiging makatarungan sa bawat tao, at itatalaga ang aking sarili sa paglilingkod sa Bansa. Kasihan nawa ako ng Diyos.\" (Kapag pagpapatotoo, ang huling pangungusap ay kakaltasin.)\nPrior to the 1987 Constitution the oath of office for the President of the Philippines is as follows:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I, (name) of (Hometown), having been elected and proclaimed as President of the Philippines, do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will faithfully and conscientiously fulfill my duties as President (or Vice-President or Acting President) of the Philippines, preserve and defend its Constitution, execute its laws, do justice to every man, and consecrate myself to the service of the Nation. So help me God.\" [In case of affirmation, last sentence will be omitted].\nDuring the second inauguration of President Ferdinand Marcos, a Filipino language version of the 1935 Constitution oath of office was used.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Ako si, __________ ng __________, inihalal at itinanghal na Pangulo ng Pilipinas, ay taimtim na sumusumpa na tutuparin ko ng buong katapatan at mabudhiing pag-iisip ang mga tungkulin ko bilang Pangulo ng Pilipinas, na aking pananatilihin at ipatatanggol ang Saligang-Batas, isasakatuparan ko ang mga batas, magbibigay katarungan sa bawat tao, at itatalaga ang aking sarili sa paglilingkod sa bayan. Kasihan nawa ako ng Maykapal.\nDuring the inauguration of President Corazon C. Aquino, this version was used:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I, (name), do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will faithfully and conscientiously fulfill my duties as President (or Vice-President or Acting President) of the Philippines, preserve and defend its fundamental law, execute its just laws, do justice to every man, and consecrate myself to the service of the Nation. So help me God.\" [In case of affirmation, last sentence will be omitted].\nThe oath of office requirement for all public officers and employees of the government including every member of the armed forces is as follows:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;All public officers and employees of the government including every member of the armed forces shall, before entering upon the discharge of his duties, take an oath or affirmation to uphold and defend the Constitution; that he will bear true faith and allegiance to it; obey the laws, legal orders and decrees promulgated by the duly constituted authorities; will well and faithfully discharge to the best of his ability the duties of the office or position upon which he is about to enter; and that he voluntarily assumes the obligation imposed by his oath of office, without mental reservation or purpose of evasion.\nThe oath of office for all public officials and employees is as follows:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I, (name) of (Residence), having been elected/appointed/promoted to the position/rank of (office), do hereby solemnly swear that I will well and faithfully discharge to the best of my ability, the duties of my present position and of all others I may hereafter hold, under the Republic of the Philippines, that I will support and defend the Constitution of the Philippines, that I will bear true faith and allegiance to the same, that I will obey the laws, legal orders and decrees, promulgated by the duly constituted authorities of the Republic of the Philippines, and that I impose this obligation upon myself, voluntarily, without mental reservation or purpose of evasion. So Help me God.\nFilipino version:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Ako si________________ng______________, naihalal/naitinalaga/naiangat sa katungkulan/rango bilang_____________, ay taimtim na nanunumpa na tutuparin ko ng buong husay at katapatan sa abot ng aking kakayahan, ang mga tungkulin ng aking kasalukuyan katungkulan at ng mga iba pang pagkaraan nito'y gagampanan ko sa ilalim ng Republika ng Pilipinas; na aking itataguyod at ipagtatanggol ang saligang batas/konstitusyon ng Pilipinas; na tunay na mananalig at tatalima ako rito; na susundin ko ang mga batas, mga kautusang legal, at mga dikretong pinaiiral ng mga sadyang itinakdang may kapangyarihan ng Republika ng Pilipinas, at kusa kong babalikatin ang mga pananagutang ito na walang anumang pasubali o hangaring umiwas. Kasihan nawa ako ng Diyos.\nFilipino version (alternate):\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Ako si________________ng, ____________, naihalal/natinalaga/naiangat sa katungkulan/rango bilang_____________, ay taimtim na nanunumpa na tutuparin ko ng buong husay at katapatan sa abot ng aking makakaya, ang mga takdang gampanin ng aking bagong katungkulan alinsabay nitoy nangangako ako sa ngalan ng Republika ng Pilipinas; na aking itataguyod at ipagtatanggol ang saligang batas/konstitusyon; na tunay na mananalig at tatalima ako rito; na susundin ko ang mga alintuntunin, mga kautusang legal, at mga dikretong pinaiiral ng mga sadyang itinakdang may kapangyarihan sa ilalim ng Republika ng Pilipinas, at kusa kong babalikatin ang mga pananagutang ito na walang anumang pasubali o hangaring umiwas. Kasihan nawa ako ng Diyos.\nIf done for personnel of the Armed Forces of the Philippines, instead of \"legal orders/mga katususang legal\", the phrase \"lawful orders/mga utos na ayon sa batas\" is used.\nOath of Allegiance.\nThis oath shall taken to those foreign nationals who acquire the Filipino citizenship:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I, (name), do solemnly swear that I will support and defend the constitution of the Republic of the Philippines and obey the laws and legal orders promulgated by the duly constituted authorities of the Philippines, and I hereby declare that I recognize and accept the supreme authority of the Philippines, and will maintain true faith and allegiance thereto; and that I impose this obligation upon myself, voluntarily, without mental reservation or purpose of evasion. So help me God.\nOath of Office of Organization/Association.\nThis oath shall taken to all elected/appointed officers of different civil society groups/organizations as administered by the President:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I, (name), having been elected/appointed as (position) of the (name of organization/association), do hereby solemnly swear that I will faithfully and conscientiously discharge the duties of my position, preserve and defend the constitution and bylaws of the organization/association, carry out to the best of my ability, its lofty purposes and objectives, and promote and enhance its interests. And I hereby impose this obligation upon myself, voluntarily, without mental reservation or purpose of evasion. So help me God.\nPoland.\nPresident.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Assuming, by the will of the Nation, the office of President of the Republic of Poland, I do solemnly swear to be faithful to the provisions of the Constitution; I pledge that I shall steadfastly safeguard the dignity of the Nation, the independence and security of the State, and also that the good of the Homeland and the prosperity of its citizens shall forever remain my supreme obligation.\n\"So help me God\" (Tak mi dopom\u00f3\u017c B\u00f3g) formula at the end is optional.\nPrime Minister, Deputy Prime Minister, Minister.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Assuming this office of Prime Minister (or Deputy Prime Minister or minister), I do solemnly swear to be faithful to the provisions of the Constitution and other laws of the Republic of Poland, and that the good of the Homeland and the prosperity of its citizens shall forever remain my supreme obligation.\n\"So help me God\" (\"Tak mi dopom\u00f3\u017c B\u00f3g\") formula at the end is optional.\nSejm Members and Senators.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I do solemnly swear to perform my duties to the Nation diligently and conscientiously, to safeguard the sovereignty and interests of the State, to do all within my power for the prosperity of the Homeland and the well-being of its citizens, and to observe the Constitution and other laws of the Republic of Poland.\n\"So help me God\" (\"Tak mi dopom\u00f3\u017c B\u00f3g\") formula at the end is optional.\nPortugal.\nThe Constitution of Portugal requires that the following oath be taken by the President-elect upon his or her official inauguration:\n\"In Portuguese:\"\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Juro por minha honra desempenhar fielmente as fun\u00e7\u00f5es em que fico investido e defender, cumprir e fazer cumprir a Constitui\u00e7\u00e3o da Rep\u00fablica Portuguesa.\n\"In English:\"\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I swear by my honour to faithfully perform the functions in which I am invested and to defend and observe the Constitution of the Portuguese Republic and cause it to be observed.\nRomania.\nPresident.\nArticle 82 of the Constitution of Romania provides that the President, before the Chamber of Deputies and Senate in joint session, gives the following oath:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I solemnly swear that I will dedicate all my strength and the best of my abilities for the spiritual and material welfare of the Romanian people, to abide by the Constitution and laws of the country, to defend democracy, the fundamental rights and freedoms of my fellow citizens, Romania's sovereignty, independence, unity and territorial integrity. So help me God!\nLocal officials.\nArticle 32 of the Law 215 (23 April 2001) provides that all local officials (Local Councilors, Mayors, County Councilors and County Council Presidents), before the assembled Councils and the Prefect of the county, give, in Romanian the following oath.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I solemnly swear to abide by the Constitution and laws of the country, and in good faith, to dedicate all my strength and the best of my abilities for the good of the citizens of the commune of (city, municipality or county)___. So help me God!\nThe religious formula may be omitted.\nRussia.\nThe oath of office of the President of Russia is prescribed in the Constitution of Russia, in Chapter 4 (The President of the Russian Federation), Article 82:\n1. When taking office the President of the Russian Federation shall take the following oath of loyalty to the people:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\n2. The oath shall be taken in a solemn atmosphere in the presence of members of the Federation Council, deputies of the State Duma and judges of the Constitution Court of the Russian Federation.\nRussian Empire.\nDuring the Coronation of the Russian monarch, after his anointing, but prior to partaking of Holy Communion, the Tsar recited a coronation oath, in which he swore to preserve the autocracy intact and to rule his realm with justice and fairness.\nSingapore.\nThe oath of office of the President of Singapore is as follows:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe Prime Minister of Singapore swears 2 oaths: the Oaths of Office and Oath of Affirmation respectively:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I, (name), having been appointed to the office of Prime Minister, do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will bear true faith and allegiance to the Republic of Singapore, and that I will preserve, protect and defend the Constitution of the Republic of Singapore.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I, (name), being chosen and appointed Prime Minister of Singapore, do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will at all times faithfully discharge my duties as Prime Minister, according to law, to the best of my knowledge and ability, and without fear or favour, affection or ill-will.\nFor Ministers of the Cabinet of Singapore, they swear the Oaths of Allegiance and Execution of Office respectively:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I, (name), having been appointed to the office of Minister, do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will bear true faith and allegiance to the Republic of Singapore, and that I will preserve, protect and defend the Constitution of the Republic of Singapore.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I, (name), being chosen as Minister of Singapore, do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will at all times faithfully discharge my duties as Minister according to law, and to the best of my knowledge and ability, without fear or favour, affection or ill-will.\nFor members of the Parliament of Singapore, it is:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I, (name), having been elected as a Member of the Parliament of Singapore, do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will faithfully discharge my duties as such to the best of my ability, that I will bear true faith and allegiance to the Republic of Singapore, and that I will preserve, protect and defend the Constitution of the Republic of Singapore.\nFor the Mayors of Community Development Council, it is:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I, (name), having been appointed as Mayor of (district name), do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will faithfully discharge my duties without fear or favour, affection or ill-will, to the best of my ability, and will faithfully endeavor to be a good Mayor.\nThe phrase \u201cSo Help me God\u201d in the last sentence is uttered if those who will take the oath is a Christian.\nSan Marino.\nThe Captains Regent of San Marino are sworn into office by reciting the following oath:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Giving praise and reverence to Almighty God, Blessed Mary ever Virgin, Blessed Marino, Patron and defender of the Commune and the People of this Land, and of its curia, District and Peasantry, You, Captains Regent, called and elected to govern the Republic for the six months ahead starting from today, and to continue and finish happily, by putting your hands on the holy Gospels of God, you swear that you will always preserve the Republic and its empire, freedom, dignity, privileges, exemptions and any other right, with your eyes, soul, thoughts and care, and that your mind will only be centred on public good.\nWith all your strength, you will promote peace and harmony among citizens, of which there is nothing more healthy in a free City; day and night, you will be the most vigilant custodians of this Land and you will care to observe and enforce the Statutes, laws and decrees of this Land, both existing and to be drawn up, and, in default of them, the praiseworthy customs of the People.\nYou will be favourable and benign defenders of widows, orphans, children and poor people, as well as of Churches, Hospitals and other venerable places, as well as of property, and of their rights. \nConstantly, at the usual times during your office, you will sit on your usual Throne to adopt decisions that are equal for all, and you will always act in a way that you judge will be good for the Republic and its citizens.\nSouth Africa.\n of the Constitution of South Africa specifies the oaths or affirmations of office for the various high offices of state. These oaths are sworn before the Chief Justice or another judge designated by the Chief Justice.\nThe President and any Acting President swears the following oath:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;In the presence of everyone assembled here, and in full realization of the high calling, I assume as President (or Acting President) of the Republic of South Africa. I, (name), swear (or solemnly affirm) that I will be faithful to the Republic of South Africa, and will obey, observe, uphold and maintain the Constitution and all other law of the Republic; and I solemnly and sincerely promise that I will always promote all that will advance the Republic, and oppose all that may harm it; protect and promote the rights of all South Africans; discharge my duties with all my strength and talents to the best of my knowledge and ability and true to the dictates of my conscience; do justice to all; and devote myself to the well-being of the Republic and all of its people. (So help me God.)\nThe Deputy President swears the following oath:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;In the presence of everyone assembled here, and in full realisation of the high calling I assume as Deputy President of the Republic of South Africa, I, (name), swear (or solemnly affirm) that I will be faithful to the Republic of South Africa and will obey, observe, uphold and maintain the Constitution and all other law of the Republic; and I solemnly and sincerely promise that I will always promote all that will advance the Republic, and oppose all that may harm it; be a true and faithful counsellor; discharge my duties with all my strength and talents to the best of my knowledge and ability and true to the dictates of my conscience; do justice to all; and devote myself to the well-being of the Republic and all of its people. (So help me God.)\nMinisters and Deputy Ministers of the Cabinet swear the following oath:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I, (name), swear (or solemnly affirm) that I will be faithful to the Republic of South Africa and will obey, respect and uphold the Constitution and all other law of the Republic; and I undertake to hold my office as Minister (or Deputy Minister) with honour and dignity; to be a true and faithful counsellor; not to divulge directly or indirectly any secret matter entrusted to me; and to perform the functions of my office conscientiously and to the best of my ability. (So help me God.)\nMembers of the National Assembly, the National Council of Provinces and the provincial legislatures swear the following oath:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I, (name), swear (or solemnly affirm) that I will be faithful to the Republic of South Africa and will obey, respect and uphold the Constitution and all other law of the Republic, and I solemnly promise to perform my functions as a member of the National Assembly (or permanent delegate to the National Council of Provinces, or member of the legislature of the province of (province)) to the best of my ability. (So help me God.)\nPremiers, Acting Premiers and Members of the Executive Council of a province swear the following oath:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I, (name), swear (or solemnly affirm) that I will be faithful to the Republic of South Africa and will obey, respect and uphold the Constitution and all other law of the Republic; and I undertake to hold my office as Premier (or Acting Premier or member of the Executive Council) of the province of (province) with honour and dignity; to be a true and faithful counsellor; not to divulge directly or indirectly any secret matter entrusted to me; and to perform the functions of my office conscientiously and to the best of my ability. (So help me God.)\nJudges and acting judges swear the following oath:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I, (name), swear (or solemnly affirm) that, as a Judge of the (court), I will be faithful to the Republic of South Africa, will uphold and protect the Constitution and the human rights entrenched in it, and will administer justice to all persons alike without fear, favour or prejudice, in accordance with the Constitution and the law. (So help me God.)\nSpain.\nArticle 61 of the Spanish Constitution requires the King to take the following oath as soon as practicable after ascending to the Throne and before performing any other official duty:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I swear to faithfully execute my duties, obey and enforce the Constitution and the laws, to respect the rights of the citizens and of the Autonomous Communities.\nThe heir to the Crown, upon becoming of age, and any Regents, upon taking office, are required by the Constitution to take the same oath, adding to it a vow of allegiance to the King.\nIn an inauguration ceremony a new Spanish Prime Minister takes an oath or affirmation of office over an open Constitution, which may be next to a cross and a Bible, and before the King of Spain and other dignitaries.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I swear/promise, under my conscience and honor, to faithfully execute the duties of the office of President of the Government with loyalty to the King, obey and enforce the Constitution as the fundamental law of the State, and preserve in secret the deliberations of the Council of Ministers. \nOther ministers take a similar oath.\nSweden.\nIn Sweden, a judge, whether a legally trained judge or a lay judge () shall take the following oath before assuming the duties of their office:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I, (name), promise and affirm on my honour and conscience that I will and shall impartially, as to the rich as well as to the poor, administer justice in all matters to the best of my ability and conscience, and judge according to the law of the Realm of Sweden; that I will never manipulate the law or further injustice for kinship, relation by marriage, friendship, envy, ill-will, or fear, nor for bribes or gifts, or any other cause in whatever guise it may appear; nor will I declare guilty one who is innocent, or innocent one who is guilty. Neither before nor after the pronouncement of the judgment of the court shall I disclose to the litigants or to other persons the in camera deliberations of the court. All this, as a honest and righteous judge, I will and shall faithfully observe.\nSwitzerland.\nIn Switzerland, according to the Federal Act on the Federal Assembly, people elected at the Swiss Federal Assembly or elected by it (such as the Swiss Federal Council) have to take an oath in front of the assembly.\nThe oath is as follows:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe solemn promise is as follows:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nRepublic of China (Taiwan).\nIn the Republic of China (mostly Taiwan and surrounding islands), the oath of office is required to be taken by the President-elect before assuming office. The Oath of office for the President of the Republic of China is specified in the Constitution of the Republic of China (Article 48):\nThe President shall, at the time of assuming office, take the following oath:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I do solemnly and sincerely swear before the people of the whole country that I will observe the Constitution, faithfully perform my duties, promote the welfare of the people, safeguard the security of the State, and will in no way betray the people's trust. Should I break my oath, I shall be willing to submit myself to severe punishment by the State. This is my solemn oath.\n\u4f59\u8b39\u4ee5\u81f3\u8aa0\uff0c\u5411\u5168\u570b\u4eba\u6c11\u5ba3\u8a93\uff0c\u4f59\u5fc5\u9075\u5b88\u61b2\u6cd5\uff0c\u76e1\u5fe0\u8077\u52d9\uff0c\u589e\u9032\u4eba\u6c11\u798f\u5229\uff0c\u4fdd\u885b\u570b\u5bb6\uff0c\u7121\u8ca0\u570b\u6c11\u4ed8\u8a17\u3002\u5982\u9055\u8a93\u8a00\uff0c\u9858\u53d7\u570b\u5bb6\u56b4\u53b2\u4e4b\u5236\u88c1\u3002\u8b39\u8a93\u3002\nThe Vice President shall also take the oath of office prior to assumption and it reads:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I do solemnly and sincerely swear before the people of the whole country that I will observe the Constitution and pledge loyalty to the State. Should I break my oath, I shall be willing to submit myself to severe punishment by the State. This is my solemn oath.\n\u4f59\u8b39\u4ee5\u81f3\u8aa0\uff0c\u5411\u5168\u570b\u4eba\u6c11\u5ba3\u8a93\u3002\u4f59\u5fc5\u9075\u5b88\u61b2\u6cd5\uff0c\u6548\u5fe0\u570b\u5bb6\uff0c\u5982\u9055\u8a93\u8a00\uff0c\u9858\u53d7\u570b\u5bb6\u56b4\u53b2\u4e4b\u5236\u88c1\u3002\u8b39\u8a93\u3002\nLegislators, councilors of the special municipality, county/city councilors, and township/city representatives shall take the oath of office prior to assumption and it reads:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I do solemnly and sincerely swear that I will observe the Constitution, be loyal to the nation, and perform duties on behalf of nationals without playing favorites and committing irregularities, pursuing personal profits, taking bribes, or interfering the judicial process. Should I break my oath, I shall be willing to submit myself to the severest punishment. This is my solemn oath.\n\u4f59\u8a93\u4ee5\u81f3\u8aa0\uff0c\u606a\u9075\u61b2\u6cd5\uff0c\u6548\u5fe0\u570b\u5bb6\uff0c\u4ee3\u8868\u4eba\u6c11\u4f9d\u6cd5\u884c\u4f7f\u8077\u6b0a\uff0c\u4e0d\u5f87\u79c1\u821e\u5f0a\uff0c\u4e0d\u71df\u6c42\u79c1\u5229\uff0c\u4e0d\u53d7\u6388\u8cc4\u8cc2\uff0c\u4e0d\u5e72\u6d89\u53f8\u6cd5\u3002\u5982\u9055\u8a93\u8a00\uff0c\u9858\u53d7\u6700\u56b4\u53b2\u4e4b\u5236\u88c1\uff0c\u8b39\u8a93\u3002\nThe speaker and deputy speaker of the Legislative Yuan, the speaker and deputy speaker of the council of the special municipality and county/city council, and the chairperson and vice chairperson of township/city council, Political appointees, directors and deputy directors, and department heads whose rank is above the tenth grade of senior-level civil servants in agencies at various levels of the central government, Justices of the Judicial Yuan, members of the Examination Yuan, members, President and Vice President of the Control Yuan, Ambassadors, ministers, charg\u00e9 d'affaires, consul generals, and consuls in the consulate, or other equivalent supervising personnel in diplomatic missions, Judges of courts at various levels, prosecutors of prosecutorial agencies and judges of administrative courts and judges of disciplinary courts, Mayors, committee members, and heads of the subordinate institutes of the special municipality, Magistrates and heads of subordinate institutes in county/city, Mayors of township/city, Principals of all-level public schools, Heads, directors, and supervisors of public enterprises and their subordinate institutes, whose rank is above the tenth grade of senior-level civil servants shall take the oath of office prior to assumption and it reads:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I do solemnly and sincerely swear that I will observe all the national regulations, faithfully perform my duties, and contribute myself to the nation without wasting public money, employing improper personnel, playing favorites and committing irregularities, and taking bribes. Should I break my oath, I shall be willing to submit myself to the severest punishment. This is my solemn oath.\n \u4f59\u8a93\u4ee5\u81f3\u8aa0\uff0c\u606a\u9075\u570b\u5bb6\u6cd5\u4ee4\uff0c\u76e1\u5fe0\u8077\u5b88\uff0c\u5831\u6548\u570b\u5bb6\uff0c\u4e0d\u5984\u8cbb\u516c\u5e11\uff0c\u4e0d\u6feb\u7528\u4eba\u54e1\uff0c\u4e0d\u71df\u79c1\u821e\u5f0a\uff0c\u4e0d\u53d7\u6388\u8cc4\u8cc2\u3002\u5982\u9055\u8a93\u8a00\uff0c\u9858\u53d7\u6700\u56b4\u53b2\u4e4b\u8655\u7f70\uff0c\u8b39\u8a93\u3002\nThailand.\nChapter VIII, Section 161 of the Constitution of Thailand states that the Prime Minister and the Council of Ministers upon assumption of his/her duties must make an oath before the King/Queen in these words:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I, [name], do solemnly declare that I will be loyal to the King/Queen and will faithfully perform my duties in the interest of the country and of the people. I will also uphold and observe the Constitution of the Kingdom of Thailand in every respect.\nTurkey.\nAll members of the Turkish Parliament, as well as cabinet ministers that are not members of parliament are required to take the following oath in a parliamentary session before taking office. The Turkish President takes a slightly modified version of this oath:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I swear upon my honour and integrity, before the great Turkish Nation, to safeguard the existence and independence of the state, the indivisible integrity of the country and the nation, and the absolute sovereignty of the nation; to remain loyal to the supremacy of law, to the democratic and secular republic, and to Atat\u00fcrk\u2019s principles and reforms; not to deviate from the ideal according to which everyone is entitled to enjoy human rights and fundamental freedoms under the notion of peace and prosperity in society, national solidarity and justice, and loyalty to the Constitution.\nAll members of the Turkish Armed Forces should take the following oath before starting their service:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I hereby take an oath on my honor:\nTo serve my nation and republic in times of war and peace with integrity and affection, on land, on the sea, and in the air,\nTo abide by all rules and regulations and to obey my superiors,\nTo value more than my life, the honor of service and the reputation of the Turkish Flag,\nAnd if necessary, to willingly give up my life in the name of duty, homeland, and republic.\nUkraine.\nPresident of Ukraine.\nIn Ukraine, the Chairman of the Constitutional Court of Ukraine administers the oath of office. The President-elect recites the oath with his hand on the Constitution and the Peresopnytsia Gospels.&lt;templatestyles src=\"Citation/styles.css\"/&gt;[c] The Ukrainian text of the oath according to the article 104 is:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\u042f, (\u0456\u043c'\u044f \u0442\u0430 \u043f\u0440\u0456\u0437\u0432\u0438\u0449\u0435), \u0432\u043e\u043b\u0435\u044e \u043d\u0430\u0440\u043e\u0434\u0443 \u043e\u0431\u0440\u0430\u043d\u0438\u0439 \u041f\u0440\u0435\u0437\u0438\u0434\u0435\u043d\u0442\u043e\u043c \u0423\u043a\u0440\u0430\u0457\u043d\u0438, \u0437\u0430\u0441\u0442\u0443\u043f\u0430\u044e\u0447\u0438 \u043d\u0430 \u0446\u0435\u0439 \u0432\u0438\u0441\u043e\u043a\u0438\u0439 \u043f\u043e\u0441\u0442, \u0443\u0440\u043e\u0447\u0438\u0441\u0442\u043e \u043f\u0440\u0438\u0441\u044f\u0433\u0430\u044e \u043d\u0430 \u0432\u0456\u0440\u043d\u0456\u0441\u0442\u044c \u0423\u043a\u0440\u0430\u0457\u043d\u0456. \u0417\u043e\u0431\u043e\u0432'\u044f\u0437\u0443\u044e\u0441\u044c \u0443\u0441\u0456\u043c\u0430 \u0441\u0432\u043e\u0457\u043c\u0438 \u0441\u043f\u0440\u0430\u0432\u0430\u043c\u0438 \u0431\u043e\u0440\u043e\u043d\u0438\u0442\u0438 \u0441\u0443\u0432\u0435\u0440\u0435\u043d\u0456\u0442\u0435\u0442 \u0456 \u043d\u0435\u0437\u0430\u043b\u0435\u0436\u043d\u0456\u0441\u0442\u044c \u0423\u043a\u0440\u0430\u0457\u043d\u0438, \u0434\u0431\u0430\u0442\u0438 \u043f\u0440\u043e \u0431\u043b\u0430\u0433\u043e \u0412\u0456\u0442\u0447\u0438\u0437\u043d\u0438 \u0456 \u0434\u043e\u0431\u0440\u043e\u0431\u0443\u0442 \u0423\u043a\u0440\u0430\u0457\u043d\u0441\u044c\u043a\u043e\u0433\u043e \u043d\u0430\u0440\u043e\u0434\u0443, \u043e\u0431\u0441\u0442\u043e\u044e\u0432\u0430\u0442\u0438 \u043f\u0440\u0430\u0432\u0430 \u0456 \u0441\u0432\u043e\u0431\u043e\u0434\u0438 \u0433\u0440\u043e\u043c\u0430\u0434\u044f\u043d, \u0434\u043e\u0434\u0435\u0440\u0436\u0443\u0432\u0430\u0442\u0438\u0441\u044f \u041a\u043e\u043d\u0441\u0442\u0438\u0442\u0443\u0446\u0456\u0457 \u0423\u043a\u0440\u0430\u0457\u043d\u0438 \u0456 \u0437\u0430\u043a\u043e\u043d\u0456\u0432 \u0423\u043a\u0440\u0430\u0457\u043d\u0438, \u0432\u0438\u043a\u043e\u043d\u0443\u0432\u0430\u0442\u0438 \u0441\u0432\u043e\u0457 \u043e\u0431\u043e\u0432'\u044f\u0437\u043a\u0438 \u0432 \u0456\u043d\u0442\u0435\u0440\u0435\u0441\u0430\u0445 \u0443\u0441\u0456\u0445 \u0441\u043f\u0456\u0432\u0432\u0456\u0442\u0447\u0438\u0437\u043d\u0438\u043a\u0456\u0432, \u043f\u0456\u0434\u043d\u043e\u0441\u0438\u0442\u0438 \u0430\u0432\u0442\u043e\u0440\u0438\u0442\u0435\u0442 \u0423\u043a\u0440\u0430\u0457\u043d\u0438 \u0443 \u0441\u0432\u0456\u0442\u0456.\nThe official English translation:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nPeople's Deputies of Ukraine.\nBefore assuming office, a People's Deputy of Ukraine must take the following oath before the parliament:\nIn original Ukrainian:\nIn English translation:\nA refusal of taking the oath on the first day of the Supreme Council's new plenary session is considered a loss of a deputy's elected mandate.\nMembers of the Cabinet of Ministers.\nAfter being approved by the Parliament, members of the Cabinet of Ministers must take an oath to assume office.\nIn original Ukrainian:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\u0423\u0441\u0432\u0456\u0434\u043e\u043c\u043b\u044e\u044e\u0447\u0438 \u0432\u0438\u0441\u043e\u043a\u0443 \u0432\u0456\u0434\u043f\u043e\u0432\u0456\u0434\u0430\u043b\u044c\u043d\u0456\u0441\u0442\u044c \u0447\u043b\u0435\u043d\u0430 \u041a\u0430\u0431\u0456\u043d\u0435\u0442\u0443 \u041c\u0456\u043d\u0456\u0441\u0442\u0440\u0456\u0432 \u0423\u043a\u0440\u0430\u0457\u043d\u0438, \u0443\u0440\u043e\u0447\u0438\u0441\u0442\u043e \u043f\u0440\u0438\u0441\u044f\u0433\u0430\u044e \u043d\u0430 \u0432\u0456\u0440\u043d\u0456\u0441\u0442\u044c \u0423\u043a\u0440\u0430\u0457\u043d\u0441\u044c\u043a\u043e\u043c\u0443 \u043d\u0430\u0440\u043e\u0434\u043e\u0432\u0456. \u0417\u043e\u0431\u043e\u0432\u2019\u044f\u0437\u0443\u044e\u0441\u044f \u0434\u043e\u0434\u0435\u0440\u0436\u0443\u0432\u0430\u0442\u0438\u0441\u044f \u041a\u043e\u043d\u0441\u0442\u0438\u0442\u0443\u0446\u0456\u0457 \u0423\u043a\u0440\u0430\u0457\u043d\u0438 \u0442\u0430 \u0437\u0430\u043a\u043e\u043d\u0456\u0432 \u0423\u043a\u0440\u0430\u0457\u043d\u0438, \u0437\u043c\u0456\u0446\u043d\u044e\u0432\u0430\u0442\u0438 \u0441\u0443\u0432\u0435\u0440\u0435\u043d\u0456\u0442\u0435\u0442 \u0456 \u043d\u0435\u0437\u0430\u043b\u0435\u0436\u043d\u0456\u0441\u0442\u044c \u0423\u043a\u0440\u0430\u0457\u043d\u0438, \u043e\u0431\u0441\u0442\u043e\u044e\u0432\u0430\u0442\u0438 \u043f\u0440\u0430\u0432\u0430 \u0456 \u0441\u0432\u043e\u0431\u043e\u0434\u0438 \u043b\u044e\u0434\u0438\u043d\u0438 \u0442\u0430 \u0433\u0440\u043e\u043c\u0430\u0434\u044f\u043d\u0438\u043d\u0430, \u0434\u0431\u0430\u0442\u0438 \u043f\u0440\u043e \u0434\u043e\u0431\u0440\u043e\u0431\u0443\u0442 \u0423\u043a\u0440\u0430\u0457\u043d\u0441\u044c\u043a\u043e\u0433\u043e \u043d\u0430\u0440\u043e\u0434\u0443, \u0441\u0442\u0430\u043b\u0438\u0439 \u0434\u0435\u043c\u043e\u043a\u0440\u0430\u0442\u0438\u0447\u043d\u0438\u0439 \u0440\u043e\u0437\u0432\u0438\u0442\u043e\u043a \u0441\u0443\u0441\u043f\u0456\u043b\u044c\u0441\u0442\u0432\u0430.\nUnofficial English translation:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Aware of the high responsibility of a member of the Cabinet of Ministers of Ukraine, I solemnly swear allegiance to the Ukrainian people. I undertake to abide by the Constitution of Ukraine and the laws of Ukraine, to strengthen the sovereignty and independence of Ukraine, to defend the rights and freedoms of man and citizen, to care for the welfare of the Ukrainian people, and to sustain the democratic development of society.\nRefusal to take an oath on the day of appointment is considered to be the refusal of his/her ministerial office.\nUnited Kingdom.\nOaths taken by the monarch.\nIn the United Kingdom, no formal oath is essential to be taken by the monarch in relation to accession. The monarch is, however, required to take an oath regarding the security of the Church of Scotland. At a coronation, the monarch usually takes an oath but as a coronation is inessential, Monarchs need not take a similar oath in order to discharge their duties, as with the case of Edward VIII, who was never crowned during his one-year reign. The exact wording of the coronation oath of various monarchs has altered throughout the years without statutory authority but remain based on the oath as prescribed by the Coronation Oath Act 1688.\nCoronation Oath.\nThe following was the oath taken by Queen Elizabeth II at her coronation on 2 June 1953:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe following was the oath taken by King Charles III at his coronation on 6 May 2023:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Archbishop: Will you solemnly promise and swear to govern the Peoples of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, your other Realms and the Territories to any of them belonging or pertaining, according to their respective laws and customs?\nKing: I solemnly promise so to do.\nArchbishop: Will you to your power cause Law and Justice, in Mercy, to be executed in all your judgements?\nKing: I will.\nArchbishop: Will you to the utmost of your power maintain the Laws of God and the true profession of the Gospel? Will you to the utmost of your power maintain in the United Kingdom the Protestant Reformed Religion established by law? Will you maintain and preserve inviolably the settlement of the Church of England, and the doctrine, worship, discipline, and government thereof, as by law established in England? And will you preserve unto the Bishops and Clergy of England, and to the Churches there committed to their charge, all such rights and privileges as by law do or shall appertain to them or any of them?\nKing: All this I promise to do.\n\"The King places his hand on the Bible.\"\nKing: The things which I have here before promised, I will perform and keep. So help me God.\nDeclaration Oath.\nThis was the oath of declaration of Charles III during the coronation on 6 May 2023:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Archbishop: Your Majesty, are you willing to make, subscribe, and declare to the statutory Accession Declaration Oath?\nKing: I am willing. I Charles do solemnly and sincerely in the presence of God profess, testify, and declare that I am a faithful Protestant, and that I will, according to the true intent of the enactments which secure the Protestant succession to the Throne, uphold and maintain the said enactments to the best of my powers according to law.\n\"The King signs copies of the Oaths, presented by the Lord Chamberlain.\"\nOath relating to the security of the Church of Scotland.\nThe following oath was made by King Charles III at his Accession Council on 10 September 2022, in accordance with the Protestant Religion and Presbyterian Church Act 1707:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I, Charles the Third, by the Grace of God of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and of My other Realms and Territories, King, Defender of the Faith, do faithfully promise and swear that I shall inviolably maintain and preserve the Settlement of the true Protestant Religion as established by the Laws made in Scotland in prosecution of the Claim of Right and particularly by an Act intituled \u201cAn Act for securing the Protestant Religion and Presbyterian Church Government\u201d and by the Acts passed in the Parliament of both Kingdoms for Union of the two Kingdoms, together with the Government, Worship, Discipline, Rights and Privileges of the Church of Scotland. So help me God.\nOath of Allegiance and Official Oath.\nA general Oath of Allegiance and Official Oath, are set out in the Promissory Oaths Act 1868 are required to be taken by various office-holders.\nMembers of the House of Commons or of the House of Lords are required to take the oath of allegiance in the House at the beginning of a new Parliament, as well as after a Demise of the Crown.\nSection 84 of the Scotland Act 1998 requires members of the Scottish Parliament to take the Oath of Allegiance at a meeting of the Parliament. Members of the Scottish Government and junior Scottish Ministers are additionally required to take the Official Oath.\nSection 20 of the Government of Wales Act 1998 requires members of the National Assembly for Wales to take the oath of allegiance. A Welsh form of the Oath is prescribed by the National Assembly for Wales (Oath of Allegiance in Welsh) Order 1999.\nOath of Allegiance.\nThe Oath of Allegiance is in the following form:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I, (name), do swear that I will be faithful and bear true allegiance to His Majesty King Charles, his heirs and successors, according to law. So help me God.\nOfficial Oath.\nThe Official Oath is in the following form:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I, (name), do swear that I will well and truly serve His Majesty King Charles in the office of (office). So help me God.\nJudicial Oath.\nThe standard form of the judicial oath is set out in the Promissory Oaths Act 1868:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThose choosing affirm simply replace \"do swear by Almighty God\" with \"solemnly sincerely and truly declare and affirm\"\nIn Northern Ireland all references to the Sovereign were removed by the Justice (Northern Ireland) Act 2002.\nSection 19(2) provides that the oath is\u2014\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I, (name), do swear that I will well and faithfully serve in the office of (office), etc.\nSection 19(3) provides that the affirmation and declaration is\u2014\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I, (name), do solemnly and sincerely and truly affirm and declare that I will well and faithfully serve in the office of (office), etc.\nArmed forces.\nAll persons enlisting in the British Armed Forces are required to attest to the following oath or equivalent affirmation:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I... swear by Almighty God \"(do solemnly, and truly declare and affirm)\" that I will be faithful and bear true allegiance to His Majesty King Charles III, His Heirs and Successors, and that I will, as in duty bound, honestly and faithfully defend His Majesty, His Heirs and Successors, in Person, Crown and Dignity against all enemies, and will observe and obey all orders of His Majesty, His Heirs and Successors, and of the generals \"(admirals / air officers)\" and officers set over me.\nPrivy Counsellors.\nPrivy Counsellors take office on being \"sworn of the Privy Council\". It was formerly regarded as criminal to disclose the form of Privy Council oath, which includes an undertaking of secrecy as to the proceedings in Council (where the Oath is taken). On 20 July 1998 it was published by the President of the Council in answer to a written parliamentary question:\nYou do swear by Almighty God to be a true and faithful Servant unto the Queen's Majesty, as one of Her Majesty's Privy Council. You will not know or understand of any manner of thing to be attempted, done, or spoken against Her Majesty's Person, Honour, Crown, or Dignity Royal, but you will lett and withstand the same to the uttermost of your Power, and either cause it to be revealed to Her Majesty Herself, or to such of Her Privy Council as shall advertise Her Majesty of the same. You will, in all things to be moved, treated, and debated in Council, faithfully and truly declare your Mind and Opinion, according to your Heart and Conscience; and will keep secret all Matters committed and revealed unto you, or that shall be treated of secretly in Council. And if any of the said Treaties or Counsels shall touch any of the Counsellors, you will not reveal it unto him, but will keep the same until such time as, by the Consent of Her Majesty, or of the Council, Publication shall be made thereof. You will to your uttermost bear Faith and Allegiance unto the Queen's Majesty; and will assist and defend all Jurisdictions, Pre-eminences, and Authorities, granted to Her Majesty, and annexed to the Crown by Acts of Parliament, or otherwise, against all Foreign Princes, Persons, Prelates, States, or Potentates. And generally in all things you will do as a faithful and true Servant ought to do to Her Majesty. So help you God.\nConstables declaration.\nA person appointed to the office of constable of a police force in Scotland is required to make the following declaration:\nI hereby do solemnly and sincerely and truly declare and affirm that I will faithfully discharge the duties of the office of constable.\nUnited Nations.\nThe Secretary General of the United Nations shall take their oath in general session of the General Assembly and it reads:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I, (name), solemnly swear to exercise in all loyalty, discretion and conscience, the function entrusted to me as Secretary General of the United Nations, to discharge these functions and regulate my conduct, with the interest of the United Nations only in view, and not in seek or to accept instructions, in regard to the performance of my duties, from any government or other authority, external to the organization.\nUnited States.\nHistory of the oath.\nWhile the oath-taking dates back to the First Congress in 1789, the current oath is a product of the 1860s, drafted by Civil War\u2013era members of Congress intent on ensnaring traitors.\nIn 1789, the 1st United States Congress passed the Oath Administration Act to create an oath of office to fulfill the requirement of Article VI of the United States Constitution:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt; It also passed the Judiciary Act of 1789, which established an additional oath taken by federal judges:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I do solemnly swear (or affirm), that I will administer justice without respect to persons, and do equal right to the poor and to the rich, and that I will faithfully and impartially discharge and perform all the duties incumbent on me, according to the best of my abilities and understanding, agreeably to the Constitution, and laws of the United States. So help me God.\nThe outbreak of the Civil War quickly transformed the routine act of oath-taking into one of enormous significance. In April 1861, a time of uncertain and shifting loyalties, President Abraham Lincoln ordered all federal civilian employees within the executive branch to take an expanded oath. When Congress convened for a brief emergency session in July, members echoed the president's action by enacting legislation requiring employees to take the expanded oath in support of the Union. This oath is the earliest direct predecessor of the modern version of the oath.\nWhen Congress returned for its regular session in December 1861, members who believed that the Union had as much to fear from northern traitors as southern soldiers again revised the oath, adding a new first section known as the \"Ironclad Test Oath\". The war-inspired Test Oath, signed into law on July 2, 1862, required \"every person elected or appointed to any office ... under the Government of the United States ... excepting the President of the United States\" to swear or affirm that they had never previously engaged in criminal or disloyal conduct. Those government employees who failed to take the 1862 Test Oath would not receive a salary; those who swore falsely would be prosecuted for perjury and forever denied federal employment.\nThe Ironclad Oath signed into law under President Johnson's term as mandatory for members of Congress as well as federal employees.\nI, A.B., do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I have never voluntarily borne arms against the United States since I have been a citizen thereof; that I have voluntarily given no aid, countenance, counsel or encouragement to person engaged in armed hostility thereto; that I have neither sought nor accepted nor attempted to exercise the functions of any office whatever, under any authority or pretended authority in hostility to the United States; that I have not yielded a voluntary support to any pretended government, authority, power, or constitution within the United States, hostile or inimical thereto. And I do further swear (or affirm) that, to the best of my knowledge and ability, I will support and defend the Constitution of the United States, against all enemies, foreign and domestic; that I will bear true faith and allegiance to the same; and I take this obligation freely, without any mental reservation or purpose of evasion, and that I will well and faithfully discharge the duties of the office on which I am about to enter, so help me God.\nThe 1862 oath's second section incorporated a different rendering of the hastily drafted 1861 oath. Although Congress did not extend coverage of the Ironclad Test Oath to its own members, many took it voluntarily. Angered by those who refused this symbolic act during a wartime crisis, and determined to prevent the eventual return of prewar southern leaders to positions of power in the national government, congressional hard-liners eventually succeeded by 1864 in making the Test Oath mandatory for all members.\nThe Senate then revised its rules to require that members not only take the Test Oath orally, but also that they \"subscribe\" to it by signing a printed copy. This condition reflected a wartime practice in which military and civilian authorities required anyone wishing to do business with the federal government to sign a copy of the Test Oath. The current practice of newly sworn senators signing individual pages in an oath book dates from this period.\nAs tensions cooled during the decade following the Civil War, Congress enacted private legislation permitting particular former Confederates to take only the second section of the 1862 oath. An 1868 public law prescribed this alternative oath for \"any person who has participated in the late rebellion, and from whom all legal disabilities arising therefrom have been removed by act of Congress.\" Northerners immediately pointed to the new law's unfair double standard that required loyal Unionists to take the Test Oath's harsh first section while permitting ex-Confederates to ignore it. In 1884, a new generation of lawmakers quietly repealed the first section of the Test Oath, leaving intact the current affirmation of constitutional allegiance.\nFederal executive and legislative branch oaths.\nIn the United States, the oath of office for the President is specified in the Constitution ():\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I, (name), do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will faithfully execute the Office of President of the United States, and will to the best of my Ability, preserve, protect and defend the Constitution of the United States. So help me God.\nThe oath may be sworn or affirmed (in which case it is called an \"affirmation\" instead of \"oath\"). Although not present in the text of the Constitution, it is customary for modern presidents to say \"So help me God\" after the end of the oath. For officers other than the President, the expression \"So help me God\" is explicitly prescribed, but the Judiciary Act of 1789 also explains when it can be omitted (specifically for oaths taken by court clerks): \"Which words, so help me God, shall be omitted in all cases where an affirmation is admitted instead of an oath.\"\nThe Constitution (Article VI, clause 3) also specifies:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The Senators and Representatives before mentioned, and the members of the several state legislatures, and all executive and judicial officers, both of the United States and of the several states, shall be bound by oath or affirmation, to support this Constitution; but no religious test shall ever be required as a qualification to any office or public trust under the United States.\nAt the start of each new U.S. Congress, in January of every odd-numbered year, newly elected or re-elected Members of Congress \u2013 the entire House of Representatives and one-third of the Senate \u2013 must recite an oath:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThis oath is also taken by the Vice President, members of the Cabinet, federal judges and all other civil and military officers and federal employees other than the President.\nFederal judiciary oaths.\nIn the United States, federal judges are required to take two oaths. The judicial oath is this:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe other is the same oath that all other officers of the United States (save the President) take:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFederal statute specifically says that the latter oath \"does not affect other oaths required by law.\"\nMilitary oaths \u2013 federal and state.\nThe military oath is the same as the one taken by members of the Congress, judicial officers, and all other officers except for the President. Members of the United States National Guard, however, take an additional oath as well.\nState and local oaths.\nThe oaths of state and local officials are largely patterned on the federal oath of constitutional allegiance, with the addition of fidelity to the state constitution. An example would be the oath taken by all New York government officials:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I, [name], do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will support and defend the Constitution of the United States, and the Constitution of the State of New York, (and the Charter of the City of New York, e.g.), and that I will faithfully discharge the duties of the office of (mayor of the City of New York, e.g.) to the best of my ability.[So Help me God.]\nTerritorial oaths.\nThe oath of territories of the United States are required to support the constitution.\nThe example is taken by the Governor of Guam:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I, [name], do solemnly swear in the presence of the Almighty God, that I will well and faithfully support the Constitution of the United States, the laws of the United States applicable to [name of territory] and the laws of [name of territory], that I will consciously and impartially discharge the duties as [position]. So help me God.\nUruguay.\nIn Uruguay, before taking office, the President and Vice President are required by Article 158 of the Constitution to take an affirmation before General Assembly in joint session:\nIn Spanish:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Yo, (name), me comprometo por mi honor a desempe\u00f1ar lealmente el cargo que se me ha confiado y a guardar y defender la Constituci\u00f3n de la Rep\u00fablicaIn English:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I, (name), pledge on my honor to loyally carry out the position entrusted to me and to uphold and defend the Constitution of the Republic.The National Representatives and Senators take the Oath based on the regulations of the respective Chamber:\nIn Spanish:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;President of the Chamber: \u00bfPromete usted por su honor desempe\u00f1ar debidamente el cargo de Representante Nacional/Senador y obrar en todo conforme a la Constituci\u00f3n de la Rep\u00fablica?\nRepresentative/Senator: S\u00ed, prometo.\nPresident of the Chamber: \u00bfPromete usted guardar secreto en todos los casos en que sea ordenado por la C\u00e1mara o por la Asamblea General?\nRepresentative/Senator: Si, prometo.In English:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;President of the Chamber: Do you promise on your honor to duly carry out the position of National Representative/Senator and to act in all accordance with the Constitution of the Republic?\nRepresentative/Senator: Yes, I promise.\nPresident of the Chamber: Do you promise secrecy in all cases ordered by the House or by the General Assembly?\nRepresentative/Senator: Yes, I promise.\nVenezuela.\nThe President of Venezuela, upon assumption of the office on his inauguration, is asked by the President of the National Assembly (until 1999, the Senate President, on behalf of the entire National Federal Congress), holding a copy of the Constitution of Venezuela, the following:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Before God and the Fatherland, Do you swear therefore to perform the duties of the position of Constitutional President of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, and in the performance of your duties fulfill the Constitution and laws of the Republic?\nWith the right hand on the shoulder level he answers with a \"Yes, I swear\" and the President then responds: \"If you do so, before God and the Fatherland your duties will be performed, and it will be demanded of you if you not. Therefore, in the name of the Republic and by the authority of the law, I invest you as Constitutional President of the Republic as of this moment for this term period.\" Then the Presidential Sash (with the colors and coat of arms from the Flag of Venezuela and the collar of the Order of the Liberatiors is turned over to him from the outgoing President, but if the case is that of succession due to death of office of his predecessor both items are cased and are given to him by the National Assembly President instead. If reelected the method is the same as after the sudden death of the President while in office.\nVietnam.\nAccording to 2013 Constitution, the President of Vietnam, Vice President of Vietnam, Prime Minister of Vietnam, Deputy Prime Minister of Vietnam, President of the National Assembly of Vietnam and Chief Justice of the Supreme People's Court of Vietnam must take an oath of office every first plenary session of the National Assembly following their election.\nThe following is the oath taken by the President, Vice President, Prime Minister, Deputy Prime Minister, President of the National Assembly and Chief Justice:\n\"In front of the sacred red flag with the yellow star of the Homeland, the National Assembly, and the electors of the whole country, I, (name), President/Vice President/Prime Minister/Deputy Prime Minister/President of the National Assembly/Chief Justice of the Socialist Republic of Vietnam, do solemnly swear, to forever absolutely remain loyal to the homeland, to the people, and the Constitution of the Socialist Republic of Vietnam. I vow to practice and strive to fulfill the tasks assigned by the Party, State and People to me and my office.\"\nAfter the Oath is taken, the Chairman of the National Assembly (or the Standing Vice President of the National Assembly if the oath taker is the President of the National Assembly) will say, \"The National Assembly has confirmed this oath.\"\nCatholic Church.\nThe Roman Catholic Church requires all of its clergy before ordination and most of those promoted to positions of authority to make a profession of faith, as follows. It is very similar to the Apostles' Creed and the Nicene Creed (referred to as the Symbol of Faith).\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther, all of those promoted to positions of authority (vicars general, judicial vicars, episcopal vicars, pastors of parishes and superiors within religious orders) or with teaching responsibilities (rectors of seminaries, professors at seminaries, heads or Catholic universities or professors on the faculties of Catholic colleges and universities who teach subjects involving religion), and all those ordained deacons (and therefore all those who will also later be ordained priests) to take the following \"Oath of Fidelity\"\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I, (name), in assuming the office of (office), promise that in my words and in my actions I shall always preserve communion with the Catholic Church.\nWith great care and fidelity I shall carry out the duties incumbent on me toward the Church, both universal and particular, in which, according to the provisions of the law, I have been called to exercise my service.\nIn fulfilling the charge entrusted to me in the name of the Church, I shall hold fast to the deposit of faith in its entirety; I shall faithfully hand it on and explain it, and I shall avoid any teachings contrary to it.\nI shall follow and foster the common discipline of the entire Church and I shall maintain the observance of all ecclesiastical laws, especially those contained in the Code of Canon Law.\nWith Christian obedience I shall follow what the Bishops, as authentic doctors and teachers of the faith, declare, or what they, as those who govern the Church, establish.\nI shall also faithfully assist the diocesan Bishops, so that the apostolic activity, exercised in the name and by mandate of the Church, may be carried out in communion with the Church.\nSo help me God, and God's Holy Gospels on which I place my hand.\nExplanatory notes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "22259", "revid": "42316941", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22259", "title": "Olympic Games/Summer", "text": ""}
{"id": "22261", "revid": "50449383", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22261", "title": "Ontology", "text": "Philosophical study of being\nOntology is the philosophical study of being. It is traditionally understood as the subdiscipline of metaphysics focused on the most general features of reality. As one of the most fundamental concepts, being encompasses all of reality and every entity within it. To articulate the basic structure of being, ontology examines the commonalities among all things and investigates their classification into basic types, such as the categories of particulars and universals. Particulars are unique, non-repeatable entities, such as the person Socrates, whereas universals are general, repeatable entities, like the color \"green\". Another distinction exists between concrete objects existing in space and time, such as a tree, and abstract objects existing outside space and time, like the number 7. Systems of categories aim to provide a comprehensive inventory of reality by employing categories such as substance, property, relation, state of affairs, and event.\nOntologists disagree regarding which entities exist at the most basic level. Platonic realism asserts that universals have objective existence, while conceptualism maintains that universals exist only in the mind, and nominalism denies their existence altogether. Similar disputes pertain to mathematical objects, unobservable objects assumed by scientific theories, and moral facts. Materialism posits that fundamentally only matter exists, whereas dualism asserts that mind and matter are independent principles. According to some ontologists, objective answers to ontological questions do not exist, with perspectives shaped by differing linguistic practices.\nOntology employs diverse methods of inquiry, including the analysis of concepts and experience, the use of intuitions and thought experiments, and the integration of findings from natural science. Formal ontology investigates the most abstract features of objects, while applied ontology utilizes ontological theories and principles to study entities within specific domains. For example, social ontology examines basic concepts used in the social sciences. Applied ontology is particularly relevant to information and computer science, which develop conceptual frameworks of limited domains. These frameworks facilitate the structured storage of information, such as in a college database tracking academic activities. Ontology is also pertinent to the fields of logic, theology, and anthropology.\nThe origins of ontology lie in the ancient period with speculations about the nature of being and the source of the universe, including ancient Indian, Chinese, and Greek philosophy. In the modern period, philosophers conceived ontology as a distinct academic discipline and coined its name.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nDefinition.\nOntology is the study of being. It is the branch of philosophy that investigates the nature of existence, the features all entities have in common, and how they are divided into basic categories of being. It aims to discover the foundational building blocks of the world and characterize reality as a whole in its most general aspects. In this regard, ontology contrasts with individual sciences like biology and astronomy, which restrict themselves to a limited domain of entities, such as living entities and celestial phenomena. In some contexts, the term \"ontology\" refers not to the general study of being but to a specific ontological theory within this discipline. It can also mean an inventory or a conceptual scheme of a particular domain, such as the ontology of genes. In this context, an inventory is a comprehensive list of elements. A conceptual scheme is a framework of the key concepts and their relationships.\nOntology is closely related to metaphysics but the exact relation of these two disciplines is disputed. A traditionally influential characterization asserts that ontology is a subdiscipline of metaphysics. According to this view, metaphysics is the study of various aspects of fundamental reality, whereas ontology restricts itself to the most general features of reality. This view sees ontology as general metaphysics, which is to be distinguished from special metaphysics focused on more specific subject matters, like God, mind, and value. A different conception understands ontology as a preliminary discipline that provides a complete inventory of reality while metaphysics examines the features and structure of the entities in this inventory. Another conception says that metaphysics is about real being while ontology examines possible being or the concept of being. It is not universally accepted that there is a clear boundary between metaphysics and ontology. Some philosophers use both terms as synonyms.\nThe etymology of the word \"ontology\" traces back to the ancient Greek terms (, meaning 'being') and (, meaning 'study of'), literally, 'the study of being'. The ancient Greeks did not use the term \"ontology\", which was coined by philosophers in the 17th century.\nBasic concepts.\nBeing.\nBeing, or existence, is the main topic of ontology. It is one of the most general and fundamental concepts, encompassing all of reality and every entity within it. In its broadest sense, being only contrasts with non-being or nothingness. It is controversial whether a more substantial analysis of the concept or meaning of being is possible. One proposal understands being as a property possessed by every entity. Critics argue that a thing without being cannot have properties. This means that properties presuppose being and cannot explain it. Another suggestion is that all beings share a set of essential features. According to the Eleatic principle, \"power is the mark of being\", meaning that only entities with causal influence truly exist. A controversial proposal by philosopher George Berkeley suggests that all existence is mental. He expressed this immaterialism in his slogan \"to be is to be perceived\".\nDepending on the context, the term \"being\" is sometimes used with a more limited meaning to refer only to certain aspects of reality. In one sense, being is unchanging and permanent, in contrast to becoming, which implies change. Another contrast is between being, as what truly exists, and phenomena, as what appears to exist. In some contexts, being expresses the fact that something is while essence expresses its qualities or what it is like. \nOntologists often divide being into fundamental classes or highest kinds, called \"categories of being\". Proposed categories include substance, property, relation, state of affairs, and event. They can be used to provide systems of categories, which offer a comprehensive inventory of reality in which every entity belongs to exactly one category. Some philosophers, like Aristotle, say that entities belonging to different categories exist in distinct ways. Others, like John Duns Scotus, insist that there are no differences in the mode of being, meaning that everything exists in the same way. A related dispute is whether some entities have a higher degree of being than others, an idea already found in Plato's work. The more common view in contemporary philosophy is that a thing either exists or not with no intermediary states or degrees.\nThe relation between being and non-being is a frequent topic in ontology. Influential issues include the status of nonexistent objects and why there is something rather than nothing.\nParticulars and universals.\nA central distinction in ontology is between particular and universal entities. Particulars, also called \"individuals\", are unique, non-repeatable entities, like Socrates, the Taj Mahal, and Mars. Universals are general, repeatable entities, like the color \"green\", the form \"circularity\", and the virtue \"courage\". Universals express aspects or features shared by particulars. For example, Mount Everest and Mount Fuji are particulars characterized by the universal \"mountain\".\nUniversals can take the form of properties or relations. Properties describe the characteristics of things. They are features or qualities possessed by an entity. Properties are often divided into essential and accidental properties. A property is essential if an entity must have it; it is accidental if the entity can exist without it. For instance, \"having three sides\" is an essential property of a triangle, whereas \"being red\" is an accidental property. Relations are ways how two or more entities stand to one another. Unlike properties, they apply to several entities and characterize them as a group. For example, \"being a city\" is a property while \"being east of\" is a relation, as in \"Kathmandu is a city\" and \"Kathmandu is east of New Delhi\". Relations are often divided into internal and external relations. Internal relations depend only on the properties of the objects they connect, like the relation of resemblance. External relations express characteristics that go beyond what the connected objects are like, such as spatial relations.\nSubstances play an important role in the history of ontology as the particular entities that underlie and support properties and relations. They are often considered the fundamental building blocks of reality that can exist on their own, while entities like properties and relations cannot exist without substances. Substances persist through changes as they acquire or lose properties. For example, when a tomato ripens, it loses the property \"green\" and acquires the property \"red\".\nStates of affairs are complex particular entities that have several other entities as their components. The state of affairs \"Socrates is wise\" has two components: the individual \"Socrates\" and the property \"wise\". States of affairs that correspond to reality are called \"facts\". Facts are truthmakers of statements, meaning that whether a statement is true or false depends on the underlying facts.\nEvents are particular entities that occur in time, like the fall of the Berlin Wall and the first moon landing. They usually involve some kind of change, like the lawn becoming dry. In some cases, no change occurs, like the lawn staying wet. Complex events, also called \"processes\", are composed of a sequence of events.\nConcrete and abstract objects.\nConcrete objects are entities that exist in space and time, such as a tree, a car, and a planet. They have causal powers and can affect each other, like when a car hits a tree and both are deformed in the process. Abstract objects, by contrast, are outside space and time, such as the number 7 and the set of integers. They lack causal powers and do not undergo changes. The existence and nature of abstract objects remain subjects of philosophical debate.\nConcrete objects encountered in everyday life are complex entities composed of various parts. For example, a book is made up of two covers and the pages between them. Each of these components is itself constituted of smaller parts, like molecules, atoms, and elementary particles. Mereology studies the relation between parts and wholes. One position in mereology says that every collection of entities forms a whole. According to another view, this is only the case for collections that fulfill certain requirements, for instance, that the entities in the collection touch one another. The problem of material constitution asks whether or in what sense a whole should be considered a new object in addition to the collection of parts composing it.\nAbstract objects are closely related to fictional and intentional objects. Fictional objects are entities invented in works of fiction. They can be things, like the One Ring in J. R. R. Tolkien's book series The Lord of the Rings, and people, like the Monkey King in the novel Journey to the West. Some philosophers say that fictional objects are abstract objects and exist outside space and time. Others understand them as artifacts that are created as the works of fiction are written. Intentional objects are entities that exist within mental states, like perceptions, beliefs, and desires. For example, if a person thinks about the Loch Ness Monster then the Loch Ness Monster is the intentional object of this thought. People can think about existing and non-existing objects. This makes it difficult to assess the ontological status of intentional objects.\nOther concepts.\nOntological dependence is a relation between entities. An entity depends ontologically on another entity if the first entity cannot exist without the second entity. For instance, the surface of an apple cannot exist without the apple. An entity is ontologically independent if it does not depend on anything else, meaning that it is fundamental and can exist on its own. Ontological dependence plays a central role in ontology and its attempt to describe reality on its most fundamental level. It is closely related to metaphysical grounding, which is the relation between a ground and the facts it explains.\nAn ontological commitment of a person or a theory is an entity that exists according to them. For instance, a person who believes in God has an ontological commitment to God. Ontological commitments can be used to analyze which ontologies people explicitly defend or implicitly assume. They play a central role in contemporary metaphysics when trying to decide between competing theories. For example, the Quine\u2013Putnam indispensability argument defends mathematical Platonism, asserting that numbers exist because the best scientific theories are ontologically committed to numbers.\nPossibility and necessity are further topics in ontology. Possibility describes what can be the case, as in \"it is possible that extraterrestrial life exists\". Necessity describes what must be the case, as in \"it is necessary that three plus two equals five\". Possibility and necessity contrast with actuality, which describes what is the case, as in \"Doha is the capital of Qatar\". Ontologists often use the concept of possible worlds to analyze possibility and necessity. A possible world is a complete and consistent way how things could have been. For example, Haruki Murakami was born in 1949 in the actual world but there are possible worlds in which he was born at a different date. Using this idea, possible world semantics says that a sentence is possibly true if it is true in at least one possible world. A sentence is necessarily true if it is true in all possible worlds. The field of modal logic provides a precise formalization of the concepts of possibility and necessity.\nIn ontology, identity means that two things are the same. Philosophers distinguish between qualitative and numerical identity. Two entities are qualitatively identical if they have exactly the same features, such as perfect identical twins. This is also called \"exact similarity\" and \"indiscernibility\". Numerical identity, by contrast, means that there is only a single entity. For example, if Fatima is the mother of Leila and Hugo then Leila's mother is numerically identical to Hugo's mother. Another distinction is between synchronic and diachronic identity. Synchronic identity relates an entity to itself at the same time. Diachronic identity relates an entity to itself at different times, as in \"the woman who bore Leila three years ago is the same woman who bore Hugo this year\". The notion of identity also has a number of philosophical implications in terms of how it interacts with the aforementioned necessity and possibility. Most famously, Saul Kripke contended that \"discovered identities\" such as \"Water is HO\" are necessarily true because \"HO\" is what's known as a rigid designator.\nBranches.\nThere are different and sometimes overlapping ways to divide ontology into branches. Pure ontology focuses on the most abstract topics associated with the concept and nature of being. It is not restricted to a specific domain of entities and studies existence and the structure of reality as a whole. Pure ontology contrasts with applied ontology, also called domain ontology. Applied ontology examines the application of ontological theories and principles to specific disciplines and domains, often in the field of science. It considers ontological problems in regard to specific entities such as matter, mind, numbers, God, and cultural artifacts.\nSocial ontology, a major subfield of applied ontology, studies social kinds, like money, gender, society, and language. It aims to determine the nature and essential features of these concepts while also examining their mode of existence. According to a common view, social kinds are useful constructions to describe the complexities of social life. This means that they are not pure fictions but, at the same time, lack the objective or mind-independent reality of natural phenomena like elementary particles, lions, and stars. In the fields of computer science, information science, and knowledge representation, applied ontology is interested in the development of formal frameworks to encode and store information about a limited domain of entities in a structured way. A related application in genetics is Gene Ontology, which is a comprehensive framework for the standardized representation of gene-related information across species and databases.\nFormal ontology is the study of objects in general while focusing on their abstract structures and features. It divides objects into different categories based on the forms they exemplify. Formal ontologists often rely on the tools of formal logic to express their findings in an abstract and general manner. Formal ontology contrasts with material ontology, which distinguishes between different areas of objects and examines the features characteristic of a specific area. Examples are ideal spatial beings in the area of geometry and living beings in the area of biology.\nDescriptive ontology aims to articulate the conceptual scheme underlying how people ordinarily think about the world. Prescriptive ontology departs from common conceptions of the structure of reality and seeks to formulate a new and better conceptualization.\nAnother contrast is between analytic and speculative ontology. Analytic ontology examines the types and categories of being to determine what kinds of things could exist and what features they would have. Speculative ontology aims to determine which entities actually exist, for example, whether there are numbers or whether time is an illusion.\nMetaontology studies the underlying concepts, assumptions, and methods of ontology. Unlike other forms of ontology, it does not ask \"what exists\" but \"what does it mean for something to exist\" and \"how can people determine what exists\". It is closely related to fundamental ontology, an approach developed by philosopher Martin Heidegger that seeks to uncover the meaning of being.\nSchools of thought.\nRealism and anti-realism.\nThe term \"realism\" is used for various theories that affirm that some kind of phenomenon is real or has mind-independent existence. Ontological realism is the view that there are objective facts about what exists and what the nature and categories of being are. Ontological realists do not make claims about what those facts are, for example, whether elementary particles exist. They merely state that there are mind-independent facts that determine which ontological theories are true. This idea is denied by ontological anti-realists, also called ontological deflationists, who say that there are no substantive facts one way or the other. According to philosopher Rudolf Carnap, for example, ontological statements are relative to language and depend on the ontological framework of the speaker. This means that there are no framework-independent ontological facts since different frameworks provide different views while there is no objectively right or wrong framework.\nIn a more narrow sense, realism refers to the existence of certain types of entities. Realists about universals say that universals have mind-independent existence. According to Platonic realists, universals exist not only independent of the mind but also independent of particular objects that exemplify them. This means that the universal \"red\" could exist by itself even if there were no red objects in the world. Aristotelian realism, also called moderate realism, rejects this idea and says that universals only exist as long as there are objects that exemplify them. Conceptualism, by contrast, is a form of anti-realism, stating that universals only exist in the mind as concepts that people use to understand and categorize the world. Nominalists defend a strong form of anti-realism by saying that universals have no existence. This means that the world is entirely composed of particular objects.\nMathematical realism, a closely related view in the philosophy of mathematics, says that mathematical facts exist independently of human language, thought, and practices and are discovered rather than invented. According to mathematical Platonism, this is the case because of the existence of mathematical objects, like numbers and sets. Mathematical Platonists say that mathematical objects are as real as physical objects, like atoms and stars, even though they are not accessible to empirical observation. Influential forms of mathematical anti-realism include conventionalism, which says that mathematical theories are trivially true simply by how mathematical terms are defined, and game formalism, which understands mathematics not as a theory of reality but as a game governed by rules of string manipulation.\nModal realism is the theory that in addition to the actual world, there are countless possible worlds as real and concrete as the actual world. The primary difference is that the actual world is inhabited by us while other possible worlds are inhabited by our counterparts. Modal anti-realists reject this view and argue that possible worlds do not have concrete reality but exist in a different sense, for example, as abstract or fictional objects.\nScientific realists say that the scientific description of the world is an accurate representation of reality. It is of particular relevance in regard to things that cannot be directly observed by humans but are assumed to exist by scientific theories, like electrons, forces, and laws of nature. Scientific anti-realism says that scientific theories are not descriptions of reality but instruments to predict observations and the outcomes of experiments.\nMoral realists claim that there exist mind-independent moral facts. According to them, there are objective principles that determine which behavior is morally right. Moral anti-realists either claim that moral principles are subjective and differ between persons and cultures, a position known as moral relativism, or outright deny the existence of moral facts, a view referred to as moral nihilism.\nBy number of categories.\nMonocategorical theories say that there is only one fundamental category, meaning that every single entity belongs to the same universal class. For example, some forms of nominalism state that only concrete particulars exist while some forms of bundle theory state that only properties exist. Polycategorical theories, by contrast, hold that there is more than one basic category, meaning that entities are divided into two or more fundamental classes. They take the form of systems of categories, which list the highest genera of being to provide a comprehensive inventory of everything.\nThe closely related discussion between monism and dualism is about the most fundamental types that make up reality. According to monism, there is only one kind of thing or substance on the most basic level. Materialism is an influential monist view; it says that everything is material. This means that mental phenomena, such as beliefs, emotions, and consciousness, either do not exist or exist as aspects of matter, like brain states. Idealists take the converse perspective, arguing that everything is mental. They may understand physical phenomena, like rocks, trees, and planets, as ideas or perceptions of conscious minds. Neutral monism occupies a middle ground by saying that both mind and matter are derivative phenomena. Dualists state that mind and matter exist as independent principles, either as distinct substances or different types of properties. In a slightly different sense, monism contrasts with pluralism as a view not about the number of basic types but the number of entities. In this sense, monism is the controversial position that only a single all-encompassing entity exists in all of reality. Pluralism is more commonly accepted and says that several distinct entities exist.\nBy fundamental categories.\nThe historically influential substance-attribute ontology is a polycategorical theory. It says that reality is at its most fundamental level made up of unanalyzable substances that are characterized by universals, such as the properties an individual substance has or relations that exist between substances. The closely related substratum theory says that each concrete object is made up of properties and a substratum. The difference is that the substratum is not characterized by properties: it is a featureless or \"bare particular\" that merely supports the properties.\nVarious alternative ontological theories have been proposed that deny the role of substances as the foundational building blocks of reality. Stuff ontologies say that the world is not populated by distinct entities but by continuous stuff that fills space. This stuff may take various forms and is often conceived as infinitely divisible. According to process ontology, processes or events are the fundamental entities. This view usually emphasizes that nothing in reality is static, meaning that being is dynamic and characterized by constant change. Bundle theories state that there are no regular objects but only bundles of co-present properties. For example, a lemon may be understood as a bundle that includes the properties yellow, sour, and round. According to traditional bundle theory, the bundled properties are universals, meaning that the same property may belong to several different bundles. According to trope bundle theory, properties are particular entities that belong to a single bundle.\nSome ontologies focus not on distinct objects but on interrelatedness. According to relationalism, all of reality is relational at its most fundamental level. Ontic structural realism agrees with this basic idea and focuses on how these relations form complex structures. Some structural realists state that there is nothing but relations, meaning that individual objects do not exist. Others say that individual objects exist but depend on the structures in which they participate. Fact ontologies present a different approach by focusing on how entities belonging to different categories come together to constitute the world. Facts, also known as states of affairs, are complex entities; for example, the fact that \"the Earth is a planet\" consists of the particular object \"the Earth\" and the property \"being a planet\". Fact ontologies state that facts are the fundamental constituents of reality, meaning that objects, properties, and relations cannot exist on their own and only form part of reality to the extent that they participate in facts.\nIn the history of philosophy, various ontological theories based on several fundamental categories have been proposed. One of the first theories of categories was suggested by Aristotle, whose system includes ten categories: substance, quantity, quality, relation, place, date, posture, state, action, and passion. An early influential system of categories in Indian philosophy, first proposed in the Vaisheshika school, distinguishes between six categories: substance, quality, motion, universal, individuator, and inherence. Immanuel Kant's transcendental idealism includes a system of twelve categories, which Kant saw as pure concepts of understanding. They are subdivided into four classes: quantity, quality, relation, and modality. In more recent philosophy, theories of categories were developed by C. S. Peirce, Edmund Husserl, Samuel Alexander, Roderick Chisholm, and E. J. Lowe.\nOthers.\nThe dispute between constituent and relational ontologies concerns the internal structure of concrete particular objects. Constituent ontologies say that objects have an internal structure with properties as their component parts. Bundle theories are an example of this position: they state that objects are bundles of properties. This view is rejected by relational ontologies, which say that objects have no internal structure, meaning that properties do not inhere in them but are externally related to them. According to one analogy, objects are like pin-cushions and properties are pins that can be stuck to objects and removed again without becoming a real part of objects. Relational ontologies are common in certain forms of nominalism that reject the existence of universal properties.\nHierarchical ontologies state that the world is organized into levels. Entities on all levels are real but low-level entities are more fundamental than high-level entities. This means that they can exist without high-level entities while high-level entities cannot exist without low-level entities. One hierarchical ontology says that elementary particles are more fundamental than the macroscopic objects they compose, like chairs and tables. Other hierarchical theories assert that substances are more fundamental than their properties and that nature is more fundamental than culture. Flat ontologies, by contrast, deny that any entity has a privileged status, meaning that all entities exist on the same level. For them, the main question is only whether something exists rather than identifying the level at which it exists.\nThe ontological theories of endurantism and perdurantism aim to explain how material objects persist through time. Endurantism is the view that material objects are three-dimensional entities that travel through time while being fully present in each moment. They remain the same even when they gain or lose properties as they change. Perdurantism is the view that material objects are four-dimensional entities that extend not just through space but also through time. This means that they are composed of temporal parts and, at any moment, only one part of them is present but not the others. According to perdurantists, change means that an earlier part exhibits different qualities than a later part. When a tree loses its leaves, for instance, there is an earlier temporal part with leaves and a later temporal part without leaves.\nDifferential ontology is a poststructuralist approach interested in the relation between the concepts of identity and difference. It says that traditional ontology sees identity as the more basic term by first characterizing things in terms of their essential features and then elaborating differences based on this conception. Differential ontologists, by contrast, privilege difference and say that the identity of a thing is a secondary determination that depends on how this thing differs from other things.\nObject-oriented ontology belongs to the school of speculative realism and examines the nature and role of objects. It sees objects as the fundamental building blocks of reality. As a flat ontology, it denies that some entities have a more fundamental form of existence than others. It uses this idea to argue that objects exist independently of human thought and perception.\nMethods.\nMethods of ontology are ways of conducting ontological inquiry and deciding between competing theories. There is no single standard method; the diverse approaches are studied by metaontology.\nConceptual analysis is a method to understand ontological concepts and clarify their meaning. It proceeds by analyzing their component parts and the necessary and sufficient conditions under which a concept applies to an entity. This information can help ontologists decide whether a certain type of entity, such as numbers, exists. Eidetic variation is a related method in phenomenological ontology that aims to identify the essential features of different types of objects. Phenomenologists start by imagining an example of the investigated type. They proceed by varying the imagined features to determine which ones cannot be changed, meaning they are essential. The transcendental method begins with a simple observation that a certain entity exists. In the following step, it studies the ontological repercussions of this observation by examining how it is possible or which conditions are required for this entity to exist.\nAnother approach is based on intuitions in the form of non-inferential impressions about the correctness of general principles. These principles can be used as the foundation on which an ontological system is built and expanded using deductive reasoning. A further intuition-based method relies on thought experiments to evoke new intuitions. This happens by imagining a situation relevant to an ontological issue and then employing counterfactual thinking to assess the consequences of this situation. For example, some ontologists examine the relation between mind and matter by imagining creatures identical to humans but without consciousness.\nNaturalistic methods rely on the insights of the natural sciences to determine what exists. According to an influential approach by Willard Van Orman Quine, ontology can be conducted by analyzing the ontological commitments of scientific theories. This method is based on the idea that scientific theories provide the most reliable description of reality and that their power can be harnessed by investigating the ontological assumptions underlying them.\nPrinciples of theory choice offer guidelines for assessing the advantages and disadvantages of ontological theories rather than guiding their construction. The principle of Ockham's Razor says that simple theories are preferable. A theory can be simple in different respects, for example, by using very few basic types or by describing the world with a small number of fundamental entities. Ontologists are also interested in the explanatory power of theories and give preference to theories that can explain many observations. A further factor is how close a theory is to common sense. Some ontologists use this principle as an argument against theories that are very different from how ordinary people think about the issue.\nIn applied ontology, ontological engineering is the process of creating and refining conceptual models of specific domains. Developing a new ontology from scratch involves various preparatory steps, such as delineating the scope of the domain one intends to model and specifying the purpose and use cases of the ontology. Once the foundational concepts within the area have been identified, ontology engineers proceed by defining them and characterizing the relations between them. This is usually done in a formal language to ensure precision and, in some cases, automatic computability. In the following review phase, the validity of the ontology is assessed using test data. Various more specific instructions for how to carry out the different steps have been suggested. They include the Cyc method, Gr\u00fcninger and Fox's methodology, and so-called METHONTOLOGY. In some cases, it is feasible to adapt a pre-existing ontology to fit a specific domain and purpose rather than creating a new one from scratch.\nRelated fields.\nOntology overlaps with many disciplines, including logic, the study of correct reasoning. Ontologists often employ logical systems to express their insights, specifically in the field of formal ontology. Of particular interest to them is the existential quantifier (formula_1), which is used to express what exists. In first-order logic, for example, the formula formula_2 states that dogs exist. Some philosophers study ontology by examining the structure of thought and language, saying that they reflect the structure of being. Doubts about the accuracy of natural language have led some ontologists to seek a new formal language, termed \"ontologese\", for a better representation of the fundamental structure of reality.\nOntologies are often used in information science to provide a conceptual scheme or inventory of a specific domain, making it possible to classify objects and formally represent information about them. This is of specific interest to computer science, which builds databases to store this information and defines computational processes to automatically transform and use it. For instance, to encode and store information about clients and employees in a database, an organization may use an ontology with categories such as person, company, address, and name. In some cases, it is necessary to exchange information belonging to different domains or to integrate databases using distinct ontologies. This can be achieved with the help of upper ontologies, which are not limited to one specific domain. They use general categories that apply to most or all domains, like Suggested Upper Merged Ontology and Basic Formal Ontology.\nSimilar applications of ontology are found in various fields seeking to manage extensive information within a structured framework. Protein Ontology is a formal framework for the standardized representation of protein-related entities and their relationships. Gene Ontology and Sequence Ontology serve a similar purpose in the field of genetics. Environment Ontology is a knowledge representation focused on ecosystems and environmental processes. Friend of a Friend provides a conceptual framework to represent relations between people and their interests and activities.\nThe topic of ontology has received increased attention in anthropology since the 1990s, sometimes termed the \"ontological turn\". This type of inquiry is focused on how people from different cultures experience and understand the nature of being. Specific interest has been given to the ontological outlook of Indigenous people and how it differs from a Western perspective. As an example of this contrast, it has been argued that various indigenous communities ascribe intentionality to non-human entities, like plants, forests, or rivers. This outlook is known as animism and is also found in Native American ontologies, which emphasize the interconnectedness of all living entities and the importance of balance and harmony with nature.\nOntology is closely related to theology and its interest in the existence of God as an ultimate entity. The ontological argument, first proposed by Anselm of Canterbury, attempts to prove the existence of the divine. It defines God as the greatest conceivable being. From this definition it concludes that God must exist since God would not be the greatest conceivable being if God lacked existence. Another overlap in the two disciplines is found in ontological theories that use God or an ultimate being as the foundational principle of reality. Heidegger criticized this approach, terming it \"ontotheology\".\nHistory.\nThe roots of ontology in ancient philosophy are speculations about the nature of being and the source of the universe. Discussions of the essence of reality are found in the Upanishads, ancient Indian scriptures dating from as early as 700 BCE. They say that the universe has a divine foundation and discuss in what sense ultimate reality is one or many. Samkhya, the first orthodox school of Indian philosophy, formulated an atheist dualist ontology based on the Upanishads, identifying pure consciousness and matter as its two foundational principles. The later Vaisheshika school proposed a comprehensive system of categories. In ancient China, Laozi's (6th century BCE) Taoism examines the underlying order of the universe, known as Tao, and how this order is shaped by the interaction of two basic forces, yin and yang. The philosophical movement of Xuanxue emerged in the 3rd century CE and explored the relation between being and non-being.\nStarting in the 6th century BCE, Presocratic philosophers in ancient Greece aimed to provide rational explanations of the universe. They suggested that a first principle, such as water or fire, is the primal source of all things. Parmenides (c. 515\u2013450 BCE) is sometimes considered the founder of ontology because of his explicit discussion of the concepts of being and non-being. Inspired by Presocratic philosophy, Plato (427\u2013347 BCE) developed his theory of forms. It distinguishes between unchangeable perfect forms and matter, which has a lower degree of existence and imitates the forms. Aristotle (384\u2013322 BCE) suggested an elaborate system of categories that introduced the concept of substance as the primary kind of being. The school of Neoplatonism arose in the 3rd century CE and proposed an ineffable source of everything, called \"the One\", which is more basic than being itself.\nThe problem of universals was an influential topic in medieval ontology. Boethius (477\u2013524 CE) suggested that universals can exist not only in matter but also in the mind. This view inspired Peter Abelard (1079\u20131142 CE), who proposed that universals exist only in the mind. Thomas Aquinas (1224\u20131274 CE) developed and refined fundamental ontological distinctions, such as the contrast between existence and essence, between substance and accidents, and between matter and form. He also discussed the transcendentals, which are the most general properties or modes of being. John Duns Scotus (1266\u20131308) argued that all entities, including God, exist in the same way and that each entity has a unique essence, called haecceity. William of Ockham (c. 1287\u20131347 CE) proposed that one can decide between competing ontological theories by assessing which one uses the smallest number of elements, a principle known as Ockham's razor.\nIn Arabic-Persian philosophy, Avicenna (980\u20131037 CE) combined ontology with theology. He identified God as a necessary being that is the source of everything else, which only has contingent existence. In 8th-century Indian philosophy, the school of Advaita Vedanta emerged. It says that only a single all-encompassing entity exists, stating that the impression of a plurality of distinct entities is an illusion. Starting in the 13th century CE, the Navya-Ny\u0101ya school built on Vaisheshika ontology with a particular focus on the problem of non-existence and negation. 9th-century China saw the emergence of Neo-Confucianism, which developed the idea that a rational principle, known as \"li\", is the ground of being and order of the cosmos.\nRen\u00e9 Descartes (1596\u20131650) formulated a dualist ontology at the beginning of the modern period. It distinguishes between mind and matter as distinct substances that causally interact. Rejecting Descartes's dualism, Baruch Spinoza (1632\u20131677) proposed a monist ontology according to which there is only a single entity that is identical to God and nature. Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz (1646\u20131716), by contrast, said that the universe is made up of many simple substances, which are synchronized but do not interact with one another. John Locke (1632\u20131704) proposed his substratum theory, which says that each object has a featureless substratum that supports the object's properties. Christian Wolff (1679\u20131754) was influential in establishing ontology as a distinct discipline, delimiting its scope from other forms of metaphysical inquiry. George Berkeley (1685\u20131753) developed an idealist ontology according to which material objects are ideas perceived by minds.\nImmanuel Kant (1724\u20131804) rejected the idea that humans can have direct knowledge of independently existing things and their nature, limiting knowledge to the field of appearances. For Kant, ontology does not study external things but provides a system of pure concepts of understanding. Influenced by Kant's philosophy, Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel (1770\u20131831) linked ontology and logic. He said that being and thought are identical and examined their foundational structures. Arthur Schopenhauer (1788\u20131860) rejected Hegel's philosophy and proposed that the world is an expression of a blind and irrational will. Francis Herbert Bradley (1846\u20131924) saw absolute spirit as the ultimate and all-encompassing reality while denying that there are any external relations. In Indian philosophy, Swami Vivekananda (1863\u20131902) expanded on Advaita Vedanta, emphasizing the unity of all existence. Sri Aurobindo (1872\u20131950) sought to understand the world as an evolutionary manifestation of a divine consciousness.\nAt the beginning of the 20th century, Edmund Husserl (1859\u20131938) developed phenomenology and employed its method, the description of experience, to address ontological problems. This idea inspired his student Martin Heidegger (1889\u20131976) to clarify the meaning of being by exploring the mode of human existence. Jean-Paul Sartre responded to Heidegger's philosophy by examining the relation between being and nothingness from the perspective of human existence, freedom, and consciousness. Based on the phenomenological method, Nicolai Hartmann (1882\u20131950) developed a complex hierarchical ontology that divides reality into four levels: inanimate, biological, psychological, and spiritual.\nAlexius Meinong (1853\u20131920) articulated a controversial ontological theory that includes nonexistent objects as part of being. Arguing against this theory, Bertrand Russell (1872\u20131970) formulated a fact ontology known as logical atomism. This idea was further refined by the early Ludwig Wittgenstein (1889\u20131951) and inspired D. M. Armstrong's (1926\u20132014) ontology. Alfred North Whitehead (1861\u20131947), by contrast, developed a process ontology. Rudolf Carnap (1891\u20131970) questioned the objectivity of ontological theories by claiming that what exists depends on one's linguistic framework. He had a strong influence on Willard Van Orman Quine (1908\u20132000), who analyzed the ontological commitments of scientific theories to solve ontological problems. Quine's student David Lewis (1941\u20132001) formulated the position of modal realism, which says that possible worlds are as real and concrete as the actual world. Since the end of the 20th century, interest in applied ontology has risen in computer and information science with the development of conceptual frameworks for specific domains.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "22264", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22264", "title": "Offensive team", "text": ""}
{"id": "22265", "revid": "46275428", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22265", "title": "Ordovician", "text": "Second period of the Paleozoic Era\nThe Ordovician ( ) is a geologic period and system, the second of six periods of the Paleozoic Era, and the second of twelve periods of the Phanerozoic Eon. The Ordovician spans 41.6 million years from the end of the Cambrian Period Ma (million years ago) to the start of the Silurian Period Ma.\nThe Ordovician, named after the Welsh tribe of the Ordovices, was defined by Charles Lapworth in 1879 to resolve a dispute between followers of Adam Sedgwick and Roderick Murchison, who were placing the same rock beds in North Wales in the Cambrian and Silurian systems, respectively. Lapworth recognized that the fossil fauna in the disputed strata were different from those of either the Cambrian or the Silurian systems, and placed them in a system of their own. The Ordovician received international approval in 1960 (forty years after Lapworth's death), when it was adopted as an official period of the Paleozoic Era by the International Geological Congress.\nLife continued to flourish during the Ordovician as it had in the earlier Cambrian Period, although the end of the period was marked by the Ordovician\u2013Silurian extinction events. Invertebrates, namely molluscs and arthropods, dominated the oceans, with members of the latter group probably starting their establishment on land during this time, becoming fully established by the Devonian. The first land plants are known from this period. The Great Ordovician Biodiversification Event considerably increased the diversity of life. Fish, the world's first true vertebrates, continued to evolve, and those with jaws may have first appeared late in the period. About 100 times as many meteorites struck the Earth per year during the Ordovician compared with today in a period known as the Ordovician meteor event. It has been theorized that this increase in impacts may originate from a ring system that formed around Earth at the time.\nSubdivisions.\nIn 2008, the ICS erected a formal international system of subdivisions for the Ordovician Period and System. Pre-existing Baltoscandic, British, Siberian, North American, Australian, Chinese, Mediterranean and North-Gondwanan regional stratigraphic schemes are also used locally.\nPaleogeography and tectonics.\nDuring the Ordovician, the southern continents were assembled into Gondwana, which reached from north of the equator to the South Pole. The Panthalassic Ocean, centered in the northern hemisphere, covered over half the globe. At the start of the period, the continents of Laurentia (in present-day North America), Siberia, and Baltica (present-day northern Europe) were separated from Gondwana by over of ocean. These smaller continents were also sufficiently widely separated from each other to develop distinct communities of benthic organisms. The small continent of Avalonia had just rifted from Gondwana and began to move north towards Baltica and Laurentia, opening the Rheic Ocean between Gondwana and Avalonia. Avalonia collided with Baltica towards the end of Ordovician.\nOther geographic features of the Ordovician world included the Tornquist Sea, which separated Avalonia from Baltica; the Aegir Ocean, which separated Baltica from Siberia; and an oceanic area between Siberia, Baltica, and Gondwana which expanded to become the Paleoasian Ocean in Carboniferous time. The Mongol-Okhotsk Ocean formed a deep embayment between Siberia and the Central Mongolian terranes. Most of the terranes of central Asia were part of an equatorial archipelago whose geometry is poorly constrained by the available evidence.\nThe period was one of extensive, widespread tectonism and volcanism. However, orogenesis (mountain-building) was not primarily due to continent-continent collisions. Instead, mountains arose along active continental margins during accretion of arc terranes or ribbon microcontinents. Accretion of new crust was limited to the Iapetus margin of Laurentia; elsewhere, the pattern was of rifting in back-arc basins followed by remerger. This reflected episodic switching from extension to compression. The initiation of new subduction reflected a global reorganization of tectonic plates centered on the amalgamation of Gondwana.\nThe Taconic orogeny, a major mountain-building episode, was well under way in Cambrian times. This continued into the Ordovician, when at least two volcanic island arcs collided with Laurentia to form the Appalachian Mountains. Laurentia was otherwise tectonically stable. An island arc accreted to South China during the period, while subduction along north China (Sulinheer) resulted in the emplacement of ophiolites.\nThe ash fall of the Millburg/Big Bentonite bed, at about 454 Ma, was the largest in the last 590 million years. This had a dense rock equivalent volume of as much as . Remarkably, this appears to have had little impact on life.\nThere was vigorous tectonic activity along northwest margin of Gondwana during the Floian, 478 Ma, recorded in the Central Iberian Zone of Spain. The activity reached as far as Turkey by the end of Ordovician. The opposite margin of Gondwana, in Australia, faced a set of island arcs. The accretion of these arcs to the eastern margin of Gondwana was responsible for the Benambran Orogeny of eastern Australia. Subduction also took place along what is now Argentina (Famatinian Orogeny) at 450 Ma. This involved significant back arc rifting. The interior of Gondwana was tectonically quiet until the Triassic.\nTowards the end of the Ordovician, Gondwana began to drift across the South Pole; this contributed to the Hirnantian glaciation and the associated extinction event.\nOrdovician meteor event.\nThe Ordovician meteor event is a proposed shower of meteors that occurred during the Middle Ordovician Epoch, about 467.5 \u00b1 0.28 million years ago, due to the break-up of the L chondrite parent body. It is not associated with any major extinction event. A 2024 study found that craters from this event cluster in a distinct band around the Earth, and that the breakup of the parent body may have formed a ring system for a period of about 40 million years, with frequent falling debris causing these craters.\nGeochemistry.\nThe Ordovician was a time of calcite sea geochemistry in which low-magnesium calcite was the primary inorganic marine precipitate of calcium carbonate. Carbonate hardgrounds were thus very common, along with calcitic ooids, calcitic cements, and invertebrate faunas with dominantly calcitic skeletons. Biogenic aragonite, like that composing the shells of most molluscs, dissolved rapidly on the sea floor after death.\nUnlike Cambrian times, when calcite production was dominated by microbial and non-biological processes, animals (and macroalgae) became a dominant source of calcareous material in Ordovician deposits.\nClimate and sea level.\nThe Early Ordovician climate was very hot, with intense greenhouse conditions and sea surface temperatures comparable to those during the Early Eocene Climatic Optimum. Carbon dioxide levels were very high at the Ordovician period's beginning. By the late Early Ordovician, the Earth cooled, giving way to a more temperate climate in the Middle Ordovician, with the Earth likely entering the Early Palaeozoic Ice Age during the Sandbian, and possibly as early as the Darriwilian or even the Floian. The Dapingian and Sandbian saw major humidification events evidenced by trace metal concentrations in Baltoscandia from this time. Evidence suggests that global temperatures rose briefly in the early Katian (Boda Event), depositing bioherms and radiating fauna across Europe. The early Katian also witnessed yet another humidification event. Further cooling during the Hirnantian, at the end of the Ordovician, led to the Late Ordovician glaciation.\nThe Ordovician saw the highest sea levels of the Paleozoic, and the low relief of the continents led to many shelf deposits being formed under hundreds of metres of water. The sea level rose more or less continuously throughout the Early Ordovician, leveling off somewhat during the middle of the period. Locally, some regressions occurred, but the sea level rise continued in the beginning of the Late Ordovician. Sea levels fell steadily due to the cooling temperatures for about 3 million years leading up to the Hirnantian glaciation. During this icy stage, the sea level has risen and dropped somewhat. Despite much study, the details remain unresolved. In particular, some researches interpret the fluctuations in sea level as pre-Hibernian glaciation, but sedimentary evidence of glaciation is lacking until the end of the period. There is evidence of glaciers during the Hirnantian on the land we now know as Africa and South America, which were near the South Pole at the time, facilitating the formation of the ice caps of the Hirnantian glaciation.\nAs with North America and Europe, Gondwana was largely covered with shallow seas during the Ordovician. Shallow clear waters over continental shelves encouraged the growth of organisms that deposit calcium carbonates in their shells and hard parts. The Panthalassic Ocean covered much of the Northern Hemisphere, and other minor oceans included Proto-Tethys, Paleo-Tethys, Khanty Ocean, which was closed off by the Late Ordovician, Iapetus Ocean, and the new Rheic Ocean.\nLife.\nFor most of the Late Ordovician life continued to flourish, but at and near the end of the period there were mass-extinction events that seriously affected conodonts and planktonic forms like graptolites. The trilobites Agnostida and Ptychopariida completely died out, and the Asaphida were much reduced. Brachiopods, bryozoans and echinoderms were also heavily affected, and the endocerid cephalopods died out completely, except for possible rare Silurian forms. The Ordovician\u2013Silurian extinction events may have been caused by an ice age that occurred at the end of the Ordovician Period, due to the expansion of the first terrestrial plants, as the end of the Late Ordovician was one of the coldest times in the last 600 million years of Earth's history.\nFauna.\nOn the whole, the fauna that emerged in the Ordovician were the template for the remainder of the Palaeozoic. The fauna was dominated by tiered communities of suspension feeders, mainly with short food chains. The ecological system reached a new grade of complexity far beyond that of the Cambrian fauna, which has persisted until the present day. Though less famous than the Cambrian explosion, the Ordovician radiation (also known as the Great Ordovician Biodiversification Event) was no less remarkable; marine faunal genera increased fourfold, resulting in 12% of all known Phanerozoic marine fauna. Several animals also went through a miniaturization process, becoming much smaller than their Cambrian counterparts. Another change in the fauna was the strong increase in filter-feeding organisms. The trilobite, inarticulate brachiopod, archaeocyathid, and eocrinoid faunas of the Cambrian were succeeded by those that dominated the rest of the Paleozoic, such as articulate brachiopods, cephalopods, and crinoids. Articulate brachiopods, in particular, largely replaced trilobites in shelf communities. Their success epitomizes the greatly increased diversity of carbonate shell-secreting organisms in the Ordovician compared to the Cambrian.\nOrdovician geography had its effect on the diversity of fauna; Ordovician invertebrates displayed a very high degree of provincialism. The widely separated continents of Laurentia and Baltica, then positioned close to the tropics and boasting many shallow seas rich in life, developed distinct trilobite faunas from the trilobite fauna of Gondwana, and Gondwana developed distinct fauna in its tropical and temperature zones. The Tien Shan terrane maintained a biogeographic affinity with Gondwana, and the Alborz margin of Gondwana was linked biogeographically to South China. Southeast Asia's fauna also maintained strong affinities to Gondwana's. North China was biogeographically connected to Laurentia and the Argentinian margin of Gondwana. A Celtic biogeographic province also existed, separate from the Laurentian and Baltican ones. However, tropical articulate brachiopods had a more cosmopolitan distribution, with less diversity on different continents. During the Middle Ordovician, beta diversity began a significant decline as marine taxa began to disperse widely across space. Faunas become less provincial later in the Ordovician, partly due to the narrowing of the Iapetus Ocean, though they were still distinguishable into the late Ordovician. \nTrilobites in particular were rich and diverse, and experienced rapid diversification in many regions. Trilobites in the Ordovician were very different from their predecessors in the Cambrian. Many trilobites developed bizarre spines and nodules to defend against predators such as primitive eurypterids and nautiloids while other trilobites such as \"Aeglina prisca\" evolved to become swimming forms. Some trilobites even developed shovel-like snouts for ploughing through muddy sea bottoms. Another unusual clade of trilobites known as the trinucleids developed a broad pitted margin around their head shields. Some trilobites such as \"Asaphus kowalewski\" evolved long eyestalks to assist in detecting predators whereas other trilobite eyes in contrast disappeared completely. Molecular clock analyses suggest that early arachnids started living on land by the end of the Ordovician. Although solitary corals date back to at least the Cambrian, reef-forming corals appeared in the early Ordovician, including the earliest known octocorals, corresponding to an increase in the stability of carbonate and thus a new abundance of calcifying animals. Brachiopods surged in diversity, adapting to almost every type of marine environment. Even after GOBE, there is evidence suggesting that Ordovician brachiopods maintained elevated rates of speciation. Molluscs, which appeared during the Cambrian or even the Ediacaran, became common and varied, especially bivalves, gastropods, and nautiloid cephalopods. Cephalopods diversified from shallow marine tropical environments to dominate almost all marine environments. Graptolites, which evolved in the preceding Cambrian period, thrived in the oceans. This includes the distinctive \"Nemagraptus gracilis\" graptolite fauna, which was distributed widely during peak sea levels in the Sandbian. Some new cystoids and crinoids appeared. It was long thought that the first true vertebrates (fish \u2014 Ostracoderms) appeared in the Ordovician, but recent discoveries in China reveal that they probably originated in the Early Cambrian. The first gnathostome (jawed fish) may have appeared in the Late Ordovician epoch. Chitinozoans, which first appeared late in the Wuliuan, exploded in diversity during the Tremadocian, quickly becoming globally widespread. Several groups of endobiotic symbionts appeared in the Ordovician.\nIn the Early Ordovician, trilobites were joined by many new types of organisms, including tabulate corals, strophomenid, rhynchonellid, and many new orthid brachiopods, bryozoans, planktonic graptolites and conodonts, and many types of molluscs and echinoderms, including the ophiuroids (\"brittle stars\") and the first sea stars. Nevertheless, the arthropods remained abundant; all the Late Cambrian orders continued, and were joined by the new group Phacopida. The first evidence of land plants also appeared (see evolutionary history of life).\nIn the Middle Ordovician, the trilobite-dominated Early Ordovician communities were replaced by generally more mixed ecosystems, in which brachiopods, bryozoans, molluscs, cornulitids, tentaculitids and echinoderms all flourished, tabulate corals diversified and the first rugose corals appeared. The planktonic graptolites remained diverse, with the Diplograptina making their appearance. One of the earliest known armoured agnathan (\"ostracoderm\") vertebrates, \"Arandaspis\", dates from the Middle Ordovician. During the Middle Ordovician there was a large increase in the intensity and diversity of bioeroding organisms. This is known as the Ordovician Bioerosion Revolution. It is marked by a sudden abundance of hard substrate trace fossils such as \"Trypanites\", \"Palaeosabella\", \"Petroxestes\" and \"Osprioneides\". Bioerosion became an important process, particularly in the thick calcitic skeletons of corals, bryozoans and brachiopods, and on the extensive carbonate hardgrounds that appear in abundance at this time. \nFlora.\nGreen algae were common in the Late Cambrian (perhaps earlier) and in the Ordovician. Terrestrial plants probably evolved from green algae, first appearing as tiny non-vascular forms resembling liverworts, in the middle to late Ordovician. Fossil spores found in Ordovician sedimentary rock are typical of bryophytes.\nAmong the first land fungi may have been arbuscular mycorrhiza fungi (Glomerales), playing a crucial role in facilitating the colonization of land by plants through mycorrhizal symbiosis, which makes mineral nutrients available to plant cells; such fossilized fungal hyphae and spores from the Ordovician of Wisconsin have been found with an age of about 460 million years ago, a time when the land flora most likely only consisted of plants similar to non-vascular bryophytes.\nMicrobiota.\nThough stromatolites had declined from their peak in the Proterozoic, they continued to exist in localised settings.\nEnd of the period.\nThe Ordovician came to a close in a series of extinction events that, taken together, comprise the second largest of the five major extinction events in Earth's history in terms of percentage of genera that became extinct. The only larger one was the Permian\u2013Triassic extinction event.\nThe extinctions occurred approximately 447\u2013444 million years ago and mark the boundary between the Ordovician and the following Silurian Period. At that time all complex multicellular organisms lived in the sea, and about 49% of genera of fauna disappeared forever; brachiopods and bryozoans were greatly reduced, along with many trilobite, conodont and graptolite families.\nThe most commonly accepted theory is that these events were triggered by the onset of cold conditions in the late Katian, followed by an ice age, in the Hirnantian faunal stage, that ended the long, stable greenhouse conditions typical of the Ordovician.\nThe ice age was possibly not long-lasting. Oxygen isotopes in fossil brachiopods show its duration may have been only 0.5 to 1.5 million years. Other researchers (Page et al.) estimate more temperate conditions did not return until the late Silurian.\nThe late Ordovician glaciation event was preceded by a fall in atmospheric carbon dioxide (from 7000 ppm to 4400 ppm). The dip may have been caused by a burst of volcanic activity that deposited new silicate rocks, which draw CO2 out of the air as they erode. Another possibility is that bryophytes and lichens, which colonized land in the middle to late Ordovician, may have increased weathering enough to draw down CO2 levels. The drop in CO2 selectively affected the shallow seas where most organisms lived. It has also been suggested that shielding of the sun's rays from the proposed Ordovician ring system, which also caused the Ordovician meteor event, may have also led to the glaciation. As the southern supercontinent Gondwana drifted over the South Pole, ice caps formed on it, which have been detected in Upper Ordovician rock strata of North Africa and then-adjacent northeastern South America, which were south-polar locations at the time. \nAs glaciers grew, the sea level dropped, and the vast shallow intra-continental Ordovician seas withdrew, which eliminated many ecological niches. When they returned, they carried diminished founder populations that lacked many whole families of organisms. They then withdrew again with the next pulse of glaciation, eliminating biological diversity with each change. Species limited to a single epicontinental sea on a given landmass were severely affected. Tropical lifeforms were hit particularly hard in the first wave of extinction, while cool-water species were hit worst in the second pulse.\nThose species able to adapt to the changing conditions survived to fill the ecological niches left by the extinctions. For example, there is evidence the oceans became more deeply oxygenated during the glaciation, allowing unusual benthic organisms (Hirnantian fauna) to colonize the depths. These organisms were cosmopolitan in distribution and present at most latitudes.\nAt the end of the second event, melting glaciers caused the sea level to rise and stabilise once more. The rebound of life's diversity with the permanent re-flooding of continental shelves at the onset of the Silurian saw increased biodiversity within the surviving Orders. Recovery was characterized by an unusual number of \"Lazarus taxa\", disappearing during the extinction and reappearing well into the Silurian, which suggests that the taxa survived in small numbers in refugia.\nAn alternate extinction hypothesis suggested that a ten-second gamma-ray burst could have destroyed the ozone layer and exposed terrestrial and marine surface-dwelling life to deadly ultraviolet radiation and initiated global cooling.\nRecent work considering the sequence stratigraphy of the Late Ordovician argues that the mass extinction was a single protracted episode lasting several hundred thousand years, with abrupt changes in water depth and sedimentation rate producing two pulses of last occurrences of species.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "22266", "revid": "20483999", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22266", "title": "Oregano", "text": "Species of flowering plant\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Taxobox/core/styles.css\" /&gt;\nOregano (, ; Origanum vulgare) is a species of flowering plant in the mint family, Lamiaceae. It was native to the Mediterranean region, but widely naturalised elsewhere in the temperate Northern Hemisphere.\nOregano is a woody perennial plant, growing to tall, with opposite leaves long. The flowers which can be white, pink or light purple, are long, and produced in erect spikes in summer. It is sometimes called wild marjoram, while its close relative \"O.\u00a0majorana\" is known as sweet marjoram. Both are widely used as culinary herbs, especially in Turkish, Greek, Spanish, Italian, Latin, and French cuisine. Oregano is also an ornamental plant, with numerous cultivars bred for varying leaf colour, flower colour and habit.\nEtymology.\nThe English word \"oregano\" is a borrowing of the Spanish , which derives from the Latin , which itself comes from Classical Greek (\"or\u012b\u0301ganon\"). The ultimate origin is disputed; some claim it is a compound Greek term that consists of (\"\u00f3ros\") meaning \"mountain\", and (\"g\u00e1nos\") meaning \"joy\", thus, \"joy of the mountain\" while \"The Oxford English Dictionary\" states it is \"probably a loanword [as] the plant comes from Africa\".\nDescription.\nOregano is a perennial, although it is grown as an annual in colder climates, as it often does not survive the winter.\nIt grows to tall and wide. The leaves are spade-shaped and olive-green. The flowers are purple, pink or white, long and grouped in clusters.\nOregano is related to the herb marjoram, sometimes being referred to as wild marjoram.\nChemistry.\nOregano contains polyphenols, including numerous flavones.\nThe essential oil of oregano is composed primarily of monoterpenoids and monoterpenes, with the relative concentration of each compound varying widely across geographic origin and other factors. Over 60 different compounds have been identified, with the primary ones being carvacrol and thymol ranging to over 80%, while lesser abundant compounds include \"p\"-cymene, \u03b3-terpinene, caryophyllene, spathulenol, germacrene\u00a0D, \u03b2-fenchyl alcohol and \u03b4-terpineol.\nDrying of the plant material affects both quantity and distribution of volatile compounds, with methods using higher heat and longer drying times having greater negative impact. A sample of fresh whole plant material found to contain 33 g/kg dry weight (3.1 g/kg wet) decreased to below a third after warm-air convection drying. Much higher concentrations of volatile compounds are achieved towards the end of the growing season.\nTaxonomy.\nMany subspecies and strains of oregano have been developed by humans over centuries for their unique flavours or other characteristics. Tastes range from spicy or astringent to more complicated and sweet. Simple oregano sold in garden stores as \"O.\u00a0vulgare\" may have a bland taste and larger, less-dense leaves, and is not considered the best for culinary use, with a taste less remarkable and pungent. It can pollinate other more sophisticated strains, but the offspring are rarely better in quality.\nThe related species \"Origanum onites\" (Greece, Turkey) and \"O.\u00a0syriacum\" (West Asia) have similar flavours. A closely related plant is marjoram from Turkey, which differs significantly in taste because phenolic compounds are missing from its essential oil. Some varieties show a flavour intermediate between oregano and marjoram.\nSubspecies.\nAccepted subspecies:\nCultivars.\nExample cultivars of oregano include:\nCultivars traded as Italian, Sicilian, etc. are usually hardy sweet marjoram (\"O.\" \u00d7 \"majoricum\"), a hybrid between the southern Adriatic \"O. v.\" subsp. \"hirtum\" and sweet marjoram (\"O.\u00a0majorana\"). They have a reputation for sweet and spicy tones, with little bitterness, and are prized for their flavor and compatibility with various recipes and sauces.\nCultivation.\nOregano is planted in early spring, the plants being spaced apart in fairly dry soil, with full sun. It will grow in a pH range between 6.0 (mildly acidic) and 9.0 (strongly alkaline), with a preferred range between 6.0 and 8.0. It prefers a hot, relatively dry climate, but does well in other environments.\nUses.\nCulinary.\nOregano is a culinary herb, used for the flavour of its leaves, which can be more intense when dried than fresh. It has an earthy, warm, and slightly bitter taste, which can vary in intensity. Good-quality oregano may be strong enough to almost numb the tongue, but cultivars adapted to colder climates may have a lesser flavour. Factors such as climate, season, and soil composition may affect the aromatic oils present, and this effect may be greater than the differences between the various species of plants. Among the chemical compounds contributing to the flavour are carvacrol, thymol, limonene, pinene, ocimene, and caryophyllene.\nOregano is the staple herb of Italian cuisine, most frequently used with roasted, fried, or grilled vegetables, meat, and fish. Oregano combines well with spicy foods popular in Southern Italy. It is less commonly used in the north of the country, as marjoram is generally preferred. Its popularity in the U.S. began when soldiers returning from World War II brought back with them a taste for the \"pizza herb\", which had probably been eaten in Southern Italy for centuries. \nOregano is widely used in cuisines of the Mediterranean Basin and Latin America, especially in Mexican cuisine and Argentine cuisine. In Turkish cuisine, oregano is mostly used for flavouring meat, especially mutton and lamb. In barbecue and kebab restaurants, it can be usually found as a condiment, together with paprika, salt, and pepper.\nDuring the summer, generous amounts of dried oregano are often added as a topping to a tomato and cucumber salad in Portugal, but it can be used to season meat and fish dishes as well. In Spain, apart from seasoning, it is used in preparations of a variety of traditional dishes such as \"morcilla\" (Iberian pig blood sausage) and adobo sauce for fish and meat. The dried and ground leaves are most often used in Greece to add flavour to Greek salad, and is usually added to the lemon-olive oil sauce that accompanies fish or meat grills and casseroles. In Albania, dried oregano is often used to make herbal tea which is especially popular in the northern part of Albania.\nOregano oil.\nOregano oil has been used in folk medicine over centuries. Oregano essential oil is extracted from the leaves of the oregano plant. Although oregano or its oil may be used as a dietary supplement, there is no clinical evidence to indicate that either has any effect on human health.\nIn 2014, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) warned a Utah company, Young Living, that its herbal products, including oregano essential oil, were being promoted to have numerous unproven anti-disease effects, and so were being sold as unauthorized misbranded drugs subject to seizure and federal penalties. Similar FDA warning letters for false advertising and unproven health claims about oregano essential oil products were published in 2017 and 2018.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "22269", "revid": "5877653", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22269", "title": "Oregonian", "text": "Oregonian may refer to:\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "22270", "revid": "44766446", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22270", "title": "Off topic", "text": "A topic outside the bounds of the current discussion\nIn the context of mailing lists, discussion groups, discussion forums, bulletin boards, newsgroups, and \nwikis a contribution is off-topic if it is not within the bounds of the current discussion, and on-topic if it is.\nEven on very specialized forums and lists, off-topic posting is not necessarily frowned upon, but a common netiquette convention is to mark a new off-topic posting or email by beginning it with \"OT\" - for example in a forum discussing the Linux operating system someone might post: \"OT: Did anyone else see that giant goose?\". \nPosting off-topic messages to deliberately aggravate other members is a form of trolling.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "22271", "revid": "29615425", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22271", "title": "Off-topic", "text": ""}
{"id": "22276", "revid": "46085058", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22276", "title": "Obituary (band)", "text": "American death metal band\nObituary is an American death metal band formed in Tampa, Florida, in 1984. Initially called Executioner, they were one of the fundamental acts in the development of the death metal genre, and are one of the genre's most successful bands of all time. Obituary has released eleven studio albums and, with the exception of a five-year hiatus from 1998 to 2003, they continue to perform live.\nObituary's current lineup consists of vocalist John Tardy, drummer Donald Tardy, rhythm guitarist Trevor Peres, bassist Terry Butler and lead guitarist Ken Andrews. The band has gone through several lineup changes, with the Tardy brothers and Peres being the only constant members.\nHistory.\nEarly career (1984\u20131990).\nFounded as Executioner in Seffner, Florida in 1984, they soon dropped the \"E\" from their name after discovering another band of the same name, becoming Xecutioner. The band's first lineup was composed of John Tardy (lead vocals), Donald Tardy (drums), Trevor Peres (rhythm guitar), Jerome Grable (bass) and Jerry Tidwell (lead guitar). The band was inspired by Hellhammer/Celtic Frost, Iron Maiden, Judas Priest, Slayer, Savatage, Nasty Savage, and bands in the then-burgeoning Florida death metal scene: Death and Morbid Angel. The band released demos between 1985 and 1987 (the 1985 demo as Executioner and the 1986 and 1987 demos as Xecutioner). They made their vinyl debut in 1987 with two tracks (\"Find the Arise\" and \"Like the Dead\") on the \"Raging Death\" compilation.\nNot long after the release of the compilation, bassist Grable was replaced by Daniel Tucker and guitarist Tidwell was replaced by Allen West. The following year, shortly before the release of the band's first album \"Slowly We Rot\" (1989), they changed their name to Obituary. Soon after the release of the album, however, Tucker and West quit the band and were respectively replaced by Frank Watkins and former Death guitarist James Murphy. This new lineup recorded the band's second album \"Cause of Death\", which was released on September 19, 1990, and is often considered to be one of the most important death metal albums of all time. Obituary supported \"Cause of Death\" with its first world tour, first North America with Sacred Reich and Forced Entry, Europe with Demolition Hammer and Morgoth and then North America again with Sepultura and Sadus.\nRise to success (1991\u20131997).\nIn 1991, just prior to the writing and recording sessions of their third album, Murphy left Obituary to join Cancer and was replaced by a returning Allen West. The lineup of Peres, Watkins, West and the Tardy brothers recorded the band's next three albums, starting with \"The End Complete\" (1992). \"The End Complete\" was a moderate success for Obituary, having sold more than a hundred thousand copies, and it was the band's first album to chart in the United States and Europe. This success also resulted in the release of Obituary's first-ever music video \"The End Complete\", which received significant airplay on MTV's \"Headbangers Ball\", and the band toured behind the album in over year (including headlining the Complete Control Tour with Cannibal Corpse, Malevolent Creation and Agnostic Front), going from playing clubs to theaters and arenas.\nObituary's fourth studio album, \"World Demise\", was released in 1994. Although the album did not sell as well as \"The End Complete\", it still managed to reach the top 100 in several territories, including the United States, United Kingdom, Germany, Switzerland and the Netherlands, and a music video for \"Don't Care\" was shot. In support of \"World Demise\", the band toured North America with Napalm Death and a then-unknown Machine Head, and Europe with Pitchshifter and Eyehategod.\nAfter a two-and-a-half year break from touring and recording, Obituary released their fifth studio album \"Back from the Dead\" in 1997. While the band did not abandon the death metal sound it had become known for with its previous albums, \"Back from the Dead\" is noted for being Obituary's most diverse record, incorporating elements of groove metal, hardcore punk, and in particular, its closing track \"Bullituary\" is played in a rap/nu metal style. Regarding the album's musical direction, John Tardy recalls: \"We took a more raw approach with that album. We used a new producer Jaime Locke on that record. We really like the NY Hardcore sound and those influences came out on that record. I love the album really in your face. Also my friends Skinner T and #1 Diablo did some rapping on it.\"\nBreakup and comeback (1998\u20132014).\nBy 1998, Obituary had disbanded due to exhaustion from touring, lack of support from their label, and its band members getting jobs and raising families of their own. John Tardy said, \"We stopped because there were a lot of politics in the band at the time. We were spending more than we were making, the label stopped supporting us and we were all getting older and for the first time in our lives realized this wasn't going to last forever. So we all had different opinions about our band.\" Guitarist Trevor Peres later claimed that one of the reasons Obituary broke up was because they \"had been together since we were teenagers, and then all of a sudden it turned into a professional thing and we were touring and for like 10 years we didn't live like normal people, we were like animals, like monkeys in a cage.\"\nFollowing Obituary's breakup, Donald Tardy played in Andrew W.K.'s touring band (during W.K.'s appearance on \"Saturday Night Live\" Tardy wore an Obituary shirt). Allen West focused on his two projects, Lowbrow and Six Feet Under. Trevor Peres formed Catastrophic in 2001, which released one album, \"The Cleansing\", in that same year. Obituary reformed in 2003 and Catastrophic continued to exist alongside the reformed Obituary. A reunion album, \"Frozen in Time\", was released in 2005. The band's first live DVD, \"Frozen Alive\", was released in January 2007.\nObituary was signed with Candlelight Records for its next three releases, \"Xecutioner's Return\" (2007), \"Darkest Day\" (2009), and the EP \"Left to Die\" (2008). A concert DVD release was also announced for January 2010. Since 2012, the band has been highly involved with the promotion of a new social networking site called Unation, as well as Donald Tardy beginning a Cat Sanctuary organization called Metal Meowlisha, an organization practicing \"trap-neuter-vaccinate-return\", and caring for 25 cat colonies (200 cats).\nIn April 2010, Obituary began work on new material for their ninth studio album \"Inked in Blood\", which was not released until 2014. It was the first Obituary album not to be recorded with longtime bassist Frank Watkins since their 1989 debut album \"Slowly We Rot\". On August 2, 2013, the band launched a Kickstarter campaign with a goal of raising $10,000.00; the money raised was promised to allow Obituary to record and release their ninth album independently. The goal was met on August 3. When interviewed by metal webzine \"All About the Rock\", John Tardy said of the Kickstarter campaign, \"This campaign has been awesome and just confirms again what we already know and that is that we have the greatest fans in the world. We are using Kickstarter to raise enough money to release an album on our own. This is not a bash against record companies, it is just what we want to do. Years ago this would not even be a thought, but today we feel everything is in place for us, for better or worse, give it a shot.\" Though the band raised enough money to self-released, they were still signed to Relapse Records and partnered with the label for distribution of \"Inked In Blood\", their first Relapse release.\nDeath of Frank Watkins, \"Obituary\" and \"Dying of Everything\" (2015\u2013present).\nOn October 18, 2015, former and longtime Obituary bassist Frank Watkins died from cancer.\nOn August 24, 2016, Obituary streamed a new song called \"Loathe\", a B-side to their then-upcoming single \"Ten Thousand Ways to Die\", which was released on October 21. The band released its self-titled tenth studio album on March 17, 2017. A month prior to its release, the band released a song called \"No\", which appeared on \"Decibel\" magazine's flexi disc series.\nIn November and December 2018, Obituary embarked on a European tour as part of Slayer's farewell tour, also featuring Lamb of God and Anthrax. When asked in a June 2018 interview about the next Obituary album, drummer Donald Tardy said, \"We're always thinking about new songs and writing riffs and this and that. But at this time of our lives and this time of the music industry\u2026 This new album has only been out for just over a year now, so we're in no hurry to try and push another album out of us as quick as we can; there's no sense.\" In an August 2020 interview with Australia's Riff Crew, Donald Tardy revealed that, during the pandemic, Obituary had been working on a \"monster\" of a new album planned for release in 2021. The band had planned to tour in 2021, specifically Europe, in support of the record. In a March 2021 interview with France's United Rock Nations, vocalist John Tardy reiterated his brother's comments, saying that Obituary had been working on new material during the COVID-19 pandemic, and added that their new album would be released in 2022, with a tour to follow. On November 10, 2022, Obituary released \"The Wrong Time\" as the lead single from their then-upcoming eleventh studio album \"Dying of Everything\", released on January 13, 2023.\nAn Obituary box set, under the title \"Godly Beings\", was released on July 18, 2025 through Dissonance Productions. It includes the band's first four albums in their entirety with bonus tracks, and is \"complimented with the addition of liner notes from writer David Gehlke, who has written \"Turned Inside Out\", the official biography of Obituary\" and \"four reproduction postcards featuring classic images of the band.\"\nObituary is currently working on a new album, which, according to bassist Terry Butler, could be released in 2026 or 2027.\nMusical style.\nObituary's music is based on heavy groove guitar and drum riffs along with John Tardy's growling vocals, creating one of the signature sounds of death metal. Obituary played material that was described as \"slower, catchier\" on the albums \"The End Complete\" and \"World Demise\". Jon Wiederhorn of \"Loudwire\" wrote that the band \"were less musically adept than Morbid Angel or Death, so they downplayed whirlwind tempos for chugging, grimy half-time rhythms that sounded like they were oozing from a sewage treatment plant.\" Eduardo Rivadavia of \"Loudwire\" wrote, \"Obituary managed to stand out among the early Floridian death metal bands by way of a very simple, but effective songwriting strategy. Namely, while most of their contemporaries were still indebted to thrash and raging away at blazing speeds, Obituary embraced the slower tempos typical of doom metal, and fused it all together behind some of the era's heaviest guitar tones.\"\nBand members.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nTimeline\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "22278", "revid": "49959671", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22278", "title": "Ottoman Empire", "text": "Turkish Empire (c. 1299\u20131922)\n&lt;/td&gt;&lt;/tr&gt;&lt;/table&gt;\nThe Ottoman Empire, also known as the Turkish Empire, controlled much of Southeast Europe, West Asia, and North Africa from the 14th century to the early 20th century. It also controlled parts of southeastern Central Europe between the early 16th and early 18th centuries. \nThe empire emerged from a \"beylik\", or principality, founded in northwestern Anatolia in c.\u20091299 by the Turkoman tribal leader Osman I. His successors conquered much of Anatolia and had expanded into the Balkans by the mid-14th century, transforming their petty kingdom into a transcontinental empire. The Ottomans under Mehmed II brought to an end the Byzantine Empire with the conquest of Constantinople in 1453. Controlling a large part of the Mediterranean Basin, and with its capital at Constantinople, the Ottoman Empire was at the centre of interactions between the Middle East and Europe for six centuries. The empire ruled over a vast population and granted varying levels of autonomy to its many confessional communities, or \"millets\", to manage their own affairs per Islamic law. The Ottoman Empire became a global power in the 16th century during the reign of Selim I and Suleiman the Magnificent.\nThe Ottoman Empire was once thought to have entered a period of decline after the death of Suleiman the Magnificent. However, modern academic consensus posits that the empire continued to maintain a flexible and strong economy, society and military well into the 18th century. The Ottomans suffered military defeats in the late 18th and early 19th centuries, culminating in the loss of territory. The rise of nationalism led to a number of new states emerging in the Balkans. Following the reforms of the 19th century, the Ottoman state became more powerful and internally organized. In the 1876 revolution, the Ottoman Empire attempted a constitutional monarchy, before reverting to a royalist dictatorship under Abdul Hamid II, following the Great Eastern Crisis.\nOver the course of the late 19th century, Ottoman intellectuals known as Young Turks sought to liberalize and rationalize society and politics along Western lines, culminating in the Young Turk Revolution of 1908 led by the Committee of Union and Progress (CUP), which reestablished a constitutional monarchy. However, following the disastrous Balkan Wars, the CUP became increasingly radicalized and nationalistic, leading to the establishment of a dictatorship in the coup d'\u00e9tat of 1913.\nIn the 19th and early 20th centuries, persecution of Muslims during the Ottoman contraction and in the Russian Empire resulted in large-scale loss of life and mass migration into modern-day Turkey from the Balkans, Caucasus, and Crimea. The CUP joined World War I on the side of the Central Powers, and struggled with internal dissent, especially the Arab Revolt, and engaged in genocide against the Armenians, Assyrians, and Greeks. In the aftermath of World War I, the victorious Allied Powers occupied and partitioned the Ottoman Empire, which lost its southern territories to the United Kingdom and France. The successful Turkish War of Independence, led by Mustafa Kemal Atat\u00fcrk against the occupying Allies, led to the founding of the Republic of Turkey and the abolition of the sultanate in 1922.\nEtymology.\nThe word \"Ottoman\" is an historical anglicisation of the name of Osman I, the founder of the Empire and of the ruling House of Osman (also known as the Ottoman dynasty). Osman's name in turn was the Turkish form of the Arabic name (). In Ottoman Turkish, the empire was referred to as (), lit.\u2009'Sublime Ottoman State', or simply (), lit.\u2009'Ottoman State'.\nThe Turkish word for \"Ottoman\" () originally referred to the tribal followers of Osman in the fourteenth century. The word subsequently came to be used to refer to the empire's military-administrative elite. In contrast, the term \"Turk\" () was used to refer to the Anatolian peasant and tribal population and was seen as a disparaging term when applied to urban, educated individuals. In the early modern period, an educated, urban-dwelling Turkish speaker who was not a member of the military-administrative class typically referred to himself neither as an nor as a , but rather as a (), or \"Roman\", meaning an inhabitant of the territory of the former Byzantine Empire in the Balkans and Anatolia. The term was also used to refer to Turkish speakers by the other Muslim peoples of the empire and beyond.\nIn Western Europe, the names Ottoman Empire, Turkish Empire and Turkey were often used interchangeably, with Turkey being increasingly favoured both in formal and informal situations. This dichotomy was officially ended in 1920\u20131923, when the newly established Ankara-based Turkish government chose Turkey as the sole official name. At present, most scholarly historians avoid the terms \"Turkey\", \"Turks\", and \"Turkish\" when referring to the Ottomans, due to the empire's multinational character.\nHistory.\nRise (c. 1299\u20131453).\nAs the Rum Sultanate declined in the 13th century, Anatolia was divided into a patchwork of independent Turkish principalities known as the Anatolian Beyliks. One of these, in the region of Bithynia on the frontier of the Byzantine Empire, was led by the Turkish tribal leader Osman I (d. 1323/4), a figure of obscure origins from whom the name Ottoman is derived. Osman's early followers consisted of Turkish tribal groups and Byzantine renegades, with many but not all converts to Islam. Osman extended control of his principality by conquering Byzantine towns along the Sakarya River. A Byzantine defeat at the Battle of Bapheus in 1302 contributed to Osman's rise. It is not well understood how the early Ottomans came to dominate their neighbors, due to the lack of sources surviving. The Ghaza thesis popular during the 20th century credited their success to rallying religious warriors to fight for them in the name of Islam, but it is no longer generally accepted. No other hypothesis has attracted broad acceptance.\nIn the century after Osman I, Ottoman rule had begun to extend over Anatolia and the Balkans. The earliest conflicts began during the Byzantine\u2013Ottoman wars, waged in Anatolia in the late 13th century before entering Europe in the mid-14th century, followed by the Bulgarian\u2013Ottoman wars and the Serbian\u2013Ottoman wars in the mid-14th century. Much of this period was characterised by Ottoman expansion into the Balkans. Osman's son, Orhan, captured the northwestern Anatolian city of Bursa in 1326, making it the new capital and supplanting Byzantine control in the region. The important port of Thessaloniki was captured from the Venetians in 1387 and sacked. The Ottoman victory in Kosovo in 1389 effectively marked the end of Serbian power in the region, paving the way for Ottoman expansion into Europe. The Battle of Nicopolis for the Bulgarian Tsardom of Vidin in 1396, regarded as the last large-scale crusade of the Middle Ages, failed to stop the advance of the victorious Ottomans.\nAs the Turks expanded into the Balkans, the conquest of Constantinople became a crucial objective. The Ottomans had already wrested control of nearly all former Byzantine lands surrounding the city, but the strong defense of Constantinople's strategic position on the Bosporus Strait made it difficult to conquer. In 1402, the Byzantines were temporarily relieved when the Turco-Mongol leader Timur, founder of the Timurid Empire, invaded Ottoman Anatolia from the east. In the Battle of Ankara in 1402, Timur defeated Ottoman forces and took Sultan Bayezid I as prisoner, throwing the empire into disorder. The ensuing civil war lasted from 1402 to 1413 as Bayezid's sons fought over succession. It ended when Mehmed I emerged as the sultan and restored Ottoman power.\nThe Balkan territories lost by the Ottomans after 1402, including Thessaloniki, Macedonia, and Kosovo, were later recovered by Murad II between the 1430s and 1450s. On 10 November 1444, Murad repelled the Crusade of Varna by defeating the Hungarian, Polish, and Wallachian armies under W\u0142adys\u0142aw III of Poland and John Hunyadi at the Battle of Varna, although Albanians under Skanderbeg continued to resist. Four years later, John Hunyadi prepared another army of Hungarian and Wallachian forces to attack the Turks, but was again defeated at the Second Battle of Kosovo in 1448.\nAccording to modern historiography, there is a direct connection between the rapid Ottoman military advance and the consequences of the Black Death from the mid-fourteenth century onwards. Byzantine territories, where the initial Ottoman conquests were carried out, were exhausted demographically and militarily due to the plague, which facilitated Ottoman expansion. In addition, slave hunting was the main economic driving force behind Ottoman conquest. Some 21st-century authors re-periodize conquest of the Balkans into the \"ak\u0131nc\u0131 phase\", which spanned 8 to 13 decades, characterized by continuous slave hunting and destruction, followed by administrative integration into the Empire.\nExpansion and peak (1453\u20131566).\nThe son of Murad II, Mehmed the Conqueror, reorganized both state and military, and on 29 May 1453 conquered Constantinople, ending the Byzantine Empire. Mehmed allowed the Eastern Orthodox Church to maintain its autonomy and land in exchange for accepting Ottoman authority. Due to tension between the states of western Europe and the later Byzantine Empire, most of the Orthodox population accepted Ottoman rule, as preferable to Venetian rule. Albanian resistance was a major obstacle to Ottoman expansion on the Italian peninsula.\nIn the 15th and 16th centuries, the Ottoman Empire entered a period of expansion. The Empire prospered under the rule of a line of committed and effective Sultans. It flourished economically due to its control of the major overland trade routes between Europe and Asia.\nSultan Selim I (1512\u20131520) dramatically expanded the eastern and southern frontiers by defeating Shah Ismail of Safavid Iran, in the Battle of Chaldiran. Selim I established Ottoman rule in Egypt by defeating and annexing the Mamluk Sultanate of Egypt and created a naval presence on the Red Sea. After this Ottoman expansion, competition began between the Portuguese Empire and the Ottomans to become the dominant power in the region.\nSuleiman the Magnificent (1520\u20131566) captured Belgrade in 1521, conquered the southern and central parts of the Kingdom of Hungary as part of the Ottoman\u2013Hungarian Wars, and, after his historic victory in the Battle of Moh\u00e1cs in 1526, he established Ottoman rule in the territory of present-day Hungary and other Central European territories. He then laid siege to Vienna in 1529, but failed to take the city. In 1532, he made another attack on Vienna, but was repulsed in the siege of G\u00fcns. Transylvania, Wallachia and, intermittently, Moldavia, became tributary principalities of the Empire. In the east, the Ottoman Turks took Baghdad from the Persians in 1535, establishing Ottoman rule in Iraq and gaining naval access to the Persian Gulf. After the end of the Ottoman\u2013Safavid War (1532\u20131555), the Caucasus became partitioned for the first time between the Safavids and the Ottomans, a \"status quo\" that persisted until the Russian conquest of the Caucasus in the 19th century. By this partitioning as signed in the Peace of Amasya, Western Armenia, western Kurdistan, and Western Georgia fell into Ottoman hands, while southern Dagestan, Eastern Armenia, Eastern Georgia, and Azerbaijan remained Persian.\nIn 1539, a 60,000-strong Ottoman army besieged the Spanish garrison of Castelnuovo on the Adriatic coast; the successful siege cost the Ottomans 8,000 casualties, but Venice agreed to terms in 1540, surrendering most of its empire in the Aegean and the Morea. France and the Ottoman Empire, united by mutual opposition to Habsburg rule, became allies. The French conquests of Nice (1543) and Corsica (1553) occurred as a joint venture between French king Francis I and Suleiman, and were commanded by the Ottoman admirals Hayreddin Barbarossa and Dragut. France supported the Ottomans with an artillery unit during the 1543 Ottoman conquest of Esztergom in northern Hungary. After further advances by the Turks, the Habsburg ruler Ferdinand officially recognized Ottoman ascendancy in Hungary in 1547. Suleiman died of natural causes during the siege of Szigetv\u00e1r in 1566. Following his death, the Ottomans were said to be declining, although this has been rejected by many scholars. By the end of Suleiman's reign, the Empire spanned approximately , extending over three continents.\nThe Empire became a dominant naval force, controlling much of the Mediterranean Sea. The Empire was now a major part of European politics. The Ottomans became involved in multi-continental religious wars when Spain and Portugal were united under the Iberian Union. The Ottomans were holders of the Caliph title, meaning they were the leaders of Muslims worldwide. The Iberians were leaders of the Christian crusaders, and so the two fought in a worldwide conflict. There were zones of operations in the Mediterranean and Indian Ocean, where Iberians circumnavigated Africa to reach India and, on their way, wage war upon the Ottomans and their local Muslim allies. Likewise, the Iberians passed through newly-Christianized Latin America and had sent expeditions that traversed the Pacific to Christianize the formerly Muslim Philippines and use it as a base to attack the Muslims in the Far East. In this case, the Ottomans sent armies to aid its easternmost vassal and territory, the Sultanate of Aceh in Southeast Asia.\nThe Spanish\u2013Ottoman wars took place primarily in the Mediterranean. Barbary corsairs from the North African cities of Algiers, Tunis, and Tripoli, which were nominally part of the Ottoman Empire, captured thousands of merchant ships and raided coastal towns in Europe, enslaving the people they captured.\nDuring the 1600s, the world conflict between the Ottoman Caliphate and Iberian Union was a stalemate since both were at similar population, technology and economic levels. Nevertheless, the success of the Ottoman political and military establishment was compared to the Roman Empire, despite the difference in size, by the likes of contemporary Italian scholar Francesco Sansovino and French political philosopher Jean Bodin.\nStagnation and reform (1566\u20131827).\nRevolts, reversals, and revivals (1566\u20131683).\nIn the second half of the sixteenth century, the Ottoman Empire came under increasing strain from inflation and the rapidly rising costs of warfare that were impacting both Europe and the Middle East. These pressures led to a series of crises around the year 1600, placing great strain upon the Ottoman system of government. The empire underwent a series of transformations of its political and military institutions in response to these challenges, enabling it to successfully adapt to the new conditions of the seventeenth century and remain powerful, both militarily and economically. Historians of the mid-twentieth century once characterised this period as one of stagnation and decline, but this view is now rejected by the majority of academics.\nThe discovery of new maritime trade routes by Western European states allowed them to avoid the Ottoman trade monopoly. The Portuguese discovery of the Cape of Good Hope in 1488 initiated a series of Ottoman-Portuguese naval wars in the Indian Ocean throughout the 16th century. Despite the growing European presence in the Indian Ocean, Ottoman trade with the east continued to flourish. Cairo, in particular, benefitted from the rise of Yemeni coffee as a popular consumer commodity. As coffeehouses appeared in cities and towns across the empire, Cairo developed into a major center for its trade, contributing to its continued prosperity throughout the seventeenth and much of the eighteenth century.\nUnder Ivan IV (1533\u20131584), the Tsardom of Russia expanded into the Volga and Caspian regions at the expense of the Tatar khanates. In 1571, the Crimean khan Devlet I Giray, commanded by the Ottomans, invaded Russia and burned Moscow. The next year, the invasion was repeated but repelled at the Battle of Molodi. The Ottoman Empire and its vassal, the Crimean Khanate, continued to invade Eastern Europe in a series of slave raids, and remained a significant power in Eastern Europe until the end of the 17th century. The Crimean cavalry became indispensable for the Ottomans' campaigns against Russia, Poland, Hungary, and Persia.\nThe Ottomans decided to conquer Venetian Cyprus and on 22 July 1570, Nicosia was besieged; 50,000 Christians died, and 180,000 were enslaved. On 15 September 1570, the Ottoman cavalry appeared before the last Venetian stronghold in Cyprus, Famagusta. The Venetian defenders held out for 11 months against a force that at its peak numbered 200,000 men with 145 cannons; 163,000 cannonballs struck the walls of Famagusta before it fell to the Ottomans in August 1571. The Siege of Famagusta claimed 50,000 Ottoman casualties. Meanwhile, the Holy League consisting of mostly Spanish and Venetian fleets won a victory over the Ottoman fleet at the Battle of Lepanto (1571), off southwestern Greece; Catholic forces killed over 30,000 Turks and destroyed 200 of their ships. It was a startling, if mostly symbolic, blow to the image of Ottoman invincibility, an image which the victory of the Knights of Malta over the Ottoman invaders in the 1565 siege of Malta had recently set about eroding. The battle was far more damaging to the Ottoman navy in sapping experienced manpower than the loss of ships, which were rapidly replaced. The Ottoman navy recovered quickly, persuading Venice to sign a peace treaty in 1573, allowing the Ottomans to expand and consolidate their position in North Africa.\nBy contrast, the Habsburg frontier had settled somewhat, a stalemate caused by a stiffening of the Habsburg defenses. The Long Turkish War against Habsburg Austria (1593\u20131606) created the need for greater numbers of Ottoman infantry equipped with firearms, resulting in a relaxation of recruitment policy. This contributed to problems of indiscipline and outright rebelliousness within the corps, which were never fully solved. Irregular sharpshooters (Sekban) were also recruited, and on demobilisation turned to brigandage in the Celali rebellions (1590\u20131610), which engendered widespread anarchy in Anatolia in the late 16th and early 17th centuries. With the Empire's population reaching 30\u00a0million people by 1600, the shortage of land placed further pressure on the government. In spite of these problems, the Ottoman state remained strong, and its army did not collapse or suffer crushing defeats. The only exceptions were campaigns against the Safavid dynasty of Persia, where many of the Ottoman eastern provinces were lost, some permanently. This 1603\u20131618 war eventually resulted in the Treaty of Nasuh Pasha, which ceded the entire Caucasus, except westernmost Georgia, back into the possession of Safavid Iran. The treaty ending the Cretan War cost Venice much of Dalmatia, its Aegean island possessions, and Crete.\nDuring his brief majority reign, Murad IV (1623\u20131640) reasserted central authority and recaptured Iraq (1639) from the Safavids. The resulting Treaty of Zuhab of that same year decisively divided the Caucasus and adjacent regions between the two neighbouring empires as it had already been defined in the 1555 Peace of Amasya.\nThe Sultanate of Women (1533\u20131656) was a period in which the mothers of young sultans exercised power on behalf of their sons. The most prominent women of this period were K\u00f6sem Sultan and her daughter-in-law Turhan Hatice, whose political rivalry culminated in K\u00f6sem's murder in 1651. During the K\u00f6pr\u00fcl\u00fc era (1656\u20131703), effective control of the Empire was exercised by a sequence of grand viziers from the K\u00f6pr\u00fcl\u00fc family. The K\u00f6pr\u00fcl\u00fc Vizierate saw renewed military success with authority restored in Transylvania, the conquest of Crete completed in 1669, and expansion into Polish southern Ukraine, with the strongholds of Khotyn, and Kamianets-Podilskyi and the territory of Podolia ceding to Ottoman control in 1676.\nThis period of renewed assertiveness came to a calamitous end in 1683 when Grand Vizier Kara Mustafa Pasha led a huge army to attempt a second Ottoman siege of Vienna in the Great Turkish War of 1683\u20131699. The final assault being fatally delayed, the Ottoman forces were swept away by allied Habsburg, German, and Polish forces spearheaded by the Polish king John III Sobieski at the Battle of Vienna. The alliance of the Holy League pressed home the advantage of the defeat at Vienna, culminating in the Treaty of Karlowitz (26 January 1699), which ended the Great Turkish War. The Ottomans surrendered control of significant territories, many permanently. Mustafa II (1695\u20131703) led the counterattack of 1695\u20131696 against the Habsburgs in Hungary, but was undone at the disastrous defeat at Zenta (in modern Serbia), 11 September 1697.\nMilitary defeats.\nAside from the loss of the Banat and the temporary loss of Belgrade (1717\u20131739), the Ottoman border on the Danube and Sava remained stable during the eighteenth century. Russian expansion, however, presented a large and growing threat. Accordingly, King Charles XII of Sweden was welcomed as an ally in the Ottoman Empire following his defeat by the Russians at the Battle of Poltava of 1709 in central Ukraine (part of the Great Northern War of 1700\u20131721). Charles XII persuaded the Ottoman Sultan Ahmed III to declare war on Russia, which resulted in an Ottoman victory in the Pruth River Campaign of 1710\u20131711, in Moldavia.\nAfter the Austro-Turkish War, the Treaty of Passarowitz confirmed the loss of the Banat, Serbia, and \"Little Walachia\" (Oltenia) to Austria. The Treaty also revealed that the Ottoman Empire was on the defensive and unlikely to present any further aggression in Europe. The Austro-Russian\u2013Turkish War (1735\u20131739), which was ended by the Treaty of Belgrade in 1739, resulted in the Ottoman recovery of northern Bosnia, Habsburg Serbia (including Belgrade), Oltenia and the southern parts of the Banat of Temeswar; but the Empire lost the port of Azov, north of the Crimean Peninsula, to the Russians. After this treaty the Ottoman Empire was able to enjoy a generation of peace in Europe, as Austria and Russia were forced to deal with the rise of Prussia.\nEducational and technological reforms came about, including the establishment of higher education institutions such as the Istanbul Technical University. In 1734 an artillery school was established to impart Western-style artillery methods, but the Islamic clergy successfully objected under the grounds of theodicy. In 1754 the artillery school was reopened on a semi-secret basis. In 1726, Ibrahim Muteferrika convinced the Grand Vizier Nev\u015fehirli Damat Ibrahim Pasha, the Grand Mufti, and the clergy on the efficiency of the printing press, and Muteferrika was later granted by Sultan Ahmed III permission to publish non-religious books (despite opposition from some calligraphers and religious leaders). Muteferrika's press published its first book in 1729 and, by 1743, issued 17 works in 23 volumes, each having between 500 and 1,000 copies.\nIn North Africa, Spain conquered Oran from the autonomous Deylik of Algiers. The Bey of Oran received an army from Algiers, but it failed to recapture Oran; the siege caused the deaths of 1,500 Spaniards, and even more Algerians. The Spanish also massacred many Muslim soldiers. In 1792, Spain abandoned Oran, selling it to the Deylik of Algiers.\nIn 1768 Russian-backed Ukrainian Haidamakas, pursuing Polish confederates, entered Balta, an Ottoman-controlled town on the border of Bessarabia in Ukraine, massacred its citizens, and burned the town to the ground. This action provoked the Ottoman Empire into the Russo-Turkish War of 1768\u20131774. The Treaty of K\u00fc\u00e7\u00fck Kaynarca of 1774 ended the war and provided freedom of worship for the Christian citizens of the Ottoman-controlled provinces of Wallachia and Moldavia. By the late 18th century, after a number of defeats in the wars with Russia, some people in the Ottoman Empire began to conclude that the reforms of Peter the Great had given the Russians an edge, and the Ottomans would have to keep up with Western technology in order to avoid further defeats.\nSelim III (1789\u20131807) made the first major attempts to modernise the army, but his reforms were hampered by the religious leadership and the Janissary corps. Jealous of their privileges and firmly opposed to change, the Janissary revolted. Selim's efforts cost him his throne and his life, but were resolved in spectacular and bloody fashion by his successor, the dynamic Mahmud II, who eliminated the Janissary corps in 1826.\nThe Serbian revolution (1804\u20131815) marked the beginning of an era of national awakening in the Balkans during the Eastern Question. In 1811, the fundamentalist Wahhabis of Arabia, led by the al-Saud family, revolted against the Ottomans. Unable to defeat the Wahhabi rebels, the Sublime Porte had Muhammad Ali Pasha of Kavala, the \"vali\" (governor) of the Eyalet of Egypt, tasked with retaking Arabia, which ended with the destruction of the Emirate of Diriyah in 1818. The suzerainty of Serbia as a hereditary monarchy under its own dynasty was acknowledged \"de jure\" in 1830. In 1821, the Greeks declared war on the Sultan. A rebellion that originated in Moldavia as a diversion was followed by the main revolution in the Peloponnese, which, along with the northern part of the Gulf of Corinth, became the first parts of the Ottoman Empire to achieve independence (in 1829). In 1830, the French invaded the Deylik of Algiers. The campaign took 21 days, and resulted in over 5,000 Algerian military casualties, and about 2,600 French ones. Before the French invasion the total population of Algeria was most likely between 3,000,000 and 5,000,000. By 1873, the population of Algeria (excluding several hundred thousand newly arrived French settlers) had decreased to 2,172,000. In 1831, Muhammad Ali of Egypt revolted against Sultan Mahmud II due to the latter's refusal to grant him the governorships of Greater Syria and Crete, which the Sultan had promised him in exchange for sending military assistance to put down the Greek revolt (1821\u20131829) that ultimately ended with the formal independence of Greece in 1830. It was a costly enterprise for Muhammad Ali, who had lost his fleet at the Battle of Navarino in 1827. Thus began the first Egyptian\u2013Ottoman War (1831\u20131833), during which the French-trained army of Muhammad Ali, under the command of his son Ibrahim Pasha, defeated the Ottoman Army as it marched into Anatolia, reaching the city of K\u00fctahya within of the capital, Constantinople. In desperation, Sultan Mahmud II appealed to the empire's traditional arch-rival Russia for help, asking Emperor Nicholas I to send an expeditionary force to assist him. In return for signing the Treaty of H\u00fcnk\u00e2r \u0130skelesi, the Russians sent the expeditionary force which deterred Ibrahim Pasha from marching any further towards Constantinople. Under the terms of the Convention of K\u00fctahya, signed on 5 May 1833, Muhammad Ali agreed to abandon his campaign against the Sultan, in exchange for which he was made the \"vali\" (governor) of the \"vilayets\" (provinces) of Crete, Aleppo, Tripoli, Damascus and Sidon (the latter four comprising modern Syria and Lebanon), and given the right to collect taxes in Adana. Had it not been for the Russian intervention, Sultan Mahmud II could have faced the risk of being overthrown and Muhammad Ali could have even become the new Sultan. These events marked the beginning of a recurring pattern where the Sublime Porte needed the help of foreign powers to protect itself.\nIn 1839, the Sublime Porte attempted to take back what it lost to the \"de facto\" autonomous, but \"de jure\" still Ottoman Eyalet of Egypt, but its forces were initially defeated, which led to the Oriental Crisis of 1840. Muhammad Ali had close relations with France, and the prospect of him becoming the Sultan of Egypt was widely viewed as putting the entire Levant into the French sphere of influence. As the Sublime Porte had proved itself incapable of defeating Muhammad Ali, the British Empire and Austrian Empire provided military assistance, and the second Egyptian\u2013Ottoman War (1839\u20131841) ended with Ottoman victory and the restoration of Ottoman suzerainty over Egypt Eyalet and the Levant.\nBy the mid-19th century, the Ottoman Empire was called the \"sick man of Europe\". Three suzerain states \u2013 the Principality of Serbia, Wallachia and Moldavia \u2013 moved towards \"de jure\" independence during the 1860s and 1870s.\nDecline and modernisation (1828\u20131908).\nDuring the Tanzimat period (1839\u20131876), the government's series of constitutional reforms led to a fairly modern conscripted army, banking system reforms, the decriminalization of homosexuality, the replacement of religious law with secular law, and guilds with modern factories. The Ottoman Ministry of Post was established in Istanbul in 1840. American inventor Samuel Morse received an Ottoman patent for the telegraph in 1847, issued by Sultan Abd\u00fclmecid, who personally tested the invention. The reformist period peaked with the Constitution, called the \"Kan\u00fbn-u Es\u00e2s\u00ee\". The empire's First Constitutional era was short-lived. The parliament survived for only two years before the sultan suspended it.\nThe empire's Christian population, owing to their higher educational levels, started to pull ahead of the Muslim majority, leading to much resentment. In 1861, there were 571 primary and 94 secondary schools for Ottoman Christians, with 140,000 pupils in total, a figure that vastly exceeded the number of Muslim children in school at the time, who were further hindered by the amount of time spent learning Arabic and Islamic theology. Author Norman Stone suggests that the Arabic alphabet, in which Turkish was written until 1928, was ill-suited to reflect the sounds of Turkish (which is a Turkic as opposed to Semitic language), which imposed further difficulty on Turkish children. In turn, Christians' higher educational levels allowed them to play a larger role in the economy, with the rise in prominence of groups such as the Sursock family indicative of this. In 1911, of the 654 wholesale companies in Istanbul, 528 were owned by ethnic Greeks. In many cases, Christians and Jews gained protection from European consuls and citizenship, meaning they were protected from Ottoman law and not subject to the same economic regulations as their Muslim counterparts.\nThe Crimean War (1853\u20131856) was part of a long-running contest between the major European powers for influence over territories of the declining Ottoman Empire. The financial burden of the war led the Ottoman state to issue foreign loans amounting to 5million pounds sterling on 4 August 1854. The war caused an exodus of the Crimean Tatars, about 200,000 of whom moved to the Ottoman Empire in continuing waves of emigration. Toward the end of the Caucasian Wars, 90% of the Circassians were ethnically cleansed and exiled from their homelands in the Caucasus, fleeing to the Ottoman Empire, resulting in the settlement of 500,000 to 700,000 Circassians in the Ottoman Empire. Crimean Tatar refugees in the late 19th century played an especially notable role in seeking to modernise Ottoman education and in first promoting both Pan-Turkism and a sense of Turkish nationalism.\nIn this period, the Ottoman Empire spent only small amounts of public funds on education; for example, in 1860\u20131861 only 0.2% of the total budget was invested in education. As the Ottoman state attempted to modernize its infrastructure and army in response to outside threats, it opened itself up to a different kind of threat: that of creditors. As the historian Eugene Rogan has written, \"the single greatest threat to the independence of the Middle East\" in the 19th century \"was not the armies of Europe but its banks\". The Ottoman state, which had begun taking on debt with the Crimean War, was forced to declare bankruptcy in 1875. By 1881, the Ottoman Empire agreed to have its debt controlled by the Ottoman Public Debt Administration, a council of European men with presidency alternating between France and Britain. The body controlled swaths of the Ottoman economy, and used its position to ensure that European capital continued to penetrate the empire, often to the detriment of local Ottoman interests.\nThe Ottoman bashi-bazouks suppressed the Bulgarian uprising of 1876, massacring up to 100,000 people in the process. The Russo-Turkish War (1877\u20131878) ended with a decisive victory for Russia. As a result, Ottoman holdings in Europe declined sharply: Bulgaria was established as an independent principality inside the Ottoman Empire; Romania achieved full independence; and Serbia and Montenegro finally gained complete independence, but with smaller territories. In 1878, Austria-Hungary unilaterally occupied the Ottoman provinces of Bosnia-Herzegovina and Novi Pazar.\nBritish Prime Minister Benjamin Disraeli advocated restoring the Ottoman territories on the Balkan Peninsula during the Congress of Berlin, and in return, Britain assumed the administration of Cyprus in 1878. Britain later sent troops to Egypt in 1882 to put down the Urabi Revolt (Sultan Abdul Hamid II was too paranoid to mobilize his own army, fearing this would result in a coup d'\u00e9tat), effectively gaining control in both territories. Abdul Hamid II was so fearful of a coup that he did not allow his army to conduct war games, lest this serve as cover for a coup, but he did see the need for military mobilization. In 1883, a German military mission under General Baron Colmar von der Goltz arrived to train the Ottoman Army, leading to the so-called \"Goltz generation\" of German-trained officers, who played a notable role in the politics of the empire's last years.\nFrom 1894 to 1896, between 100,000 and 300,000 Armenians living throughout the empire were killed in what became known as the Hamidian massacres.\nIn 1897 the population was 19million, of whom 14million (74%) were Muslim. An additional 20million lived in provinces that remained under the sultan's nominal suzerainty but were entirely outside his actual power. One by one the Porte lost nominal authority. They included Egypt, Tunisia, Bulgaria, Cyprus, Bosnia-Herzegovina, and Lebanon.\nAs the Ottoman Empire gradually shrank, 7\u20139million Muslims from its former territories in the Caucasus, Crimea, Balkans, and the Mediterranean islands migrated to Anatolia and Eastern Thrace. After the Empire lost the First Balkan War (1912\u20131913), it lost all its Balkan territories except East Thrace (European Turkey). This resulted in around 400,000 Muslims fleeing with the retreating Ottoman armies (with many dying from cholera brought by the soldiers), and 400,000 non-Muslims fled territory still under Ottoman rule. Justin McCarthy estimates that from 1821 to 1922, 5.5million Muslims died in southeastern Europe, with the expulsion of 5million. In addition the Ottoman state encouraged transnational migration, including Circassians, Bosnians, and Russian Jews resettled in the southern Levant. These communities, alongside internal Arab resettlement, reshaped rural society and land use in ways that reflected broader imperial patterns of demographic engineering and agrarian expansion.\nDefeat and dissolution (1908\u20131922).\nYoung Turk movement.\nThe defeat and dissolution of the Ottoman Empire (1908\u20131922) began with the Second Constitutional Era, a moment of hope and promise established with the Young Turk Revolution. It restored the Constitution of the Ottoman Empire and brought in multi-party politics with a two-stage electoral system (electoral law) under the Ottoman parliament. The constitution offered hope by freeing the empire's citizens to modernise the state's institutions, rejuvenate its strength, and enable it to hold its own against outside powers. Its guarantee of liberties promised to dissolve inter-communal tensions and transform the empire into a more harmonious place. Instead, this period became the story of the twilight struggle of the Empire.\nMembers of Young Turks movement who had once gone underground now established their parties. Among them \"Committee of Union and Progress\", and \"Freedom and Accord Party\" were major parties. On the other end of the spectrum were ethnic parties, which included Poale Zion, Al-Fatat, and Armenian national movement organised under Armenian Revolutionary Federation. Profiting from the civil strife, Austria-Hungary officially annexed Bosnia and Herzegovina in 1908. The last of the Ottoman censuses was performed in 1914. Despite military reforms which reconstituted the Ottoman Modern Army, the Empire lost its North African territories and the Dodecanese in the Italo-Turkish War (1911) and almost all of its European territories in the Balkan Wars (1912\u20131913). The Empire faced continuous unrest in the years leading up to World War I, including the 31 March Incident and two further coups in 1912 and 1913.\nWorld War I.\nThe Ottoman Empire entered World War I on the side of the Central Powers and was ultimately defeated. The Ottoman participation in the war began with the combined German-Ottoman surprise attack on the Black Sea coast of the Russian Empire on 29 October 1914. Following the attack, the Russian Empire (2 November 1914) and its allies France (5 November 1914) and the British Empire (5 November 1914) declared war on the Ottoman Empire. Also on 5 November 1914, the British government changed the status of the Khedivate of Egypt and Cyprus, which were de jure Ottoman territories prior to the war, to British protectorates.\nThe Ottomans successfully defended the Dardanelles strait during the Gallipoli campaign (1915\u20131916) and achieved initial victories against British forces in the first two years of the Mesopotamian campaign, such as the Siege of Kut (1915\u20131916); but the Arab Revolt (1916\u20131918) turned the tide against the Ottomans in the Middle East. In the Caucasus campaign, however, the Russian forces had the upper hand from the beginning, especially after the Battle of Sarikamish (1914\u20131915). Russian forces advanced into northeastern Anatolia and controlled the major cities there until retreating from World War I with the Treaty of Brest-Litovsk following the Russian Revolution in 1917.\nGenocides.\nIn 1915 the Ottoman government and Kurdish tribes in the region started the extermination of its ethnic Armenian population, resulting in the deaths of up to 1.5million Armenians in the Armenian genocide. The genocide was carried out during and after World War I and implemented in two phases: the wholesale killing of the able-bodied male population through massacre and subjection of army conscripts to forced labour, followed by the deportation of women, children, the elderly and infirm on death marches leading to the Syrian desert. Driven forward by military escorts, the deportees were deprived of food and water and subjected to periodic robbery, rape, and systematic massacre. Large-scale massacres were also committed against the Empire's Greek and Assyrian minorities as part of the same campaign of ethnic cleansing.\nArab Revolt.\nThe Arab Revolt began in 1916 with British support. It turned the tide against the Ottomans on the Middle Eastern front, where they seemed to have the upper hand during the first two years of the war. On the basis of the McMahon\u2013Hussein Correspondence, an agreement between the British government and Hussein bin Ali, Sharif of Mecca, the revolt was officially initiated at Mecca on 10 June 1916. The Arab nationalist goal was to create a single unified and independent Arab state stretching from Aleppo, Syria, to Aden, Yemen, which the British promised to recognise.\nThe Sharifian Army, led by Hussein and the Hashemites, with military backing from the British Egyptian Expeditionary Force, successfully fought and expelled the Ottoman military presence from much of the Hejaz and Transjordan. The rebellion eventually took Damascus and set up a short-lived monarchy led by Faisal, a son of Hussein.\nFollowing the terms of the 1916 Sykes\u2013Picot Agreement, the British and French later partitioned the Middle East into mandate territories. There was no unified Arab state, much to Arab nationalists' anger. Palestine, Iraq, Lebanon and Syria became British and French mandates.\nTreaty of S\u00e8vres and Turkish War of Independence.\nDefeated in World War I, the Ottoman Empire signed the Armistice of Mudros on 30 October 1918. Istanbul was occupied by combined British, French, Italian, and Greek forces. In May 1919, Greece also took control of the area around Smyrna (now \u0130zmir).\nThe partition of the Ottoman Empire was finalized under the terms of the 1920 Treaty of S\u00e8vres. This treaty, as designed in the Conference of London, allowed the Sultan to retain his position and title. Anatolia's status was problematic given the occupied forces.\nA nationalist opposition arose in the Turkish national movement. It won the Turkish War of Independence (1919\u20131923) under the leadership of Mustafa Kemal (later given the surname \"Atat\u00fcrk\"). The sultanate was abolished on 1 November 1922, and the last sultan, Mehmed VI (reigned 1918\u20131922), left the country on 17 November 1922. The Republic of Turkey was established in its place on 29 October 1923, in the new capital city of Ankara. The caliphate was abolished on 3 March 1924.\nHistoriographical debate on the Ottoman state.\nSeveral historians, such as British historian Edward Gibbon and the Greek historian Dimitri Kitsikis, have argued that after the fall of Constantinople, the Ottoman state took over the machinery of the Byzantine (Roman) state and that the Ottoman Empire was in essence a continuation of the Byzantine Empire under a Turkish Muslim guise. The American historian Speros Vryonis writes that the Ottoman state centered on \"a Byzantine-Balkan base with a veneer of the Turkish language and the Islamic religion\". Kitsikis and the American historian Heath Lowry posit that the early Ottoman state was a predatory confederacy open to both Byzantine Christians and Turkish Muslims whose primary goal was attaining booty and slaves, rather than spreading Islam, and that Islam only later became the empire's primary characteristic. Other historians have followed the lead of the Austrian historian Paul Wittek, who emphasizes the early Ottoman state's Islamic character, seeing it as a \"jihad state\" dedicated to expanding the Muslim world. Many historians led in 1937 by the Turkish historian Mehmet Fuat K\u00f6pr\u00fcl\u00fc championed the Ghaza thesis, according to which the early Ottoman state was a continuation of the way of life of the nomadic Turkic tribes who had come from East Asia to Anatolia via Central Asia and the Middle East on a much larger scale. They argued that the most important cultural influences on the Ottoman state came from Persia.\nThe British historian Norman Stone suggests many continuities between the Byzantine and Ottoman empires, such as that the \"zeugarion\" tax of Byzantium became the Ottoman \"Resm-i \u00e7ift\" tax, that the \"pronoia\" land-holding system that linked the amount of land one owned with one's ability to raise cavalry became the Ottoman \"timar\" system, and that the Ottoman land measurement the \"d\u00f6n\u00fcm\" was the same as the Byzantine \"stremma\". Stone also argues that although Sunni Islam was the state religion, the Ottoman state supported and controlled the Eastern Orthodox Church, which in return for accepting that control became the Ottoman Empire's largest land-holder. Despite the similarities, Stone argues that a crucial difference is that the land grants under the \"timar\" system were not hereditary at first. Even after they became inheritable, land ownership in the Ottoman Empire remained highly insecure, and the sultan revoked land grants whenever he wished. Stone argued this insecurity in land tenure strongly discouraged \"Timariots\" from seeking long-term development of their land, and instead led them to adopt a strategy of short-term exploitation, which had deleterious effects on the Ottoman economy.\nGovernment.\nBefore the reforms of the 19th and 20th centuries, the state organisation of the Ottoman Empire was a system with two main dimensions, the military administration, and the civil administration. The Sultan was in the highest position in the system. The civil system was based on local administrative units based on the region's characteristics. The state had control over the clergy. Certain pre-Islamic Turkish traditions that had survived the adoption of administrative and legal practices from Islamic Iran remained important in Ottoman administrative circles. According to Ottoman understanding, the state's primary responsibility was to defend and extend the land of the Muslims and to ensure security and harmony within its borders in the overarching context of orthodox Islamic practice and dynastic sovereignty.\nThe Ottoman Empire, or as a dynastic institution, the House of Osman, was unprecedented and unequaled in the Islamic world for its size and duration. In Europe, only the House of Habsburg had a similarly unbroken line of sovereigns (kings/emperors) from the same family who ruled for so long, and during the same period, between the late 13th and early 20th centuries. The Ottoman dynasty was Turkish in origin. On eleven occasions, the sultan was deposed (replaced by another sultan of the Ottoman dynasty, who were either the former sultan's brother, son or nephew) because he was perceived by his enemies as a threat to the state. There were only two attempts in Ottoman history to unseat the ruling Ottoman dynasty, both failures, which suggests a political system that for an extended period was able to manage its revolutions without unnecessary instability. As such, the last Ottoman sultan Mehmed VI (r.\u20091918\u00a0\u2013\u00a01922) was a direct patrilineal (male-line) descendant of the first Ottoman sultan Osman I (d. 1323/4), which was unparalleled in both Europe (e.g., the male line of the House of Habsburg became extinct in 1740) and in the Islamic world. The primary purpose of the Imperial Harem was to ensure the birth of male heirs to the Ottoman throne and secure the continuation of the direct patrilineal (male-line) power of the Ottoman sultans in the future generations.\nThe highest position in Islam, caliph, was claimed by the sultans starting with Selim I, which was established as the Ottoman Caliphate. The Ottoman sultan, \"p\u00e2di\u015f\u00e2h\" or \"lord of kings\", served as the Empire's sole regent and was considered to be the embodiment of its government, though he did not always exercise complete control. The Imperial Harem was one of the most important powers of the Ottoman court. It was ruled by the valide sultan. On occasion, the valide sultan became involved in state politics. For a time, the women of the Harem effectively controlled the state in what was termed the \"Sultanate of Women\". New sultans were always chosen from the sons of the previous sultan. The strong educational system of the palace school was geared towards eliminating the unfit potential heirs and establishing support among the ruling elite for a successor. The palace schools, which also educated the future administrators of the state, were not a single track. First, the Madrasa () was designated for the Muslims, and educated scholars and state officials according to Islamic tradition. The financial burden of the Medrese was supported by \"vakif\"s, allowing children of poor families to move to higher social levels and income. The second track was a free boarding school for the Christians, the \"Ender\u00fbn\", which recruited 3,000 students annually from Christian boys between eight and twenty years old from one in forty families among the communities settled in Rumelia or the Balkans, a process known as Devshirme (). The Devshirme falls within modern definitions of genocide.\nThough the sultan was the supreme monarch, the sultan's political and executive authority was delegated. The politics of the state had a number of advisors and ministers gathered around a council known as Divan. The Divan, in the years when the Ottoman state was still a \"Beylik\", was composed of the elders of the tribe. Its composition was later modified to include military officers and local elites (such as religious and political advisors). Later still, beginning in 1320, a Grand Vizier was appointed to assume certain of the sultan's responsibilities. The Grand Vizier had considerable independence from the sultan with almost unlimited powers of appointment, dismissal, and supervision. Beginning with the late 16th century, sultans withdrew from politics and the Grand Vizier became the \"de facto\" head of state.\nThroughout Ottoman history, there were many instances in which local governors acted independently, and even in opposition to the ruler. After the Young Turk Revolution of 1908, the Ottoman state became a constitutional monarchy. The sultan no longer had executive powers. A parliament was formed, with representatives chosen from the provinces. The representatives formed the Imperial Government of the Ottoman Empire.\nThis eclectic administration was apparent even in the diplomatic correspondence of the Empire, which was initially undertaken in the Greek language to the west.\nThe Tughra were calligraphic monograms, or signatures, of the Ottoman Sultans, of which there were 35. Carved on the Sultan's seal, they bore the names of the Sultan and his father. The statement and prayer, \"ever victorious\", was also present in most. The earliest belonged to Orhan Gazi. The ornately stylized \"Tughra\" spawned a branch of Ottoman-Turkish calligraphy.\nLaw.\nThe Ottoman legal system accepted the religious law over its subjects. At the same time the \"Qanun\" (or \"Kanun\"), dynastic law, co-existed with religious law or Sharia. The Ottoman Empire was always organized around a system of local jurisprudence. Legal administration in the Ottoman Empire was part of a larger scheme of balancing central and local authority. Ottoman power revolved crucially around the administration of the rights to land, which gave a space for the local authority to develop the needs of the local millet. The jurisdictional complexity of the Ottoman Empire was aimed to permit the integration of culturally and religiously different groups. The Ottoman system had three court systems: one for Muslims, one for non-Muslims, involving appointed Jews and Christians ruling over their respective religious communities, and the \"trade court\". The entire system was regulated from above by means of the administrative \"Qanun\", i.e., laws, a system based upon the Turkic \"Yassa\" and \"T\u00f6re\", which were developed in the pre-Islamic era.\nThese court categories were not, however, wholly exclusive; for instance, the Islamic courts, which were the Empire's primary courts, could also be used to settle a trade conflict or disputes between litigants of differing religions, and Jews and Christians often went to them to obtain a more forceful ruling on an issue. The Ottoman state tended not to interfere with non-Muslim religious law systems, despite legally having a voice to do so through local governors. The Islamic \"Sharia\" law system had been developed from a combination of the Qur'an; the Had\u012bth, or words of Muhammad; \"ijm\u0101\"', or consensus of the members of the Muslim community; qiyas, a system of analogical reasoning from earlier precedents; and local customs. Both systems were taught at the Empire's law schools, which were in Istanbul and Bursa.\nThe Ottoman Islamic legal system was set up differently from traditional European courts. Presiding over Islamic courts was a \"Qadi\", or judge. Since the closing of the \"ijtihad\", or 'Gate of Interpretation', \"Qadi\"s throughout the Ottoman Empire focused less on legal precedent, and more with local customs and traditions in the areas that they administered. However, the Ottoman court system lacked an appellate structure, leading to jurisdictional case strategies where plaintiffs could take their disputes from one court system to another until they achieved a ruling that was in their favour.\nIn the late 19th century, the Ottoman legal system saw substantial reform. This process of legal modernisation began with the Edict of G\u00fclhane of 1839. These reforms included the \"fair and public trial[s] of all accused regardless of religion\", the creation of a system of \"separate competences, religious and civil\", and the validation of testimony on non-Muslims. Specific land codes (1858), civil codes (1869\u20131876), and a code of civil procedure also were enacted.\nThese reforms were based heavily on French models, as indicated by the adoption of a three-tiered court system. Referred to as Nizamiye, this system was extended to the local magistrate level with the final promulgation of the Mecelle, a civil code that regulated marriage, divorce, alimony, will, and other matters of personal status. In an attempt to clarify the division of judicial competences, an administrative council laid down that religious matters were to be handled by religious courts, and statute matters were to be handled by the Nizamiye courts.\nMilitary.\nThe first military unit of the Ottoman State was an army that was organized by Osman I from the tribesmen inhabiting the hills of western Anatolia in the late 13th century. The military system became an intricate organization with the advance of the Empire. The Ottoman military was a complex system of recruiting and fief-holding. The main corps of the Ottoman Army included Janissary, Sipahi, Ak\u0131nc\u0131 and Mehter\u00e2n. The Ottoman army was once among the most advanced fighting forces in the world, being one of the first to use muskets and cannons. The Ottoman Turks began using \"falconets\", which were short but wide cannons, during the Siege of Constantinople. The Ottoman cavalry depended on high speed and mobility rather than heavy armor, using bows and short swords on fast Turkoman and Arabian horses (progenitors of the Thoroughbred racing horse), and often applied tactics similar to those of the Mongol Empire, such as pretending to retreat while surrounding the enemy forces inside a crescent-shaped formation and then making the real attack. The Ottoman army continued to be an effective fighting force throughout the seventeenth and early eighteenth centuries, falling behind the empire's European rivals only during a long period of peace from 1740 to 1768.\nThe modernization of the Ottoman Empire in the 19th century started with the military. In 1826 Sultan Mahmud II abolished the Janissary corps and established the modern Ottoman army. He named them as the Nizam-\u0131 Cedid (New Order). The Ottoman army was also the first institution to hire foreign experts and send its officers for training in western European countries. Consequently, the Young Turks movement began when these relatively young and newly trained men returned with their education.\nThe Ottoman Navy vastly contributed to the expansion of the Empire's territories on the European continent. It initiated the conquest of North Africa, with the addition of Algeria and Egypt to the Ottoman Empire in 1517. Starting with the loss of Greece in 1821 and Algeria in 1830, Ottoman naval power and control over the Empire's distant overseas territories began to decline. Sultan Abd\u00fclaziz (reigned 1861\u20131876) attempted to reestablish a strong Ottoman navy, building the largest fleet after those of Britain and France. The shipyard at Barrow, England, built its first submarine in 1886 for the Ottoman Empire.\nHowever, the collapsing Ottoman economy could not sustain the fleet's strength for long. Sultan Abd\u00fclhamid II distrusted the admirals who sided with the reformist Midhat Pasha and claimed that the large and expensive fleet was of no use against the Russians during the Russo-Turkish War. He locked most of the fleet inside the Golden Horn, where the ships decayed for the next 30 years. Following the Young Turk Revolution in 1908, the Committee of Union and Progress sought to develop a strong Ottoman naval force. The \"Ottoman Navy Foundation\" was established in 1910 to buy new ships through public donations.\nThe establishment of Ottoman military aviation dates back to between June 1909 and July 1911. The Ottoman Empire started preparing its first pilots and planes, and with the founding of the Aviation School (\"Tayyare Mektebi\") in Ye\u015filk\u00f6y on 3 July 1912, the Empire began to tutor its own flight officers. The founding of the Aviation School quickened advancement in the military aviation program, increased the number of enlisted persons within it, and gave the new pilots an active role in the Ottoman Army and Navy. In May 1913, the world's first specialized Reconnaissance Training Program was started by the Aviation School, and the first separate reconnaissance division was established. In June 1914 a new military academy, the Naval Aviation School (\"Bahriye Tayyare Mektebi\") was founded. With the outbreak of World War I, the modernization process stopped abruptly. The Ottoman Aviation Squadrons fought on many fronts during World War I, from Galicia in the west to the Caucasus in the east and Yemen in the south.\nAdministrative divisions.\nThe Ottoman Empire was first subdivided into provinces, in the sense of fixed territorial units with governors appointed by the sultan, in the late 14th century.\nThe eyalet (also \"pashalik\" or \"beylerbeylik\") was the territory of office of a beylerbey (\"lord of lords\" or governor), and was further subdivided into Sanjaks.\nThe vilayets were introduced with the promulgation of the \"Vilayet Law\" () in 1864, as part of the Tanzimat reforms. Unlike the previous eyalet system, the 1864 law established a hierarchy of administrative units: the vilayet, liva/sanjak/mutasarrifate, kaza and village council, to which the 1871 Vilayet Law added the nahiye.\nEconomy.\nOttoman government deliberately pursued a policy for the development of Bursa, Edirne, and Istanbul, successive Ottoman capitals, into major commercial and industrial centers, considering that merchants and artisans were indispensable in creating a new metropolis. To this end, Mehmed and his successor Bayezid, also encouraged and welcomed migration of the Jews from different parts of Europe, who were settled in Istanbul and other port cities like Salonica. In many places in Europe, Jews were suffering persecution at the hands of their Christian counterparts, such as in Spain, after the conclusion of the Reconquista. The tolerance displayed by the Turks was welcomed by the immigrants.\nThe Ottoman economic mind was closely related to the basic concepts of state and society in the Middle East in which the ultimate goal of a state was consolidation and extension of the ruler's power, and the way to reach it was to get rich resources of revenues by making the productive classes prosperous. The ultimate aim was to increase the state revenues without damaging the prosperity of subjects to prevent the emergence of social disorder and to keep the traditional organization of the society intact. The Ottoman economy greatly expanded during the early modern period, with particularly high growth rates during the first half of the eighteenth century. The empire's annual income quadrupled between 1523 and 1748, adjusted for inflation.\nThe organization of the treasury and chancery were developed under the Ottoman Empire more than any other Islamic government and, until the 17th century, they were the leading organization among all their contemporaries. This organisation developed a scribal bureaucracy (known as \"men of the pen\") as a distinct group, partly highly trained ulama, which developed into a professional body. The effectiveness of this professional financial body stands behind the success of many great Ottoman statesmen.\nModern Ottoman studies indicate that the change in relations between the Ottoman Turks and central Europe was caused by the opening of the new sea routes. It is possible to see the decline in the significance of the land routes to the East as Western Europe opened the ocean routes that bypassed the Middle East and the Mediterranean as parallel to the decline of the Ottoman Empire itself. The Anglo-Ottoman Treaty, also known as the Treaty of Balta Liman that opened the Ottoman markets directly to English and French competitors, can be seen as one of the staging posts along with this development.\nBy developing commercial centers and routes, encouraging people to extend the area of cultivated land in the country and international trade through its dominions, the state performed basic economic functions in the Empire. But in all this, the financial and political interests of the state were dominant. Within the social and political system they were living in, Ottoman administrators could not see the desirability of the dynamics and principles of the capitalist and mercantile economies developing in Western Europe.\nEconomic historian Paul Bairoch argues that free trade contributed to deindustrialisation in the Ottoman Empire. In contrast to the protectionism of China, Japan, and Spain, the Ottoman Empire had a liberal trade policy, open to foreign imports. This has origins in capitulations of the Ottoman Empire, dating back to the first commercial treaties signed with France in 1536 and taken further with capitulations in 1673 and 1740, which lowered duties to 3% for imports and exports. The liberal Ottoman policies were praised by British economists, such as John Ramsay McCulloch in his \"Dictionary of Commerce\" (1834), but later criticized by British politicians such as Prime Minister Benjamin Disraeli, who cited the Ottoman Empire as \"an instance of the injury done by unrestrained competition\" in the 1846 Corn Laws debate.\nDemographics.\nA population estimate for the empire of 11,692,480 for the 1520\u20131535 period was obtained by counting the households in Ottoman tithe registers, and multiplying this number by 5. For unclear reasons, the population in the 18th century was lower than that in the 16th century. An estimate of 7,230,660 for the first census held in 1831 is considered a serious undercount, as this census was meant only to register possible conscripts.\nCensuses of Ottoman territories only began in the early 19th century. Figures from 1831 onwards are available as official census results, but the censuses did not cover the whole population. For example, the 1831 census only counted men and did not cover the whole empire. For earlier periods estimates of size and distribution of the population are based on observed demographic patterns.\nHowever, it began to rise to reach 25\u201332\u00a0million by 1800, with around 10\u00a0million in the European provinces (primarily in the Balkans), 11\u00a0million in the Asiatic provinces, and around 3\u00a0million in the African provinces. Population densities were higher in the European provinces, double those in Anatolia, which in turn were triple the population densities of Iraq and Syria and five times the population density of Arabia.\nTowards the end of the empire's existence life expectancy was 49 years, compared to the mid-twenties in Serbia at the beginning of the 19th century. Epidemic diseases and famine caused major disruption and demographic changes. In 1785 around one-sixth of the Egyptian population died from the plague and Aleppo saw its population reduced by twenty percent in the 18th century. Six famines hit Egypt alone between 1687 and 1731 and the last famine to hit Anatolia was four decades later. The 1812\u20131819 Ottoman plague epidemic would cost the lives of at least 300,000 individuals.\nThe rise of port cities saw the clustering of populations caused by the development of steamships and railroads. Urbanization increased from 1700 to 1922, with towns and cities growing. Improvements in health and sanitation made them more attractive to live and work in. Port cities like Salonica, in Greece, saw its population rise from 55,000 in 1800 to 160,000 in 1912 and \u0130zmir which had a population of 150,000 in 1800 grew to 300,000 by 1914. Some regions conversely had population falls\u2014Belgrade saw its population drop from 25,000 to 8,000 mainly due to political strife.\nEconomic and political migrations made an impact across the empire. For example, the Russian and Austria-Habsburg annexation of the Crimean and Balkan regions respectively saw large influxes of Muslim refugees\u2014200,000 Crimean Tatars fleeing to Dobruja. Between 1783 and 1913, approximately 5\u20137\u00a0million refugees arrived into the Ottoman Empire. Between the 1850s and World War I, about a million North Caucasian Muslims arrived in the Ottoman Empire as refugees. Some migrations left indelible marks such as political tension between parts of the empire (e.g., Turkey and Bulgaria), whereas centrifugal effects were noticed in other territories, simpler demographics emerging from diverse populations. Economies were also impacted by the loss of artisans, merchants, manufacturers, and agriculturists. Since the 19th century, a large proportion of Muslim peoples from the Balkans emigrated to present-day Turkey. These people are called \"Muhacir\". By the time the Ottoman Empire came to an end in 1922, half of the urban population of Turkey was descended from Muslim refugees from Russia.\nLanguage.\nOttoman Turkish was the official language of the Empire. It was an Oghuz Turkic language highly influenced by Persian and Arabic, though lower registries spoken by the common people had fewer influences from other languages compared to higher varieties used by upper classes and governmental authorities. Turkish, in its Ottoman variation, was a language of military and administration since the nascent days of the Ottomans. The Ottoman constitution of 1876 did officially cement the official imperial status of Turkish.\nThe Ottomans had several influential languages: Turkish, spoken by the majority of the people in Anatolia and by the majority of Muslims of the Balkans except some regions such as Albania, Bosnia and the Megleno-Romanian-inhabited N\u00e2nti; Persian, only spoken by the educated; Arabic, spoken mainly in Egypt, the Levant, Arabia, Iraq, North Africa, Kuwait and parts of the Horn of Africa and Berber in North Africa. In the last two centuries, usage of these became limited, though, and specific: Persian served mainly as a literary language for the educated, while Arabic was used for Islamic prayers. In the post-Tanzimat period French became the common Western language among the educated.\nBecause of a low literacy rate among the public (about 2\u20133% until the early 19th century and just about 15% at the end of the 19th century), ordinary people had to hire scribes as \"special request-writers\" (\"arzuh\u00e2lci\"s) to be able to communicate with the government. Some ethnic groups continued to speak within their families and neighborhoods (mahalles) with their own languages, though many non-Muslim minorities such as Greeks and Armenians only spoke Turkish. In villages where two or more populations lived together, the inhabitants often spoke each other's language. In cosmopolitan cities, people often spoke their family languages; many of those who were not ethnic Turks spoke Turkish as a second language.\nReligion.\nSunni Islam was the prevailing \"D\u012bn\" (customs, legal traditions, and religion) of the Ottoman Empire; the official \"Madh'hab\" (school of Islamic jurisprudence) was \"Hanafi.\" From the early 16th century until the early 20th century, the Ottoman sultan also served as the caliph, or politico-religious leader, of the Muslim world. Most of the Ottoman Sultans adhered to Sufism and followed Sufi orders, and believed Sufism was the correct way to reach God.\nNon-Muslims, particularly Christians and Jews, were present throughout the empire's history. The Ottoman imperial system was charactised by an intricate combination of official Muslim hegemony over non-Muslims and a wide degree of religious tolerance. While religious minorities were never equal under the law, they were granted recognition, protection, and limited freedoms under both Islamic and Ottoman tradition.\nUntil the second half of the 15th century, the majority of Ottoman subjects were Christian. Non-Muslims remained a significant and economically influential minority, albeit declining significantly by the 19th century, due largely to migration and secession. The proportion of Muslims amounted to 60% in the 1820s, gradually increasing to 69% in the 1870s and 76% in the 1890s. By 1914, less than a fifth of the empire's population (19.1%) was non-Muslim, mostly made up of Jews and Christian Greeks, Assyrians, and Armenians.\nIslam.\nTurkic peoples practiced a form of shamanism before adopting Islam. The Muslim conquest of Transoxiana under the Abbasids facilitated the spread of Islam into the Turkic heartland of Central Asia. Many Turkic tribes\u2014including the Oghuz Turks, who were the ancestors of both the Seljuks and the Ottomans\u2014gradually converted to Islam and brought religion to Anatolia through their migrations beginning in the 11th century. From its founding, the Ottoman Empire officially supported the Maturidi school of Islamic theology, which emphasized human reason, rationality, the pursuit of science and philosophy (\"falsafa\"). The Ottomans were among the earliest and most enthusiastic adopters of the Hanafi school of Islamic jurisprudence, which was comparatively more flexible and discretionary in its rulings.\nThe Ottoman Empire had a wide variety of Islamic sects, including Druze, Ismailis, Alevis, and Alawites. Sufism, a diverse body of Islamic mysticism, found fertile ground in Ottoman lands; many Sufi religious orders (\"tariqa\"), such as the Bektashi and Mevlevi, were either established, or saw significant growth, throughout the empire's history. However, some heterodox Muslim groups were viewed as heretical and even ranked below Jews and Christians in terms of legal protection; Druze were frequent targets of persecution, with Ottoman authorities often citing the controversial rulings of Ibn Taymiyya, a member of the conservative Hanbali school. In 1514, Sultan Selim I ordered the massacre of 40,000 Anatolian Alevis (\"Qizilbash\"), whom he considered a fifth column for the rival Safavid Empire.\nDuring Selim's reign, the Ottoman Empire saw an unprecedented and rapid expansion into the Middle East, particularly the conquest of the entire Mamluk Sultanate of Egypt on the early 16th century. These conquests further solidified the Ottoman claim of being an Islamic caliphate, although Ottoman sultans had been claiming the title of caliph since the reign of Murad I (1362\u20131389). The caliphate was officially transferred from the Mamluks to the Ottoman sultanate in 1517, whose members were recognized as caliphs until the office's abolition on 3 March 1924 by the Republic of Turkey (and the exile of the last caliph, Abd\u00fclmecid II, to France).\nChristianity and Judaism.\nIn accordance with the Muslim \"dhimmi\" system, the Ottoman Empire guaranteed limited freedoms to Christians, Jews, and other \"people of the book\", such as the right to worship, own property, and be exempt from the obligatory alms (\"zakat\") required of Muslims. However, non-Muslims (or ) were subject to various legal restrictions, including being forbidden to carry weapons, ride on horseback, or have their homes overlook those of Muslims; likewise, they were required to pay higher taxes than Muslim subjects, including the \"jizya,\" which was a key source of state revenue. Many Christians and Jews converted to Islam to secure full social and legal status, though most continued to practice their faith without restriction.\nThe Ottomans developed a unique sociopolitical system known as the millet, which granted non-Muslim communities a large degree of political, legal, and religious autonomy; in essence, members of a millet were subjects of the empire but not subject to the Muslim faith or Islamic law. A millet could govern its own affairs, such as raising taxes and resolving internal legal disputes, with little or no interference from Ottoman authorities, so long as its members were loyal to the sultan and adhered to the rules concerning \"dhimmi.\" A quintessential example is the ancient Orthodox community of Mount Athos, which was permitted to retain its autonomy and was never subject to occupation or forced conversion; even special laws were enacted to protect it from outsiders.\nThe \"Rum\" Millet, which encompassed most Eastern Orthodox Christians, was governed by the Byzantine-era (Code of Justinian), with the Ecumenical Patriarch designated the highest religious and political authority (\"millet-bashi\", or ethnarch). Likewise, Ottoman Jews came under the authority of the \"Haham Ba\u015f\u0131,\" or Ottoman Chief Rabbi, while Armenians were under the authority of the chief bishop of the Armenian Apostolic Church. As the largest group of non-Muslim subjects, the Rum Millet enjoyed several special privileges in politics and commerce; however, Jews and Armenians were also well represented among the wealthy merchant class, as well as in public administration.\nSome modern scholars consider the millet system to be an early example of religious pluralism, as it accorded minority religious groups official recognition and tolerance.\nSocial-political-religious structure.\nBeginning in the early 19th century, society, government, and religion were interrelated in a complex, overlapping way that was deemed inefficient by Atat\u00fcrk, who systematically dismantled it after 1922. In Constantinople, the Sultan ruled two distinct domains: the secular government and the religious hierarchy. Religious officials formed the Ulama, who had control of religious teachings and theology, and also the Empire's judicial system, giving them a major voice in day-to-day affairs in communities across the Empire (but not including the non-Muslim millets). They were powerful enough to reject the military reforms proposed by Sultan Selim III. His successor Sultan Mahmud II (r. 1808\u20131839) first won ulama approval before proposing similar reforms. The secularisation program brought by Atat\u00fcrk ended the ulema and their institutions. The caliphate was abolished, madrasas were closed down, and the sharia courts were abolished. He replaced the Arabic alphabet with Latin letters, ended the religious school system, and gave women some political rights. Many rural traditionalists never accepted this secularisation, and by the 1990s they were reasserting a demand for a larger role for Islam.\nThe Janissaries were a highly formidable military unit in the early years, but as Western Europe modernized its military organization technology, the Janissaries became a reactionary force that resisted all change. Steadily the Ottoman military power became outdated, but when the Janissaries felt their privileges were being threatened, or outsiders wanted to modernize them, or they might be superseded by the cavalrymen, they rose in rebellion. The rebellions were highly violent on both sides, but by the time the Janissaries were suppressed, it was far too late for Ottoman military power to catch up with the West. The political system was transformed by the destruction of the Janissaries, a powerful military/governmental/police force, which revolted in the Auspicious Incident of 1826. Sultan Mahmud II crushed the revolt, executed the leaders and disbanded the large organization. That set the stage for a slow process of modernization of government functions, as the government sought, with mixed success, to adopt the main elements of Western bureaucracy and military technology.\nThe Janissaries had been recruited from Christians and other minorities; their abolition enabled the emergence of a Turkish elite to control the Ottoman Empire. A large number of ethnic and religious minorities were tolerated in their own separate segregated domains called millets. They were primarily Greek, Armenian, or Jewish. In each locality, they governed themselves, spoke their own language, ran their own schools, cultural and religious institutions, and paid somewhat higher taxes. They had no power outside the millet. The Imperial government protected them and prevented major violent clashes between ethnic groups.\nEthnic nationalism, based on distinctive religion and language, provided a centripetal force that eventually destroyed the Ottoman Empire. In addition, Muslim ethnic groups, which were not part of the millet system, especially the Arabs and the Kurds, were outside the Turkish culture and developed their own separate nationalism. The British sponsored Arab nationalism in the First World War, promising an independent Arab state in return for Arab support. Most Arabs supported the Sultan, but those near Mecca believed in and supported the British promise.\nAt the local level, power was held beyond the control of the Sultan by the ayans or local notables. The ayan collected taxes, formed local armies to compete with other notables, took a reactionary attitude toward political or economic change, and often defied policies handed down by the Sultan.\nAfter the 18th century, the Ottoman Empire was shrinking, as Russia put on heavy pressure and expanded to its south; Egypt became effectively independent in 1805, and the British later took it over, along with Cyprus. Greece became independent, and Serbia and other Balkan areas became highly restive as the force of nationalism pushed against imperialism. The French took over Algeria and Tunisia. The Europeans all thought that the empire was a sick man in rapid decline. Only the Germans seemed helpful, and their support led to the Ottoman Empire joining the central powers in 1915, with the result that they came out as one of the heaviest losers of the First World War in 1918.\nCulture.\nThe Ottomans absorbed some of the traditions, art, and institutions of cultures in the regions they conquered and added new dimensions to them. Numerous traditions and cultural traits of previous empires (in fields such as architecture, cuisine, music, leisure, and government) were adopted by the Ottoman Turks, who developed them into new forms, resulting in a new and distinctively Ottoman cultural identity. Although the predominant literary language of the Ottoman Empire was Turkish, Persian was the preferred vehicle for the projection of an imperial image.\nSlavery was part of Ottoman society, with most slaves employed as domestic servants. Agricultural slavery, like that in the Americas, was relatively rare. Unlike systems of chattel slavery, slaves under Islamic law were not regarded as movable property, and the children of female slaves were born legally free. Female slaves were still sold in the Empire as late as 1908. During the 19th century the Empire came under pressure from Western European countries to outlaw the practice. Policies developed by various sultans throughout the 19th century attempted to curtail the Ottoman slave trade but slavery had centuries of religious backing and sanction and so was never abolished in the Empire.\nOttomans adopted Persian bureaucratic traditions and culture. The sultans also made an important contribution in the development of Persian literature.\nLanguage was not an obvious sign of group connection and identity in the 16th century among the rulers of the Ottoman Empire, Safavid Iran and Abu'l-Khayrid Shibanids of Central Asia. Hence the ruling classes of all three polities were bilingual in varieties of Persian and Turkic. But in the century's final quarter, linguistic adjustments occurred in the Ottoman and Safavid realms defined by a new rigidity that favoured Ottoman Turkish and Persian, respectively.\nEducation.\nIn the Ottoman Empire, each millet established a schooling system serving its members. Education was therefore largely divided on ethnic and religious lines: few non-Muslims attended schools for Muslim students, and vice versa. Most institutions that served all ethnic and religious groups taught in French or other languages.\nSeveral \"foreign schools\" (\"Frerler mektebleri\") operated by religious clergy primarily served Christians, although some Muslim students attended. Garnett described the schools for Christians and Jews as \"organised upon European models\", with \"voluntary contributions\" supporting their operation and most of them \"well attended\" and with \"a high standard of education\".\nLiterature.\nThe two primary streams of Ottoman written literature are poetry and prose. Poetry was by far the dominant stream. The earliest work of Ottoman historiography for example, the \"\u0130skendern\u00e2me\", was composed by the poet Taceddin Ahmedi. Until the 19th century, Ottoman prose did not contain any examples of fiction: there were no counterparts to, for instance, the European romance, short story, or novel. Analog genres did exist, though, in both Turkish folk literature and in Divan poetry.\nOttoman Divan poetry was a highly ritualized and symbolic art form. From the Persian poetry that largely inspired it, it inherited a wealth of symbols whose meanings and interrelationships\u2014both of similitude ( / ) and opposition ( ) were more or less prescribed. Divan poetry was composed through the constant juxtaposition of many such images within a strict metrical framework, allowing numerous potential meanings to emerge. The vast majority of Divan poetry was lyric in nature: either gazels (which make up the greatest part of the repertoire of the tradition), or kas\u00eedes. But there were other common genres, especially the mesnev\u00ee, a kind of verse romance and thus a variety of narrative poetry; the two most notable examples of this form are the Leyli and Majnun of Fuzuli and the H\u00fcsn \u00fc A\u015fk of \u015eeyh G\u00e2lib. The Seyahatn\u00e2me of Evliya \u00c7elebi (1611\u20131682) is an outstanding example of travel literature.\nUntil the 19th century, Ottoman prose did not develop to the extent that contemporary Divan poetry did. A large part of the reason was that much prose was expected to adhere to the rules of (, also transliterated as ), or rhymed prose, a type of writing descended from the Arabic saj' that prescribed that between each adjective and noun in a string of words, such as a sentence, there must be a rhyme. Nevertheless, there was a tradition of prose in the literature of the time, though it was exclusively nonfictional. One apparent exception was Muhayyel\u00e2t (\"Fancies\") by Giritli Ali Aziz Efendi, a collection of stories of the fantastic written in 1796, though not published until 1867. The first novel published in the Ottoman Empire was Vartan Pasha's 1851 \"The Story of Akabi\" (Turkish: \"Akabi Hikyayesi\"). It was written in Turkish but with Armenian script.\nDue to historically close ties with France, French literature constituted the major Western influence on Ottoman literature in the latter half of the 19th century. As a result, many of the same movements prevalent in France during this period had Ottoman equivalents; in the developing Ottoman prose tradition, for instance, the influence of Romanticism can be seen during the Tanzimat period, and that of the Realist and Naturalist movements in subsequent periods; in the poetic tradition, on the other hand, the influence of the Symbolist and Parnassian movements was paramount.\nMany of the writers in the Tanzimat period wrote in several different genres simultaneously. This diversity was, in part, due to Tanzimat writers' wish to disseminate as much of the new literature as possible, in the hopes that it would contribute to a revitalization of Ottoman social structures.\nMedia.\nThe media of the Ottoman Empire was diverse, with newspapers and journals published in languages including French, Greek, and German. Many of these publications were centered in Constantinople, but there were also French-language newspapers produced in Beirut, Salonika, and Smyrna. Non-Muslim ethnic minorities in the empire used French as a lingua franca and used French-language publications, while some provincial newspapers were published in Arabic. The use of French in the media persisted until the end of the empire in 1923 and for a few years thereafter in the Republic of Turkey.\nArchitecture.\nThe architecture of the empire developed from earlier Seljuk Turkish architecture, with influences from Byzantine and Iranian architecture and other architectural traditions in the Middle East. Early Ottoman architecture experimented with multiple building types over the course of the 13th to 15th centuries, progressively evolving into the classical Ottoman style of the 16th and 17th centuries, which was also strongly influenced by the Hagia Sophia. The most important architect of the Classical period is Mimar Sinan, whose major works include the \u015eehzade Mosque, S\u00fcleymaniye Mosque, and Selimiye Mosque. The second half of the 16th century also saw the apogee of some types of decoration, most notably in the production of Iznik tiles.\nBeginning in the 18th century, Ottoman architecture was opened to external influences, particularly from Baroque architecture in Western Europe, which eventually gave rise to the Ottoman Baroque style that emerged in the 1740s. The Nuruosmaniye Mosque is one of the most important examples from this period. During the 19th century, influences from Western Europe became more prominent, brought in by architects such as those from the Balyan family. Empire style and Neoclassical motifs were introduced and a trend towards eclecticism was evident in many types of buildings, such as the Dolmaba\u00e7e Palace. The last decades of the Ottoman Empire also saw the development of a new architectural style called neo-Ottoman or Ottoman revivalism, also known as the First National Architectural Movement, by architects such as Mimar Kemaleddin and Vedat Tek.\nOttoman dynastic patronage was concentrated in the historic capitals of Bursa, Edirne, and Istanbul (Constantinople), as well as in several other important administrative centers such as Amasya and Manisa. It was in these centers that most important developments in Ottoman architecture occurred and that the most monumental Ottoman architecture can be found. Major religious monuments were typically architectural complexes, known as a \"k\u00fclliye\", that had multiple components providing different services or amenities. In addition to a mosque, these could include a madrasa, a hammam, an imaret, a sebil, a market, a caravanserai, a primary school, or others. These complexes were governed and managed with the help of a \"vak\u0131f\" agreement (Arabic \"waqf\"). Ottoman constructions were still abundant in Anatolia and in the Balkans (Rumelia), but in the more distant Middle Eastern and North African provinces older Islamic architectural styles continued to hold strong influence and were sometimes blended with Ottoman styles.\nDecorative arts.\nThe tradition of Ottoman miniatures, painted to illustrate manuscripts or used in dedicated albums, was heavily influenced by the Persian art form, though it also included elements of the Byzantine tradition of illumination and painting. A Greek academy of painters, the \"Nakkashane-i-Rum\", was established in the Topkapi Palace in the 15th century, while early in the following century a similar Persian academy, the \"Nakkashane-i-Irani\", was added. Surname-i H\u00fcmayun (Imperial Festival Books) were albums that commemorated celebrations in the Ottoman Empire in pictorial and textual detail.\nOttoman illumination covers non-figurative painted or drawn decorative art in books or on sheets in \"muraqqa\" or albums, as opposed to the figurative images of the Ottoman miniature. It was a part of the Ottoman Book Arts together with the Ottoman miniature (\"taswir\"), calligraphy (\"hat\"), Islamic calligraphy, bookbinding (\"cilt\") and paper marbling (\"ebru\"). In the Ottoman Empire, illuminated and illustrated manuscripts were commissioned by the Sultan or the administrators of the court. In Topkapi Palace, these manuscripts were created by the artists working in \"Nakkashane\", the atelier of the miniature and illumination artists. Both religious and non-religious books could be illuminated. Also, sheets for albums \"levha\" consisted of illuminated calligraphy (\"hat\") of \"tughra\", religious texts, verses from poems or proverbs, and purely decorative drawings.\nThe art of carpet weaving was particularly significant in the Ottoman Empire, carpets having an immense importance both as decorative furnishings, rich in religious and other symbolism and as a practical consideration, as it was customary to remove one's shoes in living quarters. The weaving of such carpets originated in the nomadic cultures of central Asia (carpets being an easily transportable form of furnishing), and eventually spread to the settled societies of Anatolia. Turks used carpets, rugs, and kilims not just on the floors of a room but also as a hanging on walls and doorways, where they provided additional insulation. They were also commonly donated to mosques, which often amassed large collections of them.\nMusic and performing arts.\nOttoman classical music was an important part of the education of the Ottoman elite. A number of the Ottoman sultans have accomplished musicians and composers themselves, such as Selim III, whose compositions are often still performed today. Ottoman classical music arose largely from a confluence of Byzantine music, Armenian music, Arabic music, and Persian music. Compositionally, it is organized around rhythmic units called usul, which are somewhat similar to meter in Western music, and melodic units called makam, which bear some resemblance to Western musical modes.\nThe instruments used are a mixture of Anatolian and Central Asian instruments (the saz, the ba\u011flama, the kemence), other Middle Eastern instruments (the ud, the tanbur, the kanun, the ney), and\u2014later in the tradition\u2014Western instruments (the violin and the piano). Because of a geographic and cultural divide between the capital and other areas, two broadly distinct styles of music arose in the Ottoman Empire: Ottoman classical music and folk music. In the provinces, several different kinds of folk music were created. The most dominant regions with their distinguished musical styles are Balkan-Thracian T\u00fcrk\u00fcs, North-Eastern (Laz) T\u00fcrk\u00fcs, Aegean T\u00fcrk\u00fcs, Central Anatolian T\u00fcrk\u00fcs, Eastern Anatolian T\u00fcrk\u00fcs, and Caucasian T\u00fcrk\u00fcs. Some of the distinctive styles were: Janissary music, Roma music, Belly dance, Turkish folk music.\nThe traditional shadow play called Karag\u00f6z and Hacivat was widespread throughout the Ottoman Empire and featured characters representing all of the major ethnic and social groups in that culture. It was performed by a single puppet master, who voiced all of the characters, and accompanied by tambourine (\"def\"). Its origins are obscure, deriving perhaps from an older Egyptian tradition, or possibly from an Asian source.\nCuisine.\nOttoman cuisine is the cuisine of the capital, Constantinople (Istanbul), and the regional capital cities, where the melting pot of cultures created a common cuisine that most of the population regardless of ethnicity shared. This diverse cuisine was honed in the Imperial Palace's kitchens by chefs brought from certain parts of the Empire to create and experiment with different ingredients. The creations of the Ottoman Palace's kitchens filtered to the population, for instance through Ramadan events, and through the cooking at the Yal\u0131s of the Pashas, and from there on spread to the rest of the population.\nMuch of the cuisine of former Ottoman territories today is descended from a shared Ottoman cuisine, especially Turkish, and including Greek, Balkan, Armenian, and Middle Eastern cuisines.\nSports.\nThe main sports Ottomans were engaged in were Turkish wrestling, hunting, Turkish archery, horseback riding, equestrian javelin throw, arm wrestling, and swimming. European model sports clubs were formed with the spreading popularity of football matches in 19th century Constantinople. The leading clubs, according to timeline, were Be\u015fikta\u015f Gymnastics Club (1903), Galatasaray Sports Club (1905), Fenerbah\u00e7e Sports Club (1907), MKE Ankarag\u00fcc\u00fc (formerly Turan Sanatkarang\u00fcc\u00fc) (1910) in Constantinople. Football clubs were formed in other provinces too, such as Kar\u015f\u0131yaka Sports Club (1912), Altay Sports Club (1914) and Turkish Fatherland Football Club (later \u00dclk\u00fcspor) (1914) of \u0130zmir.\nScience and technology.\nOver the course of Ottoman history, the Ottomans managed to build a large collection of libraries complete with translations of books from other cultures, as well as original manuscripts. A great part of this desire for local and foreign manuscripts arose in the 15th century. Sultan Mehmet II ordered Georgios Amiroutzes, a Greek scholar from Trabzon, to translate and make available to Ottoman educational institutions the geography book of Ptolemy. Another example is Ali Qushji \u2013 an astronomer, mathematician and physicist originally from Samarkand \u2013 who became a professor in two madrasas and influenced Ottoman circles as a result of his writings and the activities of his students, even though he only spent two or three years in Constantinople before his death.\nTaqi al-Din built the Constantinople observatory of Taqi ad-Din in 1577, where he carried out observations until 1580. He calculated the eccentricity of the Sun's orbit and the annual motion of the apogee. However, the observatory's primary purpose was almost certainly astrological rather than astronomical, leading to its destruction in 1580 due to the rise of a clerical faction that opposed its use for that purpose. He also experimented with steam power in Ottoman Egypt in 1551, when he described a steam jack driven by a rudimentary steam turbine.\n\u015eerafeddin Sabuncuo\u011flu was the author of the first surgical atlas and the last major medical encyclopaedia from the Islamic world. The Ottoman Empire is credited with the invention of several surgical instruments in use such as forceps, catheters, scalpels and lancets as well as pincers.\nIn the early 19th century, Egypt under Muhammad Ali began using steam engines for industrial manufacturing, with industries such as ironworks, textile manufacturing, paper mills and hulling mills moving towards steam power. Economic historian Jean Batou argues that the necessary economic conditions existed in Egypt for the adoption of oil as a potential energy source for its steam engines later in the 19th century.\nReferences.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\nGeneral surveys.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "22279", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22279", "title": "Optical binary", "text": ""}
{"id": "22281", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22281", "title": "Objecthood", "text": ""}
{"id": "22284", "revid": "9084172", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22284", "title": "Opel", "text": "German automotive brand, subsidiary of Stellantis\nOpel Automobile GmbH (), usually shortened to Opel, is a German automobile manufacturer which has been a subsidiary of Stellantis since January 16, 2021. It was owned by the American automaker General Motors from 1929 until 2017 and the PSA Group prior to its merger with Fiat Chrysler Automobiles to form Stellantis in 2021. Most of the Opel lineup is marketed under the Vauxhall brand in the United Kingdom since the 1980s. Some Opel vehicles were badge-engineered in Australia under the Holden brand until 2020, in North America and China under the Buick, Saturn (until 2010), and Cadillac brands, and in South America under the Chevrolet brand.\nOpel traces its roots to a sewing machine manufacturer founded by Adam Opel in 1862 in R\u00fcsselsheim am Main. The company began manufacturing bicycles in 1886 and produced its first automobile in 1899. With the Opel RAK program, the world's first rocket program, under the leadership of Fritz von Opel, the company played an important role in the history of aviation and spaceflight: Various land speed records were achieved, and the world's first rocket-powered flights were performed in 1928 and 1929. After listing on the stock market in 1929, General Motors took a majority stake in Opel and then full control in 1931, making the automaker a wholly owned subsidiary, establishing an American ownership of the German automaker for nearly 90 years. Together with British manufacturer Vauxhall Motors, which GM had acquired in 1925, the two companies formed the backbone of GM's European operations \u2013 later merged formally in the 1980s as General Motors Europe.\nIn March 2017, PSA Peugeot Citro\u00ebn agreed to acquire Opel, the British twin sister brand Vauxhall and the European auto lending business from General Motors for \u20ac2 billion ($2.3 billion), making the French automaker the second biggest in Europe, after Volkswagen.\nOpel is still headquartered in R\u00fcsselsheim am Main. The company designs, engineers, manufactures, and distributes Opel-branded passenger vehicles, light commercial vehicles, and vehicle parts; together with its British sister marque Vauxhall, they are present in over 60 countries around the world.\nHistory.\n1862\u20131898.\nThe company was founded in R\u00fcsselsheim, Hesse, Germany, on 21 January 1862, by Adam Opel. In the beginning, Opel produced sewing machines. Opel launched a new product in 1886: he began to sell high-wheel bicycles, also known as penny-farthings. Opel's two sons participated in high-wheel bicycle races, thus promoting this means of transportation. In 1888, production was relocated from a cowshed to a more spacious building in R\u00fcsselsheim. The production of high-wheel bicycles soon exceeded the production of sewing machines. At the time of Opel's death in 1895, he was the leader in both markets.\n1898\u20131920.\nThe first cars were designed in 1898 after Opel's widow Sophie and their two eldest sons entered into a partnership with Friedrich Lutzmann, a locksmith at the court in Dessau in Saxony-Anhalt, who had been working on automobile designs for some time. The first Opel production Patent Motor Car was built in R\u00fcsselsheim early 1899, although these cars were not very successful (A total of 65 motor cars were delivered: eleven in 1899, twenty-four in 1900 and thirty in 1901) and the partnership was dissolved after two years, following which Opel signed a licensing agreement in 1901 with the French Automobiles Darracq France to manufacture vehicles under the brand name Opel Darracq. These cars consisted of Opel bodies mounted on Darracq chassis, powered by two-cylinder engines.\nThe company first showed cars of its design at the 1902 Hamburg Motor Show. Production began in 1906, with the licensed Opel Darracq version discontinued in 1907.\nIn 1909, the Opel 4/8\u00a0PS model, known as the \"Doktorwagen\" (lit.\u2009'Doctor's Car') was produced. Its reliability and robustness were appreciated by physicians, who drove long distances to see their patients back when hard-surfaced roads were still rare. The \"Doktorwagen\" sold for only 3,950 marks, about half as much as the luxury models of its day.\nThe company's factory was destroyed by fire in 1911, and a new facility was built with more up-to-date machinery.\nOpel's cars were initially tested on public roads, leading to complaints about noise and road damage. Under public pressure, Opel began construction of a test oval in 1917. The track was completed in 1919, but not open to the public until 24 October 1920 under the official name of Opel-Rennbahn (Opel Race Track).\n1920\u20131939.\nIn the early 1920s, Opel became the first German car manufacturer to build automobiles with a mass-production assembly line. In 1924, they used their assembly line to produce a new open two-seater called the \"Laubfrosch\" (Tree frog). The Laubfrosch was finished exclusively in green lacquer. The car sold for an expensive 3,900\u00a0marks (expensive considering the less expensive manufacturing process), but by the 1930s, this type of vehicle would cost a mere 1,930 marks \u2013 due in part to the assembly line, but also due to the skyrocketing demand for cars. Adam Opel led the way for motorised transportation to become not just a means for the rich, but also a reliable way for people of all classes to travel.\nOpel had a 37.5% market share in Germany and was the country's largest automobile exporter in 1928. The \"Regent\" \u2013 Opel's first eight-cylinder car \u2013 was offered. The RAK 1 and RAK 2 rocket-propelled cars made sensational record-breaking runs.\nOpel as a company and its co-owner Fritz von Opel, grandson of Adam Opel, were instrumental in popularizing rocket propulsion for vehicles and have an important place in the history of spaceflight and rocket technology. In the 1920s, Fritz von Opel initiated together with Max Valier, co-founder of the \"Verein f\u00fcr Raumschiffahrt\", the world's first rocket program, Opel-RAK, leading to speed records for automobiles, rail vehicles and the first manned rocket-powered flight in September 1929. Months earlier in 1928, one of his rocket-powered prototypes, the Opel RAK2, piloted by von Opel himself at the AVUS speedway in Berlin, reached a record speed of in front of 3,000 spectators and world media representatives, including Fritz Lang, director of \"Metropolis\" and \"Woman in the Moon\", world boxing champion Max Schmeling, and many other sports and show business celebrities. A world speed record for rail vehicles was reached with RAK3 at a top speed of . After these successes, von Opel piloted the world's first public rocket-powered flight using Opel RAK.1, a rocket plane designed by Julius Hatry. World media reported these events, including Universal Newsreel in the US, causing \"Raketen-Rummel\" or \"Rocket Rumble\" immense global public excitement, particularly in Germany, where, among others, Wernher von Braun was highly influenced.\nOpel RAK became enthralled with liquid propulsion, building and testing them in the late 1920s in R\u00fcsselsheim. According to Max Valier's account, Opel RAK rocket designer, Friedrich Wilhelm Sander launched two liquid-fuel rockets at Opel Rennbahn in R\u00fcsselsheim on 10 and 12 April 1929. These Opel RAK rockets were the first European, and after Goddard, the world's second, liquid-fuel rockets in history. In his book \"Raketenfahrt\" Valier describes the size of the rockets as of in diameter and with a length of , weighing empty and with fuel. The maximum thrust was 45 to 50 kp, with a total burning time of 132 seconds. These properties indicate a gas pressure pumping. The first missile rose so quickly that Sander lost sight of it. Two days later, a second unit was ready to go, Sander tied a -long rope to the rocket. After of rope had been unwound, the line broke, and this rocket also disappeared in the area, probably near the Opel proving ground and racetrack in R\u00fcsselsheim, the \"Rennbahn\". Sander and Opel also worked on an innovative liquid-propellant rocket engine for an anticipated flight across the English Channel. By May 1929, the engine produced a thrust of 200\u00a0kg (440\u00a0lb.) \"for longer than fifteen minutes, and in July 1929, the Opel RAK collaborators were able to attain powered phases of more than thirty minutes for thrusts of 300 kg (660-lb.) at Opel's works in R\u00fcsselsheim,\" again according to Max Valier's account.\nThe Great Depression led to an end of the Opel-RAK program, but Max Valier continued the efforts. After switching from solid-fuel to liquid-fuel rockets, he died while testing and is considered the first fatality of the dawning space age. Sander's technology was confiscated by the German military in 1935. He was forced to sell his company and was imprisoned for treason. He died in 1938.\nIn March 1929, General Motors (GM), impressed by Opel's modern production facilities, bought 80% of the company. The Opel family gained $33.3\u00a0million from the transaction. Subsequently, during 1935, a second factory was built at Brandenburg for the production of \"Blitz\" light trucks. In 1929 Opel licensed the design of the radical Neander motorcycle and produced it as the Opel Motoclub in 1929 and 1930, using K\u00fcchen, J.A.P., and Motosacoche engines. Fritz von Opel attached solid-fuel rockets to his Motoclub in a publicity stunt, riding the rocket-boosted motorcycle at the Avus racetrack.\nAfter acquiring the remaining shares in 1931, General Motors had full ownership of Adam Opel AG and organized it as a wholly owned subsidiary. In 1935, Opel became the first German car manufacturer to produce over 100,000 vehicles annually. This was because of the popularity of the Opel P4 model. The sales price was 1,650\u00a0marks and the car had a 1.1\u00a0L four-cylinder engine achieving a top speed of .\nOpel also produced the first mass-production vehicle in Germany with a self-supporting (\"unibody\") all-steel body, closely following the 1934 Citro\u00ebn Traction Avant. This was one of the most important innovations in automotive history. Launched in 1935, the Olympia was light and its aerodynamics enhanced performance and fuel economy.\nThe 1930s was a decade of growth, and by 1937, with 130,267 cars produced. Opel's R\u00fcsselsheim facility was Europe's top in terms of vehicle production, and ranking seventh worldwide.\n1938 saw the presentation of the highly successful Kapit\u00e4n. With a 2.5\u00a0L six-cylinder engine, all-steel body, front independent suspension, hydraulic shock absorbers, hot-water heating (with electric blower), and central speedometer. 25,374 Kapit\u00e4ns were made before the intensification of World War II brought automotive manufacturing to a temporary stop in the autumn of 1940, by order of the government.\nWorld War II.\nOpel automobile production ended in October 1940, after the company's American leadership had rejected an \"invitation\" to switch to munitions manufacture a few months earlier. In 1942 Opel switched to wartime production, making aircraft parts and tanks. Truck manufacture continued at the Brandenburg plant, where the 3.6-liter Opel Blitz truck had been built since 1938. These trucks were also built under license by Daimler-Benz in Mannheim.\n1945\u20131970.\nAfter the end of the war, with the Brandenburg plant dismantled and transported to the Soviet Union, and 47% of the buildings in R\u00fcsselsheim destroyed, former Opel employees began to rebuild the R\u00fcsselsheim plant. The first postwar Opel Blitz truck was completed on 15 July 1946 in the presence of United States Army General Geoffrey Keyes and other local leaders and press reporters. Opel's R\u00fcsselsheim plant also made Frigidaire refrigerators in the early post-war years.\nOpel GT This two seater sports car was introduced in 1968 and was produced until 1973.\n1970\u20132017.\nDuring the 1970s and 1980s, the Vauxhall and Opel ranges were rationalised into one consistent range across Europe.\nThe 1973 version of the Opel Kadett was later rebadged in hatchback, saloon, and estate form as the Vauxhall Chevette for the UK market, with German factories producing the Opel versions. The Opel Ascona of this era was sold on the UK market (and made in British and continental factories) as the Vauxhall Cavalier. Both of these cars had mild styling changes, as did the flagship Opel Rekord and Vauxhall Carlton saloon and estate ranges, which went on sale towards the end of the 1970s.\nBy the 1970s, Opel had emerged as the stronger of GM's two European brands; Vauxhall was the third-best-selling brand in Great Britain after the British Motor Corporation (later British Leyland) but made only a modest impact elsewhere. The two companies were direct competitors outside of each other's respective home markets. Still, mirroring US automaker Ford's decision to merge its British and German subsidiaries in the late 1960s, GM followed the same precedent. Opel and Vauxhall had loosely collaborated before, but serious efforts to merge the two companies' operations and product families into one did not start until the 1970s \u2013 which had Vauxhall's complete product line replaced by vehicles built on Opel-based platforms \u2013 the only exception to the rule being the Bedford CF panel van. This only solely Vauxhall design was marketed as an Opel on the continent. By the turn of the 1980s, the two brands were, in effect, the same.\nOpel's first front-wheel drive car \u2013 the new version of the Kadett \u2013 entered production in 1979, initially built in Germany and Belgium. It was sold in the UK alongside the stronger-selling Vauxhall version \u2013 the Astra \u2013 which entered UK production in 1981.\nDuring the 1970s, Opel expressed interest in building an additional production facility in Spain and eventually settled on a location near Zaragoza, intending to develop a new supermini for the 1980s there. The factory opened in 1982, and its first product was the Opel Corsa (imported to the UK as the Vauxhall Nova from 1983).\nThe Ascona switched to front-wheel drive for an all-new General Motors J-Car global model format in 1981, with the Cavalier nameplate continuing for the UK market. The Kadett was revamped again in 1984, and became the company's first winner of the European Car of the Year accolade. The Rekord's successor, the Opel Omega (still Vauxhall Carlton in the UK), achieved the same success two years later.\nThe long-running Ascona nameplate was discontinued in 1988, with its replacement being sold as the Vectra, although the UK market version was still sold as the Vauxhall Cavalier. The Opel Manta coupe was also discontinued in 1988, with its Vectra-based successor, the Calibra, being launched the following year. Soon afterward, Opel launched a high-performance version of the Omega \u2013 the Lotus Omega (Lotus Carlton in the UK) \u2013 which featured Lotus-tuned suspension and had a top speed of 175\u00a0mph.\nOpel's first turbocharged car was the Opel Rekord 2.3 TD, first shown at Geneva in March 1984.\nIn the 1990s, Opel was considered GM's cash cow, with profit margins similar to Toyota's. Opel's profit helped to offset GM's losses in North America and to fund GM's expansion into Asia. 1999 was the last time when Opel was profitable for an entire year after almost 20 years.\nThe first major Opel launch of the 1990s was the 1991 Astra, which spelled the end for the Kadett nameplate that had debuted more than 50 years earlier. The company also turned to Japanese Isuzu for its first SUV, the Frontera, which was also launched in 1991 but produced in Europe despite its Japanese origins. The larger Monterey joined the company's SUV line-up in 1994, but had been dropped from the UK and continental markets by 2000 due to disappointing sales.\nAt the end of 1992, the company unveiled a completely new Corsa, which, like the original model, was produced at the Zaragoza plant. This car carried the Corsa nameplate on the UK market as a Vauxhall.\nA second generation Omega was launched in early 1994. It remained in production for a decade, but when production finished, there was no direct successor due to declining sales of executive saloon models from mainstream brands. A Corsa-based coupe, the Tigra, was also launched around this time and lasted in production for six years.\nThe second generation Opel Vectra was launched in 1995, with the Vectra nameplate now extending to the Vauxhall version in the UK.\nThe first Opel MPV, the Sintra, was launched in Europe in 1996, imported from the US where it was sold as a Pontiac, but discontinued after three years due to disappointing sales. The Vauxhall-badged UK market version was also slated in motoring surveys for its dismal build quality and reliability.\n1997 saw the demise of the Calibra coupe after an eight-year production, with no immediate replacement.\nThe Opel Astra hatchbacks, saloons, and estate were wholly revamped for 1998 and, within two years, had also spawned coupe and cabriolet versions, as well as a compact MPV, the Zafira.\nIn 1999, Opel unveiled its first sports car, the Speedster (Vauxhall VX220 in the UK). However, it was not a success and was discontinued in 2005. The company moved into the city car market in early 2000 with the Agila launch.\nThe third generation Opel Corsa was launched in 2000, followed by a new version of the Vectra in 2002 and the Astra in 2004.\nThree generations of Vectra gave way to the Insignia in 2008, with the new model becoming the company's first European Car of the Year award winner for 22 years.\nAfter the 2008 financial crisis, and the General Motors Chapter 11 reorganization, on 10 September 2009, GM agreed to sell a 55% stake in Opel to a consortium including Magna group and Sberbank \u2013 with the approval of the German government. The deal was later called off.\nWith ongoing restructuring plans, Opel announced the closure of its Antwerp plant in Belgium by the end of 2010.\nIn 2010, Opel announced that it would invest around \u20ac11\u00a0billion in the next five years. \u20ac1\u00a0billion of that was designated solely for the development of innovative and fuel-saving engines and transmissions.\nOn 29 February 2012, Opel announced the creation of a major alliance with PSA Peugeot Citroen, resulting in GM taking a 7% share of PSA, becoming PSA's second-largest shareholder after the Peugeot family. The alliance was intended to enable $2\u00a0billion per year of cost savings through platform sharing, common purchasing, and other economies of scale. In December 2013, GM sold its 7% interest in PSA for \u00a3250\u00a0million, after plans of cost savings were not as successful. Opel was said to be among Europe's most aggressive discounters in the market. GM reported a 2016 loss of US$257\u00a0million from its European operations. It is reported that GM has lost about US$20\u00a0billion in Europe since 1999.\nOpel's plant in Bochum closed in December 2014, after 52 years of activity, due to overcapacity.\nOpel withdrew from China, where it had a network of 22 dealers, in early 2015 after General Motors decided to withdraw its Chevrolet brand from Europe starting in 2016.\n2017\u2013present.\nIn March 2017, the PSA Group agreed to buy Opel, its British sister brand Vauxhall and their European auto lending business from General Motors for US$2.2\u00a0billion. In return, General Motors will pay PSA US$3.2\u00a0billion for future European pension obligations and keep managing US$9.8\u00a0billion worth of plans for existing retirees. Furthermore, GM is responsible for paying about US$400\u00a0million annually for 15 years to fund the existing pension plans in Great Britain and Germany.\nIn June 2017, Michael Lohscheller, Opel's chief financial officer, replaced Karl-Thomas Neumann as CEO. The acquisition of Opel and Vauxhall was completed in August 2017.\nIn the 2018 financial year, Opel achieved an operating income of \u20ac859 million. It was the first positive income since 1999.\nOn 16 January 2021, Opel became part of Stellantis following the merger of its parent company PSA Group with the Italian-American group Fiat Chrysler Automobiles.\nIn September 2021, Stellantis appointed Uwe Hochgeschurtz to Opel's management to replace Michael Lohscheller who left to Vinfast.\nCompany.\nOpel operates 10 vehicle, powertrain, and component plants and four development and test centres in six countries, and employs around 30,000 people in Europe. The brand sells vehicles in more than 60 markets worldwide. Other plants are in Eisenach and Kaiserslautern, Germany; Szentgotth\u00e1rd, Hungary; Figueruelas, Spain; Gliwice, and Tychy, Poland; Aspern, Austria; Ellesmere Port, and Luton, United Kingdom. The Dudenhofen Test Center is located near the company's headquarters and is responsible for all technical testing and vehicle validations.\nAround 6,250 people are responsible for the engineering and design of Opel/Vauxhall vehicles at the International Technical Development Center and European Design Center in R\u00fcsselsheim. All in all, Opel plays an important role in Stellantis' global R&amp;D footprint.\nPlants.\nPlant controlled as first-tier subsidiary of \"General Motors Europe Limited\", second-tier subsidiary of \"GM CME Holdings CV\" and third-tier subsidiary of \"General Motors Corporation (GMC)\":\nMarketing.\nLogo.\nAdam Opel began his manufacturing venture in R\u00fcsselsheim, Germany, in 1862, initially producing sewing machines. To represent the brand, the earliest known logo featured a bronze \"A\" for Adam and a red \"O\" for Opel\u2014his initials forming the foundation of the company's visual identity.\nIn 1866, Opel expanded and started to produce bicycles. Around 1890, the logo was completely redesigned. The new logo also contained the words \"Victoria Blitz\" (referring to Lady Victory; they were certain of the triumph of their bicycles). The word \"Blitz\" (English: lightning) first appeared back then, but without a depiction.\nAnother redesign was commissioned in 1909. The new logo was much more spirited and contained only the company name Opel. It was placed on the motorcycles that they had started to produce in 1902, and on the first cars which were produced in 1909.\nIn 1910, the logo was the shape of an eye, and it was surrounded by laurels, with the text \"Opel\" in the centre.\nFrom the mid-1930s to the 1960s, passenger cars carried a ring which was crossed by some kind of a flying thing pointing to the left, which in some form could be interpreted as a zeppelin, the same flying object being used also as a forward-pointing hood ornament. In some versions, it looked like an arrow; in others, like an aeroplane or a bird.\nBesides the hood ornament flying through the ring, Opel also used a coat of arms in various forms, which mostly had a combination of white and yellow colours in it, a shade of yellow which is typical for Opel until today. One was oval, half white and half yellow. The Opel writing was black and in the middle of the oval symbol.\nThe origin of the lightning in the Opel logo lies in the truck Opel Blitz (German \"Blitz\" = English \"lightning\"), which had been a commercial success, widely used also within the Wehrmacht, Nazi Germany's military. Originally, the logo for this truck consisted of two stripes arranged loosely like a lightning symbol with the words \"Opel\" and \"Blitz\" in them, in later, 1950s models simplified to the horizontal form of lightning which appears in the current Opel logo.The jag in the lightning always follows the original from the \"Opel Blitz\" text stripes, in the form of a horizontally stretched letter \"Z\".\nBy the end of the 1960s, the two forms merged, and the horizontal lightning replaced the flying thing in the ring, giving way to the basic design which is used since then with variations. Through all its variations, this logo is simple and unique, and both easily recognisable and reproducible with just two strokes of a pen.\nIn the 1964 version, the lightning with a ring was used in a yellow rectangle, with the Opel writing below.The whole logo was again delimited by a black rectangle. The basic form and proportions of the Blitz logo have remained unchanged since the 1970 version, which made the lightning tails shorter so that the logo could fit proportionately within a yellow square, meaning it could be displayed next to the 'blue square' General Motors logo. In the mid-1970s, the Vauxhall \"Griffin\" logo was, in turn, resized and displayed within a corresponding red square, so that all three logos could be displayed together, thus signifying the unified GM Europe.\nClubs.\nThe SC Opel R\u00fcsselsheim is a football club with over 450 members. RV 1888 Opel R\u00fcsselsheim is a cycling club.\nSlogans.\nOpel's corporate tagline as of June 2017 is \"The Future Is Everyone's\" (German: \"Die Zukunft geh\u00f6rt allen\"). The list of Opel's slogans is shown below:\nPartnerships.\nOpel currently has partnerships with association football clubs such as Bundesliga clubs Borussia Dortmund and 1. FSV Mainz 05.\nOpel cooperates with French oil and gas company TotalEnergies on plans for a battery cell factory. From 1994 until 2006, Opel has been partnership with Milan and previously with Fiorentina from 1983 until 1986 in Italy, from 1995 until 2002 with Paris Saint-Germain in France, from 1989 until 2002 with FC Bayern Munich in Germany and from 2013 until 2017 with Feyenoord Rotterdam in Netherlands.\nWorld presence.\nThe Opel brand is present in most of Europe, parts of North Africa, South Africa, the Middle East (EMEA), Chile, Colombia, Ecuador, Uruguay, Japan, Singapore, Taiwan, and New Zealand. Their models have been rebadged and sold in other countries and continents, such as Vauxhall in Great Britain, and previously, Chevrolet in Latin America, Holden in Australia and New Zealand, and Saturn in the United States and Canada. Following the demise of General Motors Corporation's Saturn division in North America, Opel cars were rebadged and sold in the United States, Canada, Mexico, and China under the Buick name with models such as the Opel Insignia/Buick Regal, Opel Astra sedan/Buick Verano (both which share underpinnings with the Chevrolet Cruze), and Opel Mokka/Buick Encore.\nIn 2017, GM confirmed plans of a \"hybrid global brand\" which includes Vauxhall, Opel and Buick to use more synergies between the brands. This plan was overridden by the sale of Vauxhall and Opel brands to PSA Peugeot Citro\u00ebn.\nNorth America.\nUnited States.\nOpel cars appeared under their own name in the U.S. from 1958 to 1975, when they were sold through Buick dealers as captive imports. The best-selling Opel models in the U.S. were the 1964 to 1972 Opel Kadett, the 1971 to 1975 Opel Manta, and the 1968 to 1973 Opel GT. (The name \"Opel\" was also applied from 1976 to 1980 to vehicles manufactured by Isuzu (similar to the \"Isuzu I-Mark\"), but mechanically those were entirely different cars).\nHistorically, Opel vehicles have also been sold at various times in the North American market as either heavily modified, or \"badge-engineered\" models under the Chevrolet, Buick, Pontiac, Saturn, and Cadillac brands \u2013 for instance the J-body platform, which was largely developed by Opel \u2013 was the basis of North American models such as the Chevrolet Cavalier and Cadillac Cimarron. Below is a list of the most recent Opel models which were sold under GM's North American brands.\nBuick Regal (fifth generation, 2009\u20132017, and sixth generation, 2018\u20132020).\nThe last two generations of the Buick Regal have been rebadged versions of the Opel Insignia. The main differences are the modified radiator grill and the altered colour of the passenger compartment illumination (blue instead of red). The Regal GS is comparable to the Insignia OPC. The 5th generation Buick Regal was first assembled alongside the Insignia at the Opel plant in R\u00fcsselsheim. In the first quarter of 2011, it began to be built on the flexible assembly line at the GM plant in Oshawa, Ontario, Canada. All 6th generation Buick Regals were built alongside the Insignia at the Opel plant in R\u00fcsselsheim, Germany.\nBuick Cascada.\nThe Buick Cascada was a rebadged Opel Cascada, built in Poland and sold in the United States unchanged from the Opel in all but badging.\nBuick LaCrosse.\nUnlike the vehicles listed above, the Buick LaCrosse was not a rebadged version of an Opel model. However, it was based on a long-wheelbase version of the Opel-developed Epsilon II-platform, so shared many key components with the Opel Insignia and thereby the Buick Regal.\nSaturn Astra (2008\u20132009).\nThe Astra H was sold in the US as the Saturn Astra for model years 2008 and 2009.\nSaturn L-Series (2000\u20132005).\nThe Saturn L-Series was a modified version of the Opel Vectra B. Though the Saturn had different exterior styling and had plastic door panels, it shared the same body shape as the Opel. Both cars rode on the GM2900 platform. The Saturn also had a different interior, yet shared some interior parts, such as the inside of the doors.\nSaturn VUE (2nd generation, 2008\u20132010), Chevrolet Captiva Sport.\nThe second generation of the Saturn VUE, introduced in 2007 for the 2008 model year, was a rebadged version of the German-designed Opel Antara, manufactured in Mexico. After the demise of the Saturn brand, the VUE was discontinued, but the car continued to be produced and sold as Chevrolet Captiva Sport in Mexican and South American markets. The Chevrolet Captiva Sport was introduced for the US commercial and fleet markets in late 2011 for the 2012 model.\nCadillac Catera (1997\u20132001).\nThe Opel Omega B was sold in the US as the Cadillac Catera.\nAfrica.\nOpel exports a variety of models to Algeria, Egypt, Morocco, South Africa, and Tunisia.\nSouth Africa.\nThe 2015 Opel range in South Africa comprises the Opel Adam, Opel Astra, Opel Corsa, Opel Meriva, Opel Mokka, and Opel Vivaro. No diesel versions are offered.\nFrom 1986 to 2003, Opel models were produced by Delta Motor Corporation, a company created through a management buyout following of GM's divestment from apartheid South Africa. Delta assembled the Opel Kadett, with the sedan version called the Opel Monza. This was replaced by the Opel Astra, although the Kadett name was retained for the hatchback and considered a separate model. A version of the Rekord Series E remained in production after the model had been replaced by the Omega in Europe, as was a Commodore model unique to South Africa, combining the bodyshell of the Rekord with the front end of the revised Senator. The Opel Corsa was introduced in 1996, with kits of the Brazilian-designed sedan and pick-up (known in South African English as a \"bakkie\") being locally assembled.\nAlthough GM's passenger vehicle line-up in South Africa consisted of Opel-based models by the late 1970s, these were sold under the Chevrolet brand name, with only the Kadett being marketed as an Opel when it was released in 1980. In 1982, the Chevrolet brand name was dropped, with the Ascona, Rekord, Commodore, and Senator being rebadged as Opels.\nOceania.\nMany Opel models or models based on Opel architectures have been sold in Australia and New Zealand under the Holden marque, such as the Holden Barina (1994\u20132005), which were rebadged versions of the Opel Corsa, the Holden Astra, a version of the Opel Astra, and the Captiva 5, a version of the Opel Antara. In New Zealand, the Opel Kadett and Ascona were sold as niche models by General Motors New Zealand in the 1980s, while the Opel brand was used on the Opel Vectra until 1994.\nFor the first time ever, the Opel brand was introduced to Australia on 1 September 2012, including the Corsa, Astra, Astra GTC, and Insignia models. On 2 August 2013, Opel announced it was ending exports to Australia due to poor sales, with only 1,530 vehicles sold in the first ten months.\nAfter the closure of Opel Australia, Holden imported newer Opel models such as the Astra GTC (ceased 1 May 2017), Astra VXR (Astra OPC), Cascada (ceased 1 May 2017), and Insignia VXR (Insignia OPC, ceased 1 May 2017), under the Holden badge. The 2018 5th-gen Holden Commodore ZB is a badge-engineered Opel Insignia, replacing the Australian-made, rear-wheel-drive Commodore with the German-made front-wheel/all-wheel-drive Insignia platform; however this model is no longer offered since the closure of Holden.\nOpel returned to the New Zealand market in 2022, backed by the existing importer of the Peugeot and Citro\u00ebn brands. Opel's New Zealand model line-up consists of the Corsa, Mokka, Astra and Grandland models, with the first two in both electric and petrol drivetrains.\nAsia.\nChina.\nOpel's presence in China recommenced in 2012 with the Antara, and added the Insignia estate in 2013. Opel-derived models are also sold as Buick. On 28 March 2014, Opel announced that it would leave China in 2015.\nJapan.\nOpel was long General Motors' strongest marque in Japan, with sales peaking at 38,000 in 1996. However, the brand was withdrawn from the Japanese market in December 2006, with just 1,800 sales there in 2005. Since then, Opel has not sold any cars or SUVs in Japan. Opel has been back on the Japanese market since 2022.\nSingapore.\nA wide range of Opel models are exported to Singapore.\nMalaysia.\nOpel was marketed in Malaysia beginning from the 1970s, and early models exported were Kadett, Gemini, and Manta. Opel had moderate sales from the 1980s until the early 2000s, when Malaysian car buyers favoured Japanese and Korean brand cars such as Toyota, Honda, Hyundai (Inokom) and Kia (Naza), which offered more competitive prices. Sales of Opel cars in Malaysia were dropped then, as Opel's prices were slightly higher than the same-segment Japanese, Korean, and local Proton and Perodua cars, and they were hard to maintain, had bad aftersales services, and spare parts were not readily available.\nOpel was withdrawn from Malaysian market in 2003, and the last models sold were the Zafira, Astra, and Vectra, and the rebadged Isuzu MU as the Frontera, later replaced by Chevrolet.\nIndia.\nOpel India Pvt Ltd (OIPL) was founded in 1996 and gave the average Indian car buyers their first choice of (somewhat) affordable German engineering with the Astra sedan. Opel was withdrawn from the Indian market in 2006, replaced by Chevrolet.\nIndonesia.\nSince 1938, the country has been producing Opels in a General Motors-owned plant since 1938. The plant was nationalized in 1957. In 1995, General Motors invested a new manufacturing plant in Indonesia, producing the Opel Astra (as Opel Optima), Opel Vectra, and Chevrolet Blazer (as Opel Blazer). The latter was proved a sales success in the country. In 2002, the Opel brand was replaced by the global Chevrolet brand.\nThailand.\nSince the 1970s, Opel cars were imported along with Holden cars by Universal Motors Thailand and Asoke Motors. Among the models imported were the Opel Rekord, Holden Torana, and the Opel Olympia. They were replaced by Phranakorn Yontrakarn (PNA) as the exclusive distributor of Opel cars in Thailand in the mid-1980s. PNA imported the Kadett, Astra, Vectra, Omega, and the Calibra to Thailand. The Corsa B was one of the more popular Opel models sold by PNA in the 1990s. In the mid to late 1990s, General Motors Thailand took over from PNA in the overseeing of sales and distribution of Opel cars in the country, with plans to build an assembly plant in Rayong to manufacture the Zafira for the domestic and export markets. However, due to the 1997 Asian financial crisis, the Opel brand was phased out from the Thai market in 2000 and was replaced by Chevrolet. The Zafira A, by then rebadged as a Chevrolet, went on sale in May 2000, to considerable success.\nPhilippines.\nOpel was one of the most popular non-Japanese car brands in the country during the 1970s and the 1980s alongside Ford, but left the Filipino market in 1985 as a result of the economic crisis at that time. GM Philippines returned with the Opel brand in 1997, and started selling the Vectra, Omega and later the Tigra and Astra. Sales were good years after its introduction but Opel still struggled as Japanese manufacturers dominated the local automobile market. GM Philippines withdrew the brand by 2004\u20132005 due to poor sales. The last cars sold by Opel in the country before leaving the Philippine market were the Astra and the Zafira A (Which was being sold under the Chevrolet brand). The Opel brand was later replaced by Chevrolet's lineup.\nTaiwan.\nIn the 1980s, Kadett E and Omega A were imported to the Taiwanese market but the dealers imported base models and modified them with unstable quality. The CAC company became the sole import agent of Opel in Taiwan and the models were later manufacturing and sold the Astra F and Vectra B in the market. However, CAC went bankrupt in the late 1990s and stopped manufacturing Opel cars. GM Taiwan and then Yulon GM, a joint venture between Yulong and General Motors, kept importing and selling Astra G/H, Corsa B/C, Omega B, and Zafira A/B in Taiwan until 2012. In 2022, Master Win Group relaunched Opel in the Taiwanese market.\nSouth America.\nSeveral Opel models were sold across Latin America, mainly Brazil and Argentina, for decades with Chevrolet development badges and its derivatives, including the Corsa, Kadett, Astra, Vectra, Omega, Meriva, and Zafira. In the early 2010s, the Chevrolet line-up changed to adopt North American models such as the Spark, Sonic, and Cruze, or local, own Brazilian development models like the Cobalt, Celta, Onix, Spin, and Agile - of which the Onix, Cobalt, and Spin are still produced. This ended once Opel came under Stellantis ownership.\nOpel has exported a wide range of products to Chile since 2011 and Colombia, Ecuador, Uruguay since 2021. \nEurope.\nIreland.\nIn the 1980s, Opel became the sole GM brand name in Ireland, with the Vauxhall brand having been dropped. Vauxhall's Managing Director has also been Opel Ireland's Chief Executive since 2015.\nThere were two Opel-franchised assembly plants in Ireland in the 1960s. One in Ringsend, Dublin, was operated by Reg Armstrong Motors, which also assembled NSU cars and motorcycles. The second assembly plant was based in Cork and operated by O'Shea's, which also assembled \u0160koda cars and Zetor tractors. The models assembled were the Kadett and the Rekord. From 1966, the Admiral was imported as a fully built unit and became a popular seller.\nEuropean Car of the Year.\nOpel have produced five winners of the European Car of the Year competition:\nShortlisted models.\nSeveral models have been shortlisted, including the:\nNomenclature.\nFrom the late 1930s to the 1980s, terms from the German Navy (\"Kapit\u00e4n, Admiral, Kadett\") and from other official sectors (\"Diplomat, Senator\") were often used as model names. Since the late 1980s, the model names of Opel passenger cars end with an a. As Opels were no longer being sold in Great Britain, the need to have separate model names for essentially identical Vauxhall and Opel cars (although some exceptions were made to suit the British market) was made redundant. The last series to be renamed across the two companies was the Opel Kadett, being the only Opel to take the name of its Vauxhall counterpart, as Opel Astra. Although only two generations of Astra were built prior to the 1991 model, the new car was referred to across Europe as the Astra F, referring to its Kadett lineage. Until 1993, the Opel Corsa was known as the Vauxhall Nova in Great Britain, as Vauxhall had initially felt that Corsa sounded too much like \"coarse\", and would not catch on.\nExceptions to the nomenclature of ending names with an \"a\" include the under-licence built Monterey, the Speedster (also known as the Vauxhall VX220 in Great Britain), GT (which was not sold at all as a Vauxhall, despite the VX Lightning concept), the Signum, Karl, and the Adam. The Adam was initially supposed to be called, \"Junior\" as was its developmental codename and because the name 'Adam' had no history/importance to the Vauxhall marque.\nSimilar to the passenger cars, the model names of commercial vehicles end with an o (Combo, Vivaro, Movano), except the Corsavan and Astravan.\nAnother unique aspect to Opel nomenclature is its use of the \"Caravan\" (originally styled as 'Car-A-Van') name to denote its station wagon body configuration, (similar to Volkswagen's \"Variant\" or Audi's \"Avant\" designations), a practice the company observed for many decades, which finally ceased with the 2008 Insignia and 2009 Astra, where the name \"Sports Tourer\" is now used for the estate/station wagon versions.\nCurrent model range.\nThe following tables list current and announced Opel production vehicles as of 2024:\nMotorsports.\nOpel Rally Team took part in World Rally Championship in the early 1980s with the Opel Ascona 400 and the Opel Manta 400, developed in conjunction with Irmscher and Cosworth. Walter R\u00f6hrl won the 1982 World Rally Championship drivers' title, and the 1983 Safari Rally was won by Ari Vatanen.\nIn the 1990s, Opel took part in the Deutsche Tourenwagen Meisterschaft and the succeeding International Touring Car Championship, and won the 1996 championship with the Calibra. The brand also participated in the Super Tourenwagen Cup in the 1990s, winning the manufacturers' title in 1998. Opel took part in the revived German DTM race series between 2000 and 2005 with the Astra and Vectra models, but after winning several races in 2000, it struggled for results afterwards and never won the championship. However, Opel won the N\u00fcrburgring 24 Hours with the Astra in 2003.\nOpel returned to motorsport competition with the Adam in 2013.\nIn 2014, Opel presented a road-legal sport version of the Adam R2 Rally Car \u2013 the Opel Adam S \u2013 powered by a 1.4 L turbocharged engine which generates 150 HP. The car makes 0\u2013100\u00a0km/h in just 8.5 seconds.\nIn 2019 at IAA, Opel presented the Corsa Rally Electric, an electric rally car for customer motor sport. Together with ADAC, Europe's largest automobile association, Opel has started the ADAC Opel Electric Rally Cup, the first rally brand cup for electric cars in the world in 2021. The charging infrastructure uses renewably generated electricity from the public power grid. In 2023, teams from seven nations took part in eight races in Germany, Austria, France and Switzerland. The electric motor, battery, inverter, and onboard charger come from the Corsa production vehicle. In 2024, the cup will enter its fourth season.\nSponsorship.\nOpel had previously sponsored football clubs AC Milan (1994\u20132006), Bayern Munich (1989\u20132002), Paris Saint-Germain (1995\u20132002), Fiorentina (1983\u20131986), Bordeaux (1985\u20131991) and Feyenoord (2013\u20132017).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nstyle=\"width:100%\" class=\"wraplinks\""}
{"id": "22286", "revid": "38472774", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22286", "title": "Oligocene", "text": "Third epoch of the Paleogene Period\nThe Oligocene is a geologic epoch of the Paleogene Period that extends from about 33.9 million to 23 million years before the present ( to ). As with other older geologic periods, the rock beds that define the epoch are well identified but the exact dates of the start and end of the epoch are slightly uncertain. The name Oligocene was coined in 1854 by the German paleontologist Heinrich Ernst Beyrich from his studies of marine beds in Belgium and Germany. The name comes from Ancient Greek \u1f40\u03bb\u03af\u03b3\u03bf\u03c2 (\"ol\u00edgos\"), meaning \"few\", and \u03ba\u03b1\u03b9\u03bd\u03cc\u03c2 (\"kain\u00f3s\"), meaning \"new\", and refers to the sparsity of extant forms of molluscs. The Oligocene is preceded by the Eocene Epoch and is followed by the Miocene Epoch. The Oligocene is the third and final epoch of the Paleogene Period.\nThe Oligocene is often considered an important time of transition, a link between the archaic world of the tropical Eocene and the more modern ecosystems of the Miocene. Major changes during the Oligocene included a global expansion of grasslands, and a regression of tropical broad leaf forests to the equatorial belt.\nThe start of the Oligocene is marked by a notable extinction event called the Grande Coupure; it featured the replacement of European fauna with Asian fauna, except for the endemic rodent and marsupial families. By contrast, the Oligocene\u2013Miocene boundary is not set at an easily identified worldwide event but rather at regional boundaries between the warmer late Oligocene and the relatively cooler Miocene.\nBoundaries and subdivisions.\nThe lower boundary of the Oligocene (its Global Boundary Stratotype Section and Point or GSSP) is placed at the last appearance of the foraminiferan genus \"Hantkenina\" in a quarry at Massignano, Italy. However, this GSSP has been criticized as excluding the uppermost part of the type Eocene Priabonian Stage and because it is slightly earlier than important climate shifts that form natural markers for the boundary, such as the global oxygen isotope shift marking the expansion of Antarctic glaciation (the Oi1 event).\nThe upper boundary of the Oligocene is defined by its GSSP at Carrosio, Italy, which coincides with the first appearance of the foraminiferan \"Paragloborotalia kugleri\" and with the base of magnetic polarity chronozone C6Cn.2n.\nOligocene faunal stages from youngest to oldest are:\nTectonics and paleogeography.\nDuring the Oligocene Epoch, the continents continued to drift toward their present positions.\nAntarctica became more isolated as deep ocean channels were established between Antarctica and Australia and South America. Australia had been very slowly rifting away from West Antarctica since the Jurassic, but the exact timing of the establishment of ocean channels between the two continents remains uncertain. However, one estimate is that a deep channel was in place between the two continents by the end of the early Oligocene. The timing of the formation of the Drake Passage between South America and Antarctica is also uncertain, with estimates ranging from 49 to 17 mya (early Eocene to Miocene), but oceanic circulation through the Drake Passage may also have been in place by the end of the early Oligocene. This may have been interrupted by a temporary constriction of the Drake Passage from sometime in the middle to late Oligocene (29 to 22 mya) to the middle Miocene (15 mya).\nThe reorganization of the oceanic tectonic plates of the northeastern Pacific, which had begun in the Paleocene, culminated with the arrival of the Murray and Mendocino Fracture Zones at the North American subduction zone in the Oligocene. This initiated strike-slip movement along the San Andreas Fault and extensional tectonics in the Basin and Range province, ended volcanism south of the Cascades, and produced clockwise rotation of many western North American terranes. The Rocky Mountains were at their peak. A new volcanic arc was established in western North America, far inland from the coast, reaching from central Mexico through the Mogollon-Datil volcanic field to the San Juan volcanic field, then through Utah and Nevada to the ancestral Northern Cascades. Huge ash deposits from these volcanoes created the White River and Arikaree Groups of the High Plains, with their excellent fossil beds.\nBetween 31 and 26 mya, the Ethiopia-Yemen Continental Flood Basalts were emplaced by the East African large igneous province, which also initiated rifting along the Red Sea and Gulf of Aden.\nThe Alps were rapidly rising in Europe as the African plate continued to push north into the Eurasian plate, isolating the remnants of the Tethys Sea. Sea levels were lower in the Oligocene than in the early Eocene, exposing large coastal plains in Europe and the Gulf Coast and Atlantic Coast of North America. The Obik Sea, which had separated Europe from Asia, retreated early in the Oligocene, creating a persistent land connection between the continents. The Paratethys Sea stretched from what is now the Balkan Peninsula across Central Asia to the Tian Shan region of what is now Xinjiang. There appears to have been a land bridge in the early Oligocene between North America and Europe, since the faunas of the two regions are very similar. However, towards the end of the Oligocene, there was a brief marine incursion in Europe.\nThe rise of the Himalayas during the Oligocene remains poorly understood. One recent hypothesis is that a separate microcontinent collided with south Asia in the early Eocene, and India itself did not collide with south Asia until the end of the Oligocene. The Tibetan Plateau may have reached nearly its present elevation by the late Oligocene.\nThe Andes first became a major mountain chain in the Oligocene, as subduction became more direct into the coastline.\nClimate.\nClimate during the Oligocene reflected a general cooling trend following the Early Eocene Climatic Optimum. This transformed the Earth's climate from a greenhouse to an icehouse climate.\nEocene-Oligocene transition and Oi1 event.\nThe Eocene-Oligocene transition was a major cooling event and reorganization of the biosphere, being part of a broader trend of global cooling lasting from the Bartonian to the Rupelian. The transition is marked by the Oi1 event, an oxygen isotope excursion occurring approximately 33.55 million years ago, during which oxygen isotope ratios decreased by 1.3\u2030. About 0.3\u20130.4\u2030 of this is estimated to be due to major expansion of Antarctic ice sheets. The remaining 0.9 to 1.0\u2030 was due to about of global cooling. The transition likely took place in three closely spaced steps over the period from 33.8 to 33.5 mya. By the end of the transition, sea levels had dropped by , and ice sheets were 25% greater in extent than in the modern world.\nThe effects of the transition can be seen in the geological record at many locations around the world. Ice volumes rose as temperature and sea levels dropped. Playa lakes of the Tibetan Plateau disappeared at the transition, pointing to cooling and aridification of central Asia. Pollen and spore counts in marine sediments of the Norwegian-Greenland Sea indicate a drop in winter temperatures at high latitudes of about just prior to the Oi1 event. Borehole dating from the Southeast Faroes drift indicates that deep-ocean circulation from the Arctic Ocean to the North Atlantic Ocean began in the early Oligocene.\nThe best terrestrial record of Oligocene climate comes from North America, where temperatures dropped by in the earliest Oligocene. This change is seen from Alaska to the Gulf Coast. Upper Eocene paleosols reflect annual precipitation of over a meter of rain, but early Oligocene precipitation was less than half this. In central North America, the cooling was by 8.2\u2009\u00b1\u20093.1\u00a0\u00b0C over a period of 400,000 years, though there is little indication of significant increase in aridity during this interval. Ice-rafted debris in the Norwegian-Greenland Sea indicated that glaciers had appeared in Greenland by the start of the Oligocene.\nContinental ice sheets in Antarctica reached sea level during the transition. Glacially rafted debris of early Oligocene age in the Weddell Sea and Kerguelen Plateau, in combination with Oi1 isotope shift, provides unambiguous evidence of a continental ice sheet on Antarctica by the early Oligocene.\nThe causes of the Eocene-Oligocene transition are not yet fully understood.\nThe timing is wrong for this to be caused either by known impact events or by the volcanic activity on the Ethiopean Plateau. Two other possible drivers of climate change, not mutually exclusive, have been proposed. The first is thermal isolation of the continent of Antarctica by development of the Antarctic Circumpolar Current. Deep sea cores from south of New Zealand suggest that cold deep-sea currents were present by the early Oligocene. However, the timing of this event remains controversial. The other possibility, for which there is considerable evidence, is a drop in atmospheric carbon dioxide levels (pCO2) during the transition. The pCO2 is estimated to have dropped just before the transition, to 760 ppm at the peak of ice sheet growth, then rebounded slightly before resuming a more gradual fall. Climate modeling suggests that glaciation of Antarctica took place only when pCO2 dropped below a critical threshold value.\nBrachiopod oxygen isotope ratios from New Zealand suggest that a proto-Subtropical Convergence developed during the Early Oligocene, with northern New Zealand being subtropical and southern and eastern New Zealand being cooled by cold, subantarctic water.\nMiddle Oligocene climate and the Oi2 event.\nOligocene climate following the Eocene-Oligocene event is poorly known. There were several pulses of glaciation in middle Oligocene, about the time of the Oi2 oxygen isotope shift. This led to the largest drop of sea level in past 100 million years, by about . This is reflected in a mid-Oligocene incision of continental shelves and unconformities in marine rocks around the world.\nSome evidence suggests that the climate remained warm at high latitudes even as ice sheets experienced cyclical growth and retreat in response to orbital forcing and other climate drivers. Other evidence indicates significant cooling at high latitudes. Part of the difficulty may be that there were strong regional variations in the response to climate shifts. Evidence of a relatively warm Oligocene suggests an enigmatic climate state, neither hothouse nor icehouse.\nLate Oligocene warming.\nThe late Oligocene (26.5 to 24 mya) likely saw a warming trend in spite of low pCO2 levels, though this appears to vary by region. However, Antarctica remained heavily glaciated during this warming period. The late Oligocene warming is discernible in pollen counts from the Tibetan Plateau, which also show that the South Asian Monsoon had already developed by the late Oligocene. Around 25.8 Ma, the South Asian Monsoon underwent an episode of major intensification brought on by the uplift of the Tibetan Plateau.\nA deep 400,000-year glaciated Oligocene-Miocene boundary event is recorded at McMurdo Sound and King George Island.\nBiosphere.\nThe early Eocene climate was very warm, with crocodilians and temperate plants thriving north of the Arctic Circle. The cooling trend that began in the middle Eocene continued into the Oligocene, bringing both poles well below freezing for the first time in the Phanerozoic. The cooling climate, together with the opening of some land bridges and the closing of others, led to a profound reorganization of the biosphere and loss of taxonomic diversity. Land animals and marine organisms reached a Phanerozoic low in diversity by the late Oligocene, and the temperate forests and jungles of the Eocene were replaced by forest and scrubland. The closing of the Tethys Seaway destroyed its tropical biota.\nFlora.\nThe Oi1 event of the Eocene-Oligocene transition covered the continent of Antarctica with ice sheets, leaving \"Nothofagus\" and mosses and ferns clinging to life around the periphery of Antarctica in tundra conditions.\nAngiosperms continued their expansion throughout the world as tropical and sub-tropical forests were replaced by temperate deciduous forests. Open plains and deserts became more common and grasses expanded from their water-bank habitat in the Eocene moving out into open tracts. The decline in pCO2 favored C4 photosynthesis, which is found only in angiosperms and is particularly characteristic of grasses. However, even at the end of the period, grass was not quite common enough for modern savannas.\nIn North America, much of the dense forest was replaced by patchy scrubland with riparian forests. Subtropical species dominated with cashews and lychee trees present, and temperate woody plants such as roses, beeches, and pines were common. The legumes spread, while sedges and ferns continued their ascent.\nIn Europe, floral assemblages became increasingly affected by strengthening seasonality as it related to wildfire activity.\nIn Pakistan, the flora consisted mainly of dry but dense forests. In northern China, there was a progressive ascendance of open, grassy environments. The Ha Long megafossil flora from the Dong Ho Formation of Oligocene age shows that the Oligocene flora of what is now Vietnam was very similar to its present flora.\nKelps make their first appearance in the fossil record during the earliest Oligocene.\nFauna.\nMost extant mammal families had appeared by the end of the Oligocene. These included primitive three-toed horses, rhinoceroses, camels, deer, and peccaries. Carnivores such as dogs, nimravids, bears, weasels, and raccoons began to replace the creodonts that had dominated the Paleocene in the Old World. Rodents and rabbits underwent tremendous diversification due to the increase in suitable habitats for ground-dwelling seed eaters, as habitats for squirrel-like nut- and fruit-eaters diminished. The primates, once present in Eurasia, were reduced in range to Africa and South America. Many groups, such as equids, entelodonts, rhinos, merycoidodonts, and camelids, became more able to run during this time, adapting to the plains that were spreading as the Eocene rainforests receded. Brontotheres died out in the Earliest Oligocene, and creodonts died out outside Africa and the Middle East at the end of the period. Multituberculates, an ancient lineage of primitive mammals that originated back in the Jurassic, also became extinct in the Oligocene, aside from the gondwanatheres.\nThe Eocene-Oligocene transition in Europe and Asia has been characterized as the Grande Coupure. The lowering of sea levels closed the Turgai Strait across the Obik Sea, which had previously separated Asia from Europe. This allowed Asian mammals, such as rhinoceroses and ruminants, to enter Europe and drive endemic species to extinction. Lesser faunal turnovers occurred simultaneously with the Oi2 event and towards the end of the Oligocene. There was significant diversification of mammals in Eurasia, including the giant indricotheres, that grew up to at the shoulder and weighed up to 20 tons. \"Paraceratherium\" was one of the largest land mammals ever to walk the Earth. However, the indricotheres were an exception to a general tendency for Oligocene mammals to be much smaller than their Eocene counterparts. The earliest deer, giraffes, pigs, and cattle appeared in the mid-Oligocene in Eurasia. The first felid, \"Proailurus\", originated in Asia during the late Oligocene and spread to Europe.\nThere was only limited migration between Asia and North America. The cooling of central North America at the Eocene-Oligocene transition resulted in a large turnover of gastropods, amphibians, and reptiles. Mammals were much less affected. Crocodilians and pond turtles replaced by dry land tortoises. Molluscs shifted to more drought-tolerant forms. The White River Fauna of central North America inhabited a semiarid prairie home and included entelodonts like \"Archaeotherium\", camelids (such as \"Poebrotherium\"), running rhinoceratoids, three-toed equids (such as \"Mesohippus\"), nimravids, protoceratids, and early canids like \"Hesperocyon\". Merycoidodonts, an endemic American group, were very diverse during this time.\nAustralia and South America became geographically isolated and developed their own distinctive endemic fauna. These included the New World and Old World monkeys. The South American continent was home to animals such as pyrotheres and astrapotheres, as well as litopterns and notoungulates. Sebecosuchians, terror birds, and carnivorous metatheres, like the borhyaenids remained the dominant predators.\nAfrica was also relatively isolated and retained its endemic fauna. These included mastodonts, hyraxes, arsinoitheres, and other archaic forms. Egypt in the Oligocene was an environment of lush forested deltas. Nevertheless, the Early Oligocene saw a major reduction in the diversity of many Afro-Arabian mammal clades, including hyaenodonts, primates, and hystricognath and anomaluroid rodents.\nDuring the Oligocene, the Tethyan marine biodiversity hotspot collapsed as the Tethys Ocean contracted. The seas around Southeast Asia and Australia became the new dominant hotspot of marine biodiversity. At sea, 97% of marine snail species, 89% of clams, and 50% of echinoderms of the Gulf Coast did not survive past the earliest Oligocene. New species evolved, but the overall diversity diminished. Cold-water mollusks migrated around the Pacific Rim from Alaska and Siberia. The marine animals of Oligocene oceans resembled today's fauna, such as the bivalves. Calcareous cirratulids appeared in the Oligocene.\nThe Oligocene saw the emergence of parrotfishes, as the centre of marine biodiversity shifted from the Central Tethys eastward into the Indo-Pacific. The fossil record of marine mammals is a little spotty during this time, and not as well known as the Eocene or Miocene, but some fossils have been found. The baleen whales and toothed whales had just appeared, and their ancestors, the archaeocete cetaceans began to decrease in diversity due to their lack of echolocation, which was very useful as the water became colder and cloudier. Other factors to their decline could include climate changes and competition with today's modern cetaceans and the requiem sharks, which also appeared in this epoch. Early desmostylians, like \"Behemotops\", are known from the Oligocene. Pinnipeds appeared near the end of the epoch from an otter-like ancestor.\nOceans.\nThe Oligocene sees the beginnings of modern ocean circulation, with tectonic shifts causing the opening and closing of ocean gateways. Cooling of the oceans had already commenced by the Eocene/Oligocene boundary, and they continued to cool as the Oligocene progressed. The formation of permanent Antarctic ice sheets during the early Oligocene and possible glacial activity in the Arctic may have influenced this oceanic cooling, though the extent of this influence is still a matter of some significant dispute.\nEffects of oceanic gateways on circulation.\nThe opening and closing of ocean gateways: the opening of the Drake Passage; the opening of the Tasmanian Gateway and the closing of the Tethys seaway; along with the final formation of the Greenland\u2013Iceland\u2013Faroes Ridge; played vital parts in reshaping oceanic currents during the Oligocene. As the continents shifted to a more modern configuration, so too did ocean circulation.\nDrake Passage.\nThe Drake Passage is located between South America and Antarctica. Once the Tasmanian Gateway between Australia and Antarctica opened, all that kept Antarctica from being completely isolated by the Southern Ocean was its connection to South America. As the South American continent moved north, the Drake Passage opened and enabled the formation of the Antarctic Circumpolar Current (ACC), which would have kept the cold waters of Antarctica circulating around that continent and strengthened the formation of Antarctic Bottom Water (ABW). With the cold water concentrated around Antarctica, sea surface temperatures and, consequently, continental temperatures would have dropped. The onset of Antarctic glaciation occurred during the early Oligocene, and the effect of the Drake Passage opening on this glaciation has been the subject of much research. However, some controversy still exists as to the exact timing of the passage opening, whether it occurred at the start of the Oligocene or nearer the end. Even so, many theories agree that at the Eocene/Oligocene (E/O) boundary, a yet shallow flow existed between South America and Antarctica, permitting the start of an Antarctic Circumpolar Current.\nStemming from the issue of when the opening of the Drake Passage took place, is the dispute over how great of an influence the opening of the Drake Passage had on the global climate. While early researchers concluded that the advent of the ACC was highly important, perhaps even the trigger, for Antarctic glaciation and subsequent global cooling, other studies have suggested that the \u03b418O signature is too strong for glaciation to be the main trigger for cooling. Through study of Pacific Ocean sediments, other researchers have shown that the transition from warm Eocene ocean temperatures to cool Oligocene ocean temperatures took only 300,000 years, which strongly implies that feedbacks and factors other than the ACC were integral to the rapid cooling.\nThe latest hypothesized time for the opening of the Drake Passage is during the early Miocene. Despite the shallow flow between South America and Antarctica, there was not enough of a deep water opening to allow for significant flow to create a true Antarctic Circumpolar Current. If the opening occurred as late as hypothesized, then the Antarctic Circumpolar Current could not have had much of an effect on early Oligocene cooling, as it would not have existed.\nThe earliest hypothesized time for the opening of the Drake Passage is around 30 Ma. One of the possible issues with this timing was the continental debris cluttering up the seaway between the two plates in question. This debris, along with what is known as the Shackleton fracture zone, has been shown in a recent study to be fairly young, only about 8 million years old. The study concludes that the Drake Passage would be free to allow significant deep water flow by around 31 Ma. This would have facilitated an earlier onset of the Antarctic Circumpolar Current. There is some evidence that it occurred much earlier, during the early Eocene.\nOpening of the Tasman Gateway.\nThe other major oceanic gateway opening during this time was the Tasman, or Tasmanian, depending on the paper, gateway between Australia and Antarctica. The time frame for this opening is less disputed than the Drake Passage and is largely considered to have occurred around 34 Ma. As the gateway widened, the Antarctic Circumpolar Current strengthened.\nTethys Seaway closing.\nThe Tethys Seaway was not a gateway, but rather a sea in its own right. Its closing during the Oligocene had significant impact on both ocean circulation and climate. The collisions of the African plate with the European plate and of the Indian subcontinent with the Asian plate, cut off the Tethys Seaway that had provided a low-latitude ocean circulation. The closure of Tethys built some new mountains (the Zagros range) and drew down more carbon dioxide from the atmosphere, contributing to global cooling.\nGreenland\u2013Iceland\u2013Faroes.\nThe gradual separation of the clump of continental crust and the deepening of the tectonic ridge in the North Atlantic that would become Greenland, Iceland, and the Faroe Islands helped to increase the deep water flow in that area. More information about the evolution of North Atlantic Deep Water will be given a few sections down.\nOcean cooling.\nEvidence for ocean-wide cooling during the Oligocene exists mostly in isotopic proxies. Patterns of extinction and patterns of species migration can also be studied to gain insight into ocean conditions. For a while, it was thought that the glaciation of Antarctica may have significantly contributed to the cooling of the ocean, however, recent evidence tends to deny this.\nDeep water.\nIsotopic evidence suggests that during the early Oligocene, the main source of deep water was the North Pacific and the Southern Ocean. As the Greenland-Iceland-Faroe Ridge sank and thereby connected the Norwegian\u2013Greenland sea with the Atlantic Ocean, the deep water of the North Atlantic began to come into play as well. Computer models suggest that once this occurred, a more modern in appearance thermo-haline circulation started.\nEvidence for the early Oligocene onset of chilled North Atlantic deep water lies in the beginnings of sediment drift deposition in the North Atlantic, such as the Feni and Southeast Faroe drifts.\nThe chilling of the South Ocean deep water began in earnest once the Tasmanian Gateway and the Drake Passage opened fully. Regardless of the time at which the opening of the Drake Passage occurred, the effect on the cooling of the Southern Ocean would have been the same.\nImpact events.\nRecorded extraterrestrial impacts:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "22287", "revid": "40192293", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22287", "title": "Semaphore telegraph", "text": ""}
{"id": "22288", "revid": "39154339", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22288", "title": "Ozymandias", "text": "Sonnet written by Percy Shelley\n\"Ozymandias\" ( ) is a sonnet written by the English Romantic poet Percy Bysshe Shelley. It was first published in the 11 January 1818 issue of \"The Examiner\" of London.\nThe poem was the result of a friendly competition between Shelley and fellow poet Horace Smith; using the subject of Egyptian pharaoh Ramesses II, \"Ozymandias\" being the Greek name for the pharaoh. Both Shelley's poem and Smith's Ozymandias explore the ravages of time to which the legacies of even the greatest are subject.\nOzymandias was included the following year in Shelley's collection \"Rosalind and Helen, A Modern Eclogue; with Other Poems,\" and in a posthumous compilation of his poems published in 1826.\nOrigin.\nShelley began writing the poem \"Ozymandias\" in 1817, upon anticipation of the arrival in Britain of the Younger Memnon, a head-and-torso fragment of a statue of Ramesses II acquired by Italian archaeologist Giovanni Battista Belzoni from the Ramesseum, the mortuary temple of Ramesses II at Thebes. Although the Younger Memnon did not arrive in London until 1821 the reputation of the statue fragment had preceded its arrival in Western Europe. European attempts to acquire the fragment had been made as early as 1798, when Napoleon's expedition unsuccessfully attempted to retrieve it. \nShelley, who had explored similar themes in his 1813 work \"Queen Mab\", was also influenced by Constantin Fran\u00e7ois de Chasseb\u0153uf's book \"Les Ruines, ou m\u00e9ditations sur les r\u00e9volutions des empires\" (\"The Ruins, or a Survey of the Revolutions of Empires\"), first published in an English translation in 1792.\nWriting, publication and text.\nPublication history.\nThe banker and political writer Horace Smith spent the Christmas season of 1817\u20131818 with Percy and Mary Shelley. At this time, members of their literary circle would sometimes challenge each other to write competing sonnets on a common subject: Shelley, John Keats and Leigh Hunt wrote competing sonnets about the Nile around the same time. Shelley and Smith both chose a passage from the writings of the Greek historian Diodorus Siculus in \"Bibliotheca historica\", which described a massive Egyptian statue and quoted its inscription: \"King of Kings Ozymandias am I. If any want to know how great I am and where I lie, let him outdo me in my work.\" In Shelley's poem, Diodorus becomes \"a traveller from an antique land.\"\nShelley wrote the poem around Christmas in 1817\u2014either in December that year or early January 1818. The poem was printed in \"The Examiner\", a weekly paper published by Leigh's brother John Hunt in London. Hunt admired Shelley's poetry and many of his other works, such as \"The Revolt of Islam\", were published in \"The Examiner\".\nShelley's poem was published on 11 January 1818 under the pen name \"Glirastes\". The name meant \"lover of dormice\", dormouse being his pet name for his spouse, author Mary Shelley. Smith's sonnet of the same name was published several weeks later. Shelley's poem appeared on page 24 in the yearly collection, under Original Poetry. It appeared again in Shelley's 1819 collection \"Rosalind and Helen, A Modern Eclogue; with Other Poems\", which was republished in 1876 under the title \"Sonnet. Ozymandias\" by Charles and James Ollier and in the 1826 \"Miscellaneous and Posthumous Poems of Percy Bysshe Shelley\" by William Benbow, both in London.\nText.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\u2014\u200a\nAnalysis.\nThe prominent theme of the poem is the inevitable decline of rulers and their hubris. In the poem, despite Ozymandias' grandiose ambitions, the power turns out to be ephemeral.\nReception and impact.\nThe poem has been cited as Shelley's best-known and is generally considered one of his best works, though it is sometimes considered uncharacteristic of his poetry. An article in \"Alif\" cited \"Ozymandias\" as \"one of the greatest and most famous poems in the English language\". Stephens considered that the Ozymandias Shelley created dramatically altered the opinion of Europeans on the king. It has been translated into Russian, as Shelley was an influential figure in Russia. The influence of the poem can be found in other works, including \"Wuthering Heights\" by Emily Bront\u00eb.\n\"Ozymandias\" has been included in many poetry anthologies, particularly school textbooks, such as AQA's GCSE English Literature Power and Conflict Anthology, where it is often included because of its perceived simplicity and the relative ease with which it can be memorized. Several poets, including Richard Watson Gilder and John B. Rosenma, have written poems titled \"Ozymandias\" in response to Shelley's work.\n\"Ozymandias gilberti\", a giant fossil fish from the Miocene of California that is known only from a few fragmentary remains, was named by David Starr Jordan as an allusion to the poem.\nThe 14th episode of the final season of \"Breaking Bad,\" covering the dramatic downfall of protagonist Walter White, was titled \"Ozymandias\". A recitation of the poem by series lead Bryan Cranston was used in a trailer for the series.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "22290", "revid": "18779361", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22290", "title": "Open-source license", "text": "Software license allowing source code to be used, modified, and shared\nOpen-source licenses are software licenses that allow content to be used, modified, and shared. They facilitate free and open-source software (FOSS) development. Intellectual property (IP) laws restrict the modification and sharing of creative works. Free and open-source licenses use these existing legal structures for an inverse purpose. They grant the recipient the rights to use the software, examine the source code, modify it, and distribute the modifications. These criteria are outlined in the Open Source Definition.\nAfter 1980, the United States began to treat software as a literary work covered by copyright law. Richard Stallman founded the free software movement in response to the rise of proprietary software. The term \"open source\" was used by the Open Source Initiative (OSI), founded by free-software developers Bruce Perens and Eric S. Raymond. \"Open source\" emphasizes the strengths of the open development model rather than software freedoms. While the goals behind the terms are different, open-source licenses and free-software licenses describe the same type of licenses.\nThe two main categories of open-source licenses are permissive and copyleft. Both grant permission to change and distribute software. Typically, they require attribution and disclaim liability. Permissive licenses come from academia. Copyleft licenses come from the free software movement. Copyleft licenses require derivative works to be distributed with the source code and under a similar license. Since the mid-2000s, courts in multiple countries have upheld the terms of both types of license. Software developers have filed cases as copyright infringement and as breaches of contract.\nBackground.\nIntellectual property (IP) is a legal category that treats creative output as property, comparable to private property. Legal systems grant the owner of an IP the right to restrict access in many ways. Owners can sell, lease, gift, or license their properties. Multiple types of IP law cover software including trademarks, patents, and copyrights.\nMost countries, including the United States (US), have created copyright laws in line with the Berne Convention with slight variations. These laws assign a copyright whenever a work is released in any fixed format. Under US copyright law, the initial release is considered an original work. The creator, or their employer, holds the copyright to this original work and therefore has the exclusive right to make copies, release modified versions, distribute copies, perform publicly, or display the work publicly. Modified versions of the original work are derivative works. When a creator modifies an existing work, they hold the copyright to their modifications. Unless the original work was in the public domain, a derivative work can only be distributed with the permission of every copyright holder.\nIn 1980, the US government amended the law to treat software as a literary work. Software released after this point was restricted by IP laws. At that time, American activist and programmer Richard Stallman was working as a graduate student at the MIT Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence Laboratory. Stallman witnessed fragmentation among software developers. He blamed the spread of proprietary software and closed models of development. To push back against these trends, Stallman founded the free software movement. Throughout the 1980s, he started the GNU Project to create a free operating system, wrote essays on freedom, founded the Free Software Foundation (FSF), and wrote several free-software licenses. The FSF used existing intellectual property laws for the opposite of their intended goal of restriction. Instead of imposing restrictions, free software explicitly provided freedoms to the recipient.\nIn the 90s, the term \"open source\" was coined as an alternative label for free software, and specific criteria were laid out to determine which licenses covered free and open-source software. Two active members of the free-software community, Bruce Perens and Eric S. Raymond, founded the Open Source Initiative (OSI). At Debian, Perens had proposed the Debian Free Software Guidelines (DFSG). The DFSG were drafted to provide a more specific and objective standard for the FOSS that Debian would host in their repositories. The OSI adopted the DSFG and used them as the basis for their Open Source Definition. The Free Software Foundation maintains a rival set of criteria, the Free Software Definition. Historically, these three organizations and their sets of criteria have been the notable authorities in determining whether a license covers free and open-source software. There is significant diversity among individual licenses but little difference between the rival definitions. The three definitions each require that people receiving covered software must be able to use, modify, and redistribute the covered work.\nEric S. Raymond was a proponent of the term \"open source\" over \"free software\". He viewed open source as more appealing to businesses and more reflective of the tangible advantages of FOSS development. One of Raymond's goals was to expand the existing hacker community to include large commercial developers. In \"The Cathedral and the Bazaar\", Raymond compared open-source development to the bazaar, an open-air public market. He argued that aside from ethics, the open model provided advantages that proprietary software could not replicate. Raymond focused heavily on feedback, testing, and bug reports. He contrasted the proprietary model where small pools of secretive workers carried out this work with the development of Linux where the pool of testers included potentially the entire world. He summarized this strength as \"Given enough eyeballs, all bugs are shallow.\" The OSI succeeded in bringing open-source development to corporate developers including Sun Microsystems, IBM, Netscape, Mozilla, Apache, Apple Inc., Microsoft, and Nokia. These companies released code under existing licenses and drafted their own to be approved by the OSI.\nTypes.\nOpen-source licenses are categorized as copyleft or permissive. Copyleft licenses require derivative works to include source code under a similar license. Permissive licenses do not, and therefore the code can be used within proprietary software. Copyleft can be further divided into strong and weak depending on whether they define derivative works broadly or narrowly.\nLicenses focus on copyright law, but code is also covered by other forms of IP. Major open-source licenses written since the late 1990s contain patent grants. These open-source patent grants cover the patents held by the developers. Software patents cover ideas and, rather than a specific implementation, cover \"any\" implementation of a claim. Patent claims give the holder the right to exclude others from making, using, selling, or importing products based on the idea. Because patents grant the right to exclude rather than the right to create, it is possible to have a patent on an idea but still be unable to legally implement it if the invention relies on another patented idea. Thus, open-source patent grants can offer permission only from covered patents. They cannot guarantee that a third party has not patented any concepts embodied in the code. The older permissive licenses do not discuss patents directly and offer only implicit patent grants in their offers to use or sell covered material. Newer copyleft licenses and the 2004 Apache License offer explicit patent grants and limited protection from patent litigation. These patent retaliation clauses protect developers by terminating grants for any party who initiates a patent lawsuit regarding covered software.\nTrademarks are the only form of IP not shared by free and open-source software. Trademarks on FOSS function the same as any other trademark. A trademark is a design that identifies the distinct source of a product. Because they distinguish products, the same designs can be used in different fields where there is no risk of confusing similar sources. To give up control of a trademark would result in the loss of that trademark. Therefore, no open-source license freely offers the use of a trademark. \nTrademark restrictions can overlap copyrights and affect material otherwise freely available. The US Supreme Court described using trademark law to restrict public domain content as \"mutant copyright\". In \"Dastar Corp. v. Twentieth Century Fox Film Corp.\", the court \"caution[ed] against misuse or over-extension of trademark\" law without providing a firm decision on those mutant copyrights. Trademark overlap can leave open-source and free content projects vulnerable to a \"hostile takeover\" if outside parties file for trademarks on derivative works. Notably, Andrey Duskin applied for trademarks on the SCP Foundation, a collaborative writing project, when creating derivative works based on SCP stories.\nPermissive.\nPermissive licenses, also known as academic licenses, allow recipients to use, modify, and distribute software with no obligation to provide source code. Institutions created these licenses to distribute their creations to the public. Permissive licenses are usually short, often less than a page of text. They impose few conditions. Most include disclaimers of warranty and obligations to credit authors. A few include explicit provisions for patents, trademarks, and other forms of intellectual property.\nThe University of California, Berkeley created the first open-source license when they began distributing their Berkeley Software Distribution (BSD) operating system. The BSD license and its later variations permit modification and distribution of the covered software. The BSD licenses brought the concept of academic freedom of ideas to computing. Early academic software authors had shared code based on implied promises. Berkeley made these concepts explicit with clear disclaimers for liability and warranty along with conditions, or clauses, for redistribution. The original had four clauses, but subsequent versions have further reduced the restrictions. As a result, it is common to specify if the covered software uses a 2-clause or 3-clause version.\nThe Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) created an academic license based on the BSD original. The MIT license clarified the conditions by making them more explicit. For example, the MIT license describes the right to sublicense. One of the strengths of open-source development is the continual process where developers can build on the derivative works of each other and combine their projects into collective works. Explicitly making covered code sublicensable provides a legal advantage when tracking the chain of authorship. The BSD and MIT are template licenses that can be adapted to any project. They are widely adapted and used by many FOSS projects.\nThe Apache License is more comprehensive and explicit. The Apache Software Foundation wrote it for their Apache HTTP Server. Version 2, published in 2004, offers legal advantages over simple licenses and provides similar grants. While the BSD and MIT licenses offer an implicit patent grant, the Apache License includes a section on patents with an explicit grant from contributors. Additionally, it is one of the few permissive licenses with a patent retaliation clause. Patent retaliation, or patent suspension, clauses take effect if a licensee initiates patent infringement litigation on covered code. In that situation, the patent grants are revoked. These clauses protect against patent trolling.\nCopyleft.\nCopyleft licenses require source code to be distributed with software and require the source code to be made available under a similar license. Like the permissive licenses, most copyleft licenses require attribution. Most, including the GPL, disclaim implied warranties.\nCopyleft uses the restrictions of IP law\u2014contrary to their usual purpose\u2014to mandate that the code remain open. The term and its related slogan, \"All rights reversed\", had been previously used in a playful manner by the \"Principia Discordia\" and Tiny BASIC; the modern usage begins with Richard Stallman's efforts to create a free operating system. In 1984, programmer Don Hopkins mailed a manual to Stallman with a \"Copyleft \u24c1\" sticker. Stallman, who was working on the GNU operating system, adopted the term. An early version of copyleft licensing was used for the 1985 release of GNU Emacs. The term became associated with the FSF's later reciprocal licenses, notably the GNU General Public License (GPL).\nTraditional, proprietary software licenses are written with the goal of increasing profit, but Stallman wrote the GPL to increase the body of available free software. His reciprocal licenses offer the rights to use, modify, and distribute the work on the condition that people must release derivative works under a license offering these same freedoms. Software built on a copyleft base must come with the source code, and the source code must be available under the same or a similar license. This offers protection against proprietary software consuming code without giving back. Richard Stallman stated that \"the central idea of copyleft is to use copyright law, but flip it over to serve the opposite of its usual purpose: instead of a means of privatizing software, [copyright] becomes a means of keeping software free.\" Free-software licenses are also open-source software licenses. The separate terms free software and open-source software reflect different values rather than a legal difference. Both movements and their formal definitions require the covered work to be made available with source code and with permission for modification and redistribution. There are occasional edge cases where only one of the FSF or the OSI accept a license, but the popular free-software licenses are open source, including the GPL.\nPractical benefits to copyleft licenses have attracted commercial developers. Corporations have used and written reciprocal licenses with a narrower scope than the GPL. For example, Netscape drafted their own copyleft terms after rejecting permissive licenses for the Mozilla project. The GPL remains the most popular license of this type, but there are other significant examples. The FSF has crafted the Lesser General Public License (LGPL) for libraries. Mozilla uses the Mozilla Public License (MPL) for their releases, including Firefox. IBM drafted the Common Public License (CPL) and later adopted the Eclipse Public License (EPL). A difference between the GPL and other reciprocal licenses is how they define derivative works covered by the reciprocal provisions. The GPL, and the Affero License (AGPL) based on it, use a broad scope to describe affected works. The AGPL extends the reciprocal obligation in the GPL to cover software made available over a network. They are called strong copyleft in contrast to the weaker copyleft licenses often used by corporations. Weak copyleft uses narrower, explicit definitions of derivative works. The MPL uses a file-based definition, the CPL and EPL use a module-based definition, and the FSF's own LGPL refers to software libraries.\nCompatibility.\nLicense compatibility determines how code with different licenses can be distributed together. The goal of open-source licensing is to make the work freely available, but this becomes complicated when working with multiple terminologies imposing different requirements. There are many uncommonly used licenses and some projects write their own bespoke agreements. As a result, this causes more confusion than other legal aspects. When releasing a collection of applications, each license can be considered separately. However, when attempting to combine software, code from another project can only be in-licensed if the project uses compatible terms and conditions.\nWhen combining code bases, the original licenses can be maintained for separate components, and the larger work released under a compatible license. This compatibility is often one-way. Public domain content can be used anywhere as there is no copyright claim, but code acquired under any almost any set of terms cannot be waved to the public domain. Permissive licenses can be used within copyleft works, but copyleft material cannot be released under a permissive license. Some weak copyleft licenses can be used under the GPL and are said to be GPL-compatible. GPL software can only be used under the GPL or AGPL. Permissive licenses are broadly compatible because they can cover separate parts of a project. Multiple licenses including the GPL and Apache License have been revised to enhance compatibility.\nTranslation issues, ambiguity in licensing terms, and incompatibility of some licenses with the law in certain jurisdictions compound the problem of license compatibility. Downloading an open-source module is straightforward, but complying with the licensing terms can be more difficult. Because of the amount of software dependencies, engineers working on complex projects often rely on license management software to achieve compliance with the licensing terms of open-source components. Many open-source software files do not unambiguously state the license, increasing the difficulties of compliance.\nEnforcement.\nFree and open-source software licenses have been successfully enforced in civil court since the mid-2000s. In a pair of early lawsuits\u2014Jacobsen v. Katzer in the United States and Welte v. Sitecom in Germany\u2014defendants argued that open-source licenses were invalid. Sitecom and Katzer separately argued that the licenses were unenforceable. Both the US and German courts rejected these claims. They ruled that the defendants could not have legally distributed the software if the licenses were unenforceable.\nCourts have found that distributing software indicates acceptance of the license's terms. Physical software releases can obtain the consumer's assent with notices placed on shrinkwrap. Online distribution can use clickwrap, a digital equivalent where the user must click to accept. Open-source software has an additional acceptance mechanism. Without permission from the copyright holder, the law prohibits redistribution. Therefore, courts treat redistribution as acceptance of the license terms. These can include attribution provisions or source code provisions for copyleft licenses.\nDevelopers typically achieve compliance without lawsuits. Social pressures, like the potential for community backlash, are often sufficient. Cease and desist letters are a common method to bring companies back into compliance, especially in Germany. A standard process has developed in the German legal system. FOSS developers present companies with a cease and desist letter. These letters outline how to come back into compliance from a violation. German judges can issue a court-mandated cease and desist order to unresponsive companies. Civil cases proceed if these first steps fail. The German procedural laws are clear and favorable to claimants. \nUncertainties remain in how different courts will handle certain aspects of licensing. For software in general, there are debates about what can be patented and what can be copyrighted. Regarding an application programming interface (API), the European Court of Justice noted in the 2012 \"SAS Institute\" case that \"ideas and principles which underlie [computer program] interfaces are not protected by copyright\". In a similar 2021 case, the US Supreme Court permitted the recreation of an API in a transformative product under fair use.\nA long-debated subject within the FOSS community is whether open-source licenses are \"bare licenses\" or contracts. A bare license is a set of conditions under which actions otherwise restricted by IP laws are permitted. Under the bare license interpretation, advocated by the FSF, a case is brought to court by the copyright holder as copyright infringement. Under the contract interpretation, a case can be brought to court by an involved party as a breach of contract. US and French courts have tried cases under both interpretations. Non-profit organizations like FSF and the Software Freedom Conservancy offer to hold the rights to developers' projects to enforce compliance.\nPublic-domain software.\nWhen a copyright expires, the work enters the public domain, and is freely available to anyone. Some creative works are not covered by copyright and enter directly into the public domain. In the early history of computing, this applied to software. Early computer software was often given away with hardware. Developed initially at MIT, the pioneering video game Spacewar! was used to market and test the PDP-1 computer. \nAccording to attorney Lawrence Rosen, copyright laws were not written with the expectation that creators would place their work into the public domain. Thus intellectual property laws lack clear paths to waive a copyright. Highly permissive licenses described as \"public domain\" may legally function as unilateral contracts that offer something but impose no terms.\nA public-domain-equivalent license, like the Creative Commons CC0, provides a waiver of copyright claims into the public domain along with a permissive software license as a fallback. In jurisdictions that do not accept a public domain waiver, the permissive license takes effect. Public domain waivers share limitations with simple academic licenses. This creates the possibility that an outside party could attempt to control a public domain work via patent or trademark law. Public domain waivers handle warranties differently from any type of license. Even very permissive ones, like the MIT license, disclaim warranty and liability. Anyone using the free software must accept this disclaimer as a condition. Because public domain content is available to everyone, the copyright waiver cannot impose a disclaimer.\nUse in proprietary software.\nOpen-source licenses allow other businesses to commercialize covered software. Work released under a permissive license can be incorporated into proprietary software. Permissive licenses permit the addition of new terms, including proprietary ones. Proprietary software has heavily integrated open-source code released under the Apache, BSD, and MIT licenses. Open core is a business model where developers release a core piece of software as open source and monetize a product containing it as proprietary software. The strong copyleft GPL is written to prevent distribution within proprietary software. Weak copyleft licenses impose specific requirements on derivative works that may allow the covered code to be distributed within proprietary software in certain circumstances.\nCloud computing relies on free and open-source software and avoids the distribution that triggers most licenses. Cloud software is hosted rather than distributed. A vendor hosts the software online, and their end users do not have to download, access, or even know about the code in use. The copyleft GNU Affero General Public License (AGPL) is triggered when covered code is hosted or distributed. Some developers have adopted the AGPL, and others have switched to proprietary licenses with features of open-source licensing. For example, open-core developer Elastic switched from the Apache license to the \"source-available\" Server Side Public License. Source-available software comes with source code as a reference. \nSince 2010, the cloud model has grown in prominence. Developers have criticized cloud companies that profit from hosting open-source software without contributing money or code upstream, comparing the practice to strip mining. Cloud computing leader Amazon Web Services has stated they comply with licenses and act in their customers' best interests.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "22291", "revid": "40192293", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22291", "title": "Ostergotland", "text": ""}
{"id": "22292", "revid": "44120587", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22292", "title": "Occitan language", "text": "Romance language of Western Europe\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Infobox/styles-images.css\" /&gt;\nOccitan (; ), also known by its native speakers as (; ), sometimes also referred to as Proven\u00e7al, is a Romance language spoken in southern France, Monaco, Italy's Occitan Valleys, as well as in the Catalonian Val d'Aran; collectively, these regions are sometimes referred to as Occitania. It is also spoken in the southern Italian province of Cosenza (mostly in Guardia Piemontese). There it is referred to as Gardiol, which is considered a separate Occitanic language. Some include Catalan as a dialect of Occitan, as the linguistic distance between this language and some Occitan dialects (such as the Gascon language) is similar to the distance between different Occitan dialects. Catalan was considered a dialect of Occitan until the end of the 19th century and still today remains its closest relative. Occitan has a particularly rich lexicon. \"Lo Panoccinari\", considered the most comprehensive dictionary ever published in this language, records over 250,000 unique words (more than 310,000 including dialectal variations).\nOccitan is an official language of Catalonia, Spain, where a subdialect of Gascon known as Aranese is spoken (in the Val d'Aran). Since September 2010, the Parliament of Catalonia has considered Aranese Occitan to be the officially preferred language for use in the Val d'Aran.\nAcross history, the terms Limousin (\"Lemosin\"), Languedocien (\"Lengadocian\"), Gascon, in addition to Proven\u00e7al (\"Proven\u00e7al\", \"Proven\u00e7au\" or \"Prouven\u00e7au\") later have been used as synonyms for the whole of Occitan; nowadays, the term \"Proven\u00e7al\" is understood mainly as the Occitan dialect spoken in Provence, in southeast France.\nUnlike other Romance languages such as French or Spanish, Occitan does not have a single written standard form, nor does it have official status in France, home to most of its speakers. Instead, there are competing norms for writing Occitan, some of which attempt to be pan-dialectal, whereas others are based on a particular dialect. These efforts are hindered by the rapidly declining use of Occitan as a spoken language in much of southern France, as well as by the significant differences in phonology and vocabulary among different Occitan dialects.\nAccording to the UNESCO Red Book of Endangered Languages, four of the six major dialects of Occitan (Proven\u00e7al, Auvergnat, Limousin and Languedocien) are considered severely endangered, whereas the remaining two (Gascon and Vivaro-Alpine) are considered definitely endangered.\nName.\nHistory of the modern term.\nThe name Occitan comes from the term (\"language of \"), being the Occitan word for \"yes.\" While the term would have been in use orally for some time after the decline of Latin, as far as historical records show, the Italian medieval poet Dante was the first to have recorded the term in writing. In his , he wrote in Latin, (\"for some say , others , yet others say \"), thereby highlighting three major Romance literary languages that were well known in Italy, based on each language's word for \"yes\", the \" language\" (Occitan), the \" language\" (French), and the \" language\" (Italian).\nThe word came from Vulgar Latin (\"this\"), while originated from Latin (\"this [is] it\"). Old Catalan and now the Catalan of Northern Catalonia also have (). Other Romance languages derive their word for \"yes\" from the Latin , \"thus [it is], [it was done], etc.\", such as Spanish , Eastern Lombard , Italian , or Portuguese . In modern Catalan, as in modern Spanish, is usually used as a response, although the language retains the word , akin to , which is sometimes used at the end of yes\u2013no questions and also in higher register as a positive response. French uses to answer \"yes\" in response to questions that are asked in the negative sense: for example, (\"You don't have any brothers, do you ?\" \"Yes I do, I have seven.\").\nThe name \"Occitan\" was attested around 1300 as , a crossing of and (Aquitanian).\nOther names for Occitan.\nFor many centuries, the Occitan dialects (together with Catalan) were referred to as \"Limousin\" or \"Proven\u00e7al\", after the names of two regions lying within the modern Occitan-speaking area. After Fr\u00e9d\u00e9ric Mistral's F\u00e9librige movement in the 19th century, Proven\u00e7al achieved the greatest literary recognition and so became the most popular term for Occitan.\nAccording to Joseph Anglade, a philologist and specialist of medieval literature who helped impose the then archaic term \"Occitan\" as the standard name, the word \"Lemosin\" was first used to designate the language at the beginning of the 13th century by Catalan troubadour Raimon Vidal de Besal\u00fa(n) in his :\nThe French language is worthier and better suited for romances and pastourelles; but [the language] from Limousin is of greater value for writing poems and can\u00e7ons and sirvent\u00e9s; and across the whole of the lands where our tongue is spoken, the literature in the Limousin language has more authority than any other dialect, wherefore I shall use this name in priority.\nThe term \"Proven\u00e7al\", though implying a reference to the region of Provence, historically was used for Occitan as a whole, for \"in the eleventh, the twelfth, and sometimes also the thirteenth centuries, one would understand under the name of Provence the whole territory of the old Provincia romana Gallia Narbonensis and even Aquitaine\". The term first came into fashion in Italy.\nCurrently, linguists use the terms \"Proven\u00e7al\" and \"Limousin\" strictly to refer to specific varieties within Occitan, using \"Occitan\" for the language as a whole. Many non-specialists, however, continue to refer to the language as \"Proven\u00e7al\".\nHistory.\nOne of the oldest written fragments of the language found dates back to 960, shown here in italics mixed with non-italicized Latin:\nCarolingian litanies (c.\u2009780), though the leader sang in Latin, were answered to in Old Occitan by the people (; ).\nOther famous pieces include the \"Boecis\", a 258-line-long poem written entirely in the Limousin dialect of Occitan between the year 1000 and 1030 and inspired by Boethius's \"The Consolation of Philosophy\"; the Waldensian (dated 1100), (c.\u20091054\u20131076), the \"Romance of Flamenca\" (13th century), the \"Song of the Albigensian Crusade\" (1213\u20131219?), (12th or 13th century), (11th century) and (9th or 10th century).\nOccitan was the vehicle for the influential poetry of the medieval troubadours () and : At that time, the language was understood and celebrated throughout most of educated Europe. It was the maternal language of the English queen Eleanor of Aquitaine and kings Richard I (who wrote troubadour poetry) and John.\nWith the gradual imposition of French royal power over its territory, Occitan declined in status from the 14th century on. The Ordinance of Villers-Cotter\u00eats (1539) decreed that the (French \u2013 though at the time referring to the Francien language and not the larger collection of dialects grouped under the name ) should be used for all French administration. Occitan's greatest decline occurred during the French Revolution, in which diversity of language was considered a threat.\nIn 1903, the four Gospels (, i.e. Matthew, Mark, Luke and John) were translated into Proven\u00e7al as spoken in Cannes and Grasse. The translation was given the official Roman Catholic Imprimatur by vicar general A. Estellon.\nThe literary renaissance of the late 19th century (in which the 1904 Nobel Prize in Literature winner, Fr\u00e9d\u00e9ric Mistral, among others, was involved) was attenuated by World War I, when (in addition to the disruption caused by any major war) many Occitan speakers spent extended periods of time alongside French-speaking comrades.\nOrigins.\nBecause the geographical territory in which Occitan is spoken is surrounded by regions in which other Romance languages are used, external influences may have influenced its origin and development. Many factors favored its development as its own language.\nOccitan in the Iberian Peninsula.\nCatalan in Spain's northern and central Mediterranean coastal regions and the Balearic Islands is closely related to Occitan, sharing many linguistic features and a common origin (see Occitano-Romance languages). The language was one of the first to gain prestige as a medium for literature among Romance languages in the Middle Ages. Indeed, in the 12th and 13th centuries, Catalan troubadours such as Guerau de Cabrera, Guilhem de Bergadan, Guilhem de Cabestany, Huguet de Mataplana, Raimon Vidal de Besal\u00fa, Cerver\u00ed de Girona, Formit de Perpinhan, and Jofre de Foix\u00e0 wrote in Occitan.\nAt the end of the 11th century, the \"Franks\", as they were called at the time, started to penetrate the Iberian Peninsula through the Ways of St. James via Somport and Roncesvalles, settling in various locations in the Kingdoms of Navarre and Aragon enticed by the privileges granted them by the Navarrese kings. They settled in large groups, forming ethnic boroughs where Occitan was used for everyday life, in Pamplona, Sang\u00fcesa, and Estella-Lizarra, among others. These boroughs in Navarre may have been close-knit communities that tended not to assimilate with the predominantly Basque-speaking general population. Their language became the status language chosen by the Navarrese kings, nobility, and upper classes for official and trade purposes in the period stretching from the early 13th century to the late 14th century. \nWritten administrative records were in a \"koin\u00e9\" based on the Languedocien dialect from Toulouse with fairly archaic linguistic features, evidence survives of a written account in Occitan from Pamplona centered on the burning of borough San Nicolas from 1258, while the \"History of the War of Navarre\" by Guilhem Anelier (1276), albeit written in Pamplona, shows a linguistic variant from Toulouse.\nThings turned out slightly otherwise in Aragon, where the sociolinguistic situation was different, with a clearer Basque-Romance bilingual situation (cf. Basques from the cited c.\u20091000), but a receding Basque language (Basque banned in the marketplace of Huesca, 1349). While the language was chosen as a medium of prestige in records and official statements along with Latin in the early 13th century, Occitan faced competition from the rising local Romance vernacular, the Navarro-Aragonese, both orally and in writing, especially after Aragon's territorial conquests south to Zaragoza, Huesca and Tudela between 1118 and 1134. It resulted that a second Occitan immigration of this period was assimilated by the similar Navarro-Aragonese language, which at the same time was fostered and chosen by the kings of Aragon. In the 14th century, Occitan across the whole southern Pyrenean area fell into decay and became largely absorbed into Navarro-Aragonese first and Castilian later in the 15th century, after their exclusive boroughs broke up (1423, Pamplona's boroughs unified).\nGascon-speaking communities were called to move in for trading purposes by Navarrese kings in the early 12th century to the coastal fringe extending from San Sebastian to the river Bidasoa, where they settled down. The language variant they used was different from the ones in Navarre, i.e. a B\u00e9arnese dialect of Gascon. Gascon remained in use in this area far longer than in Navarre and Aragon, until the 19th century, thanks mainly to the fact that Donostia and Pasaia maintained close ties with Bayonne.\nGeographic distribution.\nNumber of speakers.\nThe area where Occitan was historically dominant has approximately 16\u00a0million inhabitants. Recent research has shown it may be spoken as a first language by approximately 789,000 people in France, Italy, Spain and Monaco. In Monaco, Occitan coexists with Mon\u00e9gasque Ligurian, which is the other native language. Up to seven million people in France understand the language, whereas twelve to fourteen million fully spoke it in 1921. In 1860, Occitan speakers represented more than 39% of the whole French population (52% for francophones proper); they were still 26% to 36% in the 1920s, but less than 7% in 1993.\nUsage in France.\nThough it was still an everyday language for most of the rural population of southern France well into the 20th century, the language is now declining in every region where it was spoken.\nA 2020 study conducted by the Office Public de la Langue Occitane on the territories of the Nouvelle-Aquitaine and Occitanie regions estimated around 540,000 speakers in these two regions. It is worth noting that the survey was conducted in the Occitan language for respondents who declared they were proficient in it. However, the regions including Auvergne and Provence were effectively excluded from this census, as the Office in question does not currently have a partnership with these territories.\nAccording to the 1999 census, there were 610,000 native speakers (almost all of whom were also native French speakers) and perhaps another million people with some exposure to the language. Following the pattern of language shift, most of this remainder is to be found among the eldest populations. Occitan activists (called \"Occitanists\") have attempted, in particular with the advent of Occitan-language preschools (the \"Calandretas\"), to reintroduce the language to the young.\nNonetheless, the number of proficient speakers of Occitan is thought to be dropping precipitously. A tourist in the cities in southern France is unlikely to hear a single Occitan word spoken on the street (or, for that matter, in a home), and is likely to only find the occasional vestige, such as street signs (and, of those, most will have French equivalents more prominently displayed), to remind them of the traditional language of the area.\nOccitan speakers, as a result of generations of systematic suppression and humiliation (see Vergonha), seldom use the language in the presence of strangers, whether they are from abroad or from outside Occitania (in this case, often merely and abusively referred to as \"Parisiens\" or \"Nordistes\", which means \"northerners\"). Occitan is still spoken by many elderly people in rural areas, but they generally switch to French when dealing with outsiders.\nOccitan's decline is somewhat less pronounced in B\u00e9arn because of the province's history (a late addition to the Kingdom of France), though even there the language is little spoken outside the homes of the rural elderly. The village of Artix is notable for having elected to post street signs in the local language.\nPronunciation.\nThe following section describes the pronunciation of the Languedocian dialect which is central geographically and the most conservative among Occitan dialects. For that reason it serves as a basis for standardization of Occitan. \nStress.\nWords ending with a vowel or \"s\", as well as verb forms ending with \"n\", have stress on the penultimate syllable. Words ending with a diphthong or a consonant (except \"s\" but including \"n\") have stress on the last syllable. Exceptions have marked stress.\nExamples are:\n\"La mecanica\"; destriar; cu\u00e9lher; cantan; pen\u00f3s; gaton.\nGrammar.\nThe following section describes the grammar of the Languedocian dialect which is central geographically and most conservative among Occitan dialects. For that reason it serves as a basis for standardization of Occitan. \nPronouns.\nPersonal pronouns are shown in the following table. \nPossessives.\nPossessives are shown in the following table. \nDemonstratives.\nDemonstratives (\"this\", \"that\", \"these\", \"those\") are shown in the following table. \nNouns.\nThere are 2 genders: masculine, and feminine. Feminine nouns are usually created by adding termination \"-a\". Plural is created by adding \"-s\" to nouns.\nArticles.\nThere are two indefinite articles in singular (a/an): masculine \"un\" and feminine \"una\" and one in plural: \"de\". \"de\" before vowels is shortend to \"d\"'. It's summarized in the following table. \nDefinite articles (the) are shown in the following table. \n\"l\"' is used before a vowel. \nPrepositions \"a\", \"de\", \"per\" and \"sus\" followed by articles \"lo\" and \"los\" are merged with them according to the following table. \nFor instance \n\"a+los = als.\"\nVerbs.\nVerbs inflect for person, number, tense and mood. There are 3 conjugations: \"-ar\", \"-ir\" and -\"re\". Verbs ending with \"-ir\" have two subconjugations: with and without a suffix. \nPattern of inflection of regular verbs belonging to the first conjugation is presented in the following table. \n\"Parlar\" (= \"to speak\"), \"parlat\" (= \"spoken\"), \"parlant\" (= \"speaking\"). \nConjugation \"-ir\" with the suffix is shown below.\n\"Dormir\" (= \"to sleep\"), \"dormit\" (= \"slept\"), \"dormint\" (= \"sleeping\"). \nSecond conjugation without the suffix is shown below. \n\"Sentir\" (= \"to feel\"), \"sentit\" (= \"felt\"), \"sentent\" (= \"feeling\"). \nThe third conjugation is shown below. \n\"Batre\" (= \"to beat\"), \"batut\" (= \"beaten\"), \"beatent\" (= \"beating\")\nIrregular verbs.\nTwo very important irregular verbs are \"\u00e8sser/\u00e8stre\" (= \"to be\") and \"aver\" (= \"to have\"). \nConjugation of \"\u00e8sser/\u00e8stre\" is shown below.\n\"estat\" (= \"been\"), \"essent\" (= \"being\")\nConjugation of \"aver\" is shown below. \n\"agut\" (= \"had\"), \"avent\" (= \"having\")\nReflexive verbs.\nReflexive verbs are verbs which require reflexive pronoun \"se\". Pronoun \"se\" inflects for person and number. An example is \"se levar\" (= \"to get up\"). It's inflacted according to the following table. \nNegation.\nNegation is done by adding \"pas\" after a verb. For example:\nDialects.\nOccitan is fundamentally defined by its dialects, rather than being a unitary language, as it lacks an official written standard. Like other languages that fundamentally exist at a spoken, rather than written, level (e.g. the Rhaeto-Romance languages, Franco-Proven\u00e7al, Astur-Leonese, and Aragonese), every settlement technically has its own dialect, with the whole of Occitania forming a classic dialect continuum that changes gradually along any path from one side to the other. Nonetheless, specialists commonly divide Occitan into six main dialects:\nThe northern and easternmost dialects have more morphological and phonetic features in common with the Gallo-Italic and O\u00efl languages (e.g. nasal vowels; loss of final consonants; initial \"cha/ja-\" instead of \"ca/ga-\"; uvular \u27e8r\u27e9; the front-rounded sound instead of a diphthong, instead of before a consonant), whereas the southernmost dialects have more features in common with the Ibero-Romance languages (e.g. betacism; voiced fricatives between vowels in place of voiced stops; -\"ch\"- in place of -\"it\"-), and Gascon has a number of unusual features not seen in other dialects (e.g. in place of ; loss of between vowels; intervocalic \"-r-\" and final \"-t/ch\" in place of medieval -ll-).\nThere are also significant lexical differences, where some dialects have words cognate with French, and others have Catalan and Spanish cognates. Nonetheless, there is a significant amount of mutual intelligibility and some of the words with two cognates can be used in the same dialect as synonymous (\"totjorn/sempre\" in proven\u00e7al or \"maison/ostau\" in gascon for instance).\nThere is also no particular geographical distribution of the cognates, with some shared by distant dialects and other not shared with bordering foreign languages (for instance \"maison\" in both Gascon and Ni\u00e7ard, cognate of French but not of Spanish or Italian, although these dialects are geographically closer to these languages).\nGascon is the most divergent, and descriptions of the main features of Occitan often consider Gascon separately. Max Wheeler notes that \"probably only its copresence within the French cultural sphere has kept [Gascon] from being regarded as a separate language\", and compares it to Franco-Proven\u00e7al, which is considered a separate language from Occitan but is \"probably not more divergent from Occitan overall than Gascon is\".\nThere is no general agreement about larger groupings of these dialects.\nMax Wheeler divides the dialects into two groups:\nPierre Bec divides the dialects into three groups:\nIn order to overcome the pitfalls of the traditional romanistic view, Bec proposed a \"supradialectal\" classification that groups Occitan with Catalan as a part of a wider Occitano-Romanic group. One such classification posits three groups:\nAccording to this view, Catalan is an ausbau language that became independent from Occitan during the 13th century, but originates from the Aquitano-Pyrenean group.\nDomergue Sumien proposes a slightly different supradialectal grouping.\nJewish dialects.\nOccitan has 3 dialects spoken by Jewish communities that are all now extinct.\nJudeo-Gascon.\nA sociolect of the Gascon dialect spoken by Spanish and Portuguese Jews in Gascony. It, like many other Jewish dialects and languages, contained large amounts of Hebrew loanwords. It went extinct after World War 2 with the last speakers being elderly Jews in Bayonne. About 850 unique words and a few morphological and grammatical aspects of the dialect were transmitted to Southern Jewish French.\nJudeo-Proven\u00e7al.\nJudeo-Proven\u00e7al was a dialect of Occitan spoken by Jews in Provence. The dialect declined in usage after Jews were expelled from the area in 1498, and was probably extinct by the 20th century.\nJudeo-Ni\u00e7ard.\nThe least attested of the Judeo-Occitan dialects, Judeo-Ni\u00e7ard was spoken by the community of Jews living in Nice, who were descendants of Jewish immigrants from Provence, Piedmont, and other Mediterranean communities. Its existence is attested from a few documents from the 19th century. It contained significant influence in both vocabulary and grammar from Hebrew.\nSouthern Jewish French.\nAll three of these dialects have some influence in Southern Jewish French, a dialect of French spoken by Jews in southern France. Southern Jewish French is now estimated to only be spoken by about 50\u2013100 people.\nIETF dialect tags.\nSeveral IETF language variant tags have been registered:\nCodification.\nStandardization.\nAll regional varieties of the Occitan language have a written form; thus, Occitan can be considered as a pluricentric language. Standard Occitan, also called \"occitan larg\" (i.e., 'wide Occitan') is a synthesis that respects and admits soft regional adaptations (which are based on the convergence of previous regional koin\u00e9s). The standardization process began with the publication of \"Gramatica occitana segon los parlars lengadocians\" (\"Grammar of the Languedocien Dialect\") by Louis Alibert (1935), followed by the \"Dictionnaire occitan-fran\u00e7ais selon les parlers languedociens\" (\"French-Occitan dictionary according to Languedocien\") by the same author (1966), completed during the 1970s with the works of Pierre Bec (Gascon), Rob\u00e8rt Lafont (Proven\u00e7al), and others. However, the process has not yet been completed as of the present. Standardization is mostly supported by users of the classical norm. Due to the strong situation of diglossia, some users thusly reject the standardization process, and do not conceive Occitan as a language that can be standardized as per other standardized languages.\nWriting system.\nThere are two main linguistic norms currently used for Occitan, one (known as \"classical\") based on that of Medieval Occitan, and one (sometimes known as \"Mistralian\", due to its use by Fr\u00e9d\u00e9ric Mistral) based on modern French orthography. Sometimes, there is conflict between users of each system.\nThere are also two other norms but they have a lesser audience. The \"Esc\u00f2la dau P\u00f2 norm\" (or \"Escolo d\u00f3u Po norm\") is a simplified version of the Mistralian norm and is used only in the Occitan Valleys (Italy), besides the classical norm. The \"Bonnaudian norm\" (or \"\u00e9criture auvergnate unifi\u00e9e, EAU\") was created by Pierre Bonnaud and is used only in the Auvergnat dialect, besides the classical norm.\nNote that Catalan version was translated from the Spanish, while the Occitan versions were translated from the French. The second part of the Catalan version may also be rendered as \"S\u00f3n dotades de ra\u00f3 i de consci\u00e8ncia, i els cal actuar entre si amb un esperit de fraternitat\", showing the similarities between Occitan and Catalan.\nOrthography IETF subtags.\nSeveral IETF language subtags have been registered for the different orthographies:\nDebates concerning linguistic classification and orthography.\nThe majority of scholars think that Occitan constitutes a single language. Some authors, constituting a minority, reject this opinion and even the name \"Occitan\", thinking that there is a family of distinct rather than dialects of a single language.\nMany Occitan linguists and writers, particularly those involved with the pan-Occitan movement centered on the Institut d'Estudis Occitans, disagree with the view that Occitan is a family of languages; instead they believe Limousin, Auvergnat, Languedocien, Gascon, Proven\u00e7al and Vivaro-Alpine are dialects of a single language. Although there are indeed noticeable differences between these varieties, there is a very high degree of mutual intelligibility between them partly because they share a common literary history; furthermore, academic and literary circles have identified them as a collective linguistic entity\u2014the \u2014for centuries.\nSome Proven\u00e7al authors continue to support the view that Proven\u00e7al is a separate language. Nevertheless, the vast majority of Proven\u00e7al authors and associations think that Proven\u00e7al is a part of Occitan.\nThis debate about the status of Proven\u00e7al should not be confused with the debate concerning the spelling of Proven\u00e7al.\nFor example, the classical system writes \"Polonha\", whereas the Mistralian spelling system has \"Poulougno\", for , 'Poland'.\nThe question of Gascon is similar. Gascon presents a number of significant differences from the rest of the language; but, despite these differences, Gascon and other Occitan dialects have very important common lexical and grammatical features, so authors such as Pierre Bec argue that they could never be considered as different as, for example, Spanish and Italian. In addition, Gascon's being included in Occitan despite its particular differences can be justified because there is a common elaboration (\"Ausbau\") process between Gascon and the rest of Occitan. The vast majority of the Gascon cultural movement considers itself as a part of the Occitan cultural movement. And the official status of Val d'Aran (Catalonia, Spain), adopted in 1990, says that Aranese is a part of Gascon and Occitan. A grammar of Aranese by Aitor Carrera, published in 2007 in Lleida, presents the same view.\nThe exclusion of Catalan from the Occitan sphere, even though Catalan is closely related, is justified because there has been a consciousness of its being different from Occitan since the later Middle Ages and because the elaboration (\"Ausbau\") processes of Catalan and Occitan (including Gascon) have been quite distinct since the 20th century. Nevertheless, other scholars point out that the process that led to the affirmation of Catalan as a distinct language from Occitan started during the period when the pressure to include Catalan-speaking areas in a mainstream Spanish culture was at its greatest.\nThe answer to the question of whether Gascon or Catalan should be considered dialects of Occitan or separate languages has long been a matter of opinion or convention, rather than based on scientific ground. However, two recent studies support Gascon's being considered a distinct language. For the first time, a quantifiable, statistics-based approach was applied by Stephan Koppelberg in attempt to solve this issue. Based on the results he obtained, he concludes that Catalan, Occitan, and Gascon should all be considered three distinct languages. More recently, Y. Greub and J.P. Chambon (Sorbonne University, Paris) demonstrated that the formation of Proto-Gascon was already complete at the eve of the 7th century, whereas Proto-Occitan was not yet formed at that time. These results induced linguists to do away with the conventional classification of Gascon, favoring the \"distinct language\" alternative. Both studies supported the early intuition of the late Kurt Baldinger, a specialist of both medieval Occitan and medieval Gascon, who recommended that Occitan and Gascon be classified as separate languages.\nLinguistic characterization.\nJules Ronjat has sought to characterize Occitan with 19 principal, generalizable criteria. Of those, 11 are phonetic, five morphologic, one syntactic, and two lexical. For example, close rounded vowels are rare or absent in Occitan. This characteristic often carries through to an Occitan speaker's French, leading to a distinctive \"m\u00e9ridional\" accent. Unlike French, it is a pro-drop language, allowing the omission of the subject (: I sing; you sing)\u2014though, at least in Gascon, the verb must be preceded by an \"enunciative\" in place of the pronoun, for questions, for observations, for other occasions: e.g., (I am), (He/she is?), (We are.). Among these 19 discriminating criteria, 7 are different from Spanish, 8 from Italian, 12 from Franco-Proven\u00e7al, and 16 from French.\nFeatures of Occitan.\nMost features of Occitan are shared with either French or Catalan, or both.\nFeatures of Occitan as a whole.\nExamples of pan-Occitan features shared with French, but not Catalan:\nExamples of pan-Occitan features shared with Catalan, but not French:\nExamples of pan-Occitan features not shared with Catalan or French:\nFeatures of some Occitan dialects.\nExamples of dialect-specific features of the northerly dialects shared with French, but not Catalan:\nExamples of dialect-specific features of the southerly dialects (or some of them) shared with Catalan, but not French:\nExamples of Gascon-specific features not shared with French or Catalan:\nExamples of other dialect-specific features not shared with French or Catalan:\nLexicon.\nA comparison of terms and word counts between languages is not easy, as it is impossible to count the number of words in a language. (See Lexicon, Lexeme, Lexicography for more information.)\nSome have claimed around 450,000 words exist in the Occitan language, a number comparable to English (the \"Webster's Third New International Dictionary\", Unabridged with 1993 addenda reaches 470,000 words, as does the Oxford English Dictionary, Second edition). The Merriam-Webster website estimates that the number is somewhere between 250,000 and 1\u00a0million words.\nThe magazine \"G\u00e9o\" (2004, p.\u00a079) claims that American English literature can be more easily translated into Occitan than French, excluding modern technological terms that both languages have integrated.\nA comparison of the lexical content can find more subtle differences between the languages. For example, Occitan has 128 synonyms related to cultivated land, 62 for wetlands, and 75 for sunshine (\"G\u00e9o\"). The language went through an eclipse during the Industrial Revolution, as the vocabulary of the countryside became less important. At the same time, it was disparaged as a patois. Nevertheless, Occitan has also incorporated new words into its lexicon to describe the modern world. The Occitan word for web (as in World Wide Web) is , for example.\nDifferences between Occitan and Catalan.\nThe separation of Catalan from Occitan is seen by some as largely politically (rather than linguistically) motivated. However, the variety that has become standard Catalan differs from the one that has become standard Occitan in a number of ways. Here are just a few examples:\nOccitano-Romance linguistic group.\nDespite these differences, Occitan and Catalan remain more or less mutually comprehensible, especially when written \u2013 more so than either is with Spanish or French, for example, although this is mainly a consequence of using the classical (orthographical) norm of the Occitan, which is precisely focused in showing the similarities between the Occitan dialects with Catalan. Occitan and Catalan form a common diasystem (or a common Abstandsprache), which is called Occitano-Romance, according to the linguist Pierre Bec. Speakers of both languages share early historical and cultural heritage.\nThe combined Occitano-Romance area is 259,000\u00a0km2, with a population of 23\u00a0million. However, the regions are not equal in terms of language speakers. According to Bec 1969 (pp.\u00a0120\u2013121), in France, no more than a quarter of the population in counted regions could speak Occitan well, though around half understood it; it is thought that the number of Occitan users has decreased dramatically since then. By contrast, in the Catalonia administered by the Government of Catalonia, nearly three-quarters of the population speak Catalan and 95% understand it.\nPreservation.\nIn the modern era, Occitan has become a rare and highly threatened language. Its users are clustered almost exclusively in Southern France, and it is unlikely that any monolingual speakers remain. In the early 1900s, the French government attempted to restrict the use and teaching of many minority languages, including Occitan, in public schools. While the laws have since changed, with bilingual education returning for regions with unique languages in 1993, the many years of restrictions had already caused serious decline in the number of Occitan speakers. The majority of living speakers are older adults.\nSamples.\nOne of the most notable passages of Occitan in Western literature occurs in the 26th \"canto\" of Dante's in which the troubadour Arnaut Daniel responds to the narrator:\nModern Occitan: \nThe above strophe translates to:\nSo pleases me your courteous demand, / I cannot and I will not hide me from you. / I am Arnaut, who weep and singing go;/ Contrite I see the folly of the past, / And joyous see the hoped-for day before me. / Therefore do I implore you, by that power/ Which guides you to the summit of the stairs, / Be mindful to assuage my suffering!\nAnother notable Occitan quotation, this time from Arnaut Daniel's own 10th \"Canto\":\n\nModern Occitan:\n\nTranslation:\n\"I am Arnaut who loves the wind,\nand chases the hare with the ox,\nand swims against the torrent.\"\nFrench writer Victor Hugo's classic \"Les Mis\u00e9rables\" also contains some Occitan. In Part One, First Book, Chapter IV, \"\", one can read about Monseigneur Bienvenu:\nTranslation:\n\"Born a Proven\u00e7al, he easily familiarized himself with the dialect of the south. He would say, as in lower Languedoc; as in the Basses-Alpes; as in upper Dauphin\u00e9. [...] As he spoke all tongues, he entered into all hearts.\"\n So, Mister, everything's fine?\n Which way will you go?\n I brought some fine mutton with a fine fat cheese\nThe Spanish playwright Lope de Rueda included a Gascon servant for comical effect in one of his short pieces, \"La generosa paliza\".\nJohn Barnes's \"Thousand Cultures\" science fiction series (\"A Million Open Doors\", 1992; \"Earth Made of Glass\", 1998; \"The Merchants of Souls\", 2001; and \"The Armies of Memory\", 2006), features Occitan.\nSo does the 2005 best-selling novel \"Labyrinth\" by English author Kate Mosse. It is set in Carcassonne, where she owns a house and spends half of the year.\nThe French composer Joseph Canteloube created five sets of folk songs entitled \"Songs of the Auvergne\", in which the lyrics are in the Auvergne dialect of Occitan. The orchestration strives to conjure vivid pastoral scenes of yesteryear.\nMichael Crichton features Occitan in his \"Timeline\" novel.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExplanatory footnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "22293", "revid": "49289876", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22293", "title": "Old Turkic script", "text": "Alphabet used by early Turks (6-10th centuries)\nThe Old Turkic script (also known variously as G\u00f6kt\u00fcrk script, Orkhon script, Orkhon-Yenisey script, Turkic runes) was the alphabet used by the G\u00f6kt\u00fcrks and other early Turkic khanates from the 8th to 10th centuries to record the Old Turkic language.\nThe script is named after the Orkhon Valley in Mongolia, where early 8th-century inscriptions were discovered in an 1889 expedition by Nikolai Yadrintsev. These Orkhon inscriptions were published by Vasily Radlov and deciphered by the Danish philologist Vilhelm Thomsen in 1893.\nThis writing system was later used within the Uyghur Khaganate. Additionally, a Yenisei variant is known from 9th-century Yenisei Kyrgyz inscriptions, and it has likely cousins in the Talas Valley of Turkestan and the Old Hungarian alphabet of the 10th century. Words were usually written from right to left.\nOrigins.\nMany scientists, starting with Vilhelm Thomsen (1893), suggest that the Old Turkic script is derived from descendants of the Aramaic alphabet in particular via the Pahlavi and Sogdian alphabets of Persia, or possibly via Kharosthi used to write Sanskrit. It has also been speculated that tamgas (livestock brands used by Eurasian nomads) were one of the sources of the Old Turkic script, but despite similarities in shape and forms, this hypothesis has been widely rejected as unverifiable, largely because early tamgas are too poorly attested and understood to be subject to a thorough comparison. The text is most likely derived from Aramaic via the Sogdian alphabet and Syriac alphabet.\nContemporary Chinese sources conflict as to whether the Turks had a written language by the 6th century. The 7th century \"Book of Zhou\" mentions that the Turks had a written language similar to that of the Sogdians. Two other sources, the \"Book of Sui\" and the \"History of the Northern Dynasties\", claim that the Turks did not have a written language. According to Istv\u00e1n V\u00e1s\u00e1ry, the Old Turkic script was invented under the rule of the first khagans and was modelled after the Sogdian fashion. Several variants of the script came into being as early as the first half of the 6th century.\nCorpus.\nThe Old Turkic corpus consists of about two hundred inscriptions, plus a number of manuscripts.\nThe inscriptions, dating from the 8th to 10th century, were discovered in present-day Mongolia (the area of the Second Turkic Khaganate and the Uyghur Khaganate that succeeded it), in the upper Yenisei basin of central-south Siberia, and, in smaller numbers, in the Altai Mountains and Xinjiang. The texts are mostly epitaphs (official or private), but there are also graffiti and a handful of short inscriptions found on archaeological artifacts, including a number of bronze mirrors.\nThe website of the http:// lists 54 inscriptions from the Orkhon area, 106 from the Yenisei area, 15 from the Talas area, and 78 from the Altai area. The most famous of the inscriptions are the two monuments (obelisks) which were erected in the Orkhon Valley between 732 and 735 in honor of the G\u00f6kt\u00fcrk prince K\u00fcl Tigin and his brother the emperor Bilge Ka\u011fan. The Tonyukuk inscription, a monument situated somewhat farther east, is slightly earlier, dating to c.\u2009722. These inscriptions relate in epic language the legendary origins of the Turks, the golden age of their history, their subjugation by the Chinese (Tang-Gokturk wars), and their liberation by Bilge.\nThe Old Turkic manuscripts, of which there are none earlier than the 9th century, were found in present-day Xinjiang and represent Old Uyghur, a different Turkic dialect from the one represented in the Old Turkic inscriptions in the Orkhon valley and elsewhere. They include Irk Bitig, a 9th-century manuscript book on divination.\nAlphabet.\nOld Turkic being a synharmonic language, a number of consonant signs are divided into two \"synharmonic sets\", one for front vowels and the other for back vowels. Such vowels can be taken as intrinsic to the consonant sign, giving the Old Turkic alphabet an aspect of an abugida script. In these cases, it is customary to use superscript numerals \u00b9 and \u00b2 to mark consonant signs used with back and front vowels, respectively. This convention was introduced by Thomsen (1893), and followed by Gabain (1941), Malov (1951) and Tekin (1968).\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nA colon-like symbol () is sometimes used as a word separator. In some cases a ring () is used instead.\nA reading example (right to left): \ud803\udc45\ud803\udc2d\ud803\udc3c\ud803\udc03 transliterated t\u00b2\u00f1r\u00b2i, this spells the name of the Turkic sky god, T\u00e4\u00f1ri ().\nVariants.\nVariants of the script were found from Mongolia and Xinjiang in the east to the Balkans in the west. The preserved inscriptions were dated to between the 8th and 10th centuries.\nThese alphabets are divided into four groups by Kyzlasov (1994) \nThe Asiatic group is further divided into three related alphabets:\nThe Eurasiatic group is further divided into five related alphabets:\nA number of alphabets are incompletely collected due to the limitations of the extant inscriptions. Evidence in the study of the Turkic scripts includes Turkic-Chinese bilingual inscriptions, contemporaneous Turkic inscriptions in the Greek alphabet, literal translations into Slavic languages, and paper fragments with Turkic cursive writing from religion, Manichaeism, Buddhist, and legal subjects of the 8th to 10th centuries found in Xinjiang.\nSample text.\nTranscription of part of Bilge Ka\u011fan's inscription (lines 36-38).\nUnicode.\nThe Unicode block for Old Turkic is U+10C00\u2013U+10C4F. It was added to the Unicode standard in October 2009, with the release of version 5.2. It includes separate \"Orkhon\" and \"Yenisei\" variants of individual characters.\nSince Windows 8 Unicode Old Turkic writing support was added in the Segoe font.\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "22296", "revid": "2267950", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22296", "title": "The Open Source Definition", "text": "Policy document by the Open Source Initiative\nThe Open Source Definition (OSD) is a policy document published by the Open Source Initiative in 1998. Derived from the Debian Free Software Guidelines written by Bruce Perens, the definition is the most common standard for open-source software. The definition has ten criteria, such as requiring freely accessed source code and granting the open-source rights to everyone who receives a copy of the program. Covering both copyleft and permissive licenses, it is effectively identical to the definition of free software, but motivated by more pragmatic and business-friendly considerations. The Open Source Initiative's board votes on proposals of licenses to certify that they are compliant with the definition, and maintains a list of compliant licenses on its website. The definition has been adapted into the Open Knowledge Foundation's Open Definition for open knowledge and into open hardware definitions.\nHistory.\nThere have been several attempts to define open source and free software. Amongst the earliest was Free Software Foundation's Free Software Definition, which then defined as the three freedoms of Free Software (Freedom Zero was added later). Published versions of FSF's Free Software Definition existed as early as 1986, having been published in the first edition of the (now defunct) GNU's Bulletin.\nDebian Free Software Guidelines.\nThe Debian Free Software Guidelines (DFSG) was first published together with the first version of the Debian Social Contract in July 1997. The primary author was Bruce Perens, with input from the Debian developers during a month-long discussion on a private mailing list, as part of the larger Debian Social Contract. Perens was copied to an email discussion between Ean Schuessler (then of Debian) and Donnie Barnes of Red Hat, in which Schuessler accused Red Hat of never elucidating its social contract with the Linux community. Perens realized that Debian did not have any formal social contract either, and immediately started creating one. The (then) Three Freedoms, which preceded the drafting and promulgation of the DFSG, were unknown to its authors.\nThe guidelines were:\nOpen source.\nAs Netscape released the open-source Mozilla browser in 1998, Bruce Perens again drafted a set of open-source guidelines to go with the release. It has been claimed that the Open Source Definition was created by re-titling the exact text of the DFSG.\nA modified version of this definition was adopted by the Open Source Initiative (OSI) as the Open Source Definition. The OSI uses the label \"open source\", rather than \"free software\", because it felt that the latter term had undesirable ideological and political freight, and it wanted to focus on the pragmatic and business-friendly arguments for open-source software. It adopted a closed rather than membership-driven organizational model in order to draft the definition and work together with a wider variety of stakeholders than other free or open-source projects.\nOnce the DFSG became the Open Source Definition, Richard Stallman saw the need to differentiate free software from open source and promoted the Free Software Definition.\nDebian diverges.\nIn November 1998, Ian Jackson and others proposed several changes in a draft versioned 1.4, but the changes were never made official. Jackson stated that the problems were \"loose wording\" and the patch clause.\nThe Debian General Resolution 2004-003, titled \"Editorial amendments to the social contract\", modified the Social Contract. The proposer Andrew Suffield stated:\n \"The rule is 'this resolution only changes the letter of the law, not the spirit'. Mostly it changes the wording of the social contract to better reflect what it is supposed to mean, and this is mostly in light of issues that were not considered when it was originally written.\"\nHowever, the change of the sentence \"We promise to keep the Debian GNU/Linux Distribution entirely free software\" into \"We promise that the Debian system and all its components will be free\" resulted in the release manager, Anthony Towns, making a practical change:\n \"As [SC #1] is no longer limited to 'software', and as this decision was made by developers after and during discussion of how we should consider non-software content such as documentation and firmware, I don't believe I can justify the policy decisions to exempt documentation, firmware, or content any longer, as the Social Contract has been amended to cover all these areas.\"\nThis prompted another General Resolution, 2004\u2013004, in which the developers voted overwhelmingly against immediate action, and decided to postpone those changes until the next release (whose development started a year later, in June 2005).\nCriteria.\nProviding access to the source code is not enough for software to be considered \"open-source\". The Open Source Definition requires that ten criteria be met:\nThe Open Source Definition is available under a Creative Commons (CC BY 4.0) license. It covers both copyleft\u2014where redistribution and derivative works must be released under a free license\u2014and permissive licenses\u2014where derivative works can be released under any license. It is part of the open source movement rather than the free software movement, and seeks to promote the availability of open-source software for anyone seeking to reuse it, even the makers of proprietary software. It does not address warranty disclaimers, although these are very common in open-source software. The definition does not specify a governance structure for open-source projects.\nCompliant licenses.\nThe criteria are used by the OSI to approve certain licenses as compatible with the definition, and maintain a list of compliant licenses. New licenses have to submit a formal proposal that is discussed by the OSI mailing list before it is approved or rejected by the OSI board. Seven approved licenses are particularly recommended by the OSI as \"popular, widely used, or having strong communities\":\nApplication.\nSoftware.\nMost discussions about the DFSG happen on the \"debian-legal\" mailing list. When a Debian Developer first uploads a package for inclusion in Debian, the \"ftpmaster\" team checks the software licenses and determines whether they are in accordance with the social contract. The team sometimes confers with the debian-legal list in difficult cases.\nNon-\"software\" content.\nThe DFSG is focused on software, but the word itself is unclear\u2014some apply it to everything that can be expressed as a stream of bits, while a minority considers it to refer to just computer programs. Also, the existence of PostScript, executable scripts, sourced documents, etc., greatly muddies the second definition. Thus, to break the confusion, in June 2004 the Debian project decided to explicitly apply the same principles to software documentation, multimedia data and other content. The non-program content of Debian began to comply with the DFSG more strictly in Debian 4.0 (released in April 2007) and subsequent releases.\nGFDL.\nMuch documentation written by the GNU Project, the Linux Documentation Project and others licensed under the GNU Free Documentation License contain invariant sections, which do not comply with the DFSG. This assertion is the end result of a long discussion and the General Resolution 2006-001.\nDue to the GFDL invariant sections, content under this license must be separately contained in an additional \"non-free\" repository which is not officially considered part of Debian.\nMultimedia files.\nIt can be sometimes hard to define what constitutes the \"source\" for multimedia files, such as whether an uncompressed image file is the source of a compressed image and whether the 3D model before ray tracing is the source for its resulting image.\n\"debian-legal\" tests for DFSG compliance.\nThe \"debian-legal\" mailing list subscribers have created some tests to check whether a license violates the DFSG.\nThe common tests (as described in the draft DFSG FAQ) are the following:\nReception.\nThe Open Source Definition is the most widely used definition for open-source software, and is often used as a standard for whether a project is open source. It and the official definitions of free software by the Free Software Foundation (FSF) essentially cover the same software licenses. Nevertheless, there is a values difference between the free software and open source movements: the former is more based on ethics and values, the latter on pragmatism.\nDerived definitions.\nThe Open Knowledge Foundation's Open Definition is substantially derivative of the Open Source Definition.\nThe Open Source Hardware Statement of Principles is adapted from the Open Source Definition.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "22298", "revid": "49214", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22298", "title": "Open Source Initiative", "text": "Non-profit organization promoting open-source software\nThe Open Source Initiative (OSI) is a California public benefit corporation \"actively involved in Open Source community-building, education, and public advocacy to promote awareness and the importance of non-proprietary software\".\nGovernance.\nThe OSI is a California public-benefit nonprofit corporation, with 501(c)(3) tax-exempt status. The organization is professionally overseen by an Executive Director and staff, and supported by its https:// responsible for overseeing duty of care, fiduciary duty, and strategic alignment to mission.\nOpen Source Definition.\nThe Open Source Definition is a derivative document based on the Debian Free Software Guidelines (DFSG), released in 1997 by Bruce Perens. As Debian Project Leader, Perens released the scribed DFSG on July 4, 1997. In an announce post, Perens states he hopes other distributions use the DFSG as a model and states \"We hope that other software projects,\nincluding other Linux distributions, will use this document as a model.\nWe will gladly grant permission for any such use.\" \nAny organization can use the Debian Free Software guidelines by citing the Social Contract. No open source definition required.\nPerens modified the Debian Free Software Guidelines into the Open Source Definition by removing Debian references and replacing these with \"Open Source\". The original announcement of The Open Source Definition happened on February 9, 1998, on Slashdot and elsewhere; the definition was given in Linux Gazette on February 10, 1998.\nPerens and Raymond established the Open Source Initiative, an organization intended to promote open source software. Neither Perens nor Raymond are involved in the OSI currently.\nThe Open Source Definition seems to be a widely accepted standard for open-source software, although open source developers choosing to use GPL, BSD, MIT, Apache licenses for projects do not require any such standard. Additionally, the DFSG could be forked and other derivatives created based on the intent of the original release of the document the Open Source Definition is based upon. Providing access to the source code is not enough for software to be considered \"open-source\": it must also allow modification and redistribution under the same terms and all uses, including commercial use. The Open Source Definition requires that ten criteria be met for a license to be approved. It allows both copyleft\u2014where redistribution and derivative works must be released under a free license\u2014and permissive licenses\u2014where derivative works can be released under any license. Software licenses covered by the Open Source Definition also meet the Free Software Definition and vice versa. Both the Free Software Foundation and the OSI share the goal of supporting free and open-source software.\nLicense approval process.\nThe OSI approves certain licenses as compatible with the definition, and maintains a list of compliant licenses. New licenses have to submit a formal proposal explaining the rationale for the license, comparison with existing approved licenses, and any legal analysis. The proposal is discussed on the OSI mailing list for at least 30 days before being brought to a vote and approved or rejected by the OSI board. Although the OSI has made an effort to have a transparent process, the approval process has been a source of controversy.\nSeven approved licenses are particularly recommended by the OSI as \"popular, widely used, or having strong communities\":\nOpen Source AI Definition.\nIn 2022, OSI began work on an Open Source AI Definition (OSAID), inviting researchers, developers, and industry representatives to collaborate on a draft in a co-design process.\nThe release of the Open Source Artificial Intelligence Definition (OSAID), first working drafts in up to September 2024, and then the final first version 1.0 was launched in October 2024. But \"It doesn\u2019t end with the Stable Version: We\u2019ll need to define rules for maintenance and review of the Definition. ...\"\nHistory.\nAs a campaign of sorts, \"open source\" was launched in 1998 by Christine Peterson, Jon \"maddog\" Hall, Larry Augustin, Eric S. Raymond, Bruce Perens, and others.\nThe group adopted the Open Source Definition for open-source software, based on the Debian Free Software Guidelines. They also established the Open Source Initiative (OSI) as a steward organization for the movement. However, they were unsuccessful in their attempt to secure a trademark for 'open source' to control the use of the term. In 2008, in an apparent effort to reform governance of the organization, the OSI Board invited 50 individuals to join a \"Charter Members\" group; by 26 July 2008, 42 of the original invitees had accepted the invitations. The full membership of the Charter Members has never been publicly revealed, and the Charter Members group communicated by way of a closed-subscription mailing list, \"osi-discuss\", with non-public archives.\nIn 2012, under the leadership of OSI director and then-president Simon Phipps, the OSI began transitioning towards a membership-based governance structure. The OSI initiated an Affiliate Membership program for \"government-recognized non-profit charitable and not-for-profit industry associations and academic institutions anywhere in the world\". Subsequently, the OSI announced an Individual Membership program and listed a number of Corporate Sponsors.\nOn November 8, 2013, OSI appointed Patrick Masson as its general manager. From August 2020 to September 2021, Deb Nicholson was the interim general manager. Under the direction of Deborah Nicholson, the interim manager, the voting and election was held with results and then halted and set for re-election due to vulnerabilities in the election process. \"This week we found a vulnerability in our voting processes that was exploited and had an impact on the outcome of the recent Board Election.\" No election results or further updates are posted as of June 2021[ [update]].\nIn November 2020 the board of directors announced a search for an executive director, which was concluded in September 2021 with the appointment of Stefano Maffulli. At the same time, the role of president of the board was abandoned in favor of chair of the board.\nMaffulli stepped down in September 2025. Deborah Bryant is serving as interim executive director.\nControversy.\nIn October 2009, the OSI lost its corporate status, having been suspended by the state of California for failing to submit paperwork on time.\nIn January 2020, founder Bruce Perens left OSI over controversy regarding a new license (the Cryptographic Autonomy License), which had been proposed for the OSI's approval. Later, in August 2020, Perens elaborated on his concerns: \"We created a tower of babel of licenses. We did not design-in license compliance, and we have a tremendous noncompliance problem that isn't getting better. We can't afford to sue our copyright infringers.\"\nEric S. Raymond, another co-founder of the OSI, was later banned from the OSI mailing list in March 2020. He had claimed \"OSI has been suborned and is betraying its founding commitment to freedom\" the month prior, taking exception to proposed licensing changes that \"would be a direct and egregious violation of OSI's charter and [his] intentions in founding OSI\".\nThe October 2024 release of the Open Source AI Definition (OSAID) was controversial, opening up new disagreements and considerable ill-feeling.\nIn 2025, a petition has been made \"to release the complete, unaltered results of its 2025 Board of Directors elections\". One of the argument of the petition's authors is that by \"removing candidates and votes after voting concluded, OSI has damaged its credibility\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "22300", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22300", "title": "OSI", "text": "OSI may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "22302", "revid": "4560805", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22302", "title": "Oedipal", "text": ""}
{"id": "22303", "revid": "45764203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22303", "title": "Oxygen", "text": "element with atomic number 8 (O)\nOxygen is a chemical element; it has the symbolO and its atomic number is8. It is a member of the chalcogen group in the periodic table, a highly reactive nonmetal, and a potent oxidizing agent that readily forms oxides with most elements as well as with other compounds. Oxygen is the most abundant element in Earth's crust, making up almost half of the Earth's crust in the form of various oxides such as water, carbon dioxide, iron oxides and silicates. It is also the third-most abundant element in the universe after hydrogen and helium.\nAt standard temperature and pressure, two oxygen atoms will bind covalently to form dioxygen, a colorless and odorless diatomic gas with the chemical formula O2. Dioxygen gas currently constitutes approximately 20.95% molar fraction of the Earth's atmosphere, though this has changed considerably over long periods of time in Earth's history. A much rarer triatomic allotrope of oxygen, ozone (O3), strongly absorbs the UVB and UVC wavelengths and forms a protective ozone layer at the lower stratosphere, which shields the biosphere from ionizing ultraviolet radiation. However, ozone present at the surface is a corrosive byproduct of smog and thus an air pollutant.\nAll eukaryotic organisms, including plants, animals, fungi, algae and most protists, need oxygen for cellular respiration, a process that extracts chemical energy by the reaction of oxygen with organic molecules derived from food and releases carbon dioxide as a waste product. \nMany major classes of organic molecules in living organisms contain oxygen atoms, such as proteins, nucleic acids, carbohydrates and fats, as do the major constituent inorganic compounds of animal shells, teeth, and bone. Most of the mass of living organisms is oxygen as a component of water, the major constituent of lifeforms. Oxygen in Earth's atmosphere is produced by biotic photosynthesis, in which photon energy in sunlight is captured by chlorophyll to split water molecules and then react with carbon dioxide to produce carbohydrates and oxygen is released as a byproduct. Oxygen is too chemically reactive to remain a free element in air without being continuously replenished by the photosynthetic activities of autotroph such as cyanobacteria, chloroplast-bearing algae and plants.\nOxygen was isolated by Michael Sendivogius before 1604, but it is commonly believed that the element was discovered independently by Carl Wilhelm Scheele, in Uppsala, in 1773 or earlier, and Joseph Priestley in Wiltshire, in 1774. Priority is often given for Priestley because his work was published first. Priestley, however, called oxygen \"dephlogisticated air\", and did not recognize it as a chemical element. In 1777, Antoine Lavoisier first recognized oxygen as a chemical element and correctly characterized the role it plays in combustion.\nCommon industrial uses of oxygen include production of steel, plastics and textiles, brazing, welding and cutting of steels and other metals, rocket propellant, oxygen therapy, and life-support systems in aircraft, submarines, spaceflight and diving.\nHistory of study.\nThe modern concept of the element oxygen developed over five centuries and included many related discoveries and unsuccessful theories. Multiple people made different contributions to the concept: no one person discovered oxygen.\nEarly experiments.\nOne of the first known experiments on the relationship between combustion and air was conducted by the 2nd-century\u00a0BCE Greek writer on mechanics, Philo of Byzantium. In his work \"\", Philo observed that inverting a vessel over a burning candle and surrounding the vessel's neck with water resulted in some water rising into the neck. Philo incorrectly surmised that parts of the air in the vessel were converted into the classical element fire and thus were able to escape through pores in the glass. Many centuries later Ibn al-Nafis, writing in 1250\u00a0CE, correctly described oxygenation of blood in the circulatory system; Michael Servetus rediscovered this concept in 1553 but his books were systematically destroyed. A scientifically based and influential description was published by William Harvey in 1628.\nLeonardo da Vinci observed that a portion of air is consumed during combustion and respiration.\nPolish alchemist, philosopher, and physician Michael Sendivogius (Micha\u0142 S\u0119dziw\u00f3j), writing in 1604, described a substance contained in air, referring to it as ('food of life'); this substance is identical with oxygen. During his experiments, performed between 1598 and 1604, Sendivogius properly recognized that the substance is equivalent to the gaseous byproduct released by the thermal decomposition of potassium nitrate. However, this important connection was not understood by contemporary scientists like Robert Boyle.\nUnaware of Sendivogius's work, John Mayow wrote about a portion of air that provided heat in a fire and the human body. This work was ignored because it failed to align with the prevailing phlogiston theory of air and fire. Mayow observed that antimony increased in weight when heated, and inferred that the must have combined with it. He also thought that the lungs separate from air and pass it into the blood and that animal heat and muscle movement result from the reaction of with certain substances in the body. Accounts of these and other experiments and ideas were published in 1668 in his work \" in the tract \".\nAfter Robert Boyle proved that air is necessary for combustion in the late 17th\u00a0century, English chemist John Mayow (1641\u20131679) refined this work by showing that fire requires only a part of air that he called . In one experiment, he found that placing either a mouse or a lit candle in a closed container over water caused the water to rise and replace one-fourteenth of the air's volume before extinguishing the subjects. From this, he surmised that is consumed in both respiration and combustion.\nPhlogiston theory.\nRobert Hooke, Ole Borch, Mikhail Lomonosov, and Pierre Bayen all produced oxygen in experiments in the 17th and the 18th century but none of them recognized it as a chemical element. This may have been in part due to the prevalence of the philosophy of combustion and corrosion called the \"phlogiston theory\", which was then the favored explanation of those processes.\nEstablished in 1667 by the German alchemist J. J. Becher, and modified by the chemist Georg Ernst Stahl by 1731, phlogiston theory stated that all combustible materials were made of two parts. One part, called phlogiston, was given off when the substance containing it was burned, while the dephlogisticated part was thought to be its true form, or calx.\nHighly combustible materials that leave little residue, such as wood or coal, were thought to be made mostly of phlogiston; non-combustible substances that corrode, such as iron, contained very little. Air did not play a role in phlogiston theory, nor were any initial quantitative experiments conducted to test the idea; instead, it was based on observations of what happens when something burns, that most common objects appear to become lighter and seem to lose something in the process.\nScientific era.\nSwedish pharmacist Carl Wilhelm Scheele produced and described some properties of oxygen sometime around 1770\u20131775, but did not publish his work until a few years later because he was unable to interpret his work in the framework of the phlogiston theory. Scheele had produced oxygen gas by heating mercuric oxide (HgO) and various nitrates in 1771\u20131772. After reading about Priestley's work in 1775, Scheele published in 1777, calling the gas \"fire air\" because it was then the only known agent to support combustion.\nIn the meantime, on August 1, 1774, an experiment conducted by the British clergyman Joseph Priestley focused sunlight on mercuric oxide contained in a glass tube, which liberated a gas he named \"dephlogisticated air\". He noted that candles burned brighter in the gas and that a mouse was more active and lived longer while breathing it. After breathing the gas himself, Priestley wrote: \"The feeling of it to my lungs was not sensibly different from that of common air, but I fancied that my breast felt peculiarly light and easy for some time afterwards.\" Priestley published his findings in 1775 in a paper titled \"An Account of Further Discoveries in Air\", which was included in the second volume of his book titled \"Experiments and Observations on Different Kinds of Air\".\nThe French chemist Antoine Lavoisier later claimed to have discovered the new substance independently. Priestley visited Lavoisier in October 1774 and told him about his experiment and how he liberated the new gas. Scheele had also dispatched a letter to Lavoisier on September 30, 1774, which described his discovery of the previously unknown substance, but Lavoisier never acknowledged receiving it (a copy of the letter was found in Scheele's belongings after his death).\nDiscrediting Philogiston theory.\nLavoisier conducted the first adequate quantitative experiments on oxidation and gave the first correct explanation of how combustion works. He used these and similar experiments, all started in 1774, to discredit the phlogiston theory and to prove that the substance discovered by Priestley and Scheele was a chemical element.\nIn one experiment, Lavoisier observed that there was no overall increase in weight when tin and air were heated in a closed container. He noted that air rushed in when he opened the container, which indicated that part of the trapped air had been consumed. He also noted that the tin had increased in weight and that increase was the same as the weight of the air that rushed back in. This and other experiments on combustion were documented in his book \"\", which was published in 1777. In that work, he proved that air is a mixture of two gases; 'vital air', which is essential to combustion and respiration, and (from Greek 'lifeless'), which did not support either. later became \"nitrogen\" in English, although it has kept the earlier name in French and several other European languages.\nEtymology.\nLavoisier renamed \"vital air\" to in 1777 from the Greek roots (; \"acid\", literally 'sharp', from the taste of acids) and (; \"producer\", literally 'begetter'), because he mistakenly believed that oxygen was a constituent of all acids. Chemists (such as Sir Humphry Davy in 1812) eventually determined that Lavoisier was wrong in this regard (e.g. Hydrogen chloride (HCl) is a strong acid that does not contain oxygen), but by then the name was too well established.\n\"Oxygen\" entered the English language despite opposition by English scientists and the fact that the Englishman Priestley had first isolated the gas and written about it. This is partly due to a poem praising the gas titled \"Oxygen\" in the popular book \"The Botanic Garden\" (1791) by Erasmus Darwin, grandfather of Charles Darwin.\nLater history.\nJohn Dalton's original atomic hypothesis presumed that all elements were monatomic and that the atoms in compounds would normally have the simplest atomic ratios with respect to one another. For example, Dalton assumed that water's formula was HO, leading to the conclusion that the atomic mass of oxygen was 8 times that of hydrogen, instead of the modern value of about 16. In 1805, Joseph Louis Gay-Lussac and Alexander von Humboldt showed that water is formed of two volumes of hydrogen and one volume of oxygen; and by 1811 Amedeo Avogadro had arrived at the correct interpretation of water's composition, based on what is now called Avogadro's law and the diatomic elemental molecules in those gases.\nIn 1879 the French brothers Quentin and Arthur\nBrin discovered a commercially viable reaction to create oxygen. They realized that the known reversible reaction\n(s) + (g) \u2194 (s) was deactivated by the formation of barium carbonate from carbon dioxide in the air; treating air to remove the carbon dioxide allowed the reaction be reversed indefinitely. Their company used the process between 1886 and 1906 when more economical fractional distillation began to be used.\nBy the late 19th century scientists realized that air could be liquefied and its components isolated by compressing and cooling it. Using a cascade method, Swiss chemist and physicist Raoul Pierre Pictet evaporated liquid sulfur dioxide in order to liquefy carbon dioxide, which in turn was evaporated to cool oxygen gas enough to liquefy it. He sent a telegram on December 22, 1877, to the French Academy of Sciences in Paris announcing his discovery of liquid oxygen. Just two days later, French physicist Louis Paul Cailletet announced his own method of liquefying molecular oxygen. Only a few drops of the liquid were produced in each case and no meaningful analysis could be conducted. Oxygen was liquefied in a stable state for the first time on March 29, 1883, by Polish scientists from Jagiellonian University, Zygmunt Wr\u00f3blewski and Karol Olszewski.\nIn 1891 Scottish chemist James Dewar was able to produce enough liquid oxygen for study. The first commercially viable process for producing liquid oxygen was independently developed in 1895 by German engineer Carl von Linde and British engineer William Hampson. Both men lowered the temperature of air until it liquefied and then distilled the component gases by boiling them off one at a time and capturing them separately. Later, in 1901, oxyacetylene welding was demonstrated for the first time by burning a mixture of acetylene and compressed O2. This method of welding and cutting metal later became common.\nIn 1923, the American scientist Robert H. Goddard became the first person to develop a rocket engine that burned liquid fuel; the engine used gasoline for fuel and liquid oxygen as the oxidizer. Goddard successfully flew a small liquid-fueled rocket 56\u00a0m at 97\u00a0km/h on March 16, 1926, in Auburn, Massachusetts, US.\nCharacteristics.\nProperties and molecular structure.\nAt standard temperature and pressure, oxygen is a colorless, odorless, and tasteless gas with the molecular formula O2, referred to as dioxygen.\nAs \"dioxygen\", two oxygen atoms are chemically bound to each other. The bond can be variously described based on level of theory, but is reasonably and simply described as a covalent double bond that results from the filling of molecular orbitals formed from the atomic orbitals of the individual oxygen atoms, the filling of which results in a bond order of two. More specifically, the double bond is the result of sequential, low-to-high energy, or Aufbau, filling of orbitals, and the resulting cancellation of contributions from the 2s electrons, after sequential filling of the low \u03c3 and \u03c3* orbitals; \u03c3 overlap of the two atomic 2p orbitals that lie along the O\u2013O molecular axis and \u03c0 overlap of two pairs of atomic 2p orbitals perpendicular to the O\u2013O molecular axis, and then cancellation of contributions from the remaining two 2p electrons after their partial filling of the \u03c0* orbitals.\nThis combination of cancellations and \u03c3 and \u03c0 overlaps results in dioxygen's double-bond character and reactivity, and a triplet electronic ground state. An electron configuration with two unpaired electrons, as is found in dioxygen orbitals (see the filled \u03c0* orbitals in the diagram) that are of equal energy\u2014i.e., degenerate\u2014is a configuration termed a spin triplet state. Hence, the ground state of the O2 molecule is referred to as triplet oxygen. The highest-energy, partially filled orbitals are antibonding, and so their filling weakens the bond order from three to two. Because of its unpaired electrons, triplet oxygen reacts only slowly with most organic molecules, which have paired electron spins; this prevents spontaneous combustion.\nIn the triplet form, O2 molecules are paramagnetic. That is, they impart magnetic character to oxygen when it is in the presence of a magnetic field, because of the spin magnetic moments of the unpaired electrons in the molecule, and the negative exchange energy between neighboring O2 molecules. Liquid oxygen is so magnetic that, in laboratory demonstrations, a bridge of liquid oxygen may be supported against its own weight between the poles of a powerful magnet. Oxygen's paramagnetism can be used analytically in paramagnetic oxygen gas analysers that determine gaseous oxygen concentration, especially in industrial process control and medicine.\nSinglet oxygen is a name given to several higher-energy species of molecular O2 in which all the electron spins are paired. It is much more reactive with common organic molecules than is normal (triplet) molecular oxygen. In nature, singlet oxygen is commonly formed from water during photosynthesis, using the energy of sunlight. It is also produced in the troposphere by the photolysis of ozone by light of short wavelength and by the immune system as a source of active oxygen. Carotenoids in photosynthetic organisms (and possibly animals) play a major role in absorbing energy from singlet oxygen and converting it to the unexcited ground state before it can cause harm to tissues.\nAllotropes.\nThe common allotrope of elemental oxygen on Earth is called dioxygen, O2, the major part of the Earth's atmospheric oxygen (see Occurrence). O2 has a bond length of 121\u00a0pm and a bond energy of 498\u00a0kJ/mol. \nTrioxygen (O3) is usually known as ozone and is a very reactive allotrope of oxygen that is damaging to lung tissue. Ozone is produced in the upper atmosphere when O2 combines with atomic oxygen made by the splitting of O2 by ultraviolet (UV) radiation. Since ozone absorbs strongly in the UV region of the spectrum, the ozone layer of the upper atmosphere functions as a protective radiation shield for the planet. Near the Earth's surface, it is a pollutant formed as a by-product of automobile exhaust. At low earth orbit altitudes, sufficient atomic oxygen is present to cause corrosion of spacecraft.\nThe metastable molecule tetraoxygen (O4) was discovered in 2001, and was assumed to exist in one of the six phases of solid oxygen. In 2006 this phase, created by pressurizing O2 to 20\u00a0GPa, was shown to form a rhombohedral O8 cluster. This cluster has the potential to be a much more powerful oxidizer than either O2 or O3 and may therefore be used in rocket fuel. A metallic phase was discovered in 1990 when solid oxygen is subjected to a pressure of above 96 GPa and it was shown in 1998 that at very low temperatures, this phase becomes superconducting.\nPhysical properties.\nOxygen dissolves more readily in water than nitrogen does. Water in equilibrium with air contains approximately 1 molecule of dissolved O2 for every 2 molecules of N2 (1:2), compared with an atmospheric ratio of approximately 1:4. The solubility of oxygen in water is temperature-dependent, and about twice as much () dissolves at than at ().\nAt and of air, freshwater can dissolve about 6.04\u00a0milliliters\u00a0(mL) of oxygen per liter, and seawater contains about 4.95\u00a0mL per liter. \nAt the solubility increases to 9.0\u00a0mL (50% more than at ) per liter for freshwater and 7.2\u00a0mL (45% more) per liter for sea water.\nOxygen condenses at 90.20\u00a0K (\u2212182.95\u00a0\u00b0C, \u2212297.31\u00a0\u00b0F) and freezes at 54.36\u00a0K (\u2212218.79\u00a0\u00b0C, \u2212361.82\u00a0\u00b0F). Both liquid and solid O2 are clear substances with a light sky-blue color caused by absorption in the red (in contrast with the blue color of the sky, which is due to Rayleigh scattering of blue light). High-purity liquid O2 is usually obtained by the fractional distillation of liquefied air. Liquid oxygen may also be condensed from air using liquid nitrogen as a coolant. Liquid oxygen is a highly reactive substance and must be segregated from combustible materials.\nThe spectroscopy of molecular oxygen is associated with the atmospheric processes of aurora and airglow. The absorption in the Herzberg continuum and Schumann\u2013Runge bands in the ultraviolet produces atomic oxygen that is important in the chemistry of the middle atmosphere. Excited-state singlet molecular oxygen is responsible for red chemiluminescence in solution.\nTable of thermal and physical properties of oxygen (O2) at atmospheric pressure:\nIsotopes and stellar origin.\nNaturally occurring oxygen is composed of three stable isotopes, 16O, 17O, and 18O, with 16O being the most abundant (99.762% natural abundance).\n16O is the one of the dominant fusion products in massive stars. It is synthesized at the end of the helium fusion process with some synthesis in the neon burning process. Both 17O and 18O require seed nuclei. 17O is primarily made by the burning of hydrogen into helium during the CNO cycle, making it a common isotope in the hydrogen burning zones of stars. Most 18O is produced when 14N (made abundant from CNO burning) captures a 4He nucleus, making 18O common in the helium-rich zones of evolved, massive stars.\nFifteen radioisotopes have been characterized, ranging from 11O to 28O. The most stable are 15O with a half-life of 122.24\u00a0seconds and 14O with a half-life of 70.606\u00a0seconds. All of the remaining radioactive isotopes have half-lives that are less than 27\u00a0seconds and the majority of these have half-lives that are less than 83\u00a0milliseconds. The most common decay mode of the isotopes lighter than 16O is \u03b2+ decay to yield nitrogen, and the most common mode for the isotopes heavier than 18O is beta decay to yield fluorine.\nOccurrence.\nOxygen is the third most abundant chemical element in the universe, after hydrogen and helium. About 0.9% of the Sun's mass is oxygen. Oxygen constitutes 49.2% of the Earth's crust by mass as part of oxide compounds such as silicon dioxide and is the most abundant element by mass in the Earth's crust. It is also the major component of the world's oceans (88.8% by mass). Oxygen gas is the second most common component of the Earth's atmosphere, taking up 20.8% of its volume and 23.1% of its mass (some 1015 tonnes).\nEarth is unusual among the planets of the Solar System in having such a high concentration of oxygen gas in its atmosphere: Mars (with 0.1% O2 by volume) and Venus have much less. The O2 surrounding those planets is produced solely by the action of ultraviolet radiation on oxygen-containing molecules such as carbon dioxide.\nThe unusually high concentration of oxygen gas on Earth is the result of the oxygen cycle. This biogeochemical cycle describes the movement of oxygen within and between its three main reservoirs on Earth: the atmosphere, the biosphere, and the lithosphere. The main driving factor of the oxygen cycle is photosynthesis, which is responsible for modern Earth's atmosphere. Photosynthesis releases oxygen into the atmosphere, while respiration, decay, and combustion remove it from the atmosphere. In the present equilibrium, production and consumption occur at the same rate. \nOxygen levels in the atmosphere are trending slightly downward globally, possibly because of fossil-fuel burning.\nFree oxygen also occurs in solution in the world's water bodies. The increased solubility of O2 at lower temperatures (see Physical properties) has important implications for ocean life, as polar oceans support a much higher density of life due to their higher oxygen content. Scientists assess this aspect of water quality by measuring the water's biochemical oxygen demand, or the amount of O2 needed to restore it to a normal concentration.\nSignificant deoxygenation has been observed in tropical oceans. Warming oceans waters are expected to lose oxygen over the next century and into the future for a thousand years; the possible consequences include minimal oxygen zones which are unable to support macrofauna.\nAnalysis.\nPaleoclimatologists measure the ratio of oxygen-18 and oxygen-16 in the shells and skeletons of marine organisms to determine the climate millions of years ago (see oxygen isotope ratio cycle). Seawater molecules that contain the lighter isotope, oxygen-16, evaporate at a slightly faster rate than water molecules containing the 12% heavier oxygen-18, and this disparity increases at lower temperatures. During periods of lower global temperatures, snow and rain from that evaporated water tends to be higher in oxygen-16, and the seawater left behind tends to be higher in oxygen-18. Marine organisms then incorporate more oxygen-18 into their skeletons and shells than they would in a warmer climate. Paleoclimatologists also directly measure this ratio in the water molecules of ice core samples as old as hundreds of thousands of years.\nPlanetary geologists have measured the relative quantities of oxygen isotopes in samples from the Earth, the Moon, Mars, and meteorites, but were long unable to obtain reference values for the isotope ratios in the Sun, believed to be the same as those of the primordial solar nebula. Analysis of a silicon wafer exposed to the solar wind in space and returned by the crashed \"Genesis\" spacecraft has shown that the Sun has a higher proportion of oxygen-16 than does the Earth. The measurement implies that an unknown process depleted oxygen-16 from the Sun's disk of protoplanetary material prior to the coalescence of dust grains that formed the Earth.\nOxygen presents two spectrophotometric absorption bands peaking at the wavelengths 687 and 760\u00a0nm. Some remote sensing scientists have proposed using the measurement of the radiance coming from vegetation canopies in those bands to characterize plant health status from a satellite platform. This approach exploits the fact that in those bands it is possible to discriminate the vegetation's reflectance from its fluorescence, which is much weaker. The measurement is technically difficult owing to the low signal-to-noise ratio and the physical structure of vegetation; but it has been proposed as a possible method of monitoring the carbon cycle from satellites on a global scale.\nBiological production and role of O2.\nPhotosynthesis and respiration.\nIn nature, free oxygen is produced as a byproduct of light-driven splitting of water during chlorophyllic photosynthesis. According to some estimates, marine photoautotrophs such as red/green algae and cyanobacteria provide about 70% of the free oxygen produced on Earth, and the rest is produced in terrestrial environments by plants. Other estimates of the oceanic contribution to atmospheric oxygen are higher, while some estimates are lower, suggesting oceans produce ~45% of Earth's atmospheric oxygen each year.\nA simplified overall formula for photosynthesis is\n 6 CO2 + 6 H2O + photons \u2192 C6H12O6 + 6 O2\nor simply\n carbon dioxide + water + sunlight \u2192 glucose + dioxygen\nPhotolytic oxygen evolution occurs in the thylakoid membranes of photosynthetic organisms and requires the energy of four photons. Many steps are involved, but the result is the formation of a proton gradient across the thylakoid membrane, which is used to synthesize adenosine triphosphate (ATP) via photophosphorylation. The O2 remaining (after production of the water molecule) is released into the atmosphere.\nOxygen is used in mitochondria of eukaryotes to generate ATP during oxidative phosphorylation. The reaction for aerobic respiration is essentially the reverse of photosynthesis and is simplified as\n C6H12O6 + 6 O2 \u2192 6 CO2 + 6 H2O + 2880 kJ/mol\nIn aquatic animals, dissolved oxygen in water is absorbed by gills, through the skin or via the gut; in terrestrial animals such as tetrapods, oxygen in air is actively taken into the body via lungs, where gas exchange takes place to diffuse oxygen into the blood and carbon dioxide out, and the body's circulatory system then transports the oxygen to other tissues where cellular respiration takes place. However, in insects, the most successful and biodiverse terrestrial clade, oxygen is directly conducted to the internal tissues via a deep network of airways. Hemoglobin in red blood cells binds O2, changing color from bluish red to bright red (CO2 is released from another part of hemoglobin through the Bohr effect). Other terrestrial invertebrates use hemocyanin (molluscs and some arthropods) or hemerythrin (spiders and lobsters) instead. A liter of blood can dissolve up to 200\u00a0cm3 of O2.\nUntil the discovery of anaerobic metazoa, oxygen was thought to be a requirement for all complex life.\nReactive oxygen species, such as superoxide ion (O2-) and hydrogen peroxide (H2O2), are reactive by-products of oxygen use in organisms. Parts of the immune system of higher organisms create peroxide, superoxide, and singlet oxygen to destroy invading microbes. Reactive oxygen species also play an important role in the hypersensitive response of plants against pathogen attack. Oxygen is damaging to obligately anaerobic organisms, which were the dominant form of early life on Earth until O2 began to accumulate in the atmosphere about 2.5 billion years ago during the Great Oxygenation Event, about a billion years after the first appearance of these organisms.\nAn adult human at rest inhales 1.8 to 2.4\u00a0grams of oxygen per minute. This amounts to more than 6 billion tonnes of oxygen inhaled by humanity per year.\nLiving organisms.\nThe free oxygen partial pressure in the body of a living vertebrate organism is highest in the respiratory system, and decreases along any arterial system, peripheral tissues, and venous system, respectively. Partial pressure is the pressure that oxygen would have if it alone occupied the volume.\nBuild-up in the atmosphere.\nBefore photosynthesis evolved, Earth's atmosphere had little free diatomic elemental oxygen (O2).\nOxygen began building up in the prebiotic atmosphere at approximately 2.45 Ga during the Neoarchean-Paleoproterozoic boundary, a paleogeological event known as the Great Oxygenation Event (GOE). The concentrations of O2 attained were less than 10% of today's and probably fluctuated greatly. Around 500Mya a second event known as the Neoproterozoic Oxygenation Event lead to oxygen levels similar or even higher than the present. \nOxygen is both a result of biological activity and a key enabler. Photosynthesis produces oxygen while plants and animals using aerobic respiration consume it. Consequently the evolution of life is closely related to the concentration of available oxygen. Understanding the relationship between oxygen and evolution would aid in seeking evidence of extraterrestrial life in exoplanet data. Oxygen concentration plays a key role in the geochemical composition of sedimentary rocks, making oxygen concentration important for geology and sedimentary rocks important for understanding oxygen concentration over geologic time. The increase in oxygen concentrations had wide-ranging and significant impacts on Earth's geochemistry and biosphere. However, detailed connections between oxygen and evolution remain elusive.\nVariations in atmospheric oxygen concentration may have shaped past climates. When oxygen declined, atmospheric density dropped, which in turn increased surface evaporation, causing precipitation increases and warmer temperatures.\nExtraterrestrial free oxygen.\nIn the field of astrobiology and in the search for extraterrestrial life oxygen is a strong biosignature. \nThe value of this signature dependents on the stability of the oxygen content on Earth. Simulations of Earth's oxygen balance have \nestimated that oxygen on Earth will last for about one billion years.\nAnother potential issue is that oxygen may be produced abiotically on celestial bodies with processes and conditions (such as a peculiar hydrosphere) which allow free oxygen, like with Europa's and Ganymede's thin oxygen atmospheres.\nIndustrial production.\nEvery year one hundred\u00a0million\u00a0tonnes of O2 are extracted from air for industrial uses. The most common method of extraction is fractional distillation of liquefied air, with N2 distilling as a vapor while O2 is left as a liquid. The other primary method of producing O2 is passing a stream of clean, dry air through one bed of a pair of identical zeolite molecular sieves, which absorbs the nitrogen and delivers a gas stream that is 90%\u00a0to\u00a093% O2. Simultaneously, nitrogen gas is released from the other nitrogen-saturated zeolite bed, by reducing the chamber operating pressure and diverting part of the oxygen gas from the producer bed through it, in the reverse direction of flow. After a set cycle time the operation of the two beds is interchanged, thereby allowing for a continuous supply of gaseous oxygen to be pumped through a pipeline. This is known as pressure swing adsorption. Oxygen gas is increasingly obtained by these non-cryogenic technologies (see also the related vacuum swing adsorption).\nIn academic laboratories, oxygen can be prepared by heating together potassium chlorate mixed with a small proportion of manganese dioxide.\nOxygen gas can also be produced through electrolysis of water into molecular oxygen and hydrogen. DC electricity must be used: if AC is used, the gases in each limb consist of hydrogen and oxygen in the explosive ratio 2:1. A similar method is the electrocatalytic O2 evolution from oxides and oxoacids. Chemical catalysts can be used as well, such as in chemical oxygen generators or oxygen candles that are used as part of the life-support equipment on submarines, and are still part of standard equipment on commercial airliners in case of depressurization emergencies. Another air separation method is forcing air to dissolve through ceramic membranes based on zirconium dioxide by either high pressure or an electric current, to produce nearly pure O2 gas.\nStorage.\nOxygen storage methods include high-pressure oxygen tanks, cryogenics and chemical compounds. For reasons of economy, oxygen is often transported in bulk as a liquid in specially insulated tankers, since one liter of liquefied oxygen is equivalent to 840\u00a0liters of gaseous oxygen at atmospheric pressure and . Such tankers are used to refill bulk liquid-oxygen storage containers, which stand outside hospitals and other institutions that need large volumes of pure oxygen gas. Liquid oxygen is passed through heat exchangers, which convert the cryogenic liquid into gas before it enters the building. Oxygen is also stored and shipped in smaller cylinders containing the compressed gas; a form that is useful in certain portable medical applications and oxy-fuel welding and cutting.\nApplications.\nMedical.\nUptake of O2 from the air is the essential purpose of respiration, so oxygen supplementation is used in medicine. Treatment not only increases oxygen levels in the patient's blood, but has the secondary effect of decreasing resistance to blood flow in many types of diseased lungs, easing work load on the heart. Oxygen therapy is used to treat emphysema, pneumonia, some heart disorders (congestive heart failure), some disorders that cause increased pulmonary artery pressure, and any disease that impairs the body's ability to take up and use gaseous oxygen.\nTreatments are flexible enough to be used in hospitals, the patient's home, or increasingly by portable devices. Oxygen tents were once commonly used in oxygen supplementation, but have since been replaced mostly by the use of oxygen masks or nasal cannulas.\nHyperbaric (high-pressure) medicine uses special oxygen chambers to increase the partial pressure of O2 around the patient and, when needed, the medical staff. Carbon monoxide poisoning, gas gangrene, and decompression sickness (the 'bends') are sometimes addressed with this therapy. Increased O2 concentration in the lungs helps to displace carbon monoxide from the heme group of hemoglobin. Oxygen gas is poisonous to the anaerobic bacteria that cause gas gangrene, so increasing its partial pressure helps kill them. Decompression sickness occurs in divers who decompress too quickly after a dive, resulting in bubbles of inert gas, mostly nitrogen and helium, forming in the blood. Increasing the pressure of O2 as soon as possible helps to redissolve the bubbles back into the blood so that these excess gasses can be exhaled naturally through the lungs. Normobaric oxygen administration at the highest available concentration is frequently used as first aid for any diving injury that may involve inert gas bubble formation in the tissues. There is epidemiological support for its use from a statistical study of cases recorded in a long term database.\nLife support and recreational use.\nIn modern space suits, which surround their occupant's body, oxygen gas is used as a low-pressure breathing gas. These devices use nearly pure oxygen at about one-third normal pressure, resulting in a normal blood partial pressure of O2. This trade-off of higher oxygen concentration for lower pressure is needed to maintain suit flexibility.\nScuba and surface-supplied underwater divers and submarines also rely on artificially delivered O2. Submarines, submersibles and atmospheric diving suits usually operate at normal atmospheric pressure. Breathing air is scrubbed of carbon dioxide by chemical extraction and oxygen is replaced to maintain a constant partial pressure. Ambient pressure divers breathe air or gas mixtures with an oxygen fraction suited to the operating depth. Pure or nearly pure O2 use in diving at pressures higher than atmospheric is usually limited to rebreathers, or decompression at relatively shallow depths (~6 meters depth, or less), or medical treatment in recompression chambers at pressures up to 2.8 bar, where acute oxygen toxicity can be managed without the risk of drowning. Deeper diving requires significant dilution of O2 with other gases, such as nitrogen or helium, to prevent oxygen toxicity.\nPeople who climb mountains or fly in non-pressurized fixed-wing aircraft sometimes have supplemental O2 supplies. Pressurized commercial airplanes have an emergency supply of O2 automatically supplied to the passengers in case of cabin depressurization. Sudden cabin pressure loss activates chemical oxygen generators above each seat, causing oxygen masks to drop. Pulling on the masks \"to start the flow of oxygen\" as cabin safety instructions dictate, forces iron filings into the sodium chlorate inside the canister. A steady stream of oxygen gas is then produced by the exothermic reaction.\nOxygen, as a mild euphoric, has a history of recreational use in oxygen bars and in sports. Oxygen bars are establishments found in the United States since the late 1990s that offer higher than normal O2 exposure for a minimal fee. Professional athletes, especially in American football, sometimes go off-field between plays to don oxygen masks to boost performance. The pharmacological effect is doubted; a placebo effect is a more likely explanation. Available studies support a performance boost from oxygen enriched mixtures only if it is inhaled \"during\" aerobic exercise.\nOther recreational uses that do not involve breathing include pyrotechnic applications, such as George Goble's five-second ignition of barbecue grills.\nIndustrial.\nSmelting of iron ore into steel consumes 55% of commercially produced oxygen. In this process, O2 is injected through a high-pressure lance into molten iron, which removes sulfur impurities and excess carbon as the respective oxides, SO2 and CO2. The reactions are exothermic, so the temperature increases to 1,700\u00a0\u00b0C.\nAnother 25% of commercially produced oxygen is used by the chemical industry. Ethylene is reacted with O2 to create ethylene oxide, which, in turn, is converted into ethylene glycol; the primary feeder material used to manufacture a host of products, including antifreeze and polyester polymers (the precursors of many plastics and fabrics).\nMost of the remaining 20% of commercially produced oxygen is used in medical applications, metal cutting and welding, as an oxidizer in rocket fuel, and in water treatment. Oxygen is used in oxyacetylene welding, burning acetylene with O2 to produce a very hot flame. In this process, metal up to thick is first heated with a small oxy-acetylene flame and then quickly cut by a large stream of O2.\nCompounds.\nThe oxidation state of oxygen is \u22122 in almost all known compounds of oxygen. The oxidation state \u22121 is found in a few compounds such as peroxides. Compounds containing oxygen in other oxidation states are very uncommon: \u22121/2 (superoxides), \u22121/3 (ozonides), 0 (elemental, hypofluorous acid), +1/2 (dioxygenyl), +1 (dioxygen difluoride), and +2 (oxygen difluoride).\nOxides and other inorganic compounds.\nWater (H2O) is an oxide of hydrogen and the most familiar oxygen compound. Hydrogen atoms are covalently bonded to oxygen in a water molecule but also have an additional attraction (about 23.3\u00a0kJ/mol per hydrogen atom) to an adjacent oxygen atom in a separate molecule. These hydrogen bonds between water molecules hold them approximately 15% closer than what would be expected in a simple liquid with just van der Waals forces.\nDue to its electronegativity, oxygen forms chemical bonds with almost all other elements to give corresponding oxides. The surface of most metals, such as aluminium and titanium, are oxidized in the presence of air and become coated with a thin film of oxide that passivates the metal and slows further corrosion. Many oxides of the transition metals are non-stoichiometric compounds, with slightly less metal than the chemical formula would show. For example, the mineral FeO (w\u00fcstite) is written as formula_1, where \"x\" is usually around 0.05.\nOxygen is present in the atmosphere in trace quantities in the form of carbon dioxide (CO2). The Earth's crustal rock is composed in large part of oxides of silicon (silica SiO2, as found in granite and quartz), aluminium (aluminium oxide Al2O3, in bauxite and corundum), iron (iron(III) oxide Fe2O3, in hematite and rust), and calcium carbonate (in limestone). The rest of the Earth's crust is also made of oxygen compounds, in particular various complex silicates (in silicate minerals). The Earth's mantle, of much larger mass than the crust, is largely composed of silicates of magnesium and iron.\nWater-soluble silicates in the form of Na4SiO4, Na2SiO3, and Na2Si2O5 are used as detergents and adhesives.\nOxygen also acts as a ligand for transition metals, forming transition metal dioxygen complexes, which feature metal\u2013O2. This class of compounds includes the heme proteins hemoglobin and myoglobin. An exotic and unusual reaction occurs with PtF6, which oxidizes oxygen to give , dioxygenyl hexafluoroplatinate.\nOrganic compounds.\nAmong the most important classes of organic compounds that contain oxygen are (where \"R\" is an organic group): alcohols (R-OH); ethers (R-O-R); ketones (R-CO-R); aldehydes (R-CO-H); carboxylic acids (R-COOH); esters (R-COO-R); acid anhydrides (R-CO-O-CO-R); and amides (R-CO-NR2). There are many important organic solvents that contain oxygen, including: acetone, methanol, ethanol, isopropanol, furan, THF, diethyl ether, dioxane, ethyl acetate, DMF, DMSO, acetic acid, and formic acid. Acetone ((CH3)2CO) and phenol (C6H5OH) are used as feeder materials in the synthesis of many different substances. Other important organic compounds that contain oxygen are: glycerol, formaldehyde, glutaraldehyde, citric acid, acetic anhydride, and acetamide. Epoxides are ethers in which the oxygen atom is part of a ring of three atoms. The element is similarly found in almost all biomolecules that are important to (or generated by) life.\nOxygen reacts spontaneously with many organic compounds at or below room temperature in a process called autoxidation. Most of the organic compounds that contain oxygen are not made by direct action of O2. Organic compounds important in industry and commerce that are made by direct oxidation of a precursor include ethylene oxide and peracetic acid.\nSafety and precautions.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chembox/styles.css\"/&gt;\nChemical compound\nThe NFPA 704 standard rates compressed oxygen gas as nonhazardous to health, nonflammable and nonreactive, but an oxidizer. Refrigerated liquid oxygen (LOX) is given a health hazard rating of 3 (for increased risk of hyperoxia from condensed vapors, and for hazards common to cryogenic liquids such as frostbite), and all other ratings are the same as the compressed gas form.\nToxicity.\nOxygen gas (O2) can be toxic at elevated partial pressures, leading to convulsions and other health problems. Oxygen toxicity usually begins to occur at partial pressures more than 50 kilopascals\u00a0(kPa), equal to about 50% oxygen composition at standard pressure or 2.5 times the normal sea-level O2 partial pressure of about 21\u00a0kPa. This is not a problem except for patients on mechanical ventilators, since gas supplied through oxygen masks in medical applications is typically composed of only 30\u201350% O2 by volume (about 30\u00a0kPa at standard pressure).\nAt one time, premature babies were placed in incubators containing O2-rich air, but this practice was discontinued after some babies were blinded by the oxygen content being too high.\nBreathing pure O2 in space applications, such as in some modern space suits, or in early spacecraft such as Apollo, causes no damage due to the low total pressures used. In the case of spacesuits, the O2 partial pressure in the breathing gas is, in general, about 30\u00a0kPa (1.4 times normal), and the resulting O2 partial pressure in the astronaut's arterial blood is only marginally more than normal sea-level O2 partial pressure.\nOxygen toxicity to the lungs and central nervous system can also occur in deep scuba diving and surface-supplied diving. Prolonged breathing of an air mixture with an O2 partial pressure more than 60\u00a0kPa can eventually lead to permanent pulmonary fibrosis. Exposure to an O2 partial pressure greater than 160\u00a0kPa (about 1.6 atm) may lead to convulsions (normally fatal for divers). Acute oxygen toxicity (causing seizures, its most feared effect for divers) can occur by breathing an air mixture with 21% O2 at or more of depth; the same thing can occur by breathing 100% O2 at only .\nCombustion and other hazards.\nUnless non-flammable containers are used or all sources of ignition are eliminated, oxygen rich environments are extremely hazardous. Many materials including most metals burn faster in oxygen rich environments and ignite at lower temperatures. Concentrated O2 will allow combustion to proceed rapidly and energetically. Steel pipes and storage vessels used to store and transmit both gaseous and liquid oxygen will act as a fuel; and therefore the design and manufacture of O2 systems requires special training to ensure that ignition sources are minimized. \nThe 1967 fire that killed the Apollo 1 crew in a launch pad test spread so rapidly because the capsule was pressurized with pure O2 at slightly more than atmospheric pressure to force the doors against their seals. Once in space the exterior pressure would be minimal and the oxygen pressure would have been reduced to 5psi to reduce fire hazard. The ignition source for the fire was traced to an electrical surge under the seat of one of the astronauts, probably due to chafed wires.\nLiquid oxygen spills, if allowed to soak into organic matter, such as wood, petrochemicals, and asphalt can cause these materials to detonate unpredictably on subsequent mechanical impact.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "22304", "revid": "17087306", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22304", "title": "Osmium", "text": "element with atomic number 76 (Os)\nOsmium (from grc \" ' ()\"\u00a0'smell') is a chemical element; it has symbol Os and atomic number 76. It is a hard, brittle, bluish-white transition metal in the platinum group that is found as a trace element in alloys, mostly in platinum ores. Osmium has the highest density of any stable element (). It is also one of the rarest elements in the Earth's crust, with an estimated abundance of 50 parts per trillion (ppt). Manufacturers use alloys of osmium with platinum, iridium, and other platinum-group metals for fountain pen nib tipping, electrical contacts, and other applications that require extreme durability and hardness. \nCharacteristics.\nPhysical properties.\nOsmium is a hard, brittle, blue-gray metal, and the densest stable element\u2014about twice as dense as lead. The density of osmium is slightly greater than that of iridium; the two are so similar (22.587 versus at 20\u00a0\u00b0C) that each was at one time considered to be the densest element. Only in the 1990s were measurements made accurately enough (by means of X-ray crystallography) to be certain that osmium is the denser of the two.\nOsmium has a blue-gray tint. The reflectivity of single crystals of osmium is complex and strongly direction-dependent, with light in the red and near-infrared wavelengths being more strongly absorbed when polarized parallel to the \"c\" crystal axis than when polarized perpendicular to the \"c\" axis; the \"c\"-parallel polarization is also slightly more reflected in the mid-ultraviolet range. Reflectivity reaches a sharp minimum at around 1.5\u00a0eV (near-infrared) for the \"c\"-parallel polarization and at 2.0\u00a0eV (orange) for the \"c\"-perpendicular polarization, and peaks for both in the visible spectrum at around 3.0\u00a0eV (blue-violet).\nOsmium is a hard but brittle metal that remains lustrous even at high temperatures. It has a very low compressibility. Correspondingly, its bulk modulus is extremely high, reported between and , which rivals that of diamond (). The hardness of osmium is moderately high at . Because of its hardness, brittleness, low vapor pressure (the lowest of the platinum-group metals), and very high melting point (the fourth highest of all elements, after carbon, tungsten, and rhenium), solid osmium is difficult to machine, form, or work.\nChemical properties.\nOsmium forms compounds with oxidation states ranging from \u22122 to +8. The most common oxidation states are +2, +3, +4, and +8. The +8 oxidation state is notable for being the highest attained by any chemical element aside from iridium's +9 and is encountered besides osmium only in xenon, ruthenium, hassium, iridium, and plutonium. Examples of the \u22121 and \u22122 oxidation states are Na2[Os4(CO)13] (mixed 0 and \u22121 oxidation states) and Na2[Os(CO)4], respectively; these reactive compounds are used to synthesize osmium cluster compounds. Another example of the \u22121 oxidation state of osmium is [P(C6H5)4][Os2(CO)8].\nThe most common compound exhibiting the +8 oxidation state, osmium tetroxide (), is a volatile, water-soluble solid with a \"pronounced and nauseating\" smell. Osmium tetroxide forms red perosmates OsO4(OH)22- upon reaction with a base. With ammonia, it forms the nitrido-osmates OsO3N-. The +4 oxide, osmium dioxide (OsO2), is a darkly-colored, non-volatile, and much less reactive compound.\nOsmium pentafluoride (OsF5) is known, but osmium trifluoride (OsF3) has not yet been synthesized. The lower oxidation states are stabilized by the larger halogens, so that the trichloride, tribromide, triiodide, and even diiodide are known. The oxidation state +1 is known only for osmium monoiodide (OsI), whereas several carbonyl complexes of osmium, such as triosmium dodecacarbonyl (Os3(CO)12), represent oxidation state 0.\nIn general, the lower oxidation states of osmium are stabilized by ligands that are good \u03c3-donors (such as amines) and \u03c0-acceptors (heterocycles containing nitrogen). The higher oxidation states are stabilized by strong \u03c3- and \u03c0-donors, such as O2- and N3-.\nDespite its broad range of compounds in numerous oxidation states, osmium in bulk form at ordinary temperatures and pressures is stable in air. It resists attack by most acids and bases including aqua regia, but is attacked by and at high temperatures, and by hot concentrated nitric acid to produce . It can be dissolved by molten alkalis fused with an oxidizer such as sodium peroxide () or potassium chlorate () to give osmates such as .\nIsotopes.\nOsmium has seven naturally occurring isotopes, five of which are stable: 187Os, 188Os, 189Os, 190Os, and (most abundant) 192Os. At least 37 artificial radioisotopes and 20 nuclear isomers exist, with mass numbers ranging from 160 to 203; the most stable of these is 194Os with a half-life of 6.0 years.\nThe two primordial radioisotopes 184Os and 186Os are known to undergo alpha decay with long half-lives: the current best values being and years, approximately times the age of the universe, that for practical purposes it can be considered stable. Alpha decay is predicted for all the other naturally occurring isotopes, but has not been observed, presumably due to very long half-lives; 184Os and 192Os are also predicted to undergo double beta decay, but this not been observed either.\n189Os has a spin of 3/2131 but 187Os has a nuclear spin 1/2130. Its low natural abundance (1.64%) and low nuclear magnetic moment means that it is one of the most difficult natural abundance isotopes for NMR spectroscopy.\n187Os is the descendant of 187Re (half-life ) and is used extensively in dating terrestrial as well as meteoric rocks (see \"Rhenium\u2013osmium dating\"). It has also been used to measure the intensity of continental weathering over geologic time and to fix minimum ages for stabilization of the mantle roots of continental cratons. This decay is a reason why rhenium-rich minerals are abnormally rich in 187Os.\nHistory.\nOsmium was discovered in 1803 by Smithson Tennant and William Hyde Wollaston in London, England. The discovery of osmium is intertwined with that of platinum and the other metals of the platinum group. Platinum reached Europe as \"platina\" (\"small silver\"), first encountered in the late 17th century in silver mines around the Choc\u00f3 Department, in Colombia. The discovery that this metal was not an alloy, but a distinct new element, was published in 1748.\nChemists who studied platinum dissolved it in aqua regia (a mixture of hydrochloric and nitric acids) to create soluble salts. They always observed a small amount of a dark, insoluble residue. Joseph Louis Proust thought that the residue was graphite. Victor Collet-Descotils, Antoine Fran\u00e7ois, comte de Fourcroy, and Louis Nicolas Vauquelin also observed iridium in the black platinum residue in 1803, but did not obtain enough material for further experiments. Later the two French chemists Fourcroy and Vauquelin identified a metal in a platinum residue they called \"pt\u00e8ne\".\nIn 1803, Smithson Tennant analyzed the insoluble residue and concluded that it must contain a new metal. Vauquelin treated the powder alternately with alkali and acids and obtained a volatile new oxide, which he believed was of this new metal\u2014which he named \"ptene\", from the Greek word (pt\u00e8nos) for winged. However, Tennant, who had the advantage of a much larger amount of residue, continued his research and identified two previously undiscovered elements in the black residue, iridium and osmium. He obtained a yellow solution (probably of \"cis\"\u2013[Os(OH)2O4]2\u2212) by reactions with sodium hydroxide at red heat. After acidification he was able to distill the formed OsO4. He named it osmium after Greek \"osme\" meaning \"a smell\", because of the chlorine-like and slightly garlic-like smell of the volatile osmium tetroxide. Discovery of the new elements was documented in a letter to the Royal Society on June 21, 1804.\nUranium and osmium were early successful catalysts in the Haber process, the nitrogen fixation reaction of nitrogen and hydrogen to produce ammonia, giving enough yield to make the process economically successful. At the time, a group at BASF led by Carl Bosch bought most of the world's supply of osmium to use as a catalyst. Shortly thereafter, in 1908, cheaper catalysts based on iron and iron oxides were introduced by the same group for the first pilot plants, removing the need for the expensive and rare osmium.\nOsmium is now obtained primarily from the processing of platinum and nickel ores.\nOccurrence.\nOsmium is one of the least abundant stable elements in Earth's crust, with an average mass fraction of 50\u00a0parts per trillion in the continental crust.\nOsmium is found in nature as an uncombined element or in natural alloys; especially the iridium\u2013osmium alloys, osmiridium (iridium rich), and iridosmium (osmium rich). In nickel and copper deposits, the platinum-group metals occur as sulfides (i.e., ), tellurides (e.g., ), antimonides (e.g., ), and arsenides (e.g., ); in all these compounds platinum is exchanged by a small amount of iridium and osmium. As with all of the platinum-group metals, osmium can be found naturally in alloys with nickel or copper.\nWithin Earth's crust, osmium, like iridium, is found at highest concentrations in three types of geologic structure: igneous deposits (crustal intrusions from below), impact craters, and deposits reworked from one of the former structures. The largest known primary reserves are in the Bushveld Igneous Complex in South Africa, though the large copper\u2013nickel deposits near Norilsk in Russia, and the Sudbury Basin in Canada are also significant sources of osmium. Smaller reserves can be found in the United States. The alluvial deposits used by pre-Columbian people in the Choc\u00f3 Department, Colombia, are still a source for platinum-group metals. The second large alluvial deposit was found in the Ural Mountains, Russia, which is still mined.\nProduction.\nOsmium is obtained commercially as a by-product from nickel and copper mining and processing. During electrorefining of copper and nickel, noble metals such as silver, gold and the platinum-group metals, together with non-metallic elements such as selenium and tellurium, settle to the bottom of the cell as \"anode mud\", which forms the starting material for their extraction. Separating the metals requires that they first be brought into solution. Several methods can achieve this, depending on the separation process and the composition of the mixture. Two representative methods are fusion with sodium peroxide followed by dissolution in aqua regia, and dissolution in a mixture of chlorine with hydrochloric acid. Osmium, ruthenium, rhodium, and iridium can be separated from platinum, gold, and base metals by their insolubility in aqua regia, leaving a solid residue. Rhodium can be separated from the residue by treatment with molten sodium bisulfate. The insoluble residue, containing ruthenium, osmium, and iridium, is treated with sodium oxide, in which Ir is insoluble, producing water-soluble ruthenium and osmium salts. After oxidation to the volatile oxides, RuO4 is separated from OsO4 by precipitation of (NH4)3RuCl6 with ammonium chloride.\nAfter it is dissolved, osmium is separated from the other platinum-group metals by distillation or extraction with organic solvents of the volatile osmium tetroxide. The first method is similar to the procedure used by Tennant and Wollaston. Both methods are suitable for industrial-scale production. Modern methods involve reducing ammonium hexachloroosmate(IV) using hydrogen, yielding the metal as a powder or sponge that can be treated using powder metallurgy techniques.\nEstimates of annual worldwide osmium production are on the order of several hundred to a few thousand kilograms. Production and consumption figures for osmium are not well reported because demand for the metal is limited and can be fulfilled with the byproducts of other refining processes. To reflect this, statistics often report osmium with other minor platinum group metals such as iridium and ruthenium. US imports of osmium from 2014 to 2021 averaged 155\u00a0kg annually.\nApplications.\nBecause osmium is virtually unforgeable when fully dense and very fragile when sintered, it is rarely used in its pure state, but is instead often alloyed with other metals for high-wear applications. Osmium alloys such as osmiridium are very hard and, along with other platinum-group metals, are used in the tips of fountain pens, instrument pivots, and electrical contacts, as they can resist wear from frequent operation. They were also used for the tips of phonograph styli during the late 78\u00a0rpm and early \"LP\" and \"45\" record era, circa 1945 to 1955. Osmium-alloy tips were significantly more durable than steel and chromium needle points, but wore out far more rapidly than competing, and costlier, sapphire and diamond tips, so they were discontinued.\nOnly two osmium compounds have major applications: osmium tetroxide for staining tissue in electron microscopy and for the oxidation of alkenes in organic synthesis, and the non-volatile osmates for organic oxidation reactions.\nOsmium tetroxide has been used in fingerprint detection and in staining fatty tissue for optical and electron microscopy. As a strong oxidant, it cross-links lipids mainly by reacting with unsaturated carbon\u2013carbon bonds and thereby both fixes biological membranes in place in tissue samples and simultaneously stains them. Because osmium atoms are extremely electron-dense, osmium staining greatly enhances image contrast in transmission electron microscopy (TEM) studies of biological materials. Those carbon materials otherwise have very weak TEM contrast. Another osmium compound, osmium ferricyanide (OsFeCN), exhibits similar fixing and staining action.\nThe tetroxide and its derivative potassium osmate are important oxidants in organic synthesis. For the Sharpless asymmetric dihydroxylation, which uses osmate for the conversion of a double bond into a vicinal diol, Karl Barry Sharpless was awarded the Nobel Prize in Chemistry in 2001. OsO4 is very expensive for this use, so KMnO4 is often used instead, even though the yields are less for this cheaper chemical reagent.\nIn 1898, the Austrian chemist Auer von Welsbach developed the Oslamp with a filament made of osmium, which he introduced commercially in 1902. After only a few years, osmium was replaced by tungsten, which is more abundant (and thus cheaper) and more stable. Tungsten has the highest melting point among all metals, and its use in light bulbs increases the luminous efficacy and life of incandescent lamps.\nThe light bulb manufacturer Osram (founded in 1906, when three German companies, Auer-Gesellschaft, AEG and Siemens &amp; Halske, combined their lamp production facilities) derived its name from the elements of osmium and \"Wolfram\" (the latter is German for tungsten).\nLike palladium, powdered osmium effectively adsorbs hydrogen atoms. This could make osmium a potential candidate for a metal-hydride battery electrode. However, osmium is expensive and would react with potassium hydroxide, the most common battery electrolyte.\nOsmium has high reflectivity in the ultraviolet range of the electromagnetic spectrum; for example, at 600\u00a0\u00c5 osmium has a reflectivity twice that of gold. This high reflectivity is desirable in space-based UV spectrometers, which have reduced mirror sizes due to space limitations. Osmium-coated mirrors were flown in several space missions aboard the Space Shuttle, but it soon became clear that the oxygen radicals in low Earth orbit are abundant enough to significantly deteriorate the osmium layer.\nPrecautions.\nThe primary hazard presented by metallic osmium is the potential formation of osmium tetroxide (OsO4), which is volatile and very poisonous. This reaction is thermodynamically favorable at room temperature, but the rate depends on the temperature and surface area of the metal. As a result, bulk material is not considered hazardous while powders react quickly enough that samples can sometimes smell like OsO4 if they are handled in air.\nPrice.\nBetween 1990 and 2010, the nominal price of osmium metal was almost constant, while inflation reduced the real value from ~US to ~US Because osmium has few commercial applications, it is not heavily traded and prices are seldom reported.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "22305", "revid": "1741963", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22305", "title": "Oxide", "text": "Chemical compound\nAn oxide () is a chemical compound containing at least one oxygen atom and one other element in its chemical formula. \"Oxide\" itself is the dianion (anion bearing a net charge of \u22122) of oxygen, an O2\u2212 ion with oxygen in the oxidation state of \u22122. Most of the Earth's crust consists of oxides. Even materials considered pure elements often develop an oxide coating. For example, aluminium foil develops a thin skin of (called a passivation layer) that protects the foil from further oxidation.\nStoichiometry.\nOxides are extraordinarily diverse in terms of stoichiometries (the measurable relationship between reactants and chemical equations of an equation or reaction) and in terms of the structures of each stoichiometry. Most elements form oxides of more than one stoichiometry. A well known example is carbon monoxide and carbon dioxide. This applies to \"binary\" oxides, that is, compounds containing only oxide and another element. Far more common than binary oxides are oxides of more complex stoichiometries. Such complexity can arise by the introduction of other cations (a positively charged ion, i.e. one that would be attracted to the cathode in electrolysis) or other anions (a negatively charged ion). Iron silicate, Fe2SiO4, the mineral fayalite, is one of many examples of a ternary oxide. For many metal oxides, the possibilities of polymorphism and nonstoichiometry exist as well. The commercially important dioxides of titanium exists in three distinct structures, for example. Many metal oxides exist in various nonstoichiometric states. Many molecular oxides exist with diverse ligands as well.\nFor simplicity's sake, most of this article focuses on binary oxides.\nFormation.\nOxides are associated with all elements except a few noble gases. The pathways for the formation of this diverse family of compounds are correspondingly numerous.\nMetal oxides.\nMany metal oxides arise by decomposition of other metal compounds, e.g. carbonates, hydroxides, and nitrates. In the making of calcium oxide, calcium carbonate (limestone) breaks down upon heating, releasing carbon dioxide:\nThe reaction of elements with oxygen in air is a key step in corrosion relevant to the commercial use of iron especially. Almost all elements form oxides upon heating with oxygen atmosphere. For example, zinc powder will burn in air to give zinc oxide:\nThe production of metals from ores often involves the production of oxides by roasting (heating) metal sulfide minerals in air. In this way, (molybdenite) is converted to molybdenum trioxide, the precursor to virtually all molybdenum compounds:\nNoble metals (such as gold and platinum) are prized because they resist direct chemical combination with oxygen.\nNon-metal oxides.\nImportant and prevalent nonmetal oxides are carbon dioxide and carbon monoxide. These species form upon full or partial oxidation of carbon or hydrocarbons. With a deficiency of oxygen, the monoxide is produced:\n\nWith excess oxygen, the dioxide is the product, the pathway proceeds by the intermediacy of carbon monoxide:\n\nElemental nitrogen () is difficult to convert to oxides, but the combustion of ammonia gives nitric oxide, which further reacts with oxygen:\n\nThese reactions are practiced in the production of nitric acid, a commodity chemical.\nThe chemical produced on the largest scale industrially is sulfuric acid. It is produced by the oxidation of sulfur to sulfur dioxide, which is separately oxidized to sulfur trioxide: \n\nFinally the trioxide is converted to sulfuric acid by a hydration reaction:\nStructure.\nOxides have a range of structures, from individual molecules to polymeric and crystalline structures. At standard conditions, oxides may range from solids to gases. Solid oxides of metals usually have polymeric structures at ambient conditions. \nMolecular oxides.\nAlthough most metal oxides are crystalline solids, many non-metal oxides are molecules. Examples of molecular oxides are carbon dioxide and carbon monoxide. All simple oxides of nitrogen are molecular, e.g., NO, N2O, NO2 and N2O4. Phosphorus pentoxide is a more complex molecular oxide with a deceptive name, the real formula being P4O10. Tetroxides are rare, with a few more common examples being ruthenium tetroxide, osmium tetroxide, and xenon tetroxide.\nReactions.\nReduction.\nReduction of metal oxide to the metal is practiced on a large scale in the production of some metals. Many metal oxides convert to metals simply by heating (thermal decomposition). For example, silver oxide decomposes at 200\u00a0\u00b0C:\nMost often, however, metal oxides are reduced by a chemical reagent. A common and cheap reducing agent is carbon in the form of coke. The most prominent example is that of iron ore smelting. Many reactions are involved, but the simplified equation is usually shown as:\nSome metal oxides dissolve in the presence of reducing agents, which can include organic compounds. Reductive dissolution of ferric oxides is integral to geochemical phenomena such as the iron cycle.\nHydrolysis and dissolution.\nBecause the M\u2013O bonds are typically strong, metal oxides tend to be insoluble in solvents, though they may be attacked by aqueous acids and bases.\nDissolution of oxides often gives oxyanions. Adding aqueous base to gives various phosphates. Adding aqueous base to gives polyoxometalates. Oxycations are rarer, some examples being nitrosonium (), vanadyl (), and uranyl (). Many compounds are known with both oxides and other groups. In organic chemistry, these include ketones and many related carbonyl compounds. For the transition metals, many oxo complexes are known as well as oxyhalides.\nNomenclature and formulas.\nThe chemical formulas of the oxides of the chemical elements in their highest oxidation state are predictable and are derived from the number of valence electrons for that element. Even the chemical formula of O4, tetraoxygen, is predictable as a group 16 element. One exception is copper, for which the highest oxidation state oxide is copper(II) oxide and not copper(I) oxide. Another exception is fluoride, which does not exist as one might expect\u2014as F2O7\u2014but as OF2.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "22306", "revid": "50821201", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22306", "title": "Overgrazing", "text": "When plants are grazed for extended periods without sufficient recovery time\nOvergrazing occurs when plants are exposed to intensive grazing for extended periods of time, or without sufficient recovery periods. It can be caused by either livestock in poorly managed agricultural applications, game reserves, or nature reserves. It can also be caused by immobile, travel restricted populations of native or non-native wild animals.\nOvergrazing reduces the usefulness, productivity and biodiversity of the land and is one cause of desertification and erosion. Overgrazing is also seen as a cause of the spread of invasive species of non-native plants and of weeds. Degrading land, emissions from animal agriculture and reducing the biomass in a ecosystem contribute directly to climate change between grazing events.\nEcological impact.\nOvergrazing typically increases soil erosion.\nWith continued overutilization of land for grazing, there is an increase in degradation. This leads to poor soil conditions that only xeric and early successional species can tolerate. A meta-analysis of 148 studies found that the value of most ecosystem functions declines with increasing grazing intensity and that increasing aridity weakens positive impacts of light grazing.\nNative plant grass species, both individual bunch grasses and in grasslands, are especially vulnerable. For example, excessive browsing by white-tailed deer can lead to the growth of less preferred species of grasses and ferns or non-native plant species that can potentially displace native, woody plants, decreasing the biodiversity.\nTurning to the aquatic environment, Ling et al. (2015) have documented the phenomenon of catastrophic sea urchin overgrazing and its role in marine ecosystem regime shifts. Their study underscores the urgent need for effective management and conservation strategies to mitigate the profound ecological impacts of overgrazing, highlighting the issue's global scope. Similarly, on the Mongolian steppes, Liu et al. (2013) found that approximately 60% of vegetation decline could be attributed to climate factors, with the rest significantly influenced by increased goat density due to overgrazing. This points to a complex interplay between climate change and grazing practices in ecosystem degradation.\nFurther expanding our understanding, Stevens et al. (2016) investigated woody encroachment in South African savannahs over a 70-year period, identifying overgrazing, global changes, and the ecological effects of megafauna extinction as key factors. Their findings shed light on the multifaceted drivers behind changes in savannah ecosystems. Echoing this theme of alternative strategies to combat overgrazing, Kriegisch et al. (2019) demonstrated how drift-kelp availability could reduce the foraging movement of overgrazing sea urchins, suggesting that alternative food sources may significantly influence grazing behaviors and aid in managing marine ecosystem pressures.\nIn a similar vein, the research by Cai et al. (2020) presents a stark example of the terrestrial impact of overgrazing, showing how the fertile island effect collapses under extreme conditions in shrub-encroached grasslands. This case study emphasizes the critical need for sustainable grazing practices to protect soil health and maintain ecosystem functionality, further illustrating the wide-reaching consequences of overgrazing across diverse habitats.\nEconomic theory.\nOvergrazing is used as an \nexample in the economic concept now known as the Tragedy of the Commons devised in a 1968 paper by Garrett Hardin. This cited the work of a Victorian economist who used as an example the over-grazing of common land. Hardin's example could only apply to unregulated use of land regarded as a common resource.\nNormally, rights of use of common land in England and Wales were, and still are, closely regulated, and available only to \"commoners\". If excessive use was made of common land, for example in overgrazing, a common would be \"stinted\", that is, a limit would be put on the number of animals each commoner was allowed to graze. These regulations were responsive to demographic and economic pressure; thus rather than let a common become degraded, access was restricted even further. This important part of actual historic practice was absent from the economic model of Hardin. In reality the use of common land in England and Wales was a triumph of conserving a scarce resource using agreed custom and practice.\nBy region.\nAfrica-Sahel region.\nThere have been overgrazing consequences in the Sahel region. The violent herder\u2013farmer conflicts in Nigeria, Mali, Sudan and other countries in the Sahel region have been exacerbated by land degradation and overgrazing. See 2010 Sahel famine.\nSub-Sahara Africa.\nVarious countries in Sub-Sahara Africa are affected by overgrazing and resulting ecological effects.\nIn Namibia, overgrazing is considered the main cause of woody plant encroachment at the expenses of grasses on a land area of up to 45 million hectares.\nAustralia.\nIn many arid zones in Australia, overgrazing by sheep and cattle during the 19th century, as pastoralism was introduced by European settlers, caused many long-lived species of trees and shrubs to give way to short-lived annual plants and weed species. Introduced feral rabbits, cats and foxes exacerbated the threat to both flora and fauna. Many bird species have become extinct or endangered, and many of the medium-sized desert mammals are now completely extinct or only exist on a few islands of Australia.\nOvergrazing can also occur with native species. In the Australian Capital Territory, the local government in 2013 authorised a cull of 1455 kangaroos due to overgrazing. Maisie Carr (1912-1988), Ecologist and Botanist, undertook significant research and studies in overgrazing and established consequences on the surrounding land in Australia.\nCaribbean.\nIn the Caribbean region, overgrazing is a threat to vegetation areas where there is livestock farming, which is an important source of livelihood and food security for many people. a combination of small scale livestock farming with small ruminants, and mixed farming is practised. However, livestock consume vegetation faster than it can be renewed and this leads to land degradation, loss of vegetative areas, and soil erosion resulting in poor quality feed and reduced livestock yields and income. Also, these grazing lands are critical in controlling carbon dioxide and mitigating risks against severe weather such as floods and droughts. Overgrazing weakens ecological conservation.\nNew Zealand.\nIn New Zealand, overgrazing is a massive threat to the native species of flora and fauna, especially the native bushes which are often overlooked by invasive species looking for homes. Mustalids, rabbits, hares and possums often eat the plants that hold soil together. This makes the ground very unstable and crumbly. If soil is unstable, it is prone to collapse in extreme weather events such as floods and heavy rain. This is detrimental to farmers of crops and animals alike. 40% of the native species of New Zealand have been wiped out by pests including humans.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "22308", "revid": "50519108", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22308", "title": "Oxford", "text": "City and district in Oxfordshire, England\nOxford () is a cathedral city and non-metropolitan district in Oxfordshire, England, of which it is the county town.\nThe city is home to the University of Oxford, the oldest university in the English-speaking world; it has buildings in every style of English architecture since late Anglo-Saxon. Oxford's industries include motor manufacturing, education, publishing, science, and information technologies.\nFounded in the 8th century, it was granted city status in 1542. The city is located at the confluence of the rivers Thames (locally known as the Isis) and Cherwell. It had a population of 166,034 in 2024. It is north-west of London, south-east of Birmingham and north-east of Bristol.\nHistory.\nThe history of Oxford in England dates back to its original settlement in the Saxon period. The name \u201cOxford\u201d comes from the Old English \"Oxenaforda\", meaning \u201cford of the oxen,\u201d referring to a shallow crossing in the river where oxen could pass. The town was of strategic significance, because of the ford and the town's controlling location on the upper reaches of the River Thames at its confluence with the River Cherwell.\nAfter the Norman Conquest in 1066, Norman lord Robert D\u2019Oyly built Oxford Castle in 1071 to secure control of the area. The town grew in national importance during the early Norman period.\nTeaching began in the 11th century and by the late 12th century the town was home to the fledgling University of Oxford. Tensions sometimes erupted between the scholastic community and the town: in 1209, after a townsperson hanged two scholars for an alleged murder, a number of Oxford academics fled and founded Cambridge University. Town-and-gown conflicts continued, culminating in the St. Scholastica Day Riot of 1355 \u2013 a feuding that lasted days and left around 93 students and townspeople dead.\nOxford was besieged during The Anarchy in 1142. During the Middle Ages, Oxford had an important Jewish community, of which David of Oxford and his wife Licoricia of Winchester were prominent members. The university rose to dominate the town.\nA heavily ecclesiastical town, Oxford was greatly affected by the changes of the English Reformation. Oxford\u2019s ecclesiastical institutions were dismantled \u2014 the city\u2019s monasteries were closed in the 1530s. Religious strife touched Oxford directly during the Marian persecution: the Oxford Martyrs were tried for heresy here. Bishops Hugh Latimer and Nicholas Ridley were burned at the stake in Oxford in October 1555, and the former Archbishop Thomas Cranmer was executed in March 1556. A Victorian-era monument, the Martyrs\u2019 Memorial in St Giles\u2019, now commemorates these events.\nOxford was elevated from town to city status in 1542 when the Diocese of Oxford was created \u2013 \"Christ Church\" college chapel was made a cathedral, officially granting Oxford its city privileges.\nDuring the English Civil War Charles I made Oxford his de facto capital (1642\u20131646): he moved his court to Oxford, using the city as his headquarters after being expelled from London.\nThe city began to grow industrially during the 19th century, and had an industrial boom in the early 20th century. Traditional industries included brewing and publishing \u2013 Oxford University Press and other print houses were major employers by the 19th century. In 1910 entrepreneur William Morris (later Lord Nuffield) founded a motor car business in Oxford, opening an assembly plant at Cowley.\nThe city\u2019s population and economy grew with this industrial boom, diversifying beyond the university.\nGeography.\nPhysical.\nLocation.\nOxford's latitude and longitude are , with Ordnance Survey grid reference (at Carfax Tower, which is usually considered the centre). Oxford is north-west of Reading, north-east of Swindon, east of Cheltenham, east of Gloucester, south-west of Milton Keynes, south-east of Evesham, south-east of Worcester, south of Rugby and west-north-west of London. The rivers Cherwell and Thames (also sometimes known as the Isis locally, supposedly from the Latinised name ) run through Oxford and meet south of the city centre. These rivers and their flood plains constrain the size of the city centre.\nClimate.\nOxford has a maritime temperate climate (K\u00f6ppen: \"Cfb\"). Precipitation is uniformly distributed throughout the year and is provided mostly by weather systems that arrive from the Atlantic. The lowest temperature ever recorded in Oxford was on 24 December 1860. The highest temperature ever recorded in Oxford is on 19 July 2022. The average conditions below are from the Radcliffe Meteorological Station. It has the longest series of temperature and rainfall records for one site in Britain. These records are continuous from January 1815. Irregular observations of rainfall, cloud cover, and temperature exist since 1767.\nThe driest year on record was 1788, with of rainfall. The wettest year was 2012, with . The wettest month on record was September 1774, with a total fall of . The warmest month on record is July 1983, with an average of and the coldest is January 1963, with an average of . The warmest year on record is 2014, with an average of and the coldest is 1879, with a mean temperature of . The sunniest month on record is May 2020, with 331.7 hours and December 1890 is the least sunny, with 5.0 hours. The greatest one-day rainfall occurred on 10 July 1968, with a total of . The greatest known snow depth was in February 1888.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nDistricts.\nThe city centre.\nThe city centre is relatively small and is centred on Carfax, a crossroads which forms the junction of Cornmarket Street (pedestrianised), Queen Street (mainly pedestrianised), St Aldate's and the High Street (\"the High\"; blocked for through traffic). Cornmarket Street and Queen Street are home to Oxford's chain stores, as well as a small number of independent retailers, one of the longest established of which was Boswell's, founded in 1738. The store closed in 2020. St Aldate's has few shops but several local government buildings, including the town hall, the city police station and local council offices. The High (the word \"street\" is traditionally omitted) is the longest of the four streets and has a number of independent and high-end chain stores, but mostly university and college buildings. The historic buildings mean the area is often used by film and TV crews.\nSuburbs.\nAside from the city centre, there are several suburbs and neighbourhoods within the borders of the city of Oxford, including:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nGreen belt.\nOxford is at the centre of the Oxford Green Belt, which is an environmental and planning policy that regulates the rural space in Oxfordshire surrounding the city, aiming to prevent urban sprawl and minimize convergence with nearby settlements. The policy has been blamed for the large rise in house prices in Oxford, making it the least affordable city in the United Kingdom outside of London, with some estate agents calling for brownfield land inside the green belt to be released for new housing.\nThe vast majority of the area covered is outside of the city, but there are some green spaces within that which are covered by the designation, such as much of the Thames and river Cherwell flood-meadows, and the village of Binsey, along with several smaller portions on the fringes. Other landscape features and places of interest covered include Cutteslowe Park and the mini railway attraction, the University Parks, Hogacre Common Eco Park, numerous sports grounds, Aston's Eyot, St Margaret's Church and well, and Wolvercote Common and community orchard.\nGovernance.\nThere are two tiers of local government covering Oxford, at district and county level: Oxford City Council and Oxfordshire County Council. From 1889 to 1974 the city of Oxford was a county borough, independent from the county council. Oxford City Council meets at the Town Hall on the street called St Aldate's in the city centre. The current building was completed in 1897, on a site which had been occupied by Oxford's guildhall since the 13th century.\nMost of Oxford is an unparished area, but there are four civil parishes within the city's boundaries: Blackbird Leys, Littlemore, Old Marston, and Risinghurst and Sandhills.\nEconomy.\nOxford's economy includes manufacturing, publishing and science-based industries as well as education, sports, entertainment, breweries, research and tourism.\nCar production.\nOxford has been an important centre of motor manufacturing since Morris Motors was established in the city in 1910. The principal production site for Mini cars, owned by BMW since 2000, is in the Oxford suburb of Cowley. The plant, which survived the turbulent years of British Leyland in the 1970s and was threatened with closure in the early 1990s, also produced cars under the Austin and Rover brands following the demise of the Morris brand in 1984, although the last Morris-badged car was produced there in 1982.\nPublishing.\nOxford University Press, a department of the University of Oxford, is based in the city, although it no longer operates its own paper mill and printing house. The city is also home to the UK operations of Wiley-Blackwell, Elsevier and several smaller publishing houses.\nScience and technology.\nThe presence of the university has given rise to many science and technology based businesses, including Oxford Instruments, Research Machines and Sophos. The university established Isis Innovation in 1987 to promote technology transfer. The Oxford Science Park was established in 1990, and the Begbroke Science Park, owned by the university, lies north of the city. Oxford increasingly has a reputation for being a centre of digital innovation, as epitomized by Digital Oxford. Several startups including Passle, Brainomix, Labstep, and more, are based in Oxford.\nEducation.\nThe presence of the university has also led to Oxford becoming a centre for the education industry. Companies often draw their teaching staff from the pool of Oxford University students and graduates, and, especially for EFL education, use their Oxford location as a selling point.\nTourism.\nOxford has numerous major tourist attractions, many belonging to the university and colleges. As well as several famous institutions, the town centre is home to Carfax Tower and the University Church of St Mary the Virgin, both of which offer views over the spires of the city. Many tourists shop at the historic Covered Market. In the summer, punting on the Thames/Isis and the Cherwell is a common practice. As well as being a major draw for tourists (9.1\u00a0million in 2008, similar in 2009), Oxford city centre has many shops, several theatres and an ice rink.\nRetail.\nThere are two small shopping malls in the city centre: the Clarendon Centre and the Westgate Oxford. The Westgate Centre is named for the original West Gate in the city wall, and is at the west end of Queen Street. A major redevelopment and expansion to , with a new John Lewis department store and a number of new homes, was completed in October 2017. Blackwell's Bookshop is a bookshop which claims the largest single room devoted to book sales in the whole of Europe, the Norrington Room (10,000 sq ft).\nBrewing.\nThere is a long history of brewing in Oxford. Several of the colleges had private breweries, one of which, at Brasenose, survived until 1889. In the 16th century brewing and malting appear to have been the most popular trades in the city. There were breweries in Brewer Street and Paradise Street, near the Castle Mill Stream. The rapid expansion of Oxford and the development of its railway links after the 1840s facilitated expansion of the brewing trade. As well as expanding the market for Oxford's brewers, railways enabled brewers further from the city to compete for a share of its market. By 1874 there were nine breweries in Oxford and 13 brewers' agents in Oxford shipping beer in from elsewhere. The nine breweries were: Flowers &amp; Co in Cowley Road, Hall's St Giles Brewery, Hall's Swan Brewery (see below), Hanley's City Brewery in Queen Street, Le Mills's Brewery in St. Ebbes, Morrell's Lion Brewery in St Thomas Street (see below), Simonds's Brewery in Queen Street, Weaving's Eagle Brewery (by 1869 the Eagle Steam Brewery) in Park End Street and Wootten and Cole's St. Clement's Brewery.\nThe Swan's Nest Brewery, later the Swan Brewery, was established by the early 18th century in Paradise Street, and in 1795 was acquired by William Hall. The brewery became known as Hall's Oxford Brewery, which acquired other local breweries. Hall's Brewery was acquired by Samuel Allsopp &amp; Sons in 1926, after which it ceased brewing in Oxford. Morrell's was founded in 1743 by Richard Tawney. He formed a partnership in 1782 with Mark and James Morrell, who eventually became the owners. After an acrimonious family dispute the brewery was closed in 1998. The beer brand names were taken over by the Thomas Hardy Burtonwood brewery, while the 132 tied pubs were bought by Michael Cannon, owner of the American hamburger chain Fuddruckers, through a new company, Morrells of Oxford. The new owners sold most of the pubs on to Greene King in 2002. The Lion Brewery was converted into luxury apartments in 2002. Oxford's first legal distillery, the Oxford Artisan Distillery, was established in 2017 in historic farm buildings at the top of South Park.\nBellfounding.\nThe Taylor family of Loughborough had a bell-foundry in Oxford between 1786 and 1854.\nBuildings.\nThis is a small selection of the many notable buildings in Oxford.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nParks and nature walks.\nOxford is a very green city, with several parks and nature walks within the ring road, as well as several sites just outside the ring road. In total, 28 nature reserves exist within or just outside the ring road, including:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nDemographics.\nAs of 2023, Oxford\u2019s population was approximately 165,200. More than a third (35%) of Oxford's residents were born outside of the United Kingdom.\nOxford\u2019s population is notably young and diverse. About 30% of residents are ages 18\u201329, roughly double the national average for that age bracket. This is largely because of the substantial student population: about 35,000 students are enrolled for full-time studies in the city's two universities.\nTransport.\nAir.\nIn addition to the larger airports in the region, Oxford is served by nearby Oxford Airport, in Kidlington. The airport is also home to CAE Oxford Aviation Academy and Airways Aviation airline pilot flight training centres, and several private jet companies. The airport is also home to Airbus Helicopters UK headquarters.\nRail\u2013airport links.\nDirect trains run from Oxford railway station to London Paddington where there is an interchange with the Heathrow Express. Passengers can change at Reading for connecting trains to Gatwick Airport or the RailAir coach link to Heathrow. CrossCountry runs direct services to Birmingham International, as well as to Southampton Airport Parkway further afield.\nBuses.\nBus services in Oxford and its suburbs are run by the Oxford Bus Company and Stagecoach West as well as other operators including Arriva Shires &amp; Essex and Thames Travel. Oxford has one of the largest urban park and ride networks in the United Kingdom. Its five sites, at Pear Tree, Redbridge, Seacourt, Thornhill, Water Eaton and Oxford Parkway have a combined capacity of 4,930 car parking spaces, served by 20 Oxford Bus Company double decker buses with a combined capacity of 1,695 seats. Hybrid buses began to be used in Oxford in 2010, and their usage has been expanded. In 2014 Oxford Bus introduced a fleet of 20 new buses with flywheel energy storage on the services it operates under contract for Oxford Brookes University. Most buses in the city now use a smartcard to pay for journeys and have free WiFi installed.\nCoach.\nThe Oxford to London coach route offers a frequent coach service to London. The Oxford Tube is operated by Stagecoach West and the Oxford Bus Company runs the Airline services to Heathrow and Gatwick airports. There is a bus station at Gloucester Green, used mainly by the London and airport buses, National Express coaches and other long-distance buses including route X5 to Milton Keynes and Bedford and Stagecoach Gold route S6.\nCycling.\nAmong cities in England and Wales, Oxford has the second highest percentage of people cycling to work.\nRail.\nOxford railway station is half a mile (about 1\u00a0km) west of the city centre. The station is served by trains from three train operating companies. Great Western Railway (GWR) manage the station and run direct services to London Paddington and Worcester, Malvern and Hereford. CrossCountry trains call at Oxford on their Bournemouth\u2014Manchester route via Southampton, Reading and Birmingham. Chiltern Railways operates a service to London Marylebone and will operate the East West Rail trains to Milton Keynes when these start running in 2025.\nOxford has had three main railway stations. The first was opened at Grandpont in 1844, but this was a terminus, inconvenient for routes to the north; it was replaced by the present station on Park End Street in 1852 with the opening of the Birmingham route. Another terminus, at Rewley Road, was opened in 1851 to serve the Bletchley route; this station closed in 1951. There have also been a number of local railway stations, all of which are now closed. A fourth station, Oxford Parkway, is just outside the city, at the park and ride site near Kidlington. The present railway station opened in 1852.\nOxford is the junction for a short branch line to Bicester, a remnant of the former Varsity line to Cambridge. This Oxford\u2013Bicester line was upgraded to running during an 18-month closure in 2014/2015 \u2013 and is scheduled to be extended to form the planned East West Rail line to Milton Keynes. East West Rail is proposed to continue through Bletchley (for Milton Keynes Central) to Bedford, Cambridge, and ultimately Ipswich and Norwich, thus providing alternative route to East Anglia without needing to travel via, and connect between, the London mainline terminals.\nChiltern Railways operates from Oxford to London Marylebone via Bicester Village, having sponsored the building of about 400 metres of new track between Bicester Village and the Chiltern Main Line southwards in 2014. The route serves High Wycombe and London Marylebone, avoiding London Paddington and Didcot Parkway.\nIn 1844, the Great Western Railway linked Oxford with London Paddington via Didcot and Reading; in 1851, the London &amp; North Western Railway opened its own route from Oxford to London Euston, via Bicester, Bletchley and Watford; and in 1864 a third route, also to Paddington, running via Thame, High Wycombe and Maidenhead, was provided; this was shortened in 1906 by the opening of a direct route between High Wycombe and London Paddington by way of Denham. The distance from Oxford to London was via Bletchley; via Didcot and Reading; via Thame and Maidenhead; and via Denham.\nOnly the original (Didcot) route is still in use for its full length, portions of the others remain. There were also routes to the north and west. The line to Banbury was opened in 1850, and was extended to Birmingham Snow Hill in 1852; a route to Worcester opened in 1853. A branch to Witney was opened in 1862, which was extended to Fairford in 1873. The line to Witney and Fairford closed in 1962, but the others remain open.\nRiver and canal.\nOxford was historically an important port on the River Thames, with this section of the river being called the Isis; the Oxford-Burcot Commission in the 17th century attempted to improve navigation to Oxford. Iffley Lock and Osney Lock lie within the bounds of the city. In the 18th century the Oxford Canal was built to connect Oxford with the Midlands. Commercial traffic has given way to recreational use of the river and canal. Oxford was the original base of Salters Steamers (founded in 1858), which was a leading racing-boatbuilder that played an important role in popularising pleasure boating on the Upper Thames. The firm runs a regular service from Folly Bridge downstream to Abingdon and beyond.\nRoads.\nOxford's central location on several transport routes means that it has long been a crossroads city with many coaching inns, although road traffic is now strongly discouraged, and largely prevented, from using the city centre. The Oxford Ring Road or A4142 (southern part) surrounds the city centre and close suburbs Marston, Iffley, Cowley and Headington; it consists of the A34 to the west, a 330-yard section of the A44, the A40 north and north-east, A4142/A423 to the east. It is a dual carriageway, except for a 330-yard section of the A40 where two residential service roads adjoin, and was completed in 1966.\nA roads.\nThe main roads to/from Oxford are:\nZero emission zone.\nOn 28 February 2022 a zero-emission pilot area became operational in Oxford city centre. Zero-emission vehicles can be used without incurring a charge but all petrol and diesel vehicles (including hybrids) incur a daily charge if they are driven in the zone between 7am and 7pm.\nA consultation on the introduction of a wider zero-emission zone is expected in the future, at a date to be confirmed.\nBus gates.\nOxford has eight bus gates, short sections of road where only buses and other authorised vehicles can pass.\nSix further bus gates are currently proposed. A council-led consultation on the traffic filters ended on 13 October 2022. On 29 November 2022, Oxfordshire County Council cabinet approved the introduction on a trial basis, for a minimum period of six months. The trial will begin after improvement works to Oxford railway station are complete, which is expected to be by October 2024. The additional bus gates have been controversial; Oxford University and Oxford Bus Company support the proposals but more than 3,700 people have signed an online petition opposing the new traffic filters for Marston Ferry Road and Hollow Way, and hotelier Jeremy Mogford has argued they would be a mistake. In November 2022, Mogford announced that his hospitality group The Oxford Collection had joined up with Oxford Business Action Group (OBAG), Oxford High Street Association (OHSA), ROX (Backing Oxford Business), Reconnecting Oxford, Jericho Traders, and Summertown traders to launch a legal challenge to the new bus gates.\nMotorway.\nThe city is served by the M40 motorway, which connects London to Birmingham. The M40 approached Oxford in 1974, leading from London to Waterstock, where the A40 continued to Oxford. When the M40 extension to Birmingham was completed in January 1991, it curved sharply north, and a mile of the old motorway became a spur. The M40 comes no closer than away from the city centre, curving to pass to the east of Otmoor. The M40 meets the A34 to the north of Oxford.\nEducation.\nUniversities and colleges.\nThere are two universities in Oxford, the University of Oxford and Oxford Brookes University, as well as the specialist further and higher education institution Ruskin College that is part of the University of West London in Oxford. The Islamic Azad University also has a campus near Oxford. The University of Oxford is the oldest university in the English-speaking world, and one of the most prestigious higher education institutions of the world, averaging nine applications to every available place, and attracting 40% of its academic staff and 17% of undergraduates from overseas. In September 2016, it was ranked as the world's number one university, according to the \"Times Higher Education World University Rankings\". Oxford is renowned for its tutorial-based method of teaching.\nThe Bodleian Library.\nThe University of Oxford maintains the largest university library system in the United Kingdom, and, with over 11\u00a0million volumes housed on of shelving, the Bodleian group is the second-largest library in the United Kingdom, after the British Library. The Bodleian Library is a legal deposit library, which means that it is entitled to request a free copy of every book published in the United Kingdom. As such, its collection is growing at a rate of over three miles (five kilometres) of shelving every year.\nMedia.\nAs well as the BBC national radio stations, Oxford and the surrounding area has several local stations, including BBC Radio Oxford, Heart South, First FM (formerly Destiny 105), Greatest Hits Radio and Hits Radio Oxfordshire, along with Oxide: Oxford Student Radio (which went on terrestrial radio at 87.7\u00a0MHz FM in late May 2005). A local TV station, Six TV: The Oxford Channel, was also available but closed in April 2009; a service operated by That's TV, originally called That's Oxford (now That's Oxfordshire), took to the airwaves in 2015. The city is home to a BBC Television newsroom which produces an opt-out from the main \"South Today\" programme broadcast from Southampton.\nLocal papers include \"The Oxford Times\" (compact; weekly), its sister papers the \"Oxford Mail\" (tabloid; daily) and the \"Oxford Star\" (tabloid; free and delivered), and \"Oxford Journal\" (tabloid; weekly free pick-up). Oxford is also home to several advertising agencies. \"Daily Information\" (known locally as \"Daily Info\") is an event information and advertising news sheet which has been published since 1964 and now provides a connected website. \"Nightshift\" is a monthly local free magazine that has covered the Oxford music scene since 1991.\nCulture.\nMuseums and galleries.\nOxford is home to many museums, galleries, and collections, most of which are free of admission charges and are major tourist attractions. The majority are departments of the University of Oxford. The first of these to be established was the Ashmolean Museum, the world's first university museum, and the oldest museum in the UK. Its first building was erected in 1678\u20131683 to house a cabinet of curiosities given to the University of Oxford in 1677. The museum reopened in 2009 after a major redevelopment. It holds significant collections of art and archaeology, including works by Michelangelo, Leonardo da Vinci, Turner, and Picasso, as well as treasures such as the Scorpion Macehead, the Parian Marble and the Alfred Jewel. It also contains \"The Messiah\", a pristine Stradivarius violin, regarded by some as one of the finest examples in existence.\nThe University Museum of Natural History holds the university's zoological, entomological and geological specimens. It is housed in a large neo-Gothic building on Parks Road, in the university's Science Area. Among its collection are the skeletons of a \"Tyrannosaurus rex\" and \"Triceratops\", and the most complete remains of a dodo found anywhere in the world. It also hosts the Simonyi Professorship of the Public Understanding of Science, currently held by Marcus du Sautoy. Adjoining the Museum of Natural History is the Pitt Rivers Museum, founded in 1884, which displays the university's archaeological and anthropological collections, currently holding over 500,000 items. It recently built a new research annexe; its staff have been involved with the teaching of anthropology at Oxford since its foundation, when as part of his donation General Augustus Pitt Rivers stipulated that the university establish a lectureship in anthropology.\nThe Museum of the History of Science is housed on Broad Street in the world's oldest-surviving purpose-built museum building. It contains 15,000 artefacts, from antiquity to the 20th century, representing almost all aspects of the history of science. In the university's Faculty of Music on St Aldate's is the Bate Collection of Musical Instruments, a collection mostly of instruments from Western classical music, from the medieval period onwards. Christ Church Picture Gallery holds a collection of over 200 old master paintings. The university also has an archive at the Oxford University Press Museum. Other museums and galleries in Oxford include Modern Art Oxford, the Museum of Oxford, the Oxford Castle, Science Oxford and The Story Museum.\nArt.\nArt galleries in Oxford include the Ashmolean Museum, the Christ Church Picture Gallery, and Modern Art Oxford. William Turner (aka \"Turner of Oxford\", 1789\u20131862), was a watercolourist who painted landscapes in the Oxford area. The Oxford Art Society was established in 1891. The later watercolourist and draughtsman Ken Messer (1931\u20132018) has been dubbed \"The Oxford Artist\" by some, with his architectural paintings around the city. In 2018, \"The Oxford Art Book\" featured many contemporary local artists and their depictions of Oxford scenes. The annual Oxfordshire Artweeks is well-represented by artists in Oxford itself.\nMusic.\nHolywell Music Room is said to be the oldest purpose-built music room in Europe, and hence Britain's first concert hall. Tradition has it that George Frideric Handel performed there, though there is little evidence. Joseph Haydn was awarded an honorary doctorate by Oxford University in 1791, an event commemorated by three concerts of his music at the Sheldonian Theatre, directed by the composer and from which his Symphony No. 92 earned the nickname of the \"Oxford\" Symphony. Victorian composer Sir John Stainer was organist at Magdalen College and later Professor of Music at the university, and is buried in Holywell Cemetery.\nOxford, and its surrounding towns and villages, have produced many successful bands and musicians in the field of popular music. The most notable Oxford act is Radiohead, who all met at nearby Abingdon School, though other well known local bands include Supergrass, Ride, Mr Big, Swervedriver, Lab 4, Talulah Gosh, the Candyskins, Medal, the Egg, Unbelievable Truth, Hurricane No. 1, Crackout, Goldrush and more recently, South Arcade, Young Knives, Foals, Glass Animals, Dive Dive and Stornoway. These and many other bands from over 30 years of the Oxford music scene's history feature in the documentary film \"Anyone Can Play Guitar?\". In 1997, Oxford played host to Radio 1's Sound City, with acts such as Travis, Bentley Rhythm Ace, Embrace, Spiritualized and DJ Shadow playing in various venues around the city including Oxford Brookes University. It is also home to several brass bands, notably the City of Oxford Silver Band, founded in 1887.\nTheatres and cinemas.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nLiterature and film.\nThe city hosts the annual Oxford Literary Festival each Spring. Well-known Oxford-based authors include:\nOxford appears in the following works:\n \"Dreaming spires\" of Oxford University viewed from South Park in the snow\nSport.\nFootball.\nThe city's leading football club, Oxford United, compete in the EFL Championship, the second level of the English football league system, following promotion in the 2023\u201324 season. They play at the Kassam Stadium (named after former chairman Firoz Kassam), which is near the Blackbird Leys housing estate and has been their home since relocation from the Manor Ground in 2001.\nOxford City F.C. is a semi-professional football club, separate from Oxford United, they play in the National League North, the sixth tier, two levels below the Football League in the pyramid.\nOxford City Nomads F.C. was a semi-professional football club that ground-shared with Oxford City and played in the Hellenic league.\nRowing.\nOxford University Boat Club compete in the world-famous Boat Race. Since 2007 the club has been based at a training facility and boathouse in Wallingford, south of Oxford, after the original boathouse burnt down in 1999. Oxford Brookes University also has an elite rowing club, and there are public clubs near Donnington Bridge, namely the City of Oxford Rowing Club, Falcon Boat Club and Oxford Academicals Rowing Club.\nCricket.\nOxford University Cricket Club is Oxford's most famous club with more than 300 Oxford players gaining international honours, including Colin Cowdrey, Douglas Jardine and Imran Khan. Oxfordshire County Cricket Club play in the Minor Counties League.\nAthletics.\nHeadington Road Runners are based at the OXSRAD sports facility in Marsh Lane (next to Oxford City F.C.) is Oxford's only road running club with an average annual membership exceeding 300. It was the club at which double Olympian Mara Yamauchi started her running career.\nRugby league.\nIn 2013, Oxford Rugby League entered rugby league's semi-professional Championship 1, the third tier of British rugby league. Oxford Cavaliers, who were formed in 1996, compete at the next level, the Conference League South. Oxford University (The Blues) and Oxford Brookes University (The Bulls) both compete in the rugby league BUCS university League.\nRugby union.\nOxford Harlequins RFC is the city's main rugby union team and currently plays in the South West Division. Oxford R.F.C is the oldest city team and currently plays in the Berks, Bucks and Oxon Championship. Their most famous player was arguably Michael James Parsons known as Jim Parsons who was capped by England. Oxford University RFC are the most famous club with more than 300 Oxford players gaining International honours; including Phil de Glanville, Joe Roff, Tyrone Howe, Anton Oliver, Simon Halliday, David Kirk and Rob Egerton. London Welsh RFC moved to the Kassam Stadium in 2012 to fulfil their Premiership entry criteria regarding stadium capacity. At the end of the 2015 season, following relegation, the club left Oxford.\nHockey.\nThere are several field hockey clubs based in Oxford. The Oxford Hockey Club (formed after a merger of City of Oxford HC and Rover Oxford HC in 2011) plays most of its home games on the pitch at Oxford Brookes University, Headington Campus and also uses the pitches at Headington Girls' School and Iffley Road. Oxford Hawks has two astroturf pitches at Banbury Road North, by Cutteslowe Park to the north of the city.\nIce hockey.\nOxford City Stars is the local Ice Hockey Team which plays at Oxford Ice Rink. There is a senior/adults' team and a junior/children's team. The Oxford University Ice Hockey Club was formed as an official University sports club in 1921, and traces its history back to a match played against Cambridge in St Moritz, Switzerland in 1885. The club currently competes in Checking Division 1 of the British Universities Ice Hockey Association.\nSpeedway and greyhound racing.\nOxford Cheetahs motorcycle speedway team has raced at Oxford Stadium in Cowley on and off since 1939. The Cheetahs competed in the Elite League and then the Conference League until 2007. They were Britain's most successful club in the late 1980s, becoming British League champions in 1985, 1986 and 1989. Four-times world champion Hans Nielsen was the club's most successful rider. Greyhound racing took place at the Oxford Stadium from 1939 until 2012 and hosted some of the sport's leading events such as the Pall Mall Stakes, The Cesarewitch and Trafalgar Cup. The stadium remains intact but unused after closing in 2012.\nAmerican football.\nOxford Saints is Oxford's senior American football team. One of the longest-running American football clubs in the UK, the Saints were founded in 1983 and have competed for over 40 years against other British teams across the country.\nGaelic football.\n\u00c9ire \u00d3g Oxford is Oxford's local Gaelic Football team. Originally founded as a hurling club by Irish immigrants in 1959, the club plays within the Hertfordshire league and championship, being the only Gaelic Football club within Oxfordshire. Hurling is no longer played by the club; however, \u00c9ire \u00d3g do contribute players to the Hertfordshire-wide amalgamated club, St Declans. Several well-known Irishmen have played for \u00c9ire \u00d3g, including Darragh Ennis of ITV's \"The Chase\", and Stephen Molumphy, former member of the Waterford county hurling team.\nReligion.\nOxford has been closely associated with the religious life of Britain. It was the birthplace of the Oxford Movement within Anglicanism, the Wesleyan Church, and, following the expulsion of theologian John Wycliffe from the University of Oxford in 1381, the Lollard movement. The city is also notable for its religious architecture, which includes Christ Church Cathedral, Oxford, the University Church of St Mary the Virgin, the Oxford Oratory, Oxford Central Mosque, and the Oxford Centre for Islamic Studies.\nInternational relations.\nOxford is twinned with:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nFreedom of the City.\nThe following people and military units have received the Freedom of the City of Oxford.\nIndividuals.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "22309", "revid": "7611264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22309", "title": "Oslo", "text": "Capital and most populous city of Norway\nOslo is the capital and most populous city of Norway. It constitutes both a county and a municipality. The municipality of Oslo had a population of in 2022, while the city's greater urban area had a population of 1,064,235 in 2022, and the metropolitan area had an estimated population of in 2021.\nDuring the Viking Age, the area was part of Viken. Oslo was founded as a city at the end of the Viking Age in 1040 under the name \u00c1nslo, and established as a \"kaupstad\" or trading place in 1048 by Harald Hardrada. The city was elevated to a bishopric in 1070 and a capital under Haakon V of Norway around the year 1300. Personal unions with Denmark from 1397 to 1523 and again from 1536 to 1814 reduced its influence. After being destroyed by a fire in 1624, during the reign of King Christian IV, a new city was built closer to Akershus Fortress and named Christiania in honour of the king. It became a municipality (\"formannskapsdistrikt\") on 1 January 1838. The city functioned as the capital of Norway during the 1814\u20131905 union between Sweden and Norway. From 1877, the city's name was spelled Kristiania in government usage, a spelling that was adopted by the municipal authorities in 1897, although 'Christiania' was also used. In 1925, the city, after incorporating the village retaining its former name, was renamed 'Oslo'. In 1948, Oslo merged with Aker, a municipality which surrounded the capital and which was 27 times larger, thus creating the modern, much larger Oslo municipality.\nOslo is the economic and governmental centre of Norway. The city is also a hub of Norwegian trade, banking, industry and shipping. It is an important centre for maritime industries and maritime trade in Europe. The city is home to many companies within the maritime sector, some of which are among the world's largest shipping companies, shipbrokers and maritime insurance brokers. Oslo is a pilot city of the Council of Europe and the European Commission intercultural cities programme.\nOslo is considered a global city and was ranked \"Beta World City\" in studies carried out by the Globalization and World Cities Study Group and Network in 2008. It was ranked number one in terms of quality of life among European large cities in the European Cities of the Future 2012 report by \"fDi\" magazine. A survey conducted by ECA International in 2011 placed Oslo as the second most expensive city in the world for living expenses after Tokyo. In 2013, Oslo tied with the Australian city of Melbourne as the fourth most expensive city in the world, according to the Economist Intelligence Unit (EIU)'s Worldwide Cost of Living study. Oslo was ranked as the 24th most liveable city in the world by Monocle magazine.\nOslo's population was increasing at record rates during the early 2000s, making it the fastest growing major city in Europe at the time. This growth stems for the most part from international immigration and related high birth rates, but also from intra-national migration. By 2010 the immigrant population in the city was growing somewhat faster than the Norwegian population, and in the city proper this had become more than 25% of the total population if the children of immigrant parents were included.\nUrban region.\nThe municipality of Oslo has a population of 717,710 as of 1 January 2024. The urban area extends far beyond the boundaries of the municipality into the surrounding county of Akershus (municipalities of Asker, B\u00e6rum, Lillestr\u00f8m, Enebakk, R\u00e6lingen, L\u00f8renskog, Nittedal, Gjerdrum, Nordre Follo); being, to a great degree suburbs of Oslo making up approximately 500,000 of the population of the greater Oslo region. The total population of this agglomeration was 1,546,706 in 2023. The city centre is situated at the end of the Oslofjord, from which point the city sprawls out in three distinct \"corridors\"\u2014inland north-eastwards, and southwards along both sides of the fjord\u2014which gives the urbanized area a shape reminiscent of an upside-down reclining \"Y\" (on maps, satellite pictures, or from high above the city).\nTo the north and east, wide forested hills (\"Marka\") rise above the city giving the location the shape of a giant amphitheatre. The urban municipality (\"bykommune\") of Oslo and county (\"fylke\") of Oslo are two parts of the same entity, making Oslo the only city in Norway where two administrative levels are integrated. Of Oslo's total area, is built-up and is agricultural. The open areas within the built-up zone amount to .\nThe city of Oslo was established as a municipality on 3 January 1838 (see formannskapsdistrikt). It was separated from the county of Akershus to become a county of its own in 1842. The rural municipality of Aker was merged with Oslo on 1 January 1948 (and simultaneously transferred from Akershus county to Oslo county). Furthermore, Oslo shares several important functions with Akershus county.\nIn addition is Marka (1,610 residents, 301.1\u00a0km2), that is administered by several boroughs; and Sentrum (1,471 residents, 1.8\u00a0km2) that is partially administered by St. Hanshaugen, and in part directly by the city council. As of 27 February 2020, there were 2,386 residents who were not allocated to a borough.\nThe nine municipalities directly included in the Urban area of Oslo.\nName and seal.\nAfter being destroyed by a fire in 1624, during the reign of King Christian IV, a new city was built closer to Akershus Fortress and named Christiania in the king's honour. The old site east of the Aker river was not abandoned, however, and the village of Oslo remained as a suburb outside the city gates. The suburb called Oslo was eventually included in the city proper. In 1925 the name of the suburb was transferred to the whole city, while the suburb was renamed \"Gamlebyen\", literally \"the Old town\", to avoid confusion.\nThe Old Town is an area within the administrative district Gamle Oslo. The previous names are reflected in street names like Oslo gate (Oslo street)\nand Oslo hospital.\nToponymy.\nThe origin of the name \"Oslo\" has been the subject of much debate. It is almost certainly derived from Old Norse and was\u2014in all probability\u2014originally the name of a large farm at Bj\u00f8rvika, while the meaning of that name is disputed. Modern linguists generally interpret the original \"\u00d3slo\", \"\u00c1slo\" or \"\u00c1nslo\" as either \"meadow at the foot of a hill\" or \"meadow consecrated to the Gods\", with both considered equally likely.\nErroneously, it was once assumed that \"Oslo\" meant \"the mouth of the Lo river\", a supposed previous name for the river Alna. Not only has no evidence been found of a river \"Lo\" predating the work where Peder Clauss\u00f8n Friis first proposed this etymology, but the very name is ungrammatical in Norwegian: the correct form would have been \"Loaros\" (cf. Nidaros). The name \"Lo\" is now believed to be a back-formation arrived at by Friis in support of his [idea about] etymology for \"Oslo\".\nSeal.\nOslo is one of very few cities in Norway, besides Bergen and T\u00f8nsberg, that does not have a formal coat of arms, but which uses a city seal instead. The seal of Oslo shows the city's patron saint, St. Hallvard, with his attributes, the millstone and arrows, with a naked woman at his feet. He is seated on a throne with lion decorations, which at the time was also commonly used by the Norwegian kings.\nOther names.\nOslo has various nicknames and names in other languages. The city is sometimes known as \"The Tiger City\" (), probably inspired by an 1870 poem by Bj\u00f8rnstjerne Bj\u00f8rnson which referenced then-Christiania in central Oslo. The nickname is mostly used by Norwegians from out of town, and rarely by people from the Oslo region.\nHistory.\nViking Age.\nDuring the Viking Age, the area that includes modern Oslo was located in Viken, the northernmost province of Denmark. Control over the area shifted between Danish and Norwegian kings in the Middle Ages, and Denmark continued to claim the area until 1241.\nAccording to the Norse sagas, Oslo was founded around 1049 by Harald Hardrada. Recent archaeological research, however, uncovered Christian burials which could be dated to prior to AD 1000, evidence of a preceding urban settlement. This called for the celebration of Oslo's millennium in 2000 rather than 2049.\n1000\u20131600.\nUnder the reign of Olaf III of Norway (1067-1093), Oslo became a cultural centre for Eastern Norway. Hallvard Vebj\u00f8rnsson became the city's patron saint and is depicted on the city's seal.\nIn 1174, Hoved\u00f8ya Abbey was built. The churches and abbeys became major owners of large tracts of land, which proved important for the city's economic development, especially before the Black Death.\nAt the end of the 12th century, Hanseatic League traders from Rostock moved into the city and gained major influence in the city.\nOn 25 July 1197, Sverre of Norway and his soldiers attacked Oslo from Hoved\u00f8ya.\nDuring the Middle Ages, Oslo reached new heights during the reign of Haakon V of Norway (1299\u20131319). He was the first king to reside permanently in the city, and it has been regarded as the capital city of Norway since his reign. He also started the construction of the Akershus Fortress and the Oslo Kongsg\u00e5rd.\nThe Black Death came to Norway in 1349 and, like other cities in Europe, the city suffered greatly. The churches' earnings from their land dropped so much that the Hanseatic traders dominated the city's foreign trade in the 15th century.\nIn 1380, Norway was the weaker part in a personal union with Denmark, and Oslo's role was reduced to that of provincial administrative centre, with the monarchs residing in Copenhagen.\n17th century.\nOver the years, fires destroyed significant parts of the city multiple times, as many of the city's buildings were built entirely of wood. After the fourteenth calamity, in 1624, which lasted for three days, Christian IV of Denmark decided that the old city should not be rebuilt again. His men built a network of roads on the other side of the bay in Akershagen near Akershus Castle. He demanded that all citizens move their shops and workplaces to the newly built city of \"Christiania\", named in his honour. The part of the city built starting in 1624 is now often called \"\" because of its orthogonal layout in regular, square blocks. Anatomig\u00e5rden is a historic timber framing house located on the north side of Christiania Torv; it was built in 1640.\nThe transformation of Christiania went slowly for the first hundred years. However, outside of the city at Vaterland, Gr\u00f8nland, and the old town of Oslo, a new, unmanaged part of the city arose populated by citizens of lower class status.\nThe last Black Death outbreak in Oslo occurred in 1654.\n18th century.\nIn the 18th century, after the Great Northern War, the city's economy boomed with shipbuilding and trade. The strong economy transformed Christiania into a trading port.\n19th century.\nThe Royal Frederick University (now the University of Oslo) was founded in 1811; the fact that it was founded this late reportedly had an adverse effect on the development of the nation.\nIn 1814 the former provincial town of Christiania became the capital of the independent Kingdom of Norway, when the union with Denmark was dissolved and replaced by a personal union with Sweden. Several state institutions were established and the city's role as a capital initiated a period of rapidly increasing population. The government of this new state needed buildings for its expanding administration and institutions. Several important buildings and landmarks were erected in the 19th century, including the Royal Palace (1825-1848), the Stock Exchange (1826-1828), the Bank of Norway (1828), the Storting (1861-1866), the National Theatre (1899), and several University buildings. Among the world-famous artists who lived here during this period were Henrik Ibsen and Knut Hamsun (the latter was awarded the Nobel Prize for literature).\nLarge areas of the surrounding Aker municipality were incorporated in 1839, 1859, and 1878. The 1859 expansion included Gr\u00fcnerl\u00f8kka, Gr\u00f8nland, and Oslo. At that time the area called \"Oslo\" (now \"Gamlebyen\" or Old Town) was a village or suburb outside the city borders east of Aker river. The population increased from approximately 10.000 in 1814 to 230.000 in 1900. In 1850, Christiania overtook Bergen and became the most populous city in the country. Christiania expanded its industry from 1840, most importantly around Akerselva. There was a spectacular building boom during the last decades of the 19th century, with many new apartment buildings and renewal of the city center, but the boom collapsed in 1899.\nIn 1877 the city was renamed \"Kristiania\".\n1900\u2013present.\nThe city and municipality used the name \"Kristiania\" until 1 January 1925 when the original name of \"Oslo\" was restored. This was because Norway became fully independent in 1905, and Norwegians argued that a name memorializing a Danish king (Christian IV of Denmark) was inappropriate as the name of the capital of their country.\nThe municipality developed new areas such as Ullev\u00e5l garden city (1918\u20131926) and Torshov (1917\u20131925). City Hall was constructed in the former slum area of Vika from 1931 to 1950. In 1948, Oslo merged with Aker, a municipality which surrounded the capital and was 27 times larger, thus creating the modern, vastly enlarged Oslo municipality. At the time, Aker was a mostly affluent, green suburban community, and the merger was unpopular in Aker. Other suburbs, such as Lambertseter, began to be developed in the 1950s. Aker Brygge was constructed on the site of the former shipyard, Akers Mekaniske Verksted, from 1982 to 1998.\nNorway was invaded by Germany on 9 April 1940. Efforts to stop the invasion, most notably the sinking of the \"Bl\u00fccher\", delayed the occupation of Oslo for several hours which allowed King Haakon to escape the city. Oslo remained occupied throughout the war until Germany capitulated in 1945. During this time, the occupying troops were harried by saboteurs in acts of resistance. On 31 December 1944, allied bombers missed their intended target and hit a tram, resulting in 79 civilian deaths.\nDuring the 2011 Norway attacks, Oslo was hit by a bomb blast that ripped through the Government Quarter, damaging several buildings including the building that houses the Office of the Prime Minister. Eight people died in the bomb attack.\nOn 25 June 2022, two people were killed and 21 others injured in a mass shooting. An Iranian-born Norwegian citizen was subsequently charged with \"aggravated terrorism\".\nThe city has continued to expand. For a few years, new large scale housing areas and infrastructure projects are being built and planned across the city, notably in Hasle, Helsfyr,Bj\u00f8rvika, Nydalen and Sinsen, this is increasing the density in and around Ring 2 and Ring 3. The Fornebu line on the metro is under construction as of 2024, and further subway lines crossing the inner city are being planned.\nGeography.\nOslo occupies an arc of land at the northernmost end of the Oslofjord. The fjord, which is nearly bisected by the Nesodden peninsula opposite Oslo, lies to the south; in all other directions Oslo is surrounded by green hills and mountains. There are 40 islands within the city limits, the largest being Malm\u00f8ya (), and scores more around the Oslofjord. Oslo has 343 lakes, the largest being Maridalsvannet (). This is also a main source of drinking water for large parts of Oslo.\nAlthough Eastern Norway has a number of rivers, none of these flow into the ocean at Oslo. Instead Oslo has two smaller rivers: Akerselva (draining Maridalsvannet, which flows into the fjord in Bj\u00f8rvika), and Alna. The waterfalls in Akerselva gave power to some of the first modern industry of Norway in the 1840s. Later in the century, the river became the symbol of the stable and consistent economic and social divide of the city into an East End and a West End; the labourers' neighbourhoods lie on both sides of the river, and the divide in reality follows Uelands street a bit further west. River Alna flows through Groruddalen, Oslo's major suburb and industrial area. The highest point is Kirkeberget, at . Although the city's population is small compared to most European capitals, it occupies an unusually large land area, of which two-thirds are protected areas of forests, hills and lakes. Its boundaries encompass many parks and open areas, giving it an airy and green appearance. \nClimate.\nOslo has a humid continental climate (K\u00f6ppen climate classification: \"Dfb\") or, if the original K\u00f6ppen winter threshold is used, an oceanic climate (\"Cfb\") bordering on a humid continental climate in the 1991\u20132020 base period. Oslo has some of the warmest summers of Norway and fairly cold winters. Oslo receives a fair amount of precipitation during the year. The driest seasons are winter and spring, and the wettest are summer and autumn. Because of the city's northern latitude, daylight varies greatly, from more than 18 hours in midsummer, when it never gets completely dark at night (no darker than nautical twilight), to around 6 hours in midwinter.\nThe warmest month on record is July 1901 with mean , and the all-time high was also recorded in July 1901. The warmest month in more recent years is July 2018 with mean and average daily high . The record summer of 2018 also recorded the warmest May and May all-time high with on 30th, and 2018 was even the sunniest year on record with 2133 sunhours. On 27 July 2018, the temperature in Oslo rose to , the hottest recorded since 1937, when weather recordings started at Blindern. \nIn January, on average three out of four days are below freezing () and one out of four days is colder than (1961\u20131990). The coldest temperature recorded is , on 21 January 1841, while the coldest recorded at Blindern is in January 1941. The coldest temperature more recently was on 6 January 2024, where the temperature reached -23.1\u00a0\u00b0C (-17\u00a0\u00b0F) at Oslo-Blindern, which is the coldest measured temperature since January 1987. The coldest month on record is January 1941 and also January 1947 with mean and average daily low . The average date for the last overnight freeze (low below ) in spring is 23 April and average date for first freeze in autumn is 17 October giving a frost-free season of 176 days (1981\u20132010 average for Blindern). Oslo sits right on the border between hardiness zones 7a and 7b.\nOslo Gardermoen airport is located 35\u00a0km northeast of Oslo and has a humid continental climate (K\u00f6ppen climate classification: \"Dfb\") bordering on a subarctic climate (K\u00f6ppen climate classification: \"Dfc\").\nParks and recreation areas.\nOslo has many parks and green areas within the city core, as well as outside it.\nOslo (with neighbouring Sandvika-Asker) is built in a horseshoe shape on the shores of the Oslofjord and limited in most directions by hills and forests. As a result, any point within the city is relatively close to the forest. There are two major forests bordering the city: \"\u00d8stmarka\" (literally \"Eastern Forest\", on the eastern perimeter of the city), and the very large \"Nordmarka\" (literally \"Northern Forest\", stretching from the northern perimeter of the city deep into the hinterland).\nThe lake's altitude above sea level is 183 metres. The water is in a popular hiking area. Near the water itself, it is great for barbecues, swimming, beach volleyball and other activities.\nThe municipality operates eight public swimming pools. T\u00f8yenbadet is the largest indoor swimming facility in Oslo and one of the few pools in Norway offering a 50-metre main pool. Another in that size is the outdoor pool Frognerbadet.\nCityscape.\nOslo's cityscape is being redeveloped as a modern city with various access-points, an extensive metro-system with a new financial district and a cultural city. In 2008, an exhibition was held in London presenting the award-winning Oslo Opera House, the urban regeneration scheme of Oslo's seafront, Munch/Stenersen and the new Deichman Library. Most of the buildings in the city and in neighbouring communities are low in height with only the Plaza, Posthuset and the highrises at Bj\u00f8rvika considerably taller.\nArchitecture.\nOslo's architecture is very diverse. The architect Carl Frederik Stanley (1769\u20131805), who was educated in Copenhagen, spent some years in Norway around the turn of the 19th century. He undertook some minor commissions for wealthy patrons in and around Oslo, but his major achievement was the renovation of the Oslo Katedralskole, completed in 1800. He added a classical portico to the front of an older structure, and a semicircular auditorium that was sequestered by Parliament in 1814 as a temporary place to assemble, now preserved at Norsk Folkemuseum as a national monument.\nWhen Christiania was made capital of Norway in 1814, there were practically no buildings suitable for the many new government institutions. An ambitious building program was initiated, but realised very slowly because of economic constraints. The first major undertaking was the Royal Palace, designed by Hans Linstow and built between 1824 and 1848. Linstow also planned Karl Johans gate, the avenue connecting the Palace and the city, with a monumental square halfway to be surrounded by buildings for University, the Parliament (Storting) and other institutions. Only the university buildings were realised according to this plan. Christian Heinrich Grosch, one of the first architects educated completely within Norway, designed the original building for the Oslo Stock Exchange (1826\u20131828), the local branch of the Bank of Norway (1828), Christiania Theatre (1836\u20131837), and the first campus for the University of Oslo (1841\u20131856). For the university buildings, he sought the assistance of the German architect Karl Friedrich Schinkel. German architectural influence persisted in Norway, and many wooden buildings followed the principles of Neoclassicism. In Oslo, the German architect Alexis de Chateauneuf designed Trefoldighetskirken, the first neo-gothic church, completed by von Hanno in 1858.\nA number of landmark buildings, particularly in Oslo, were built in the Functionalist style (better known in the US and Britain as Modernist), the first being Skansen restaurant (1925\u20131927) by Lars Backer, demolished in 1970. Backer also designed the restaurant at Ekeberg, which opened in 1929. Kunstnernes Hus art gallery by Gudolf Blakstad and Herman Munthe-Kaas (1930) still shows the influence of the preceding classicist trend of the 1920s. The redevelopment of Oslo Airport (by the Aviaplan consortium) at Gardermoen, which opened in 1998, was Norway's largest construction project to date.\nPolitics and government.\nOslo is the capital of Norway, and as such is the seat of Norway's national government. Most government offices, including that of the Prime Minister, are gathered at \"Regjeringskvartalet\", a cluster of buildings close to the national Parliament, the Storting.\nConstituting both a municipality and a county of Norway, the city of Oslo is represented in the Storting by twenty members of parliament. The Conservative Party is the most represented party in Oslo with five members, the Labour Party has four, the Liberals and the Socialist Left Party have three each; the Green Party, the Red Party have two each and the Progress Party has one.\nThe combined municipality and county of Oslo has had a parliamentary system of government since 1986. The supreme authority of the city is the City Council (\"Bystyret\"), which has 59 seats. Representatives are popularly elected every four years. The city council has five standing committees, each having its own areas of responsibility.\nRecent elections.\nThe largest parties in the City Council after the 2015-elections were the Labour Party and the Conservatives, with 20 and 19 representatives respectively. After 2015, the city government was a coalition of the Labour Party, the Green Party and the Socialist Left. With support from the Red Party, the coalition maintained a workable majority in the city council. Following the local elections of 2019, the centre-left coalition remained in government until the 2023 local elections.\n2023 elections.\nAfter the Conservative Party's substantial gains in the 2023 election, they formed an alliance with the Liberal Party. With confidence and support from the Christian Democrats and the Progress Party, this alliance was able to form a government.\nThe Mayor of Oslo chairs the city council and is the highest ranking representative of the city. Because of Oslo's parliamentary system, its mayor fulfills different needs than that of many other cities. Therefore, one of the mayor's most important roles is that of the ceremonial head of the city and its public face, similar to that of the President of the Storting at the national level. The Mayor of Oslo is Anne Lindboe.\nThe Governing Mayor of Oslo is the head of the City government. The post was created with the implementation of parliamentarism in Oslo and is similar to the role of the prime minister at the national level. The governing mayor is Eirik Lae Solberg.\nEconomy.\nOslo has a varied and strong economy and was ranked number one among European large cities in economic potential in the fDi Magazine report European Cities of the Future 2012. It was ranked 2nd in the category of business friendliness, behind Amsterdam.\nOslo is an important centre of maritime knowledge in Europe and is home to approximately 1980 companies and 8,500 employees within the maritime sector. Some of them are the world's largest shipping companies, shipbrokers, and insurance brokers. Det Norske Veritas, headquartered at H\u00f8vik outside Oslo, is one of the three major maritime classification societies in the world, with 16.5% of the world fleet to class in its register. The city's port is the largest general cargo port in the country and its leading passenger gateway. Close to 6,000 ships dock at the Port of Oslo annually with a total of 6 million tonnes of cargo and over five million passengers.\nThe GDP of Oslo totaled \u20ac64\u00a0billion (\u20ac96,000 per capita) in 2016, which amounted to 20% of the national GDP. This compares with NOK253\u00a0billion (\u20ac23 billion) in 1995 (adjusting for 2016 inflation). The metropolitan area, bar Moss and Drammen, contributed 25% of the national GDP in 2003 and was also responsible for more than one quarter of tax revenues. In comparison, total tax revenues from the oil and gas industry on the Norwegian Continental Shelf amounted to about 16%.\nOslo is one of the most expensive cities in the world. As of 2006[ [update]], it is ranked tenth according to the Worldwide Cost of Living Survey provided by Mercer Human Resource Consulting and first according to the Economist Intelligence Unit (EIU). The reason for this discrepancy is that the EIU omits certain factors from its final index calculation, most notably housing. In the 2015 update of the EIU's Worldwide Cost of Living survey, Oslo now ranks as the third most expensive city in the world. Although Oslo does have the most expensive housing market in Norway, it is comparably cheaper than other cities on the list in that regard. Meanwhile, prices on goods and services remain some of the highest of any city. Oslo hosts 2654 of the largest companies in Norway. Within the ranking of Europe's largest cities ordered by their number of companies Oslo is in fifth position. A whole group of oil and gas companies is situated in Oslo.\nAccording to a report compiled by Swiss bank UBS in the month of August 2006, Oslo and London were the world's most expensive cities.\nEnvironment and decarbonization.\nOslo is a compact city. It is easy to move around by public transportation and rentable city bikes accessible to all in many places in the city centre. In 2003, Oslo received The European Sustainable City Award and in 2007 Reader's Digest ranked Oslo as number two on a list of the world's greenest, most livable cities.\nThe City of Oslo has set the goal of becoming a low carbon city, and reducing greenhouse gas emissions 95% from 1990 levels by 2030. The climate action plan for the Port of Oslo includes implementing a low-carbon contracting process, and installing shore power for vessels which are docked.\nBy October 2022, Oslo had an extensive network of bicycle lanes and tram lines, most of its ferry boats had been electrified, and the city was \"on course to become the first capital city in the world with an all-electric public transport system\", including e-buses.\nEducation.\nInstitutions of higher education.\nThe level of education and productivity in the workforce is high in Norway. Nearly half of those with education at tertiary level in Norway live in the Oslo region, placing it among Europe's top three regions in relation to education.\nIn 2008, the total workforce in the greater Oslo region (5 counties) numbered 1,020,000 people. The greater Oslo region has several higher educational institutions and is home to more than 73,000 students. The University of Oslo is the largest institution for higher education in Norway with 27,400 students and 7,028 employees in total.\nCulture.\nOslo has a large and varied number of , which include several buildings containing artwork from Edvard Munch and various other international artists but also several Norwegian artists. Several world-famous writers have either lived or been born in Oslo. Examples are Knut Hamsun and Henrik Ibsen. The government has recently invested large amounts of money in cultural installations, facilities, buildings and festivals in the City of Oslo. Bygd\u00f8y, outside the city centre is the centre for history and the Norwegian Vikings' history. The area contains many parks and seasites and many museums. Examples are the Fram Museum, Vikingskiphuset and the Kon-Tiki Museum. Oslo hosts the annual Oslo Freedom Forum, a conference described by \"The Economist\" as \"on its way to becoming a human-rights equivalent of the Davos economic forum.\" Oslo is also known for giving out the Nobel Peace Prize every year.\nFood.\nGr\u00f8nland, the central areas around Youngstorget and Torggata, Karl Johans gate (the main pedestrian thoroughfare), Aker Brygge and Tjuvholmen, S\u00f8renga, and the boroughs of Frogner, Majorstuen, St. Hanshaugen / Bislett, and Gr\u00fcnerl\u00f8kka all have a high concentration of cafes and restaurants. There are several food markets, the largest being Mathallen Food Hall at Vulkan with more than 30 specialty shops, caf\u00e9s, and eateries.\nAs of March 2018 six Oslo restaurants were mentioned in the Michelin Guide. Maaemo is the only Norwegian restaurant ever to have been awarded three Michelin stars. Statholdergaarden, Kontrast, and Galt each have one star. Only two restaurants in Oslo have a BIB gourmand mention: Restaurant Eik and Smalhans.\nDue to its proximity to the North Sea, fish and seafood are a staple component of cuisine in Oslo. Many restaurants also serve game meat year round.\nMuseums, galleries.\nOslo houses several major museums and galleries. The Munch Museum contains \"The Scream\" and other works by Edvard Munch, who donated all his work to the city after his death. The city council is planning a new Munch Museum which is most likely to be built in Bj\u00f8rvika, in the southeast of the city. The museum will be named Munch/Stenersen. 50 different museums are located around the city.\nFolkemuseet is located on the Bygd\u00f8y peninsula and is dedicated to Folk art, Folk Dress, Sami culture and the viking culture. The outdoor museum contains 155 authentic old buildings from all parts of Norway, including a Stave Church.\nThe Vigeland Museum located in the large Frogner Park, is free to access and contains over 212 sculptures by Gustav Vigeland including an obelisk and the Wheel of Life.\nAnother popular sculpture is Sinnataggen, a baby boy stamping his foot in fury. This statue is very well known as an icon in the city. There is also a newer landscaped sculpture park, Ekebergparken Sculpture Park, with works by Norwegian and international artists such as Salvador Dal\u00ed.\nThe Viking Ship Museum features three Viking ships found at Oseberg, Gokstad and Tune and several other unique items from the Viking Age. The museum is currently closed for renovation, but will open again in 2026. The new museum will be called Museum of the Viking Age, and has plans to feature more viking items than at the old location.\nThe Oslo City Museum holds a permanent exhibition about the people in Oslo and the history of the city.\nThe Kon-Tiki Museum houses Thor Heyerdahl's Kon-tiki and Ra II.\nThe Fram Museum features items from arctic and antarctic expeditions, including the wooden ship Fram used by Fritjof Nansen and Roald Amundsen during their expeditions.\nThe National Museum holds and preserves, exhibits and promotes public knowledge about Norway's most extensive collection of art. The museum shows permanent exhibitions of works from its own collections but also temporary exhibitions that incorporate work loaned from elsewhere. The National Museums exhibition avenues are the National Gallery, the Museum of Contemporary Art, the National Museum, the Museum of Decorative Arts and the National Museum of Architecture. A new National Museum in Oslo will open in 2020 located at Vestbanen behind the Nobel Peace Center.\nThe Nobel Peace Center is an independent organisation opened on 11 June 2005 by the King Harald V as part of the celebrations to mark Norway's centenary as an independent country. The building houses a permanent exhibition, expanding every year when a new Nobel Peace Prize winner is announced, containing information of every winner in history. The building is mainly used as a communication centre.\nMusic and events.\nMany festivals are held in Oslo, such as Oslo Jazz festival, a six-day jazz festival which has been held annually in August for the past 25 years. Oslo's biggest rock festival is \u00d8yafestivalen or simply \"\u00d8ya\". It draws about 60,000 people to the T\u00f8yen Park east in Oslo and lasts for four days.\nThe Oslo International Church Music Festival has been held annually since 2000. The Oslo World Music Festival showcases people who are stars in their own country but strangers in Norway. The Oslo Chamber Music Festival is held in August every year and world-class chamber musicians and soloists gather in Oslo to perform at this festival. The Norwegian Wood Rock Festival is held every year in June in Oslo.\nThe Nobel Peace Prize Ceremony is headed by the Institute; the award ceremony is held annually in The City Hall on 10 December. Even though Sami land is far away from the capital, the Norwegian Museum of Cultural History marks the Sami National Day with a series of activities and entertainment.\nThe World Cup Biathlon in Holmenkollen is held every year and here male and female competitors compete against each other in Sprint, Pursuit and Mass Start disciplines.\nOther examples of annual events in Oslo are Desucon, a convention focusing on Japanese culture and F\u00e6rderseilasen, the world's largest overnight regatta with more than 1100 boats taking part every year.\nRikard Nordraak, composer of the national anthem of Norway, was born in Oslo in 1842.\nNorway's principal orchestra is the Oslo Philharmonic, based at the Oslo Concert Hall since 1977. Although it was founded in 1919, the Oslo Philharmonic can trace its roots to the founding of the \"Christiania Musikerforening\" (Christiania Musicians Society) by Edvard Grieg and Johan Svendsen in 1879.\nOslo has hosted the Eurovision Song Contest twice, in 1996 and 2010.\nPerforming arts.\nOslo houses over 20 theatres, such as the Norwegian Theatre and the National Theatre located at Karl Johan Street. The National Theatre is the largest theatre in Norway and is situated between the royal palace and the parliament building, Stortinget.\nThe names of Ludvig Holberg, Henrik Ibsen and Bj\u00f8rnstjerne Bj\u00f8rnson are engraved on the fa\u00e7ade of the building over the main entrance. This theatre represents the actors and play-writers of the country but the songwriters, singers and dancers are represented in the form of a newly opened Oslo Opera House, situated in Bj\u00f8rvika. The Opera was opened in 2008 and is a national landmark, designed by the Norwegian architectural firm, Sn\u00f8hetta. There are two houses, together containing over 2000 seats. The building cost 500 million euro to build and took five years to build and is known for being the first Opera House in the world to let people walk on the roof of the building. The foyer and the roof are also used for concerts as well as the three stages.\nLiterature.\nMost great Norwegian authors have lived in Oslo for some period in their life. For instance, Nobel Prize-winning author Sigrid Undset grew up in Oslo, and described her life there in the autobiographical novel \"Elleve \u00e5r\" (1934; translated as \"The Longest Years\"; New York 1971).\nThe playwright Henrik Ibsen is probably the most famous Norwegian author. Ibsen wrote plays such as \"Hedda Gabler\", \"Peer Gynt\", \"A Doll's House\" and \"The Lady from the Sea\". The Ibsen Quotes project completed in 2008 is a work of art consisting of 69 Ibsen quotations in stainless steel lettering which have been set into the granite sidewalks of the city's central streets.\nIn recent years, novelists like Lars Saabye Christensen, Tove Nilsen, Suresh Chandra Shukla, Jo Nesb\u00f8 and Roy Jacobsen have described the city and its people in their novels. Early 20th-century literature from Oslo include poets Rudolf Nilsen and Andr\u00e9 Bjerke.\nMedia.\nThe newspapers , \"Finansavisen\", , \"Morgenbladet\", are published in Oslo. The main office of the national broadcasting company NRK is located at Marienlyst in Oslo, near Majorstuen, and NRK also has regional services via both radio and television. TVNorge (TVNorway) is also located in Oslo, while TV 2 (based in Bergen) and TV3 (based in London) operate branch offices in central Oslo. There is also a variety of specialty publications and smaller media companies. A number of magazines are produced in Oslo. The two dominant companies are Aller Media and Hjemmet Mortensen AB.\nSports.\nOslo is home to the Holmenkollen National Arena and Holmenkollbakken, the country's main biathlon and Nordic skiing venues. It hosts annual world cup tournaments, including the Holmenkollen Ski Festival. Oslo hosted the Biathlon World Championships in 1986, 1990, 2000, 2002 and 2016. FIS Nordic World Ski Championships have been hosted in 1930, 1966, 1982 and 2011, as well as the 1952 Winter Olympics.\nOslo is the home of several football clubs in the Norwegian league system. V\u00e5lerenga, Lyn and Skeid have won both the league and the cup, KFUM-Kameratene entered the top division in 2024. while Mercantile SFK and Frigg have won the cup.\nUllev\u00e5l Stadion is the home arena for the Norway national team and the Football Cup Final. The stadium has previously hosted the finals of the UEFA Women's Championship in 1987 and 1997, and the 2002 UEFA European Under-19 Football Championship. R\u00f8a IL is Oslo's only team in the women's league, Toppserien. Each year, the international youth football tournament Norway Cup is held on Ekebergsletta and other places in the city.\nDue to the cold climate and proximity to major forests bordering the city, skiing is a popular recreational activity in Oslo. The Tryvann Ski Resort is the most used ski resort in Norway. The most successful ice hockey team in Norway, V\u00e5lerenga Ishockey, is based in Oslo. Manglerud Star is another Oslo-team who play in the top league.\nBislett Stadium is the city's main track and field venue, and hosts the annual Bislett Games, part of Diamond League. Bjerke Travbane is the main venue for harness racing in the country. Oslo Spektrum is used for large ice hockey and handball matches. Nordstrand HE and Oppsal IF plays in the women's GRUNDIGligaen in handball, while B\u00e6kkelaget HE plays in the men's league. Jordal Amfi, the home of the ice hockey team V\u00e5lerenga Ishockey, and the national team. The 1999 IIHF World Championship in ice hockey were held in Oslo, as have three Bandy World Championships, in 1961, 1977 and 1985. The UCI Road World Championships in bicycle road racing were hosted 1993.\nOslo is also home to the Oslo Pretenders Sportsklubb, a club that hosts a baseball, softball, basketball, and disc golf teams. The baseball team has won 21 Norwegian Cup Championships and 18 Norwegian Baseball League titles. They participate in the European Cup.\nOslo was bidding to host the 2022 Winter Olympics, but later withdrew on 2 October 2014.\nTourism.\nIn 2018 Oslo is named one of Lonely Planet's Top Ten Cities. The travel guide's best-selling yearbook Best in Travel has selected Oslo as one of the ten best cities in the world to visit in 2018, citing the Norwegian capital's \"innovative architecture and unmissable museums alongside cool bars, bistros and caf\u00e9s\".\nCrime.\nOslo is commonly regarded as one of the safest capitals in Europe. The Oslo Police District received reported crimes in 2020, and crime is generally on the decrease in the city. The category of reported crime that's decreasing the quickest in Oslo is property theft. 11.6% of all crimes in Norway are reported to be within Oslo's six central boroughs, as of 2020.\nPolice.\nOslo Police District is Norway's largest police district with over 2,300 employees. Over 1,700 of those are police officers, nearly 140 police lawyers and 500 civilian employees. Oslo Police District has five police stations located around the city at Gr\u00f8nland, Sentrum, Stovner, Majorstuen and Manglerud. The National Criminal Investigation Service is located in Oslo, which is a Norwegian special police division under the NMJP. PST is also located in the Oslo District. PST is a security agency which was established in 1936 and is one of the non-secret agencies in Norway.\nTransport.\nPublic transport.\nOslo has Norway's most extensive public transport system, managed by Ruter. This includes the five-line Oslo Metro, the world's most extensive metro per resident; the six-line Oslo Tramway; and the eight-line Oslo Commuter Rail. The tramway operates within the areas close to the city centre, while the metro, which runs underground through the city centre, operates to suburbs further away; this includes two lines that operate to B\u00e6rum, and the Ring Line which loops to areas north of the centre. Oslo is also covered by a bus network consisting of 52 city lines, as well as regional buses to the neighboring county of Akershus.\nOslo Central Station acts as the central hub, and offers rail services to most major cities in southern Norway as well as Stockholm and Gothenburg in Sweden. The Airport Express Train operates along the high-speed Gardermoen Line. The Drammen Line runs under the city centre in the Oslo Tunnel. Some of the city islands and the neighbouring municipality of Nesodden are connected by ferry. Daily cruiseferry services operate to Copenhagen and Frederikshavn in Denmark, and to Kiel in Germany.\nAirports.\nThe main airport serving Oslo is Gardermoen Airport, located in Ullensaker, from the city centre of Oslo. It acts as the main international gateway to Norway, and is, as of 2021, ranked as the 23rd busiest airport in Europe. Gardermoen is a hub for Scandinavian Airlines, Norwegian Air Shuttle and Wider\u00f8e. Oslo is also served by a secondary airport, Torp Airport, from the city, which serves some low-cost carriers.\nRoads and automobiles.\nMany of the motorways pass through the downtown and other parts of the city in tunnels. The construction of the roads is partially supported through a toll ring. The major motorways through Oslo are European Route E6 and E18. There are three ring roads in Oslo; the innermost 2 being city streets and the outermost, Ring 3, being an expressway.\nOslo has made an effort since the late 2000s in restricting private car use, as well promoting the use of electric vehicles above fossil-fueled vehicles. In 2018, Oslo banned all non-resident cars from its downtown areas. Oslo has been called the electric vehicle capital of the world, as 41% of all registered cars in the municipality are fully electric.\n In September 2021, the number of electric vehicles entering Oslo's toll ring was higher than the number of fossil-fueled vehicles. The high amount of electric vehicles in Oslo can be attributed to cheaper tolls, no vehicle import tax, no VAT, free parking, and access to bus lanes throughout the city.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe population of Oslo was by 2010 increasing at a record rate of nearly 2% annually (17% over the last 10 years), making it the fastest-growing Scandinavian capital. In 2015, according to Statistics Norway annual report, there were permanent residents in the Oslo municipality, of which resided in the city proper. There were also in the city's urban area and an estimated in the Greater Oslo Region, within of the city centre.\nAccording to the most recent census Oslo residents (70.4% of the population) were ethnically Norwegian, an increase of 6% since 2002 (). Oslo has the largest population of immigrants and Norwegians born to immigrant parents in Norway, both in relative and absolute figures. Of Oslo's inhabitants, were immigrants or born to immigrant parents, representing 30.4 percent of the capital's population. All suburbs in Oslo were above the national average of 14.1 percent. The suburbs with the highest proportions of people of immigrant origin were S\u00f8ndre Nordstrand, Stovner and Alna, where they formed around 50 percent of the population.\nPakistanis make up the single largest ethnic minority, followed by Poles, Somalis, and Swedes. Other large immigrant groups are people from Sri Lanka, Vietnam, Turkey, Morocco, Iraq &amp; Kurdistan region and Iran &amp; Kordestan province.\nIn 2013, 40% of Oslo's primary school pupils were registered as having a first language other than Norwegian or Sami. The western part of the city is predominantly ethnic Norwegian, with several schools having less than 5% pupils with an immigrant background. The eastern part of Oslo is more mixed, with some schools up to 97% of immigrant background. In the borough of Groruddalen in 2008 for instance, the ethnic Norwegian population decreased by 1,500, while the immigrant population increased by 1,600.\nAs of 2022, immigrants of non-Western origin and their children enumerated 164,824, and made up an estimated 24% of Oslo's population.\nImmigrants of Western origin and their children enumerated 71,858, and made up an estimated 10% of the city's population. Immigrants made up a total of 35% of Oslo's population in 2022.\nOslo has numerous religious communities. In 2019, 48.7% of the population were members of the Church of Norway, lower than the national average of 69.9%. Members of other Christian denominations make up 8.4% of the population. Islam was followed by 9.5% and Buddhism by 0.6% of the population. Adherents of other religions formed 1.1% of the population. Life stance communities, mainly the Norwegian Humanist Association, were represented by 2.8% of the population. 28.9% of the Oslo population were unaffiliated with any religion or life stance community.\nInternational relations.\nOslo is a pilot city of the Council of Europe and the European Commission's \"Intercultural cities\" programme, along with a number of other European cities.\nTwin towns \u2013 sister cities.\nOslo was formerly twinned with Madison, Tel Aviv and Vilnius, but has since abolished the concept of twin cities.\nCooperation agreements.\nAs of 2012, Oslo had cooperation agreements with:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nChristmas trees as gifts.\nOslo has a tradition of sending a Christmas tree every year to the cities of Washington, D.C.; New York City; London; Edinburgh; Rotterdam; Antwerp and Reykjav\u00edk. Since 1947, Oslo has sent a , 50 to 100-year-old spruce, as an expression of gratitude toward Britain for its support of Norway during World War II.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "22310", "revid": "28146993", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22310", "title": "Outing", "text": "Disclosing an LGBTQ person's identity without their consent\nOuting is the act of disclosing an LGBTQ person's sexual orientation or gender identity without their consent. It is often done for malicious reasons, either to instrumentalize homophobia, biphobia, and/or transphobia in order to discredit someone, or to combat homophobia, heterosexism, and/or cissexism by revealing that a prominent or respected individual is homosexual and/or transgender. Historical examples of outing include the Krupp affair, the Eulenburg affair, the R\u00f6hm scandal, George Michael's April 1998 arrest, Ricky Martin's 2000 interview with Barbara Walters, and the Larry Craig scandal.\nGenerally, outing someone in a personal context is thought to be unethical and tends to be frowned upon. When it comes to public figures, the ethics of outing are highly contested as it can often have a negative effect on the target's personal life or career. Some LGBTQ activists argue that gay individuals who oppose LGBTQ rights do not enjoy a right to privacy because of their perceived hypocrisy. In an attempt to pre-empt being outed, an LGBTQ public figure may decide to come out publicly first, although controlling the conditions under which one's LGBTQ identity is revealed is only one of the numerous motives for coming out.\nTerminology.\nIt is hard to pinpoint the first use of outing in the modern sense. In a 1982 issue of \"Harper's\", Taylor Branch predicted that \"outage\" would become a political tactic in which the closeted would find themselves trapped in a crossfire. The article \"Forcing Gays Out of the Closet\" by William A. Henry III in \"Time\" (January 29, 1990) introduced the term \"outing\" to the general public.\nHistory.\nThe Eulenburg affair of 1907\u20131909 was the first public outing scandal of the twentieth century. Left-wing journalists opposed to Kaiser Wilhelm II's policies outed a number of prominent members of his cabinet and inner circle \u2014 and by implication the Kaiser \u2014 beginning with Maximilian Harden's indictment of the aristocratic diplomat Prince Eulenburg. Harden's accusations incited other journalists to follow suit, including Adolf Brand, founder of \"Der Eigene\". Many activists of the first homosexual movement denounced outing as \"the way over corpses\". In 1928, Kurt Hiller argued that it would be permissible to out a member of a cabinet preparing an anti-homosexual law, arguing: \"Our solidarity with the homosexuals of all classes and political viewpoints extends very far; but it does not include traitors to their own cause.\"\nLeft-wing journalists outed Adolf Hitler's closest ally Ernst R\u00f6hm in 1931 and 1932. In response, Brand wrote, \"when someone\u00a0\u2014 as teacher, priest, representative, or statesman\u00a0\u2014 would like to set in the most damaging way the intimate love contacts of others under degrading control\u00a0\u2014 in that moment his own love-life also ceases to be a private matter and forfeits every claim to remain protected hence-forward from public scrutiny and suspicious oversight.\" Left-wing journalist Kurt Tucholsky disagreed, writing in \"Die Weltb\u00fchne\", \"We fight the scandalous \u00a7175, everywhere we can, therefore we must not join the choir of those among us who want to banish a man from society because he is homosexual.\"\nUnited States.\nIn the 1950s during the Lavender Scare, tabloid publications like \"Confidential\" emerged, specializing in the revelation of scandalous information about entertainment and political celebrities. Among the political figures targeted by the magazine were former Under Secretary of State Sumner Welles and Arthur H. Vandenberg Jr., who had briefly served as President Eisenhower's Appointments Secretary.\nOuting may be found to be libel by a court of law. For example, quite paradoxically, in 1957, American pianist Liberace successfully sued the \"Daily Mirror\" for merely insinuating that he was gay. The newspaper responded that columnist William Connor's words (written under his byline 'Cassandra') did not imply that Liberace was gay. Their defence contended that there was no libel as no accusation had been made, rather than arguing that the accusation was true. Following Liberace's death from an AIDS-related illness in 1987, the paper asked for the award to be refunded. In a 2011 interview, actress and close friend Betty White stated that Liberace was gay, and that she often served as a beard to counter rumors of the musician's homosexuality.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Rquote/styles.css\"/&gt;{ class=\"rquote pullquote floatright\" role=\"presentation\" style=\"display:table; border-collapse:collapse; border-style:none; float:right; margin:0.5em 0.75em; width:33%; \"\nAfter the Stonewall riots of 1969, gay-liberationists came out in the 1970s, crying out: \"Out of the closets, Into the streets!\"\nOliver Sipple, who helped save the life of United States President Gerald Ford during an assassination attempt, was outed by gay activists, most prominently Harvey Milk. The negative impact the outing had on Sipple's life later provoked opposition.\nSome political conservatives opposed to increased public acceptance of homosexuality engaged in outing in this period as well, with the goal of embarrassing or discrediting their ideological foes. Conservative commentator Dinesh D'Souza, for example, published the letters of gay fellow students at Dartmouth College in the campus newspaper he edited (\"The Dartmouth Review\") in 1981; a few years later, succeeding \"Review\" editor Laura Ingraham had a meeting of a campus gay organization secretly tape-recorded, then published a transcript along with attendees' names as part of an editorial denouncing the group as \"cheerleaders for latent campus sodomites.\"\nIn the 1980s, the AIDS pandemic led to the outing of several major entertainers, including Rock Hudson.\nOne of the first outings by an activist in the United States occurred in February 1989. Michael Petrelis, along with a few others, alleged that Mark Hatfield, a Republican Senator from Oregon, was gay. They did this because he supported homophobic legislation such as the Helms Amendment. At a fundraiser in a small town outside of Portland, the group stood up and outed him in front of the crowd. Petrelis later tried to make news by standing on the U.S. Capitol steps and reading the names of \"twelve men and women in politics and music who ... are secretly gay.\" Though the press showed up, no major news organization published the story. Potential libel suits deterred publishers.\nMichelangelo Signorile, an editor of \"OutWeek\", outed the recently deceased Malcolm Forbes in March 1990. His column \"Gossip Watch\" became a hot spot for outing the rich and famous. Both praised and lambasted for his behavior, he garnered responses to his actions as wide-ranging as \"one of the greater contemporary gay heroes,\" to \"revolting, infantile, cheap name-calling.\"\nOther people who have been outed include Fannie Flagg, Pete Williams, Chaz Bono, Richard Chamberlain, and Sherman Hemsley.\nIn 2004, gay rights activist Michael Rogers outed Edward Schrock, a Republican Congressman from Virginia. Rogers posted a story on his website alleging that Schrock used an interactive phone sex service to meet other men for sex. Schrock did not deny this, and announced on August 30, 2004, that he would not seek re-election. Rogers said that he outed Schrock to punish him for his hypocrisy in voting for the Marriage Protection Act and signing on as a co-sponsor of the Federal Marriage Amendment.\nNew Jersey Governor Jim McGreevey announced that he was a \"gay American\" in August 2004. McGreevey had become aware that he was about to be named in a sexual harassment suit by Golan Cipel, his former security advisor, with whom it was alleged McGreevey had a sexual relationship. McGreevey resigned, but unlike Schrock, McGreevey decided not to step out of public life. John McCain's Presidential Campaign removed images of Alabama Attorney General Troy King from its website after he was outed in 2008.\nSome activists argue that outing is appropriate and legitimate in some cases\u00a0\u2014 for example, if the individual is actively working against LGBTQ rights. United States Congressman Barney Frank argued during the 2006 Mark Foley scandal, \"I think there's a right to privacy. But the right to privacy should not be a right to hypocrisy. And people who want to demonize other people shouldn't then be able to go home and close the door and do it themselves.\"\n\"Outrage\" film.\nIn 2009, Kirby Dick's documentary \"Outrage\" argued that several American political figures have led closeted gay lives while supporting and endorsing legislation that is harmful to the gay community. The film was based on the work of Michael Rogers and BlogActive.com. The film focused particular attention on Idaho Senator Larry Craig, an outspoken opponent of gay rights who in 2007 pleaded guilty to disorderly conduct for soliciting sex from an undercover police officer in a public bathroom. \"Outrage\" featured interviews with several people who claim that Governor of Florida Charlie Crist has led a private gay life while publicly opposing gay marriage and gay adoption.\nOther politicians discussed in the film include former Virginia Representative Ed Schrock, California Representative David Dreier, former New York City mayor Ed Koch, and former Louisiana Representative Jim McCrery.\nThe film argues that the mass media is reluctant to discuss issues involving gay politicians despite the many comparable news stories about heterosexual politicians and scandals. \"Outrage\" describes this behavior as a form of institutionalized homophobia that has resulted in a tacit policy of self-censorship when reporting on these issues.\nMotives.\nGabriel Rotello, once editor of \"OutWeek\", explained outing as \"equalizing\", stating: \"what we have called 'outing' is a primarily journalistic movement to treat homosexuality as equal to heterosexuality in the media\".\nSignorile described OutWeek's aim as an awareness raiser of the presence of gay people and political issues. The goal would be that being gay and lesbian is not \"so utterly grotesque that it should never be discussed.\" (Signorile, p.\u00a078) Signorile posits that outing is not the airing of private details.\nRichard Mohr noted, \"Some people have compared outing to McCarthyism..such outing feeds gays to the wolves, who thereby are made stronger...But the sort of outing I have advocated does not invoke, mobilize, or ritualistically confirm anti-gay values; rather it cuts against them.\" Thus Mohr argues that outing is \"both permissible and an expected consequence of living morally.\"\nIn the context of Ali Fazeli Monfared's murder, Tara Far, a human rights investigator in Iran and Kuwait, has described outing as \"dangerous\" within societies where the LGBTQ community is not protected by law, or families that do not accept the individual. Shadi Amin described the military exemption card as a danger to Monfared in her petition to the Iranian government to remove the sexuality information.\nThere is no widely agreed definition of \"fair outing\". Warren Johansson and William Percy describe least four intermediate positions have been described to justify outing:\nAssessing to which degree the outer goes allows insight into the goal striven towards. Most outers target those who support decisions and further policy, both religious and secular, which discriminate against gay people while they themselves live a clandestine gay existence. A \"truism to people active in the gay movement [is] that the greatest impediments to homosexuals' progress often [are] not heterosexuals, but closeted homosexuals,\" said San Francisco journalist Randy Shilts.British activist Peter Tatchell says \"The lesbian and gay community has a right to defend itself against public figures who abuse their power and influence to support policies which inflict suffering on homosexuals.\" In 1994 Tatchell's activist group OutRage! alleged that fourteen bishops of the Church of England were homosexual or bisexual and named them, accusing them of hypocrisy for upholding the Church's policy of regarding homosexual acts as sinful while not observing this prohibition in their personal lives.\n\"Outing is queer self-defence,\" Tatchell said in a 1995 speech to the Lesbian and Gay Christian Movement conference. \"Lesbians and gay men have a right, and a duty, to expose hypocrites and homophobes. By not outing gay Bishops who support policies which harm homosexuals, we would be protecting those Bishops and thereby allowing them to continue to inflict suffering on members of our community. Collusion with hypocrisy and homophobia is not ethically defensible for Christians, or for anyone else.\"\nOuting as a form of political repression.\nBelarus.\nIn Belarus, forced outing has been used as a tool of political repression, especially following the 2020\u20132021 Belarusian protests. Individuals detained for their alleged political activity have been coerced into participating in so-called \"forced confession videos\", where they are made to disclose personal details under duress, including their sexual orientation.\nIn some instances, gay men were forced not only to out themselves on camera but also to reveal the names of their partners. These videos were disseminated through pro-government Telegram channels and, later, on state television. The outing was frequently combined with other forms of humiliation, including forced disclosures of psychiatric diagnoses, labeling individuals with opposition symbols like the white-red-white flag, and emphasizing stigmatized characteristics such as mental health status, body type, or social status.\nSuch actions have been condemned by human rights organizations as violations of privacy, human dignity, and international norms prohibiting inhuman or degrading treatment.\nImpact and effectiveness.\nSignorile argues that the outing of journalist Pete Williams \"and its aftermath did indeed make a big dent in the military's policy against gays. The publicity generated put the policy on the front burner in 1992, thrusting the issue into the presidential campaign,\" with every Democratic candidate and independent Ross Perot publicly promising to end the ban.\nOuting in the military.\nThe military forces of the world have differing approaches to the enlistment of homosexual and bisexual individuals. Some have open policies, others prohibit, and some are ambiguous. The armed forces of most developed countries have now removed policies excluding non-heterosexual individuals (with strict policies on sexual harassment).\nNations that permit gay people to serve openly in the military include 3 of the 5 permanent members of the UN Security Council (United States, United Kingdom and France), the Republic of China (Taiwan), Australia, Israel, Argentina, and all NATO members except Turkey.\nIn the United Kingdom the Ministry of Defence policy since the year 2000 is to allow gay men, lesbians and transgender personnel to serve openly, and discrimination on a sexual orientation basis is forbidden. It is also forbidden for someone to pressure LGBTQ people to come out.\nIn the United States lesbian, gay, and bisexual people are allowed to serve openly in the United States military. As of 2021, transgender individuals are allowed to serve openly, and to transition during their service. The Trump administration however has taken steps to exclude trans people from the military in 2025. Those attempts are currently being litigated in US courts.\nMilitary policy and legislation had previously entirely prohibited gay individuals from serving, and subsequently from serving openly, but these prohibitions were ended in September 2011 after the United States Congress voted to repeal the policy. The first time homosexuals were differentiated from non-homosexuals in the military literature was in revised army mobilization regulations in 1942. Additional policy revisions in 1944 and 1947 further codified the ban. Throughout the next few decades, homosexuals were routinely discharged, regardless of whether they had engaged in sexual conduct while serving. In response to the gay rights movements of the 1970s and 1980s, the Department of Defense issued a 1982 policy (DOD Directive 1332.14) stating that homosexuality was clearly incompatible with military service. Controversy over this policy created political pressure to amend the policy, with socially liberal efforts seeking a repeal of the ban and socially conservative groups wishing to reinforce it by statute.\nCriticism.\nOuting can be damaging or life-threatening to those with unsupportive families. In response to a North Carolina bill that could out children to parents under the school system, various mental health experts warned of the potential damage, which could be life-threatening.\nAfter several Moroccans were outed from using gay dating apps, the Human Rights Watch requested that the Moroccan government do more to protect their LGBTQ community, as many of them were facing abuse and discrimination.\nOuting is dangerous in various Islamic countries where the LGBTQ community faces discrimination or death from outings, resulting in many LGBTQ refugees to Western countries.\nRoger Rosenblatt argued in his January 1993 \"New York Times Magazine\" essay \"Who Killed Privacy?\" that, \"The practice of 'outing' homosexuals implies contradictorily that homosexuals have a right to private choice but not to private lives.\" In March 2002, singer Will Young revealed he was gay, pre-empting a tabloid newspaper (reportedly \"News of the World\") that was preparing to out him.\nChristine Jorgensen, Beth Elliott, Ren\u00e9e Richards, Sandy Stone, Billy Tipton, Alan L. Hart, April Ashley, Caroline Cossey (\"Tula\"), Jahna Steele, were outed as transgender by European or American media or, in the case of Billy Tipton, by his coroner. In many cases, being outed had an adverse effect on their personal lives and their careers.\nIn some cases well-known celebrities have been outed as transgender or intersex when no proof to substantiate the claims was presented, e.g., Jamie Lee Curtis.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
