{"id": "22625", "revid": "45366078", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22625", "title": "Organized crime", "text": "Structured criminal groups\nOrganized crime refers to transnational, national, or local groups of centralized enterprises that engage in illegal activities, most commonly for profit. While organized crime is generally considered a form of illegal business, some criminal organizations, such as terrorist groups, rebel groups, and separatists, are politically motivated. Many criminal organizations rely on fear or terror to achieve their goals and maintain control within their ranks. These groups may adopt tactics similar to those used by authoritarian regimes to maintain power. Some forms of organized crime exist simply to meet demand for illegal goods or to facilitate trade in products and services banned by the state, such as illegal drugs or firearms. In other cases, criminal organizations force people to do business with them, as when gangs extort protection money from shopkeepers. Street gangs may be classified as \"organized\" crime groups under broader definitions, or may develop sufficient discipline to be considered organized crime under stricter definitions.\nA criminal organization can also be referred to as an outfit, a gangster/gang, thug, crime family, mafia, mobster/mob, (crime) ring, or syndicate; the network, subculture, and community of criminals involved in organized crime may be referred to as the underworld or gangland. Sociologists sometimes specifically distinguish a \"mafia\" as a type of organized crime group that specializes in the supply of extra-legal protection and quasi-law enforcement. Academic studies of the original \"Mafia\", the Sicilian Mafia, as well as its American counterpart, generated an economic study of organized crime groups and exerted great influence on studies of the Russian mafia, the Indonesian preman, the Chinese triads, the Hong Kong triads, the Indian thuggee, and the Japanese yakuza.\nOther organizations\u2014including states, places of worship, militaries, police forces, and corporations\u2014may sometimes use organized-crime methods to conduct their activities, but their powers derive from their status as formal social institutions. There is a tendency to distinguish \"traditional\" organized crime such as gambling, loan sharking, drug-trafficking, prostitution, and fraud from certain other forms of crime that also usually involve organized or group criminal acts, such as white-collar crime, financial crimes, political crimes, war crimes, state crimes, and treason. This distinction is not always apparent and academics continue to debate the matter. For example, in failed states that can no longer perform basic functions such as education, security, or governance (usually due to fractious violence or to extreme poverty), organized crime, governance, and war sometimes complement each other. The term \"oligarchy\" has been used to describe democratic countries whose political, social, and economic institutions come under the control of a few families and business oligarchs that may be deemed or may devolve into organized crime groups in practice. By their very nature, kleptocracies, mafia states, narco-states or narcokleptocracies, and states with high levels of clientelism and political corruption are either heavily involved with organized crime or tend to foster organized crime within their own governments.\nIn the United States, the Organized Crime Control Act (1970) defines organized crime as \"[t]he unlawful activities of [...] a highly organized, disciplined association [...]\". Criminal activity as a structured process is referred to as racketeering. In the UK, police estimate that organized crime involves up to 38,000 people operating in 6,000 various groups. Historically, the largest organized crime force in the United States has been Cosa Nostra (Italian-American Mafia), but other transnational criminal organizations have also risen in prominence in recent decades. A 2012 article in a U.S. Department of Justice journal stated that: \"Since the end of the Cold War, organized crime groups from Russia, China, Italy, Nigeria, and Japan have increased their international presence and worldwide networks or have become involved in more transnational criminal activities. Most of the world's major international organized crime groups are present in the United States.\" The US Drug Enforcement Administration's 2017 \"National Drug Threat Assessment\" classified Mexican transnational criminal organizations (TCOs) as the \"greatest criminal drug threat to the United States,\" citing their dominance \"over large regions in Mexico used for the cultivation, production, importation, and transportation of illicit drugs\" and identifying the Sinaloa, Jalisco New Generation, Ju\u00e1rez, Gulf, Los Zetas, and Beltr\u00e1n-Leyva cartels as the six Mexican TCO with the greatest influence in drug trafficking to the United States. The United Nations Sustainable Development Goal 16 has a target to combat all forms of organized crime as part of the 2030 Agenda.\nIn some countries, football hooliganism has been linked to organized crime.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nModels of organized crime.\nVarious models have been proposed to describe the structure of criminal organizations.\nOrganizational.\nPatron\u2013client networks.\nPatron\u2013client networks are defined by fluid interactions. They produce crime groups that operate as smaller units within the overall network, and as such tend towards valuing significant others, familiarity of social and economic environments, or tradition. These networks are usually composed of:\nBureaucratic/corporate operations.\nBureaucratic/corporate organized crime groups are defined by the general rigidity of their internal structures. They focus more on how the operation works, succeeds, sustains itself or avoids retribution, they are generally typified by:\nHowever, this model of operation has some flaws:\nWhile bureaucratic operations emphasize business processes and strongly authoritarian hierarchies, these are based on enforcing power relationships rather than an overlying aim of protectionism, sustainability or growth.\nYouth and street gangs.\nAn estimate on youth street gangs in the United States provided by Hannigan, et al., marked an increase of 35% between 2002 and 2010. A distinctive gang culture underpins many, but not all, organized groups; this may develop through recruiting strategies, social learning processes in the corrective system experienced by youth, family or peer involvement in crime, and the coercive actions of criminal authority figures. The term \"street gang\" is commonly used interchangeably with \"youth gang,\" referring to neighborhood or street-based youth groups that meet \"gang\" criteria. Miller (1992) defines a street gang as \"a self-formed association of peers, united by mutual interests, with identifiable leadership and internal organization, who act collectively or as individuals to achieve specific purposes, including the conduct of illegal activity and control of a particular territory, facility, or enterprise.\" Some reasons youth join gangs include to feel accepted, attain status, and increase their self-esteem. A sense of unity brings together many of the youth gangs that lack the family aspect at home.\n\"Zones of transition\" are deteriorating neighborhoods with shifting populations. In such areas, conflict between groups, fighting, \"turf wars\", and theft promote solidarity and cohesion. Cohen (1955): working class teenagers joined gangs due to frustration of inability to achieve status and goals of the middle class; Cloward and Ohlin (1960): blocked opportunity, but unequal distribution of opportunities lead to creating different types of gangs (that is, some focused on robbery and property theft, some on fighting and conflict and some were retreatists focusing on drug taking); Spergel (1966) was one of the first criminologists to focus on \"evidence-based practice\" rather than intuition into gang life and culture. Participation in gang-related events during adolescence perpetuate a pattern of maltreatment on their own children years later. Klein (1971) like Spergel studied the effects on members of social workers' interventions. More interventions actually lead to greater gang participation and solidarity and bonds between members. Downes and Rock (1988) on Parker's analysis: strain theory applies, labeling theory (from experience with police and courts), control theory (involvement in trouble from early childhood and the eventual decision that the costs outweigh the benefits) and conflict theories. No ethnic group is more disposed to gang involvement than another, rather it is the status of being marginalized, alienated or rejected that makes some groups more vulnerable to gang formation, and this would also be accounted for in the effect of social exclusion, especially in terms of recruitment and retention. These may also be defined by age (typically youth) or peer group influences, and the permanence or consistency of their criminal activity. These groups also form their own symbolic identity or public representation which are recognizable by the community at large (include colors, symbols, patches, flags and tattoos).\nResearch has focused on whether the gangs have formal structures, clear hierarchies and leadership in comparison with adult groups, and whether they are rational in pursuit of their goals, though positions on structures, hierarchies and defined roles are conflicting. Some studied street gangs involved in drug dealing - finding that their structure and behavior had a degree of organizational rationality. Members saw themselves as organized criminals; gangs were formal-rational organizations, Strong organizational structures, well defined roles and rules that guided members' behavior. Also a specified and regular means of income (i.e., drugs). Padilla (1992) agreed with the two above. However some have found these to be loose rather than well-defined and lacking persistent focus, there was relatively low cohesion, few shared goals and little organizational structure. Shared norms, value and loyalties were low, structures \"chaotic\", little role differentiation or clear distribution of labor. Similarly, the use of violence does not conform to the principles behind protection rackets, political intimidation and drug trafficking activities employed by those adult groups. In many cases gang members graduate from youth gangs to highly developed OC groups, with some already in contact with such syndicates and through this we see a greater propensity for imitation. Gangs and traditional criminal organizations cannot be universally linked (Decker, 1998), however there are clear benefits to both the adult and youth organization through their association. In terms of structure, no single crime group is archetypal, though in most cases there are well-defined patterns of vertical integration (attempting to control all or part of the supply chain), as is the case in arms, sex and drug trafficking.\nIndividual difference.\nEntrepreneurial.\nThe entrepreneurial model looks at either the individual criminal or a smaller group of organized criminals, that capitalize off the more fluid 'group-association' of contemporary organized crime. This model conforms to social learning theory or differential association in that there are clear associations and interaction between criminals where knowledge may be shared, or values enforced, however, it is argued that rational choice is not represented in this. The choice to commit a certain act, or associate with other organized crime groups, may be seen as much more of an entrepreneurial decision - contributing to the continuation of a criminal enterprise, by maximizing those aspects that protect or support their own individual gain. In this context, the role of risk is also easily understandable, however it is debatable whether the underlying motivation should be seen as true entrepreneurship, or entrepreneurship as a product of some social disadvantage.\nThe criminal organization, much in the same way as one would assess pleasure and pain, weighs such factors as legal, social and economic risk to determine potential profit and loss from certain criminal activities. This decision-making process rises from the entrepreneurial efforts of the group's members, their motivations and the environments in which they work. Opportunism is also a key factor \u2013 the organized criminal or criminal group is likely to frequently reorder the criminal associations they maintain, the types of crimes they perpetrate, and how they function in the public arena (recruitment, reputation, etc.) in order to ensure efficiency, capitalization and protection of their interests.\nMulti-model approach.\nCulture and ethnicity provide an environment where trust and communication between criminals can be efficient and secure. This may ultimately lead to a competitive advantage for some groups; however, it is inaccurate to adopt this as the only determinant of classification in organized crime. This categorization includes the Sicilian Mafia, 'Ndrangheta, ethnic Chinese criminal groups, Japanese yakuza (or Boryokudan), Colombian drug trafficking groups, Nigerian organized crime groups, Corsican mafia, Korean criminal groups and Jamaican posses. From this perspective, organized crime is not a modern phenomenon - the construction of 17th and 18th century crime gangs fulfill all the present day criteria of criminal organizations (in opposition to the Alien Conspiracy Theory). These roamed the rural borderlands of central Europe embarking on many of the same illegal activities associated with today's crime organizations, with the exception of money laundering.\nWhen the French revolution created strong nation states, the criminal gangs moved to other poorly controlled regions like the Balkans and Southern Italy, where the seeds were sown for the Sicilian Mafia - the linchpin of organized crime in the New World.\nComputational approach.\nWhile most of the conceptual frameworks used to model organized crime emphasize the role of \"actors\" or \"activities\", computational approaches built on the foundations of data science and artificial intelligence are focusing on deriving new insights on organized crime from big data. For example, novel machine learning models have been applied to study and detect urban crime and online prostitution networks. Big data has also been used to develop online tools predicting the risk for an individual to be a victim of online sex trade or getting drawn into online sex work. In addition, data from Twitter and Google Trends have been used to study the public perceptions of organized crime.\nTypical activities.\nOrganized crime groups provide a range of illegal services and goods. Organized crime often victimizes businesses through the use of extortion or theft and fraud activities like hijacking cargo trucks and ships, robbing goods, committing bankruptcy fraud (also known as \"bust-out\"), insurance fraud or stock fraud (insider trading). Organized crime groups also victimize individuals by car theft (either for dismantling at \"chop shops\" or for export), art theft, Metal theft, bank robbery, burglary, jewelry and gems theft and heists, shoplifting, computer hacking, credit card fraud, economic espionage, embezzlement, identity theft, and securities fraud (\"pump and dump\" scam). Some organized crime groups defraud national, state, or local governments by bid rigging public projects, counterfeiting money, smuggling or manufacturing untaxed alcohol (rum-running) or cigarettes (buttlegging), and providing immigrant workers to avoid taxes.\nOrganized crime groups seek out corrupt public officials in executive, law enforcement, and judicial roles so that their criminal rackets and activities on the black market can avoid, or at least receive early warnings about, investigation and prosecution.\nActivities of organized crime include:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nOrganized crime groups also do a range of business and labor racketeering activities, such as skimming casinos, insider trading, setting up monopolies in industries such as garbage collecting, construction and cement pouring, bid rigging, getting \"no-show\" and \"no-work\" jobs, political corruption and bullying.\nViolence.\nAssault.\nViolent crime may be one of a criminal organization's tools used to achieve its goals, due to psycho-social factors (cultural conflict, aggression, rebellion against authority, access to illicit substances, counter-cultural dynamic), or it may simply be committed by individual criminals and the groups they form. Assaults are used for coercive measures, to \"rough up\" debtors, competition or recruits, in the commission of robberies, in connection to other property offenses, and as an expression of counter-cultural authority. Violence is normalized within criminal organizations (in direct opposition to mainstream society) and the locations they control.\nWhile the intensity of violence is dependent on the types of crime the organization is involved in (as well as their organizational structure or cultural tradition), aggressive acts range on a spectrum from low-grade physical assaults to major trauma assaults. Bodily harm and grievous bodily harm, within the context of organized crime, must be understood as indicators of intense social and cultural conflict, motivations contrary to the security of the public, and other psycho-social factors.\nMurder.\nMurder has evolved from the honor and vengeance killings of the yakuza or Sicilian mafia which placed large physical and symbolic importance on the act of murder, its purposes and consequences, to a much less discriminate form of expressing power, enforcing criminal authority, achieving retribution or eliminating competition.\nThe role of the hit man has been generally consistent throughout the history of organized crime, whether that be due to the efficiency or expediency of hiring a professional assassin or the need to distance oneself from the commission of murderous acts (making it harder to prove criminal culpability). This may include the assassination of notable figures (public, private or criminal), once again dependent on authority, retribution or competition.\nRevenge killings, armed robberies, violent disputes over controlled territories and offenses against members of the public must also be considered when looking at the dynamic between different criminal organizations and their (at times) conflicting needs. After killing their victims, the gangsters often try to destroy evidence by getting rid of the victims' remains in such a way as to prevent, hinder, or delay the discovery of the body, to prevent identification of the body, or to prevent autopsy. Criminals have been known to dispose of dead bodies by hiding the bodies in trash or landfills, feeding them to animals (such as pigs or rats), industrial processes (e.g., chemical baths), injection into the legitimate body disposal system (such as morgues, funeral homes, cemeteries, crematoriums, funeral pyres or cadaver donations), covert killings at health care facilities, disguising as animal flesh (such as food waste or restaurant food), creating false evidence of the circumstances of death and letting investigators dispose of the body, obscuring the victim's identity, or abandoning the body in a remote area where it can degrade significantly. Animal activity, such as consumption by scavengers, can contaminate the crime scene or destroy evidence before being discovered. However, there are also many instances of gangsters putting the bodies of their victims on display as a form of psychological warfare against their enemies.\nVigilantism.\nCriminal syndicates often commit acts of vigilantism by enforcing laws, investigating certain criminal acts and punishing those who violate such rules. People who are often targeted by organized criminals tend to be individualistic criminals, people who committed crimes that are considered particularly heinous by society, people who committed wrongdoings against members or associates, rivals or terrorist groups. One reason why criminal groups might commit vigilantism in their neighborhoods is to prevent heavy levels of community policing, that could be harmful to their illicit businesses; additionally the vigilante acts could help the gangs to ingratiate themselves in their communities.\nIn the US during the roaring twenties, the anti-catholic and anti-semitic Ku Klux Klan was known to be a staunch enforcer of prohibition, as a result Italian, Irish, Polish and Jewish gangsters would at times have violent confrontations against the KKK. On one occasion FBI informant and mobster Gregory Scarpa kidnapped and tortured a local Klansman into revealing the bodies of Civil rights workers who had been killed by the KKK. During World War II, America had a growing number of Nazi supporters that formed the German American Bund, which was known to be threatening to local Jewish people, as a result Jewish mobsters (such as Meyer Lansky, Bugsy Siegel and Jack Ruby) were often hired by the American Jewish community to help defend against the Nazi bund, even going as far as attacking and killing Nazi sympathizers during bund meetings. Vigilante groups such as the Black Panther Party, White Panther Party, and Young Lords have been accused of committing crimes in order to fund their political activities.\nWhile protection racketeering is often seen as nothing more than extortion, criminal syndicates that participate in protection rackets have at times provided genuine protection against other criminals for their clients, the reason for this is because the criminal organization would want the business of their clients to do better so that the gang can demand even more protection money, additionally if the gang has enough knowledge of the local fencers, they may even be able to track down and retrieve any objects that were stolen from the business owner, to further help their clients the gang may also force out, disrupt, vandalize, steal from or shutdown competing businesses for their clients. In Colombia the insurgent groups were trying to steal land, kidnap family members, and extort money from the drug barons. As a result the drug lords of the Medell\u00edn Cartel formed a paramilitary vigilante group known as Muerte a Secuestradores (\"Death to Kidnappers\") to defend the cartel against the FARC and M-19, even kidnapping and torturing the leader of M-19 before leaving him tied up in front of a police station. During the Medell\u00edn Cartel's war against the Colombian government, both the Norte del Valle Cartel and Cali Cartel formed and operated a vigilante group called Los Pepes (which also comprised members of the Colombian government, police and former members of the Medell\u00edn Cartel) to bring about the downfall of Pablo Escobar; they did so by bombing the properties of the Medell\u00edn Cartel and kidnapping, torturing and killing Escobar's associates as well as working alongside the Search Bloc, which would eventually lead to the dismantling of the Medell\u00edn Cartel and the death of Pablo Escobar. Because of the high levels of corruption, the Oficina de Envigado would do things to help the police and vice versa, to the point where the police and the cartel would sometimes do operations together against other criminals; additionally the leaders of La Oficina would often act as judges to mediate disputes between the various different drug gangs throughout Colombia, which according to some helped prevented a lot of disputes from turning violent.\nOn Somalia coastline many people rely on fishing for economic survival, because of this Somali pirates are often known to attack foreign vessels who partake in illegal fishing and overfishing in their waters and vessels that illegally dump waste into their waters. As a result, marine biologists say that the local fishery is recovering. In Mexico a vigilante group called Grupos de autodefensa comunitaria was formed to counter the illegal loggers, the La Familia Michoacana Cartel and a drug cartel/cult known as the Knights Templar Cartel; as they grew, they were being joined by former cartel members and as they got bigger they began to sell drugs in order to buy weapons. The Knights Templar Cartel was eventually defeated and dissolved by the vigilantes' actions but they ended up forming their own cartel called Los Viagras, which has links with the Jalisco New Generation Cartel. The Minuteman Project is a far-right paramilitary organization that seeks to prevent illegal immigration across the US-Mexico border; however, doing so is detrimental to gangs like Mara Salvatrucha (MS-13), who make money through people smuggling, and as a result MS-13 is known to commit acts of violence against members of the Minutemen, to prevent them from interfering with their illegal immigration activities. Throughout the world there are various anti-gang vigilante groups, who profess to be fighting against gang influence, but share characteristics and acts similarly to gangs, including Sombra Negra, Friends Stand United, People Against Gangsterism and Drugs, and OG Imba. Gangs that are involved in drug trafficking often commit violent acts to stop or force out independent dealers\u2014drug dealers with no gang ties\u2014to keep them from taking customers.\nIn America, there is an animal welfare organization called Rescue Ink, in which outlaw biker gang members volunteer to rescue animals in need and combat against people who commit animal cruelty, such as breaking up cockfighting rings, stopping the killing of stray cats, breaking up dog fighting rings, and rescuing pets from abusive owners. In the American prison system, prison gangs are often known to physically harm and even kill inmates who have committed such crimes as child murder, serial killing, pedophilia, hate crimes, domestic violence, and rape, and inmates who have committed crimes against the elderly, animals, the disabled, the poor and the less fortunate. In many minority communities and poor neighborhoods, residents often distrust law enforcement, as a result the gang syndicates often take over to \"police\" their neighborhoods by committing acts against people who had committed crimes such as bullying, muggings, home invasions, hate crimes, stalking, sexual assault, domestic violence and child molestation, as well as mediating disputes between neighbors. The ways that the gangs would punish such individuals could range from forced apologies, being threatened, being forced to return stolen objects, vandalizing property, arson, being forced to move, bombings, being assaulted or battered, kidnappings, false imprisonment, torture or being murdered. Some criminal syndicates have been known to hold their own \"trials\" for members of theirs who had been accused of wrongdoing; the punishments that the accused member would face if \"found guilty\" would vary depending on the offense.\nTerrorism.\nIn addition to what is considered traditional organized crime involving direct crimes of fraud swindles, scams, racketeering and other acts motivated for the accumulation of monetary gain, there is also non-traditional organized crime which is engaged in for political or ideological gain or acceptance. Such crime groups are often labelled terrorist groups or narcoterrorists.\nThere is no universally agreed, legally binding, criminal law definition of terrorism. Common definitions of terrorism refer only to those violent acts which are intended to create fear (terror), are perpetrated for a religious, political or ideological goal, deliberately target or disregard the safety of non-combatants (e.g., neutral military personnel or civilians), and are committed by non-government agencies. Some definitions also include acts of unlawful violence and war, especially crimes against humanity (\"see the Nuremberg Trials\"), Allied authorities deeming the German Nazi Party, its paramilitary and police organizations, and numerous associations subsidiary to the Nazi Party \"criminal organizations\". The use of similar tactics by criminal organizations for protection rackets or to enforce a code of silence is usually not labeled terrorism though these same actions may be labeled terrorism when done by a politically motivated group.\nNotable groups include the Medell\u00edn Cartel, Corleonesi Mafia, various Mexican Cartels, and Jamaican Posse.\nFinancial crime.\nOrganized crime groups generate large amounts of money by activities such as drug trafficking, arms smuggling, extortion, theft, and financial crime. These illegally sourced assets are of little use to them unless they can disguise it and convert it into funds that are available for investment into legitimate enterprise. The methods they use for converting its 'dirty' money into 'clean' assets encourages corruption. Organized crime groups need to hide the money's illegal origin. This allows for the expansion of OC groups, as the 'laundry' or 'wash cycle' operates to cover the money trail and convert proceeds of crime into usable assets. Money laundering is bad for international and domestic trade, banking reputations and for effective governments and rule of law. This is due to the methods used to hide the proceeds of crime. These methods include, but are not limited to: buying easily transported values, transfer pricing, and using \"underground banks,\" as well as infiltrating firms in the legal economy.\nLaunderers will also co-mingle illegal money with revenue made from businesses in order to further mask their illicit funds. Accurate figures for the amounts of criminal proceeds laundered are almost impossible to calculate, rough estimates have been made, but only give a sense of the scale of the problem and not quite how great the problem truly is. The United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime conducted a study, they estimated that in 2009, money laundering equated to about 2.7% of global GDP; this is equal to about 1.6 trillion US dollars. The Financial Action Task Force on Money Laundering (FATF), an intergovernmental body set up to combat money laundering, has stated that \"A sustained effort between 1996 and 2000 by the Financial Action Task Force (FATF) to produce such estimates failed.\" However, anti-money laundering efforts that seize money laundered assets in 2001 amounted to $386 million. The rapid growth of money laundering is due to:\nMoney laundering is a three-stage process:\nMeans of money laundering:\nThe policy aim in this area is to make the financial markets transparent, and minimize the circulation of criminal money and its cost upon legitimate markets.\nCounterfeiting.\nCounterfeiting money is another financial crime. The counterfeiting of money includes illegally producing money that is then used to pay for anything desired. In addition to being a financial crime, counterfeiting also involves manufacturing or distributing goods under assumed names. Counterfeiters benefit because consumers believe they are buying goods from companies that they trust, when in reality they are buying low quality counterfeit goods. In 2007, the OECD reported the scope of counterfeit products to include food, pharmaceuticals, pesticides, electrical components, tobacco and even household cleaning products in addition to the usual films, music, literature, games and other electrical appliances, software and fashion. A number of qualitative changes in the trade of counterfeit products:\nTax evasion.\nThe economic effects of organized crime have been approached from a number of both theoretical and empirical positions, however the nature of such activity allows for misrepresentation. The level of taxation taken by a nation-state, rates of unemployment, mean household incomes and level of satisfaction with government and other economic factors all contribute to the likelihood of criminals to participate in tax evasion. As most organized crime is perpetrated in the liminal state between legitimate and illegitimate markets, these economic factors must adjusted to ensure the optimal amount of taxation without promoting the practice of tax evasion. As with any other crime, technological advancements have made the commission of tax evasion easier, faster and more globalized. The ability for organized criminals to operate fraudulent financial accounts, utilize illicit offshore bank accounts, access tax havens or tax shelters, and operating goods smuggling syndicates to evade importation taxes help ensure financial sustainability, security from law enforcement, general anonymity and the continuation of their operations. Al Capone became a notorious example of tax evasion. In 1931, he was sentenced to 11 years in federal prison and ordered to pay $215,000 in back taxes, along with accrued interest\nCybercrime.\nInternet fraud.\nIdentity theft is a form of fraud or cheating of another person's identity in which someone pretends to be someone else by assuming that person's identity, typically in order to access resources or obtain credit and other benefits in that person's name. Victims of identity theft (those whose identity has been assumed by the identity thief) can suffer adverse consequences if held accountable for the perpetrator's actions, as can organizations and individuals who are defrauded by the identity thief, and to that extent are also victims. Internet fraud refers to the actual use of Internet services to present fraudulent solicitations to prospective victims, to conduct fraudulent transactions, or to transmit the proceeds of fraud to financial institutions or to others connected with the scheme. In the context of organized crime, both may serve as means through which other criminal activity may be successfully perpetrated or as the primary goal themselves. Email fraud, advance-fee fraud, romance scams, employment scams, and other phishing scams are the most common and most widely used forms of identity theft, though with the advent of social networking fake websites, accounts and other fraudulent or deceitful activity has become commonplace.\nCopyright infringement.\nCopyright infringement is the unauthorized or prohibited use of works under copyright, infringing the copyright holder's exclusive rights, such as the right to reproduce or perform the copyrighted work, or to make derivative works. Whilst almost universally considered under civil procedure, the impact and intent of organized criminal operations in this area of crime has been the subject of much debate. Article 61 of the Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPs) requires that signatory countries establish criminal procedures and penalties in cases of willful trademark counterfeiting or copyright piracy on a commercial scale. More recently copyright holders have demanded that states provide criminal sanctions for all types of copyright infringement. Organized criminal groups capitalize on consumer complicity, advancements in security and anonymity technology, emerging markets and new methods of product transmission, and the consistent nature of these provides a stable financial basis for other areas of organized crime.\nCyberwarfare.\nCyberwarfare refers to politically motivated hacking to conduct sabotage and espionage. It is a form of information warfare sometimes seen as analogous to conventional warfare although this analogy is controversial for both its accuracy and its political motivation. It has been defined as activities by a nation-state to penetrate another nation's computers or networks with the intention of causing civil damage or disruption. Moreover, it acts as the \"fifth domain of warfare,\" and William J. Lynn, U.S. Deputy Secretary of Defense, states that \"as a doctrinal matter, the Pentagon has formally recognized cyberspace as a new domain in warfare . . . [which] has become just as critical to military operations as land, sea, air, and space.\" Cyber espionage is the practice of obtaining confidential, sensitive, proprietary or classified information from individuals, competitors, groups, or governments using illegal exploitation methods on internet, networks, software or computers. There is also a clear military, political, or economic motivation. Unsecured information may be intercepted and modified, making espionage possible internationally. The recently established Cyber Command is currently debating whether such activities as commercial espionage or theft of intellectual property are criminal activities or actual \"breaches of national security.\" Furthermore, military activities that use computers and satellites for coordination are at risk of equipment disruption. Orders and communications can be intercepted or replaced. Power, water, fuel, communications, and transportation infrastructure all may be vulnerable to sabotage. According to Clarke, the civilian realm is also at risk, noting that the security breaches have already gone beyond stolen credit card numbers, and that potential targets can also include the electric power grid, trains, or the stock market.\nComputer viruses.\nThe term \"computer virus\" may be used as an overarching phrase to include all types of true viruses, malware, including computer worms, Trojan horses, most rootkits, spyware, dishonest adware and other malicious and unwanted software (though all are technically unique), and proves to be quite financially lucrative for criminal organizations, offering greater opportunities for fraud and extortion whilst increasing security, secrecy and anonymity. Worms may be utilized by organized crime groups to exploit security vulnerabilities (duplicating itself automatically across other computers a given network), while a Trojan horse is a program that appears harmless but hides malicious functions (such as retrieval of stored confidential data, corruption of information, or interception of transmissions). Worms and Trojan horses, like viruses, may harm a computer system's data or performance. Applying the Internet model of organized crime, the proliferation of computer viruses and other malicious software promotes a sense of detachment between the perpetrator (whether that be the criminal organization or another individual) and the victim; this may help to explain vast increases in cyber-crime such as these for the purpose of ideological crime or terrorism. In mid July 2010, security experts discovered a malicious software program that had infiltrated factory computers and had spread to plants around the world. It is considered \"the first attack on critical industrial infrastructure that sits at the foundation of modern economies,\" notes the \"New York Times.\"\nWhite-collar crime and corruption.\nCorporate crime.\nCorporate crime refers to crimes committed either by a corporation (i.e., a business entity having a separate legal personality from the natural persons that manage its activities), or by individuals that may be identified with a corporation or other business entity (see vicarious liability and corporate liability). Corporate crimes are motivated by either the individuals desire or the corporations desire to increase profits. The cost of corporate crimes to United States taxpayers is about $500 billion. Note that some forms of corporate corruption may not actually be criminal if they are not specifically illegal under a given system of laws. For example, some jurisdictions allow insider trading. The different businesses that organized crime figures have been known to operate is vast, including but not limited to pharmacies, import-export companies, check-cashing stores, tattoo parlors, zoos, online dating sites, liquor stores, motorcycle shops, banks, hotels, ranches and plantations, electronic stores, beauty salons, real estate companies, daycares, framing stores, taxicab companies, phone companies, shopping malls, jewelry stores, modeling agencies, dry cleaners, pawn shops, pool halls, clothing stores, freight companies, charity foundations, youth centers, recording studios, sporting goods stores, furniture stores, gyms, insurance companies, security companies, law firms, and private military companies. One example of this is a tequila factory in Mexico collaborating with the organized crime group CJNG.\nLabor racketeering.\nLabor racketeering, as defined by the United States Department of Labor, is the infiltrating, exploiting, and controlling of employee benefit plan, union, employer entity, or workforce that is carried out through illegal, violent, or fraudulent means for profit or personal benefit. Labor racketeering has developed since the 1930s, affecting national and international construction, mining, energy production and transportation sectors immensely. Activity has focused on the importation of cheap or unfree labor, involvement with union and public officials (political corruption), and counterfeiting.\nPolitical corruption.\nPolitical corruption is the use of legislated powers by government officials for illegitimate private gain. Misuse of government power for other purposes, such as repression of political opponents and general police brutality, is not considered political corruption. Neither are illegal acts by private persons or corporations not directly involved with the government. An illegal act by an officeholder constitutes political corruption only if the act is directly related to their official duties. Forms of corruption vary, but include bribery, extortion, cronyism, nepotism, patronage, graft, and embezzlement. While corruption may facilitate criminal enterprise such as drug trafficking, money laundering, and human trafficking, it is not restricted to these activities. The activities that constitute illegal corruption differ depending on the country or jurisdiction. For instance, certain political funding practices that are legal in one place may be illegal in another. In some cases, government officials have broad or poorly defined powers, which make it difficult to distinguish between legal and illegal actions. Worldwide, bribery alone is estimated to involve over 1 trillion US dollars annually. A state of unrestrained political corruption is known as a kleptocracy, literally meaning \"rule by thieves\".\nDrug trafficking.\nThere are three major regions that center around drug trafficking, known as the Golden Triangle (Burma, Laos, Thailand), Golden Crescent (Afghanistan) and Central and South America. There are suggestions that due to the continuing decline in opium production in South East Asia, traffickers may begin to look to Afghanistan as a source of heroin.\"\nWith respect to organized crime and accelerating synthetic drug production in East and Southeast Asia, especially the Golden Triangle, Sam Gor, also known as The Company, is the most prominent international crime syndicate based in Asia-Pacific. It is made up of members of five different triads. Sam Gor is understood to be headed by Chinese-Canadian Tse Chi Lop. The Cantonese Chinese syndicate is primarily involved in drug trafficking, earning at least $8 billion per year. Sam Gor is alleged to control 40% of the Asia-Pacific methamphetamine market, while also trafficking heroin and ketamine. The organization is active in a variety of countries, including Myanmar, Thailand, New Zealand, Australia, Japan, China and Taiwan. Sam Gor previously produced meth in Southern China and is now believed to manufacture mainly in the Golden Triangle, specifically Shan State, Myanmar, responsible for much of the massive surge of crystal meth in recent years. The group is understood to be headed by Tse Chi Lop, a Chinese-Canadian gangster born in Guangzhou, China. Tse is a former member of the Hong Kong-based crime group, the Big Circle Gang. In 1988, Tse immigrated to Canada. In 1998, Tse was convicted of transporting heroin into the United States and served nine years behind bars. Tse has been compared in prominence to Joaqu\u00edn \"El Chapo\" Guzm\u00e1n and Pablo Escobar.\nThe U.S. supply of heroin comes mainly from foreign sources which include Southeast Asia's Golden Triangle, Southwest Asia, and Latin America. Heroin comes in two forms. The first is its chemical base form which presents itself as brown and the second is a salt form that is white. The former is mainly produced in Afghanistan and some south-west countries while the latter had a history of being produced in only south-east Asia, but has since moved to also being produced in Afghanistan. There is some suspicion white Heroin is also being produced in Iran and Pakistan, but it is not confirmed. This area of Heroin production is referred to as the Golden Crescent. Heroin is not the only drug being used in these areas. The European market has shown signs of growing use in opioids on top of the long-term heroin use.\nDrug traffickers produce drugs in drug laboratories and drug farms. A drug lab can range in size from small workshops to the size of small towns (such as Tranquilandia). A drug farm is a place where drug crops are grown before being made into illegal narcotics. A drug farm can range in size from smallholdings to large plantations. In addition to drug crops, it is also not uncommon for drug farms to also host livestock, both to have a legal source of revenue to help disguise the dirty money and so that the livestock can provide a source of organic fertilizer (such as manure) for the drug crops. There are multiple instances where traffickers set up some of their drug farms, safe houses and drug labs in remote wilderness areas. Once produced, the fully processed narcotics are then transported to more populated areas to be sold. Oftentimes the traffickers stationed in these remote criminal settlements, sustain themselves with a combination of survival skills and with food, supplies and workers being brought to them by associates. The reason that traffickers have been known to establish such remote compounds is so that the surrounding area can help to provide varying degrees of natural cover. Additionally the traffickers may also hope, that the surrounding terrain and local wildlife might serve to deter or impede either investigative authorities or rival gangs if the location of the clandestine compound were revealed. While usually thought of as an urban issue, drug trafficking is also known to be a problem in both suburban and rural areas as well.\nHuman trafficking.\nHuman trafficking is a modern form of slavery where people are forced, tricked, or pressured into working or doing sexual acts. It can happen anywhere and affect anyone, no matter their age, race, or background.\nSex trafficking.\nHuman trafficking for the purpose of sexual exploitation is a major cause of contemporary sexual slavery and is primarily for prostituting women and children into sex industries. Sexual slavery encompasses most, if not all, forms of forced prostitution. The terms \"forced prostitution\" or \"enforced prostitution\" appear in international and humanitarian conventions but have been insufficiently understood and inconsistently applied. \"Forced prostitution\" generally refers to conditions of control over a person who is coerced by another to engage in sexual activity. Official numbers of individuals in sexual slavery worldwide vary. In 2001 International Organization for Migration estimated 400,000, the Federal Bureau of Investigation estimated 700,000 and UNICEF estimated 1.75 million. The most common destinations for victims of human trafficking are Thailand, Japan, Israel, Belgium, the Netherlands, Germany, Italy, Turkey and the United States, according to a report by UNODC.\nIllegal immigration and people smuggling.\nPeople smuggling is defined as \"the facilitation, transportation, attempted transportation or illegal entry of a person or persons across an international border, in violation of one or more countries laws, either clandestinely or through deception, such as the use of fraudulent documents\". The term is understood as and often used interchangeably with migrant smuggling, which is defined by the United Nations Convention Against Transnational Organized Crime as \"...the procurement, in order to obtain, directly or indirectly, a financial or other material benefit, of the illegal entry of a person into a state party of which the person is not a national\". This practice has increased over the past few decades and today now accounts for a significant portion of illegal immigration in countries around the world. People smuggling generally takes place with the consent of the person or persons being smuggled, and common reasons for individuals seeking to be smuggled include employment and economic opportunity, personal or familial betterment, and escape from persecution or conflict.\nContemporary slavery and forced labor.\nThe number of slaves today remains as high as 12 million to 27 million. This is probably the smallest proportion of slaves to the rest of the world's population in history. Most are debt slaves, largely in South Asia, who are under debt bondage incurred by lenders, sometimes even for generations. It is the fastest growing criminal industry and is predicted to eventually outgrow drug trafficking.\nHistorical origins.\nPre-nineteenth century.\nToday, crime is sometimes thought of as an urban phenomenon, but for most of human history it was the rural interfaces that encountered the majority of crimes (bearing in mind the fact that for most of human history, rural areas were the vast majority of inhabited places). For the most part, within a village, members kept crime at very low rates; however, outsiders such as pirates, highwaymen and bandits attacked trade routes and roads, at times severely disrupting commerce, raising costs, insurance rates and prices to the consumer. According to criminologist Paul Lunde, \"Piracy and banditry were to the pre-industrial world what organized crime is to modern society.\"\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;If we take a global rather than a strictly domestic view, it becomes evident that even crime of the organized kind has a long if not a necessarily noble heritage. The word 'thug' dates back to early 13th-century India, when Thugs, or gangs of criminals, roamed from town to town, looting and pillaging. Smuggling and drug-trafficking rings are as old as the hills in Asia and Africa, and extant criminal organizations in Italy and Japan trace their histories back several centuries...\nAs Lunde states, \"Barbarian conquerors, whether Vandals, Goths, the Norse, Turks or Mongols are not normally thought of as organized crime groups, yet they share many features associated with thriving criminal organizations. They were for the most part non-ideological, predominantly ethnically based, used violence and intimidation, and adhered to their own codes of law.\" In Ancient Rome, there was an infamous outlaw called Bulla Felix who organized and led a gang of up to six hundred bandits. Terrorism is linked to organized crime, but has political aims rather than solely financial ones, so there is overlap but separation between terrorism and organized crime.\nFencing in Ming and Qing China.\nA fence or receiver (\u92b7\u8d13\u8005), was a merchant who bought and sold stolen goods. Fences were part of the extensive network of accomplices in the criminal underground of Ming and Qing China. Their occupation entailed criminal activity, but as fences often acted as liaisons between the more respectable community to the underground criminals, they were seen as living a \"precarious existence on the fringes of respectable society\".\nA fence worked alongside bandits, but in a different line of work. The network of criminal accomplices that was often acquired was essential to ensuring both the safety and the success of fences.\nThe path into the occupation of a fence stemmed, in a large degree, from necessity. As most fences came from the ranks of poorer people, they often took whatever work they could \u2013 both legal and illegal.\nLike most bandits operated within their own community, fences also worked within their own town or village. For example, in some satellite areas of the capital, military troops lived within or close to the commoner population and they had the opportunity to hold illegal trades with commoners.\nIn areas like Baoding and Hejian, local peasants and community members not only purchased military livestock such as horses and cattle, but also helped to hide the \"stolen livestock from military allured by the profits\". Local peasants and community members became fences and they hid criminal activities from officials in return for products or money from these soldiers.\nTypes of fences.\nMost fences were not individuals who only bought and sold stolen goods to make a living. The majority of fences had other occupations within the \"polite\" society and held a variety of official occupations. These occupations included laborers, coolies, and peddlers. Such individuals often encountered criminals in markets in their line of work, and, recognizing a potential avenue for an extra source of income, formed acquaintances and temporary associations for mutual aid and protection with criminals. In one example, an owner of a tea house overheard the conversation between Deng Yawen, a criminal and others planning a robbery and he offered to help to sell the loot for an exchange of spoils.\nAt times, the robbers themselves filled the role of fences, selling to people they met on the road. This may actually have been preferable for robbers in certain circumstances, because they would not have to pay the fence a portion of the spoils.\nButchers were also prime receivers for stolen animals because of the simple fact that owners could no longer recognize their livestock once butchers slaughtered them. Animals were very valuable commodities within Ming China and a robber could potentially sustain a living from stealing livestock and selling them to butcher-fences.\nAlthough the vast majority of the time, fences worked with physical stolen property, fences who also worked as itinerant barbers also sold information as a good. Itinerant barbers often amassed important sources of information and news as they traveled, and sold significant pieces of information, often to criminals in search of places to hide or individuals to rob. In this way, itinerant barbers also served the role as a keeper of information that could be sold to both members of the criminal underground, as well as powerful clients in performing the function of a spy.\nFences not only sold items such as jewelry and clothing but was also involved in trafficking hostages that bandits had kidnapped. Women and children were the easiest and among the most common \"objects\" the fences sold. Most of the female hostages were sold to fences and then sold as prostitutes, wives or concubines. One example of human trafficking can be seen from Chen Akuei's gang who abducted a servant girl and sold her to Lin Baimao, who in turn sold her for thirty parts of silver as wives. In contrast to women, who required beauty to sell for a high price, children were sold regardless of their physical appearance or family background. Children were often sold as servants or entertainers, while young girls were often sold as prostitutes.\nNetwork of connections.\nLike merchants of honest goods, one of the most significant tools of a fence was their network of connections. As they were the middlemen between robbers and clients, fences needed to form and maintain connections in both the \"polite\" society, as well as among criminals. However, there were a few exceptions in which members of the so-called \"well-respected\" society became receivers and harborers. They not only help bandits to sell the stolen goods but also acted as agents of bandits to collect protection money from local merchants and residents. These \"part-time\" fences with high social status used their connection with bandits to help themselves gain social capital as well as wealth.\nIt was extremely important to their occupation that fences maintained a positive relationship with their customers, especially their richer gentry clients. When some members of the local elites joined the ranks of fences, they not only protected bandits to protect their business interests, they actively took down any potential threats to their illegal profiting, even government officials. In the Zhejiang Province, the local elites not only got the provincial commissioner, Zhu Wan, dismissed from his office but also eventually \"[drove] him to suicide\". This was possible because fences often had legal means of making a living, as well as illegal activities and could threaten to turn in bandits to the authorities.\nIt was also essential for them to maintain a relationship with bandits. However, it was just as true that bandits needed fences to make a living. As a result, fences often held dominance in their relationship with bandits and fences could exploit their position, cheating the bandits by manipulating the prices they paid bandits for the stolen property.\nSafe houses.\nAside from simply buying and selling stolen goods, fences often played additional roles in the criminal underground of early China. Because of the high floating population in public places such as inns and tea houses, they often became ideal places for bandits and gangs to gather to exchange information and plan for their next crime. Harborers, people who provided safe houses for criminals, often played the role of receiving stolen goods from their harbored criminals to sell to other customers. Safe houses included inns, tea houses, brothels, opium dens, as well as gambling parlors and employees or owners of such institutions often functioned as harborers, as well as fences. These safe houses were located in places with high floating populations and people from all kinds of social backgrounds.\nBrothels themselves helped these bandits to hide and sell stolen goods because of the special Ming Law that exempted brothels from being held responsible \"for the criminal actions of their clients.\" Even though the government required owners of these places to report any suspicious activities, lack of enforcement from the government itself and some of the owners being fences for the bandits made an ideal safe house for bandits and gangs.\nPawnshops were also often affiliated with fencing stolen goods. The owners or employees of such shops often paid cash for stolen goods at a price a great deal below market value to bandits, who were often desperate for money, and resold the goods to earn a profit.\nPunishments for fences.\nTwo different Ming Laws, the \"Da Ming L\u00fc\" \u5927\u660e\u5f8b and the \"Da Gao\" \u5927\u8bf0, drafted by the Hongwu Emperor Zhu Yuanzhang, sentenced fences with different penalties based on the categories and prices of the products that were stolen.\nIn coastal regions, illegal trading with foreigners, as well as smuggling, became a huge concern for the government during the middle to late Ming era. In order to prohibit this crime, the government passed a law in which illegal smugglers who traded with foreigners without the consent of the government would be punished with exile to the border for military service.\nIn areas where military troops were stationed, stealing and selling military property would result in a more severe punishment. In the Jiaqing time, a case was recorded of stealing and selling military horses. The emperor himself gave direction that the thieves who stole the horses and the people who helped to sell the horses would be put on cangue and sent to labor in a border military camp.\nIn the salt mines, the penalty for workers who stole salt and people who sold the stolen salt was the most severe. Anyone who was arrested and found guilty of stealing and selling government salt was put to death.\nNineteenth century.\nDuring the Victorian era, criminals and gangs started to form organizations which would collectively become London's criminal underworld. Criminal societies in the underworld started to develop their own ranks and groups which were sometimes called \"families\" and were often made up of lower-classes and operated on pick-pocketry, prostitution, forgery and counterfeiting, commercial burglary and even money laundering schemes. Unique also were the use of slang and argots used by Victorian criminal societies to distinguish each other, like those propagated by street gangs like the Peaky Blinders. One of the most infamous crime bosses in the Victorian underworld was Adam Worth, who was nicknamed \"the Napoleon of the criminal world\" or \"the Napoleon of Crime\" and became the inspiration behind the popular character of Professor Moriarty.\nOrganized crime in the United States first came to prominence in the Old West and historians such as Brian J. Robb and Erin H. Turner traced the first organized crime syndicates to the Coschise Cowboy Gang and the Wild Bunch. The Cochise Cowboys, though loosely organized, were unique for their criminal operations in the Mexican border, in which they would steal and sell cattle as well smuggled contraband goods in between the countries. In the Old west there were other examples of gangs that operated in ways similar to an organized crime syndicate such as the Innocents gang, the Jim Miller gang, the Soapy Smith gang, the Belle Starr gang and the Bob Dozier gang.\nTwentieth century.\nDonald Cressey's Cosa Nostra model studied Mafia families exclusively and this limits his broader findings. Structures are formal and rational with allocated tasks, limits on entrance, and influence on the rules established for organizational maintenance and sustainability. In this context there is a difference between organized and professional crime; there is well-defined hierarchy of roles for leaders and members, underlying rules and specific goals that determine their behavior and these are formed as a social system, one that was rationally designed to maximize profits and to provide forbidden goods. Albini saw organized criminal behavior as consisting of networks of patrons and clients, rather than rational hierarchies or secret societies.\nThe networks are characterized by a loose system of power relations. Each participant is interested in furthering his own welfare. Criminal entrepreneurs are the patrons and they exchange information with their clients in order to obtain their support. Clients include members of gangs, local and national politicians, government officials and people engaged in legitimate business. People in the network may not directly be part of the core criminal organization. Furthering the approach of both Cressey and Albini, Ianni and Ianni studied Italian-American crime syndicates in New York and other cities.\nKinship is seen as the basis of organized crime rather than the structures Cressey had identified; this includes fictive godparental and affinitive ties as well as those based on blood relations and it is the impersonal actions, not the status or affiliations of their members, that define the group. Rules of conduct and behavioral aspects of power and networks and roles include the following:\nStrong family ties are derived from the traditions of southern Italy, where family rather than the church or state is the basis of social order and morality.\nThe \"disorganized crime\" and choice theses.\nOne of the most important trends to emerge in criminological thinking about OC in recent years is the suggestion that it is not, in a formal sense, \"organized\" at all. Evidence includes lack of centralized control, absence of formal lines of communication, fragmented organizational structure. It is distinctively disorganized. For example, Seattle's crime network in the 1970s and 80s consisted of groups of businessmen, politicians and of law enforcement officers. They all had links to a national network via Meyer Lansky, who was powerful, but there was no evidence that Lansky or anyone else exercised centralized control over them.\nWhile some crime involved well-known criminal hierarchies in the city, criminal activity was not subject to central management by these hierarchies nor by other controlling groups, nor were activities limited to a finite number of objectives. The networks of criminals involved with the crimes did not exhibit organizational cohesion. Too much emphasis had been placed on the Mafia as controlling OC. The Mafia were certainly powerful but they \"were part of a heterogeneous underworld, a network characterized by complex webs of relationships.\" OC groups were violent and aimed at making money but because of the lack of structure and fragmentation of objectives, they were \"disorganized\".\nFurther studies showed neither bureaucracy nor kinship groups are the primary structure of organized crime; rather, the primary structures were found to lie in partnerships or a series of joint business ventures. Despite these conclusions, all researchers observed a degree of managerial activities among the groups they studied. All observed networks and a degree of persistence, and there may be utility in focusing on the identification of organizing roles of people and events rather than the group's structure. There may be three main approaches to understand the organizations in terms of their roles as social systems:\nOrganized crime groups may be a combination of all three.\nInternational governance approach.\nInternational consensus on defining organized crime has become important since the 1970s due to its increased prevalence and impact. e.g., UN in 1976 and EU 1998. OC is \"...the large scale and complex criminal activity carried on by groups of persons, however loosely or tightly organized for the enrichment of those participating at the expense of the community and its members. It is frequently accomplished through ruthless disregard of any law, including offences against the person and frequently in connection with political corruption.\" (UN) \"A criminal organization shall mean a lasting, structured association of two or more persons, acting in concert with a view to committing crimes or other offenses which are punishable by deprivation of liberty or a detention order of a maximum of at least four years or a more serious penalty, whether such crimes or offenses are an end in themselves or a means of obtaining material benefits and, if necessary, of improperly influencing the operation of public authorities.\" (UE) Not all groups exhibit the same characteristics of structure. However, violence and corruption and the pursuit of multiple enterprises and continuity serve to form the essence of OC activity.\nThere are eleven characteristics from the European Commission and Europol pertinent to a working definition of organized crime. Six of those must be satisfied and the four in italics are mandatory. Summarized, they are:\nwith the Convention against Transnational Organized Crime (the \"Palermo Convention\") having a similar definition:\nOthers stress the importance of power, profit and perpetuity, defining organized criminal behavior as:\nDefinitions need to bring together its legal and social elements. OC has widespread social, political and economic effects. It uses violence and corruption to achieve its ends: \"OC when group primarily focused on illegal profits systematically commit crimes that adversely affect society and are capable of successfully shielding their activities, in particular by being willing to use physical violence or eliminate individuals by way of corruption.\"\nIt is a mistake to use the term \"OC\" as though it denotes a clear and well-defined phenomenon. The evidence regarding OC \"shows a less well-organized, very diversified landscape of organizing criminals\u2026the economic activities of these organizing criminals can be better described from the viewpoint of 'crime enterprises' than from a conceptually unclear frameworks such as 'OC'.\" Many of the definitions emphasize the 'group nature' of OC, the 'organization' of its members, its use of violence or corruption to achieve its goals and its extra-jurisdictional character...OC may appear in many forms at different times and in different places. Due to the variety of definitions, there is \"evident danger\" in asking \"what is OC?\" and expecting a simple answer.\nThe locus of power and organized crime.\nSome espouse that all organized crime operates at an international level, though there is currently no international court capable of trying offenses resulting from such activities (the International Criminal Court's remit extends only to dealing with people accused of offenses against humanity, e.g., genocide). If a network operates primarily from one jurisdiction and carries out its illicit operations there and in some other jurisdictions it is 'international,' though it may be appropriate to use the term 'transnational' only to label the activities of a major crime group that is centered in no one jurisdiction but operating in many. The understanding of organized crime has therefore progressed to combined internationalization and an understanding of social conflict into one of power, control, efficiency risk and utility, all within the context of organizational theory. The accumulation of social, economic and political power have sustained themselves as a core concerns of all criminal organizations:\nContemporary organized crime may be very different from traditional Mafia style, particularly in terms of the distribution and centralization of power, authority structures and the concept of 'control' over one's territory and organization. There is a tendency away from centralization of power and reliance upon family ties towards a fragmentation of structures and informality of relationships in crime groups. Organized crime most typically flourishes when a central government and civil society is disorganized, weak, absent or untrustworthy.\nThis may occur in a society facing periods of political, economic or social turmoil or transition, such as a change of government or a period of rapid economic development, particularly if the society lacks strong and established institutions and the rule of law. The dissolution of the Soviet Union and the Revolutions of 1989 in Eastern Europe that saw the downfall of the Communist Bloc created a breeding ground for criminal organizations.\nThe newest growth sectors for organized crime are identity theft and online extortion. These activities are troubling because they discourage consumers from using the Internet for e-commerce. E-commerce was supposed to level the playing ground between small and large businesses, but the growth of online organized crime is leading to the opposite effect; large businesses are able to afford more bandwidth (to resist denial-of-service attacks) and superior security. Furthermore, organized crime using the Internet is much harder to trace down for the police (even though they increasingly deploy cybercops) since most police forces and law enforcement agencies operate within a local or national jurisdiction while the Internet makes it easier for criminal organizations to operate across such boundaries without detection.\nIn the past criminal organizations have naturally limited themselves by their need to expand, putting them in competition with each other. This competition, often leading to violence, uses valuable resources such as manpower (either killed or sent to prison), equipment and finances. In the United States, James \"Whitey\" Bulger, the Irish Mob boss of the Winter Hill Gang in Boston turned informant for the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI). He used this position to eliminate competition and consolidate power within the city of Boston which led to the imprisonment of several senior organized crime figures including Gennaro Angiulo, underboss of the Patriarca crime family. Infighting sometimes occurs within an organization, such as the Castellamarese war of 1930\u201331 and the Boston Irish Mob Wars of the 1960s and 1970s.\nToday criminal organizations are increasingly working together, realizing that it is better to work in cooperation rather than in competition with each other (once again, consolidating power). This has led to the rise of global criminal organizations such as Mara Salvatrucha, 18th Street gang and Barrio Azteca. The American Mafia, in addition to having links with organized crime groups in Italy such as the Camorra, the 'Ndrangheta, Sacra Corona Unita and Sicilian Mafia, has at various times done business with the Irish Mob, Jewish-American organized crime, the Japanese yakuza, Indian mafia, the Russian mafia, Thief in law and Post-Soviet Organized crime groups, the Chinese triads, Chinese Tongs and Asian street gangs, Motorcycle Gangs and numerous White, Black and Hispanic prison and street gangs. The United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime estimated that organized crime groups held $322 billion in assets in 2005.\nThis rise in cooperation between criminal organizations has meant that law enforcement agencies are increasingly having to work together. The FBI operates an organized crime section from its headquarters in Washington, D.C. and is known to work with other national (e.g., Polizia di Stato, Russian Federal Security Service (FSB) and the Royal Canadian Mounted Police), federal (e.g., Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives, Drug Enforcement Administration, United States Marshals Service, Immigration and Customs Enforcement, United States Secret Service, US Diplomatic Security Service, United States Postal Inspection Service, U.S. Customs and Border Protection, United States Border Patrol, and the United States Coast Guard), state (e.g., Massachusetts State Police Special Investigation Unit, New Jersey State Police organized crime unit, Pennsylvania State Police organized crime unit and the New York State Police Bureau of Criminal Investigation) and city (e.g., New York City Police Department Organized Crime Unit, Philadelphia Police Department Organized crime unit, Chicago Police Organized Crime Unit and the Los Angeles Police Department Special Operations Division) law enforcement agencies.\nAcademic analysis.\nCriminal psychology.\nCriminal psychology is defined as the study of the intentions, behaviors, and actions of a criminal or someone who allows themselves to participate in criminal behavior. The goal is to understand what is going on in the criminal's head and explain why they are doing what they are doing. This varies depending on whether the person is facing the punishment for what they did, are roaming free, or if they are punishing themselves. Criminal psychologists get called to court to explain the inside the mind of the criminal.\nRational choice.\nThis theory treats all individuals as rational operators, committing criminal acts after consideration of all associated risks (detection and punishment) compared with the rewards of crimes (personal, financial etc.). Little emphasis is placed on the offenders' emotional state. The role of criminal organizations in lowering the perceptions of risk and increasing the likelihood of personal benefit is prioritized by this approach, with the organizations structure, purpose, and activity being indicative of the rational choices made by criminals and their organizers.\nDeterrence.\nThis theory sees criminal behavior as reflective of an individual, internal calculation by the criminal that the benefits associated with offending (whether financial or otherwise) outweigh the perceived risks. The perceived strength, importance or infallibility of the criminal organization is directly proportional to the types of crime committed, their intensity and arguably the level of community response. The benefits of participating in organized crime (higher financial rewards, greater socioeconomic control and influence, protection of the family or significant others, perceived freedoms from 'oppressive' laws or norms) contribute greatly to the psychology behind highly organized group offending.\nSocial learning.\nCriminals learn through associations with one another. The success of organized crime groups is therefore dependent upon the strength of their communication and the enforcement of their value systems, the recruitment and training processes employed to sustain, build or fill gaps in criminal operations. An understanding of this theory sees close associations between criminals, imitation of superiors, and understanding of value systems, processes and authority as the main drivers behind organized crime. Interpersonal relationships define the motivations the individual develops, with the effect of family or peer criminal activity being a strong predictor of inter-generational offending. This theory also developed to include the strengths and weaknesses of reinforcement, which in the context of continuing criminal enterprises may be used to help understand propensities for certain crimes or victims, level of integration into the mainstream culture and likelihood of recidivism / success in rehabilitation.\nEnterprise.\nUnder this theory, organized crime exists because legitimate markets leave many customers and potential customers unsatisfied. High demand for a particular good or service (e.g., drugs, prostitution, arms, slaves), low levels of risk detection and high profits lead to a conducive environment for entrepreneurial criminal groups to enter the market and profit by supplying those goods and services. For success, there must be:\nUnder these conditions competition is discouraged, ensuring criminal monopolies sustain profits. Legal substitution of goods or services may (by increasing competition) force the dynamic of organized criminal operations to adjust, as will deterrence measures (reducing demand), and the restriction of resources (controlling the ability to supply or produce to supply).\nDifferential association.\nSutherland goes further to say that deviancy is contingent on conflicting groups within society, and that such groups struggle over the means to define what is criminal or deviant within society. Criminal organizations therefore gravitate around illegal avenues of production, profit-making, protectionism or social control and attempt (by increasing their operations or membership) to make these acceptable. This also explains the propensity of criminal organizations to develop protection rackets, to coerce through the use of violence, aggression and threatening behavior (at times termed 'terrorism'). Preoccupation with methods of accumulating profit highlight the lack of legitimate means to achieve economic or social advantage, as does the organization of white-collar crime or political corruption (though it is debatable whether these are based on wealth, power or both). The ability to effect social norms and practices through political and economic influence (and the enforcement or normalization of criminogenic needs) may be defined by differential association theory.\nCritical criminology and sociology.\nSocial disorganization.\nSocial disorganization theory is intended to be applied to neighborhood level street crime, thus the context of gang activity, loosely formed criminal associations or networks, socioeconomic demographic impacts, legitimate access to public resources, employment or education, and mobility give it relevance to organized crime. Where the upper- and lower-classes live in close proximity this can result in feelings of anger, hostility, social injustice and frustration. Criminals experience poverty; and witness affluence they are deprived of and which is virtually impossible for them to attain through conventional means. The concept of neighborhood is central to this theory, as it defines the social learning, locus of control, cultural influences and access to social opportunity experienced by criminals and the groups they form. Fear of or lack of trust in mainstream authority may also be a key contributor to social disorganization; organized crime groups replicate such figures and thus ensure control over the counter-culture. This theory has tended to view violent or antisocial behavior by gangs as reflective of their social disorganization rather than as a product or tool of their organization.\nAnomie.\nSociologist Robert K. Merton believed deviance depended on society's definition of success, and the desires of individuals to achieve success through socially defined avenues. Criminality becomes attractive when expectations of being able to fulfill goals (therefore achieving success) by legitimate means cannot be fulfilled. Criminal organizations capitalize on states with a lack of norm by imposing criminogenic needs and illicit avenues to achieve them. This has been used as the basis for numerous meta-theories of organized crime through its integration of social learning, cultural deviance, and criminogenic motivations. If crime is seen as a function of anomie, organized behavior produces stability, increases protection or security, and may be directly proportional to market forces as expressed by entrepreneurship- or risk-based approaches. It is the inadequate supply of legitimate opportunities that constrains the ability for the individual to pursue valued societal goals and reduces the likelihood that using legitimate opportunities will enable them to satisfy such goals (due to their position in society).\nCultural deviance.\nCriminals violate the law because they belong to a unique subculture - the counter-culture - their values and norms conflicting with those of the working-, middle- or upper-classes upon which criminal laws are based. This subculture shares an alternative lifestyle, language and culture, and is generally typified by being tough, taking care of their own affairs and rejecting government authority. Role models include drug dealers, thieves and pimps, as they have achieved success and wealth not otherwise available through socially-provided opportunities. It is through modeling organized crime as a counter-cultural avenue to success that such organizations are sustained.\nAlien conspiracy/queer ladder of mobility.\nThe alien conspiracy theory and queer ladder of mobility theories state that ethnicity and 'outsider' status (immigrants, or those not within the dominant ethnocentric groups) and their influences are thought to dictate the prevalence of organized crime in society. The alien theory posits that the contemporary structures of organized crime gained prominence during the 1860s in Sicily and that elements of the Sicilian population are responsible for the foundation of most European and North American organized crime, made up of Italian-dominated crime families. Bell's theory of the 'queer ladder of mobility' hypothesized that 'ethnic succession' (the attainment of power and control by one more marginalized ethnic group over other less marginalized groups) occurs by promoting the perpetration of criminal activities within a disenfranchised or oppressed demographic. Whilst early organized crime was dominated by the Irish Mob (early 1800s), they were relatively substituted by the Sicilian Mafia and Italian-American Mafia, the Aryan Brotherhood (1960s onward), Colombian Medell\u00edn Cartel and Cali cartel (mid-1970s - 1990s), and more recently the Mexican Tijuana Cartel (late 1980s onward), Mexican Los Zetas (late 1990s to onward), the Russian Mafia (1988 onward), terrorism-related organized crime Al-Qaeda (1988 onward), the Taliban (1994 onward), and Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) (2010s to onward). Many argue this misinterprets and overstates the role of ethnicity in organized crime. A contradiction of this theory is that syndicates had developed long before large-scale Sicilian immigration in the 1860s, with these immigrants merely joining a widespread phenomenon of crime and corruption.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "22626", "revid": "45200048", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22626", "title": "One Foot in the Grave", "text": "British TV sitcom (1990\u20132000)\nOne Foot in the Grave is a British television sitcom written by David Renwick. There were six series (each consisting of six half-hour episodes) and seven Christmas specials over a period of ten years from early 1990 to late 2000. The first five series were broadcast between January 1990 and January 1995. For the next five years, the show appeared only as Christmas specials, followed by the sixth and final series in 2000.\nThe series features the exploits of Victor Meldrew, played by Richard Wilson, and his long-suffering wife, Margaret, played by Annette Crosbie. Wilson initially turned down the part of Meldrew and David Renwick considered Les Dawson for the role, until Wilson changed his mind. The programmes invariably deal with Meldrew's battle against a long series of problems, some of which he creates for himself.\nThe location is set in an unnamed town in Southern England, where Victor takes involuntary early retirement. His various efforts to keep himself busy while encountering various misfortunes and misunderstandings are the themes of the sitcom. Indoor scenes were videotaped at BBC Television Centre with most exterior scenes filmed on Tresillian Way in Walkford in Christchurch, Dorset. Despite its traditional production, the series subverts its domestic sitcom setting with elements of black humour and surrealism.\nThe series was occasionally the subject of controversy for some of its darker story elements, but nevertheless received a number of awards, including the 1992 BAFTA for Best Comedy. The programme came 80th in the British Film Institute's 100 Greatest British Television Programmes. Four episodes were remade for BBC Radio 2. The series inspired a novel, published in 1992, featuring the most memorable moments from the first two series and the first Christmas special.\nPlot.\nThe series features the exploits, mishaps and misadventures of irascible early retiree Victor Meldrew, who, after being made redundant from his job as a security guard at the age of 60, finds himself at war with the world and everything in it. Meldrew, cursed with misfortune and always complaining, is married to long-suffering wife Margaret, who is often left exasperated by his many misfortunes.\nAmongst other witnesses to Victor's wrath are tactless family friend Jean Warboys and next-door neighbours Patrick (Victor's nemesis) and Pippa Trench. Patrick often discovers Victor in inexplicably bizarre or compromising situations, leading him to believe he is insane. The Meldrews' neighbour on the other side, overly cheery charity worker Nick Swainey, also adds to Victor's frustration.\nAlthough set in a traditional suburban setting, the show subverts this genre with a strong overtone of black comedy. Series One's \"The Valley of Fear\" is an episode which caused controversy, when Victor found a frozen cat in his freezer. Writer David Renwick also combined farce with elements of tragedy. For example, and although there is no explicit reference that Victor and Margaret had children, the episode \"Timeless Time\" contained a reference to someone named Stuart; the strong implication being that they once had a son who had died as a child, and in the final episode, Victor is killed by a hit-and-run driver.\nA number of episodes were also experimental in that they took place entirely in one setting. Such episodes include \"The Beast in the Cage\" (where Victor, Margaret and Mrs Warboys are stuck in a traffic jam), \"Timeless Time\" (where Victor and Margaret are in bed suffering insomnia), \"The Trial\" (where Victor is left alone in the house waiting to see if he has to take part in jury service), \"Rearranging the Dust\" (where Victor and Margaret have a long wait in their solicitor's waiting room), and \"Threatening Weather\" (where Victor and Margaret try to cope during a power cut on the hottest night of the year).\nDespite Margaret's frequent exasperation with her husband's antics, the series shows the couple have a deep affection for one another.\nCharacters.\nMain characters.\nVictor Meldrew (Richard Wilson) \u2013 Victor is the main protagonist of the sitcom and finds himself constantly battling against all that life throws at him as he becomes entangled in complicated misfortunes and farcical situations. Renwick once pointed out in an interview that the name \"Victor\" was ironic, since he almost always ends up a loser. From being buried alive to being prosecuted for attacking a feisty pit bull terrier with a collection of coconut meringues, Victor tries to adjust to life after an automatic security system made him redundant at the office where he worked as a security guard, but to no avail. He believes everything is going wrong for him all the time and he has the right to be upset because it is always someone else's fault. Victor does not see himself as retired and is always trying to find another job, but most of his attempts end in failure.\nVictor is a tragic comedy character and sympathy is directed towards him as he becomes embroiled in complex misunderstandings, bureaucratic vanity and, at times, sheer bad luck. The audience sees a philosophical ebb and flow to his character, however, along with a degree of optimism. Yet his polite fa\u00e7ade collapses when events get the better of him and a full verbal onslaught is forthcoming. \"Victor-isms\" include \"I do not believe it!\", \"I don't believe it!\", \"Un-be-lievable!\", \"What in the name of bloody hell?\", \"In the name of sanity!\" Despite his grumpy demeanour Victor isn't totally devoid of compassion; in \"Hearts of Darkness\" he liberates elderly nursing home residents who were being mistreated by the staff, and in \"Descent into The Maelstrom\" he calls an incident room number and gives the location of an emotionally disturbed woman who abducted a baby and stole Margaret's mother's pearl earrings, which resulted in the woman being picked up by the police. However, because the woman was a friend of Margaret, and knowing she meant a lot to her, Victor never said anything.\nVictor has also shown a vast amount of loyalty to Margaret as, throughout their entire 42 years of lifelong marriage together, not once has the thought of infidelity ever occurred to him. In \"Rearranging the Dust\", Victor and Margaret recollect the days of their courtship at a party after which Victor says \"You were always my first choice\", which leaves Margaret stunned. In another episode, Margaret recounts the time Victor took her to the funfair and they ended up getting stuck in the hall of mirrors for over an hour. Victor had said he did not mind as he was happy to stay there and look at all the reflections of her. Victor's very best act of compassion comes in the episode \"The Wisdom of the Witch\" in which he ends up saving Patrick's life from his new secretary's psychopathic boyfriend by forcing Patrick's would-be murderer, along with himself as well, out of the window of the house in which they are trapped during a snowstorm.\nMargaret Meldrew (n\u00e9e Pellow) (Annette Crosbie) \u2013 Victor's long-suffering, tolerant and kind-hearted wife. Margaret tries to maintain a degree of calmness and to rise above her husband's antics. However, she is often engulfed in these follies, mishaps and confusion and often vents her anger at Victor. In early episodes, her character acts more as a comic foil to Victor's misfortunes. Examples include fearfully asking if a cat found frozen in their freezer is definitely dead and mentioning a friend who died of a terminal illness. When Victor reminds her that the woman actually fell from a cliff, Margaret retorts she only did so because \"she went to the seaside to convalesce\".\nIn later episodes, Margaret develops into a more complex character. She is shown to be fiercely protective of her marriage to Victor by becoming easily suspicious and jealous\u2014for example, of a Dutch marionette that Victor becomes occupied with repairing in the episode \"Hole in the Sky\", eventually leading her to destroy it. In \"The Affair of the Hollow Lady\", a greengrocer (played by Barbara Windsor) develops a soft spot for Victor and tries to convince Margaret that he has been unfaithful to her. In revenge, Margaret assaults her with a pair of boxing gloves. However, Margaret herself is shown to have contemplated infidelity with a man called Ben whom she met on holiday in the episode \"Warm Champagne\". She decides against cheating on Victor. In this episode, she sums up her relationship with Victor by telling Ben, \"He's the most sensitive person I've ever met and that's why I love him and why I constantly want to ram his head through a television screen.\" She also begins to develop a sense of cynicism, slowly coming to see the world the way Victor sees it. This is especially evident in \"Things Aren't Simple Anymore\" in which she remarks that the world is \"all speed and greed\" and that \"nobody does anything about anything\". In \"Rearranging the Dust\", Margaret recounts the time she first chose Victor at a party and, during a power cut, \"shared their bodies\" in the garden. After this moment of passion, they went back inside and when the lights came back on, Margaret realised that she had \"grabbed hold of the wrong person\". Margaret's demeanour seemed to stem from an incident at school when she was a child. When she was five, she had two budgies; one day when she opened the door of their cage, one flew straight out and hit the window, killing itself, while the other stayed in the cage despite her best efforts to get it to come out. The next day at school her teacher asked the class to write a story about something that had happened to them so Margaret wrote her story about the budgies. Her teacher made Margaret read it out loud in front of the whole class which resulted in everyone laughing at her. She then realised that the teacher had done it deliberately just to be cruel to her\u2014whereupon she understood why the other budgie never wanted to leave its cage.\nMargaret could be said to have a catchphrase, typically a long, exasperated use of the word \"God\", usually when coming to a realisation about the reason behind one of Victor's mishaps. These mishaps are occasionally inadvertently aided by herself in some way, such as leaving the phone off the hook or giving permission to someone to enter the Meldrews' house when she is not there. Margaret works at a florist's until series five, when the shop closes. In a later series she has found a new job as a caregiver for the elderly, where she inadvertently discovers on a TV documentary that she has actually been unwittingly used as a sex worker by a man who did not need personal care but just enjoyed being bathed and dressed anyway. It is presumed that she left the job after making this discovery, as it is never mentioned again.\nSupporting characters.\nJean Warboys (Doreen Mantle) \u2013 Mrs Warboys is a friend of Margaret's (and a rather annoying one in Victor's eyes) who has attached herself to the Meldrews, accompanying them on many of their exploits. Until the fourth series she is married to (unseen) Chris until he leaves her for a private detective she had hired, believing he was having an affair, and they divorce.\nShe often bears the brunt of Victor's temper due to muddled misunderstandings and in part due to her aloof nature. One such occasion saw Victor asking her to pick up a suit of his from the dry-cleaners, only for her to return with a gorilla suit. Another occasion saw her persuading Victor to take on a dog whose owner had just died. Victor spent time building a kennel in the garden and when Mrs Warboys arrives with the dog, she forgets to mention that the dog is stuffed, much to Victor and Margaret's consternation. On another occasion she wins a competition where the prize is either \u00a3500 or to have a life-size waxwork model made of herself; she chooses the waxwork, which had to be delivered to the Meldrews' house. As it turns out, she hates it as much as Victor and Margaret do, and the waxwork ends up in the dustbin.\nDespite being friends, she has driven Margaret to distraction on several occasions, most notably in \"Only a Story\", when she stayed with the Meldrews after her flat had been flooded and enraged Margaret with her complaining and laziness. Jean is also shown as a somewhat absent-minded character, as she has a pet cockatiel despite her lifelong allergy to feathers. She would often bore the Meldrews by showing them her complete collection of holiday pictures at the most unwelcome times. A running joke is her beating Victor at board games, including Trivial Pursuit and chess, while having a conversation with someone else. Doreen Mantle described her character as \"wanting to do the right thing but always finding out that it was the wrong thing\". Victor's annoyance with her is often demonstrated by shouting her name, sometimes repeatedly, in an impatient tone.\nPatrick Trench (Angus Deayton) \u2013 Patrick and his wife Pippa live next door to Victor from the second series. Patrick often catches Victor engrossed in seemingly preposterous situations, all of which in context are perfectly innocuous. The couple's relationship with their neighbours begins badly after Victor mistakes Patrick and Pippa for distant relations when they arrive outside with three suitcases\u00a0\u2013 not realising that they are his next-door neighbours, having been on a lengthy holiday from the day Victor and Margaret moved in. Victor subsequently invites the bemused pair to stay; this and later incidents cause Patrick to suspect that Victor is quite insane, possibly bordering on malicious.\nHowever, Patrick's rift with Victor eventually transforms him into a rather cynical character (much like Victor) and he often responds to him in similarly petty or vindictive ways as a means of trying to settle the score, such as writing complaints and grievances on Post-it Notes. This aspect of Patrick's character came to a head in the episode \"The Executioner's Song\" where his face temporarily morphs into that of Victor's as he looks into a mirror.\nIt is mentioned several times that Patrick would like to have children. After Pippa miscarries and Patrick is, so he claims, rendered infertile by a freak accident (for which he unfairly blames Victor), he adopts a dachshund called Denzil, which Pippa describes as his \"baby substitute\". Denzil frequently appears with Patrick through series 3\u20135. Despite their animosity towards each other, Victor ends up saving Patrick's life in \"The Wisdom of the Witch\".\nPippa Trench (n\u00e9e Croker) (Janine Duvitski) \u2013 Patrick's wife \u2013 a bus driver \u2013 sought friendly relations with the Meldrews and, after a while, became good friends with Margaret. The two women usually attempt to get their husbands to make peace with each other at least once per series. Eventually Patrick proposes that the Trenches move house, but they soon realise that the Meldrew curse has followed them: Victor sent workmen to their home, thinking they were removal men who had initially come to the wrong house. They were in fact from a house clearance firm Margaret had employed to clear her late cousin Ursula's country mansion. The workmen consequently cleared Patrick and Pippa's house of their entire furniture and sold it for a mere \u00a3475. Pippa is slightly dim-witted (Victor once described her as a \"gormless twerp\" on an answering machine message, unaware she was listening)\u00a0\u2013 for example, believing Victor had murdered an elderly blind man simply because the victim had been found clutching a double-one domino in his hand and Victor had two pimples on his nose.\nNew neighbours Derek and Betty McVitie replaced the Trenches for the 1997 special \"Endgame\". However, this turned out to be their only appearances in the series and they were said to have emigrated by the penultimate episode, which caused Nick Swainey to leap straight in with the offer for their old house. Series six saw the Trenches return as prominent characters, albeit living in a house some distance from the Meldrews. Despite appearing in five out of six series and three Christmas specials, neither of the Trenches ever share a scene with Mrs Warboys and Pippa only ever shares one scene with Nick Swainey (in the episode \"Who Will Buy?\").\nNick Swainey (Owen Brenman) \u2013 The excessively cheerful and often oblivious Mr Swainey appeared in the first episode, encouraging Victor to join his OAPs' trip to Eastbourne and being greeted with Victor's trademark abuse. When the Meldrews move house, they discover he is their neighbour, living on the other side of the Meldrews from the Trenches. He remains continuously optimistic; even his being told to \"piss off\" by Victor is laughed off. Despite this run-in he later befriends Victor and they frequently chat in their gardens, where Victor is often surprised by Mr Swainey's activities, ranging from archery and preparing amateur dramatics props, to bizarre games he arranges for his senile, bedridden mother, whom the audience never actually see. Despite his cheery demeanour, he does occasionally drop his guard, once displaying apparent depression at being nothing more than \"an overgrown Boy Scout\". Following his mother's death, he moved house near the end of the series, but only went as far as the Trenches'/McVities' old house, claiming he had \"always wanted to live in an end house, without leaving the area\". This took Victor by surprise; he did not learn where Mr Swainey was moving to until, while reminiscing in the garden about his departure, Mr Swainey suddenly appeared from the other side.\nOther characters.\nRonnie and Mildred (Gordon Peters and Barbara Ashcroft) \u2013 Ronnie and Mildred were a constantly cheerful, but incredibly boring, couple who provided yet another annoyance to the Meldrews, who dreaded any upcoming visits to them; Victor once said that he had hoped they were both dead. In \"The Worst Horror of All\", when the couple attempted a surprise visit, the Meldrews hid in their house to give the impression they were away on holiday and then took the phone off the hook for several days afterwards, though these efforts to avoid them were in vain. They are referenced a number of times in the series for giving the Meldrews bizarre and always unwanted presents that are seldom opened, usually involving a garish photograph of themselves. In the final series, however it was clear that their cheerfulness was a fa\u00e7ade and, in a particularly dark scene, Mildred hanged herself \"during a game of Happy Families\". The shot of Mildred's feet dangling outside the window is usually cut from pre-watershed screenings.\nAlfred Meldrew (Richard Pearson) - Victor's absent-minded brother, who lives in New Zealand. During the episode \"The Broken Reflection\", he comes to visit after 25 years, to the disdain of Victor. Alfred is an eccentric character, often walking around with his hat on fire and bringing over his and Victor's great-grandfather's skull. He is a clumsy character too, mistaking the table cloth for a napkin and dropping the entire contents of the table all over the floor when he stands up and breaking a mirror in the middle of the night after mistaking his own reflection for a burglar. Victor starts to warm to Alfred towards the end of his visit, but Alfred leaves early the next day after finding an unpleasant message about him that Victor had accidentally recorded on a dictaphone. He is not seen again, but keeps in touch with the Meldrews, as Victor is seen looking at some photographs Alfred had sent over in \"The Trial\".\nCousin Wilfred (John Rutland) \u2013 Mrs. Warboys' cousin Wilfred, first appeared in an episode in the third series. In the final series the character returned, but the effects of a stroke had rendered him mute and forced him to \"speak\" with the aid of an electronic voice generator. His poor typing on the generator led to several misunderstandings, such as asking Victor for a \"bra of soup\" (as opposed to a \"bar of soap\") and describing a visit to his \"brothel\" (as opposed to \"brother\").\nGreat Aunt Joyce and Uncle Dick - Unseen characters, they are sometimes mentioned by Victor and Margaret, as an aging, grim couple whom Victor and Margaret dread having anything to do with. Great Aunt Joyce is mentioned as having a glass eye and has the habit of knitting bizarre items (such as six-fingered gloves) for Victor. Uncle Dick has a wooden arm; in the final Comic Relief (2001) episode, it transpires that a nurse had mistakenly placed a drip in the false arm for 18 hours after a trip to hospital after trying to remove a kidney stone with a wire coat hanger.\nMimsy Berkovitz - Another unseen character, she is the local agony aunt, whom many of the characters turn to for advice. In the episode \"The Secret of the Seven Sorcerers\", Patrick is heard talking to her on the radio, seeking her advice on how to cope when Victor and Margaret invite him and Pippa around to dinner.\nMrs Birkett (Gabrielle Blunt) An elderly neighbour in the first series. She accidentally gets trapped in the Meldrews' loft when Victor closes the trap door whilst she is up there looking for jumble that Margaret has prepared. She continues to be mentioned throughout the rest of the series but is not seen again.\nMartin Trout (Peter Cook) - A paparazzo in the 1993 Christmas special \"One Foot in the Algarve\". He manages to take a number of compromising photographs involving a high-ranking politician. Trout compares the potential impact of the photos to the Profumo affair. On his way to sell the images, he loses the roll of film whilst arguing at a phone box with the Meldrews and subsequently pursues them across the Algarve to retrieve it. He suffers a number of disasters both related and unrelated to Victor and Margaret's own misfortunes, only to find that the film had actually fallen into the lining of his jacket and had been with him for much of his journey. He lost it in the door of the Meldrews' car. Retrieving the roll after a brief spell in hospital, Trout attempts to leave the Algarve in a taxi but is involved in a car crash.\nGuest appearances.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;* Stephen Lewis\nProduction.\nThe production of the show was in a conventional sitcom format, with episodes taped live in front of a studio audience, interposed with pre-filmed location material.\nThe series' opening credits were designed by Pete Wane and feature footage of a \"Galapagos Giant Turtle\", at the request of writer David Renwick, which \"[serves] as a metaphor for grumpy old Victor Meldrew.\" Wane found the footage of the creature to be \"not very upbeat visually for a comedy,\" but he found, \"to [his] relief a shot of it stumbling on a rock which gave the sequence a bit of a lift.\"\nMost of the first five series of \"One Foot in the Grave\" were produced and directed by Susan Belbin, the exceptions being \"Love and Death\", which was partly directed by veteran sitcom director Sydney Lotterby and \"Starbound\", for which Gareth Gwenlan (who in fact had originally commissioned the series in 1989) stepped in to direct some sequences after Belbin was taken ill. Afterward, Belbin retired owing to ill-health, and the final series was produced by Jonathan P. Llewellyn and directed by Christine Gernon. Wilson and Renwick felt that Gernon's experience of working with Belbin on earlier series of \"One Foot\" as a production secretary and assistant, as well as other shows, meant that her style was similar to Belbin's, aiding the transition between directors.\nThe show used Bournemouth to film some exterior sequences because of its favourable climate, easy access to London and economical benefits relative to filming in the capital. After the first series was filmed, the house\u2014near Pokesdown, Bournemouth\u2014which had been used for the Meldrews' house in location sequences, changed hands and the new owners demanded nearly triple the usage fees that the previous owners had asked for. Rather than agree to this, the production team decided to find a new house and the first episode of the second series was rewritten to have the Meldrews' house destroyed in a fire (this was filmed on waste ground in Northcote Road, Springbourne). This also gave the opportunity for a new interior set to be designed, as Belbin had been unhappy with the original set designed for the series, which she felt was too restrictive to shoot in.\nBeginning with series two, the exterior scenes of the Meldrew's home were filmed at Tresillian Way, Walkford, near Christchurch in Dorset. These later series make extensive use of specific street and garden locations in most episodes, particularly for scenes involving the Meldrew's neighbours. Most outside locations were filmed in and around Bournemouth and Christchurch. These include Richmond Hill, Undercliff Drive and Boscombe Pier, Bournemouth Town Hall, Lansdowne College, Christchurch Hospital and the former Royal Victoria Hospital (Boscombe). Later episodes, such as \"Hearts of Darkness\", were filmed entirely on location. Victor's death by a hit and run driver in the final episode was filmed at Shawford railway station, Hampshire. Fans left floral tributes at the site.\nOver the show's history, it featured a number of notable comic actors in one-off roles. These include Susie Blake, John Bird, Tim Brooke-Taylor, Peter Cook, Diana Coupland, Phil Daniels, Edward de Souza, Hannah Gordon, Georgina Hale, Roy Hudd, Jimmy Jewel, Rula Lenska, Stephen Lewis, Paul Merton, Brian Murphy, Christopher Ryan, Jim Sweeney, Barbara Windsor, Joan Sims and Ray Winstone. Two of Angus Deayton's former \"Radio Active\" and \"KYTV\" co-stars, Geoffrey Perkins and Michael Fenton Stevens were cast, in separate episodes, as respectively the brother and brother-in-law of Deayton's character. A few actors little-known at the time also appeared in one-off roles before going on to greater fame, including Lucy Davis, Joanna Scanlan, Eamonn Walker and Arabella Weir.\nMusic.\nThe \"One Foot in the Grave\" theme song was written, composed and sung by Eric Idle. A longer version was produced for the special \"One Foot in the Algarve\", released as a single with five remixes and a karaoke version in November 1994. Idle included a live version of the song on his album \"Eric Idle Sings Monty Python\". It is preluded by a similar adaptation of \"Bread of Heaven\" to that used in the episode \"The Beast in the Cage\" by disgruntled car mechanics.\nThe title music on the TV series is accompanied at the beginning and end of each episode by footage of Gal\u00e1pagos tortoises.\nThe series also made extensive use of incidental music, composed by Ed Welch, which often hinted at a particular genre to fit the mood of the scenes, frequently incorporating well-known pieces of music such as \"God Rest You Merry, Gentlemen\" or \"Intermezzo\" from Jean Sibelius' \"Karelia Suite\". In the Christmas special \"Endgame\" during Margaret's alleged death scene, a compilation of clips from past episodes are accompanied by the song \"River Runs Deep\" performed by J. J. Cale. The final episode ended with a montage of some of the mishaps Victor encountered, which were mentioned in the episode\u00a0\u2013 backed by \"End of the Line\" by the Traveling Wilburys.\nAwards.\nThe programme received a number of prestigious awards. In 1992, it won a BAFTA as Best Comedy (Programme or Series). During its ten-year run, the series was nominated a further six times. Richard Wilson also won Best Light Entertainment Performance in 1992 and 1994 and Annette Crosbie was nominated for the same award in 1994.\nThe series also won the Best Television Sitcom in 1992 from the Royal Television Society and the British Comedy Award for Best Sitcom in 1992, 1995 and 2001.\nIn 2004, \"One Foot in the Grave\" came tenth in a BBC poll to find \"Britain's Best Sitcom\" with 31,410 votes. The programme also came 80th in the British Film Institute's 100 Greatest British Television Programmes.\nControversies.\nA number of complaints were made during the series' run for its depiction of animal deaths. For example, in the episode \"The Valley of Fear\", a dead cat is found in the Meldrews' freezer; in another, a tortoise is roasted in a brazier. However, this was later cited as a positive feature of the programme's daring scripts in \"Britain's Best Sitcom\" by its advocate Rowland Rivron. The programme was censored, however, for a scene in the episode \"Hearts of Darkness\" in which an elderly resident is abused in an old people's home and, following complaints, the scene was slightly cut when the episode was repeated. In the DVD commentary for the episode, David Renwick stated his continued opposition to the cuts. Another controversial scene in the episode \"Tales of Terror\" saw the Meldrews visit Ronnie and Mildred on the understanding that Mildred had gone upstairs during a game of Happy Families and not returned; Ronnie then shows her feet hanging outside of the window, revealing that she has ended her life by suicide. The Broadcasting Standards Commission received complaints about this scene.\nWhen the final episode, \"Things Aren't Simple Any More\" originally aired on 20 November 2000 at 9pm, it coincided with the broadcast of the first jackpot winner in the British version of \"Who Wants to Be a Millionaire?\", which had been filmed the Sunday before the broadcast and the news leaked to the press. ITV was accused of engineering this in order to damage the final episode's expected high ratings, but was later cleared by the Independent Television Commission.\nCultural impact.\nDue to the series' popularity, people who constantly complain and are irritated by minor things are often compared to Victor Meldrew by the British media. Renwick disputes this usage however, claiming that Victor's reactions are entirely in proportion to the things that happen to him.\nRenwick integrated some of the plots and dialogue from the series into a novel, which was first published by BBC Books in 1992. A second novel, \"One Foot in the Grave and Counting\", was published in 2021. Renwick also adapted four episodes for BBC Radio 2, which first aired between 21 January 1995 and 11 February 1995. The episodes are \"Alive and Buried\", \"In Luton Airport, No One Can Hear You Scream\", \"Timeless Time\" and \"The Beast in the Cage\". They are regularly repeated on the digital speech station BBC Radio 4 Extra and are available on audio CD.\nWilson dislikes saying his character's catchphrase (\"I don't believe it!\") and only performs the line for charity events for a small fee. This became a joke in the actor's guest appearance as himself in the \"Father Ted\" episode \"The Mainland\", where Ted annoys him by constantly repeating his catchphrase. The situation was conceived when \"Father Ted\" writers Graham Linehan and Arthur Mathews sat behind Wilson at a performance of \"Le Cirque du Soleil\" at the Royal Albert Hall. They considered how \"tasteless and wrong\" it would be to lean forward to him every time that an acrobat did a stunt and yell the catchphrase and then they realised that that was exactly what their fictional priests would do. This was also played upon when Wilson made a guest appearance on the comedy TV quiz show \"Shooting Stars\", in which Vic Reeves and Bob Mortimer purposefully misquoted his catchphrase by referring to him as \"Richard 'I don't believe you' Wilson\".\n\"One Foot in the Grave - 30 Years Of Laughs\".\nIn April 2023, Channel 5 aired a 67-minute special retrospective for their \"Comedy Classics\" series. Cast, crew and celebrities discuss and pay tribute to the show. The documentary features an interview with Wilson, sharing his memories of the show, along with other cast members Doreen Mantle, who was 96 years old at the time, Angus Deayton, as well as director Christine Gernon.\nVHS and DVD releases.\nAll six series and specials were initially available on BBC Worldwide VHS video tapes during the late 1990s and early 2000s. The Comic Relief Shorts from 1993 and 2001 have not been released on DVD. A One Foot in the Grave Very Best of DVD featuring five of the greatest episodes was released on 22 October 2001 in Region 2. Then on 8 July 2004, a One Foot in the Grave Very Best of was also released in Region 4. Each series was gradually released on DVD in Region 2 between 2004 and 2006, with a complete series 1-6 box set towards the end of 2006. A slimmer series 1-6 box set was released in 2010 in Region 2.\nForeign versions.\n\"One Leg in the Grave\".\nA German version was made of the series in 1996\u201397, \"\" (\"One Leg in the Grave\"), directed by Thomas Nennstiel and Frank Strecker. It was broadcast on . It starred Heinz Schubert as \"Viktor B\u00f6lkhoff\", Brigitte B\u00f6ttrich as \"Margret B\u00f6lkhoff\" and Irm Hermann as \"Lisbeth Albermann\".\n\"A Foot in the Grave\".\nA Swedish version, \"\" (\"A Foot in the Grave\") was made in 2001. Produced by commercial television channel TV4 and aired on , it starred G\u00f6sta Ekman as \"Victor Melldrov\" and Lena S\u00f6derblom as his wife. A total of 12 episodes were broadcast.\n\"With One Foot in the Grave\".\nIn 2006 a Dutch version was made under the title \"\" (\"With One Foot in the Grave\") airing on NCRV. It starred Serge Henri Valcke as Victor Monter. The series was directed by Zdenek Kraus, who had directed the highly successful series \"Toen Was Geluk Heel Gewoon\" (\"Then Happiness Was Common\", based on the American sitcom \"The Honeymooners\") and was adapted for Dutch television by Ger Apeldoorn and Harm Edens, who also wrote Het Zonnetje in Huis. The series only lasted one series.\n\"Cosby\".\nThe American version, \"Cosby\", ran on CBS from 1996 to 2000. Named after its star Bill Cosby (whose character was named Hilton Lucas), it was a looser and lighter adaptation, with Renwick listed as a consultant.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "22627", "revid": "44062", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22627", "title": "Oscar", "text": "Oscar, OSCAR, or The Oscar may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "22628", "revid": "40192293", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22628", "title": "Oscars", "text": ""}
{"id": "22629", "revid": "35585582", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22629", "title": "Ottoman Turks", "text": "Turkic ethnic group\nThe Ottoman Turks () were a Turkic ethnic group in Anatolia. Originally from Central Asia, they migrated to Anatolia in the 13th century and founded the Ottoman Empire, in which they remained socio-politically dominant for the entirety of the six centuries that it existed. Their descendants are the present-day Turkish people, who comprise the majority of the population in the Republic of Turkey, which was established shortly after the end of World War I.\nReliable information about the early history of the Ottoman Turks remains scarce, but they take their Turkish name from Osman I, who founded the House of Osman alongside the Ottoman Empire; the name \"Osman\" was altered to \"Ottoman\" when it was transliterated into some European languages over time. The Ottoman principality, expanding from S\u00f6\u011f\u00fct, gradually began incorporating other Turkish-speaking Muslims and non-Turkish Christians into their realm. By the 1350s, they had begun crossing into Europe and eventually came to dominate the Mediterranean Sea. In 1453, the fall of Constantinople, which had served as the capital city of the Byzantine Empire, enabled the Ottoman Turks to control all major land routes between Asia and Europe. This development forced Western Europeans to find other ways to trade with Asians. Following the dissolution of the Ottoman Empire, the Ottoman Turkish identity ceased to exist; the Ottoman Turkish language, which was written using the Perso-Arabic script, developed into the modern Latinized Turkish language.\nHistory.\nMigration to Anatolia from Central Asia.\nThe Ottomans first became known to the West in the 13th century, when they migrated from their homeland in Central Asia westward to the Seljuk Sultanate of Rum in Anatolia. The Ottoman Turks established a beylik in Western Anatolia under Ertugrul, the capital of which was . Ertugrul, leader of the nomadic Kay\u0131 tribe, first established a principality as part of the decaying Seljuk Empire. His son Osman expanded the principality; the polity and the people were named \"Ottomans\" by Europeans after him (\"Ottoman\" being a corruption of \"Osman\"). Osman's son Orhan expanded the growing realm into an empire, taking Nicaea (present-day \u0130znik) and crossed the Dardanelles in 1362. All coins unearthed in during the two centuries before Orhan bear the names of Ilkhanate rulers. The Seljuks were under the suzerainty of the Ilkhanate, and later the Turco-Mongol conqueror Tamerlane. The Ottoman Empire came into its own when Mehmed II captured the reduced Byzantine Empire's well-defended capital, Constantinople in 1453.\nOttoman Empire until World War I.\nThe Ottoman Empire came to rule much of the Balkans, the Caucasus, the Middle East (excluding Iran), and North Africa over the course of several centuries, with an advanced army and navy. The Empire lasted until the end of the First World War, when it was defeated by the Allies and partitioned. Following the successful Turkish War of Independence that ended with the Turkish national movement retaking most of the land lost to the Allies, the movement abolished the Ottoman sultanate on November 1, 1922, and proclaimed the Republic of Turkey on October 29, 1923. The movement nullified the Treaty of S\u00e8vres and negotiated the significantly more favorable Treaty of Lausanne (1923), assuring recognition of modern Turkish national borders, termed \"Misak-\u0131 Milli\" (National Pact).\nDefinition of a Turk.\nNot all Ottoman Empire citizens were Muslims and not all Ottoman Muslims were Turks, but starting from 1924, every citizen of the newly found Turkish Republic became considered as \"Turk\". Article 88 of 1924 Constitution, which was based on the 1921 Constitution, states that the name Turk, as a political term, shall be understood to include all citizens of the Turkish Republic, without distinction of, or reference to race or religion.\nCulture.\nThe conquest of Constantinople began to make the Ottomans the rulers of one of the most profitable empires, connected to the flourishing Islamic cultures of the time, and at the crossroads of trade into Europe. The Ottomans made major developments in calligraphy, writing, law, architecture, and military science, and became the standard of opulence.\nCalligraphy.\nBecause Islam is a monotheistic religion that focuses heavily on learning the central text of the Quran and Islamic culture has historically tended towards discouraging or prohibiting figurative art, calligraphy became one of the foremost of the arts. \nThe early Y\u00e2k\u00fbt period was supplanted in the late 15th century by a new style pioneered by \u015eeyh Hamdullah (1429\u20131520), which became the basis for Ottoman calligraphy, focusing on the Nesih version of the script, which became the standard for copying the Quran (see Islamic calligraphy).\nThe next great change in Ottoman calligraphy came from the style of H\u00e2fiz Osman (1642\u20131698), whose rigorous and simplified style found favour with an empire at its peak of territorial extent and governmental burdens. \nThe late calligraphic style of the Ottomans was created by Mustafa R\u00e2kim (1757\u20131826) as an extension and reform of Osman's style, placing greater emphasis on technical perfection, which broadened the calligraphic art to encompass the s\u00fcl\u00fcs script as well as the Nesih script.\nPoetry.\nOttoman poetry included epic-length verse but is better known for shorter forms such as the gazel. For example, the epic poet Ahmedi (-1412) is remembered for his \"Alexander the Great\". His contemporary Sheykhi wrote verses on love and romance. Yaziji-Oglu produced a religious epic on Mohammed's life, drawing from the stylistic advances of the previous generation and Ahmedi's epic forms.\nPainting.\nBy the 14th century, the Ottoman Empire's prosperity made manuscript works available to merchants and craftsmen, and produced a flowering of miniatures that depicted pageantry, daily life, commerce, cities and stories, and chronicled events. \nBy the late 18th century, European influences in painting were clear, with the introduction of oils, perspective, figurative paintings, use of anatomy and composition.\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "22631", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22631", "title": "Outline of the history of Africa", "text": ""}
{"id": "22637", "revid": "525927", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22637", "title": "Object Management Group", "text": "Computer industry standards consortium\nThe Object Management Group (OMG) is a computer industry Standards Development Organization (SDO), or Voluntary Consensus Standards Body (VCSB). OMG develops enterprise integration and modeling standards for a range of technologies.\nBusiness activities.\nThe goal of the OMG was a common portable and interoperable object model with methods and data that work using all types of development environments on all types of platforms.\nThe group provides only specifications, not implementations. But before a specification can be accepted as a standard by the group, the members of the submitter team must guarantee that they will bring a conforming product to market within a year. This is an attempt to prevent unimplemented (and unimplementable) standards. Other private companies or open source groups are encouraged to produce conforming products and OMG is attempting to develop mechanisms to enforce true interoperability.\nOMG hosts four technical meetings per year for its members and interested nonmembers. The Technical Meetings provide a neutral forum to discuss, develop and adopt standards that enable software interoperability.\nHistory.\nFounded in 1989 by eleven companies (including Hewlett-Packard, IBM, Sun Microsystems, Apple Computer, American Airlines, iGrafx, and Data General), OMG's initial focus was to create a heterogeneous distributed object standard. The founding executive team included Christopher Stone and John Slitz. Current leadership includes chairman and CEO Bill Hoffman and Technical Director Mike Bennett. Dr. Richard Soley, who led OMG from its creation onwards and was its Chairman and President, died in 2023.\nSince 2000, the group's international headquarters has been located in Boston, Massachusetts; however, OMG's corporate office is now virtual.\nOMG is a standards development organization whose technical work is accomplished by Task Forces, Special Interest Groups, and an Architecture Board (https://).\nOver OMG's history, its members have defined more than 200 standard specifications. A few of the most widely known OMG standards are mentioned below.\nRatified ISO Standards.\nOf the many standards maintained by the OMG, 13 have been ratified as ISO standards. These standards are:\nHistorically, there were packages codice_1 in Java and its standard library. These have since been deprecated in Java 9 and removed in Java 11.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "22638", "revid": "51060902", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22638", "title": "OMG", "text": "OMG may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "22639", "revid": "40192293", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22639", "title": "Outed", "text": ""}
{"id": "22641", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22641", "title": "Oxford English Dictionary", "text": "Historical dictionary of the English language\nThe Oxford English Dictionary (OED) is the principal historical dictionary of the English language, published by Oxford University Press (OUP), a University of Oxford publishing house. The dictionary, which began publication in 1884, traces the historical development of the English language, providing a comprehensive resource to scholars and academic researchers, and provides ongoing descriptions of English language usage in its variations around the world.\nWork began on the dictionary in 1857, although publication did not commence until 1884. The work then began to be issued incrementally in unbound fascicles (instalments), as work continued on other parts of the project. The original title was \"A New English Dictionary on Historical Principles; Founded Mainly on the Materials Collected by The Philological Society\". In 1895, the title \"The Oxford English Dictionary\" was first used unofficially on the covers of the series, and in 1928 the full dictionary was republished in 10 bound volumes.\nIn 1933, the title \"The Oxford English Dictionary\" fully replaced the former name in all occurrences in its reprinting as 12 volumes with a one-volume supplement. More supplements came over the years until 1989, when the second edition was published, comprising 21,728 pages in 20 volumes. Since 2000, compilation of a third edition of the dictionary has been underway, approximately half of which was complete by 2018.\nIn 1988, the first electronic version of the dictionary was made available, and the online version has been available since 2000. By April 2014, it was receiving over two million visits per month. The third edition of the dictionary is expected to be available exclusively in electronic form; the CEO of OUP has stated that it is unlikely that it will ever be printed.\nHistorical nature.\nAs a historical dictionary, the \"Oxford English Dictionary\" features entries in which the earliest ascertainable recorded sense of a word, whether current or obsolete, is presented first, and each additional sense is presented in historical order according to the date of its earliest ascertainable recorded use. Following each definition are several brief illustrating quotations presented in chronological order from the earliest ascertainable use of the word in that sense to the last ascertainable use for an obsolete sense, to indicate both its life span and the time since its desuetude, or to a relatively recent use for current ones.\nThe format of the \"OED\"'s entries has influenced numerous other historical lexicography projects. The forerunners to the \"OED\", such as the early volumes of the \"Deutsches W\u00f6rterbuch\", had initially provided few quotations from a limited number of sources, whereas the \"OED\" editors preferred larger groups of quite short quotations from a wide selection of authors and publications. This influenced later volumes of this and other lexicographical works.\nEntries and relative size.\nAccording to the publishers, it would take a single person 120 years to \"key in\" the 59 million words of the \"OED\" second edition, 60 years to proofread them, and 540 megabytes to store them electronically. As of 30 November 2005, the \"Oxford English Dictionary\" contained approximately 301,100 main entries. Supplementing the entry headwords, there are 157,000 bold-type combinations and derivatives; 169,000 italicized-bold phrases and combinations; 616,500 word-forms in total, including 137,000 pronunciations; 249,300 etymologies; 577,000 cross-references; and 2,412,400 usage quotations. The dictionary's latest, complete print edition (second edition, 1989) was printed in 20 volumes, comprising 291,500 entries in 21,730 pages. The longest entry in the \"OED2\" was for the verb \"set\", which required 60,000 words to describe some 580 senses (430 for the bare verb, the rest in phrasal verbs and idioms). As entries began to be revised for the \"OED3\" in sequence starting from M, the record was progressively broken by the verbs \"make\" in 2000, then \"put\" in 2007, then \"run\" in 2011 with 645 senses.\nDespite its considerable size, the \"OED\" is neither the world's largest nor the earliest exhaustive dictionary of a language. Another earlier large dictionary is the Grimm brothers' dictionary of the German language, begun in 1838 and completed in 1961. The first edition of the is the first great dictionary devoted to a modern European language (Italian) and was published in 1612; the first edition of dates from 1694. The official dictionary of Spanish is the (produced, edited, and published by the Royal Spanish Academy), and its first edition was published in 1780. The \"Kangxi Dictionary\" of Chinese was published in 1716. The largest dictionary by number of pages is believed to be the Dutch .\nHistory.\nOrigins.\nThe dictionary began as a Philological Society project of a small group of intellectuals in London (and unconnected to Oxford University): Richard Chenevix Trench, Herbert Coleridge, and Frederick Furnivall, who were dissatisfied with the existing English dictionaries. The society expressed interest in compiling a new dictionary as early as 1844, but it was not until June 1857 that they began by forming an \"Unregistered Words Committee\" to search for words that were unlisted or poorly defined in current dictionaries. In November, Trench's report was not a list of unregistered words; instead, it was the study \"On Some Deficiencies in our English Dictionaries\", which identified seven distinct shortcomings in contemporary dictionaries:\nThe society ultimately realized that the number of unlisted words would be far more than the number of words in the English dictionaries of the 19th century, and shifted their idea from covering only words that were not already in English dictionaries to a larger project. Trench suggested that a new, truly \"comprehensive\" dictionary was needed. On 7 January 1858, the society formally adopted the idea of a comprehensive new dictionary. Volunteer readers would be assigned particular books, copying passages illustrating word usage onto quotation slips. Later the same year, the society agreed to the project in principle, with the title \"A New English Dictionary on Historical Principles\" (\"NED\").\nEarly editors.\nRichard Chenevix Trench (1807\u20131886) played the key role in the project's first months, but his appointment as Dean of Westminster meant that he could not give the dictionary project the time that it required. He withdrew and Herbert Coleridge became the first editor.\nOn 12 May 1860, Coleridge's dictionary plan was published and research was started. His house was the first editorial office. He arrayed 100,000 quotation slips in a 54 pigeon-hole grid. In April 1861, the group published the first sample pages; later that month, Coleridge died of tuberculosis, aged 30.\nThereupon Furnivall became editor; he was enthusiastic and knowledgeable, but temperamentally ill-suited for the work. Many volunteer readers eventually lost interest in the project, as Furnivall failed to keep them motivated. Furthermore, many of the slips were misplaced.\nFurnivall believed that, since many printed texts from earlier centuries were not readily available, it would be impossible for volunteers to efficiently locate the quotations that the dictionary needed. As a result, he founded the Early English Text Society in 1864 and the Chaucer Society in 1868 to publish old manuscripts. Furnivall's preparatory efforts lasted 21 years and provided numerous texts for the use and enjoyment of the general public, as well as crucial sources for lexicographers, but they did not actually involve compiling a dictionary. Furnivall recruited more than 800 volunteers to read these texts and record quotations. While enthusiastic, the volunteers were not well trained and often made inconsistent and arbitrary selections. Ultimately, Furnivall handed over nearly two tons of quotation slips and other materials to his successor.\nIn the 1870s, Furnivall unsuccessfully attempted to recruit both Henry Sweet and Henry Nicol to succeed him. He then approached James Murray, who accepted the post of editor. In the late 1870s, Furnivall and Murray met with several publishers about publishing the dictionary. In 1878, Oxford University Press agreed with Murray to proceed with the massive project; the agreement was formalized the following year. 20 years after its conception, the dictionary project finally had a publisher. It would take another 50 years to complete.\nLate in his editorship, Murray learned that one especially prolific reader, W.\u00a0C. Minor, was confined to a mental hospital for (in modern terminology) schizophrenia. Minor was a Yale University\u2013trained surgeon and a military officer in the American Civil War who had been confined to Broadmoor Asylum for the Criminally Insane after killing a man in London. He invented his own quotation-tracking system, allowing him to submit slips on specific words in response to editors' requests. The story of how Murray and Minor worked together to advance the \"OED\" was retold in the 1998 book \"The Surgeon of Crowthorne\" (US title: \"The Professor and the Madman\"), which was the basis for a 2019 film, \"The Professor and the Madman\", starring Mel Gibson and Sean Penn.\nOxford editors.\nDuring the 1870s, the Philological Society was concerned with the process of publishing a dictionary with such an immense scope. They had pages printed by publishers, but no publication agreement was reached; both the Cambridge University Press and the Oxford University Press were approached. The OUP finally agreed in 1879 (after two years of negotiating by Sweet, Furnivall, and Murray) to publish the dictionary and to pay Murray, who was both the editor and the Philological Society president. The dictionary was to be published as interval fascicles, with the final form in four volumes, totalling 6,400 pages. They hoped to finish the project in ten years.\nMurray started the project, working in a corrugated iron outbuilding called the \"Scriptorium\" which was lined with wooden planks, bookshelves, and 1,029 pigeon-holes for the quotation slips. He tracked and regathered Furnivall's collection of quotation slips, which were found to concentrate on rare, interesting words rather than common usages. For instance, there were ten times as many quotations for \"abusion\" as for \"abuse\". He appealed, through newspapers distributed to bookshops and libraries, for readers who would report \"as many quotations as you can for ordinary words\" and for words that were \"rare, obsolete, old-fashioned, new, peculiar or used in a peculiar way\". Murray had American philologist and liberal arts college professor Francis March manage the collection in North America; 1,000 quotation slips arrived daily to the Scriptorium and, by 1880, there were 2,500,000.\nThe first dictionary fascicle was published on 1 February 1884\u2014twenty-three years after Coleridge's sample pages. The full title was \"A New English Dictionary on Historical Principles; Founded Mainly on the Materials Collected by The Philological Society\"; the 352-page volume, words from \"A\" to \"Ant\", cost 12s 6d (). The total sales were only 4,000 copies.\nThe OUP saw that it would take too long to complete the work unless editorial arrangements were revised. Accordingly, new assistants were hired, and two new demands were made on Murray. The first was that he move from Mill Hill to Oxford to work full-time on the project, which he did in 1885. Murray had his Scriptorium re-erected in the back garden of his new property.\nMurray resisted the second demand: that if he could not meet the schedule, he must hire a second, senior editor to work in parallel to him, outside his supervision, on words from elsewhere in the alphabet. Murray did not want to share the work, feeling that he would accelerate his work pace with experience. That turned out not to be so, and Philip Gell of the OUP forced the promotion of Murray's assistant Henry Bradley (hired by Murray in 1884), who worked independently in the British Museum in London beginning in 1888. In 1896, Bradley moved to Oxford University.\nGell continued harassing Murray and Bradley with his business concerns \u2013 containing costs and speeding production \u2013 to the point where the project's collapse seemed likely. Newspapers reported the harassment, particularly the \"Saturday Review\", and public opinion backed the editors. Gell was fired, and the university reversed his cost policies. If the editors felt that the dictionary would have to grow larger, it would; it was an important work, and worth the time and money to finish properly.\nFurther progress.\nNeither Murray nor Bradley lived to see it. Murray died in 1915, having been responsible for words starting with \"A\u2013D\", \"H\u2013K\", \"O\u2013P\", and \"T\", nearly half the finished dictionary; Bradley died in 1923, having completed \"E\u2013G\", \"L\u2013M\", \"S\u2013Sh\", \"St\", and \"W\u2013We\". By then, two additional editors had been promoted from assistant work to independent work, continuing without much trouble. William Craigie started in 1901 and was responsible for \"N\", \"Q\u2013R\", \"Si\u2013Sq\", \"U\u2013V\", and \"Wo\u2013Wy\". The OUP had previously thought London too far from Oxford but, after 1925, Craigie worked on the dictionary in Chicago, where he was a professor. The fourth editor was Charles Talbut Onions, who compiled the remaining ranges starting in 1914: \"Su\u2013Sz\", \"Wh\u2013Wo\", and \"X\u2013Z\".\nIn 1919\u20131920, J. R. R. Tolkien was employed by the \"OED\", researching etymologies of the \"Waggle\" to \"Warlock\" range; later he parodied the principal editors as \"The Four Wise Clerks of Oxenford\" in the story \"Farmer Giles of Ham\".\nBy early 1894, a total of 11 fascicles had been published, or about one per year: four for \"A\u2013B\", five for \"C\", and two for \"E\". Of these, eight were 352 pages long, while the last one in each group was shorter to end at the letter break (which eventually became a volume break). At this point, it was decided to publish the work in smaller and more frequent instalments: once every three months beginning in 1895 there would be a fascicle of 64 pages, priced at 2s 6d. If enough material was ready, 128 or even 192 pages would be published together. This pace was maintained until World War I forced reductions in staff. Each time enough consecutive pages were available, the same material was also published in the original larger fascicles. Also in 1895, the title \"Oxford English Dictionary\" was first used. It then appeared only on the outer covers of the fascicles; the original title was still the official one and was used everywhere else.\nCompletion of first edition and first supplement.\nThe 125th and last fascicle covered words from \"Wise\" to the end of \"W\" and was published on 19 April 1928, and the full dictionary in bound volumes followed immediately. William Shakespeare is the most-quoted writer in the completed dictionary, with \"Hamlet\" his most-quoted work. George Eliot (Mary Ann Evans) is the most-quoted female writer. Collectively, the Bible is the most-quoted work (in many translations); the most-quoted single work is \"Cursor Mundi\".\nAdditional material for a given letter range continued to be gathered after the corresponding fascicle was printed, with a view towards inclusion in a supplement or revised edition. A one-volume supplement of such material was published in 1933, with entries weighted towards the start of the alphabet where the fascicles were decades old. The supplement included at least one word (\"bondmaid\") accidentally omitted when its slips were misplaced; many words and senses newly coined (famously \"appendicitis\", coined in 1886 and missing from the 1885 fascicle, which came to prominence when Edward VII's 1902 appendicitis postponed his coronation); and some previously excluded as too obscure (notoriously \"radium\", omitted in 1903, months before its discoverers Pierre and Marie Curie won the Nobel Prize in Physics). Also in 1933 the original fascicles of the entire dictionary were re-issued, bound into 12 volumes, under the title \"The Oxford English Dictionary\". This edition of 13 volumes including the supplement was subsequently reprinted in 1961 and 1970.\nSecond supplement.\nIn 1933, Oxford had finally put the dictionary to rest; all work ended, and the quotation slips went into storage. However, the English language continued to change and, by 20 years later, the dictionary was outdated.\nThere were three possible ways to update it. The cheapest would have been to leave the existing work alone and simply compile a new supplement of perhaps one or two volumes, but then anyone looking for a word or sense and unsure of its age would have to look in three different places. The most convenient choice for the user would have been for the entire dictionary to be re-edited and retypeset, with each change included in its proper alphabetical place; but this would have been the most expensive option, with perhaps 15 volumes required to be produced. The OUP chose a middle approach: combining the new material with the existing supplement to form a larger replacement supplement.\nRobert Burchfield was hired in 1957 to edit the second supplement; Charles Talbut Onions turned 84 that year but was still able to make some contributions as well. The work on the supplement was expected to take about seven years. It actually took 29 years, by which time the new supplement \"(OEDS)\" had grown to four volumes, starting with \"A\", \"H\", \"O\", and \"Sea\". They were published in 1972, 1976, 1982, and 1986 respectively, bringing the complete dictionary to 16 volumes, or 17 counting the first supplement.\nBurchfield emphasized the inclusion of modern-day language and, through the supplement, the dictionary was expanded to include a wealth of new words from the burgeoning fields of science and technology, as well as popular culture and colloquial speech. Burchfield said that he broadened the scope to include developments of the language in English-speaking regions beyond the United Kingdom, including North America, Australia, New Zealand, South Africa, India, Pakistan, and the Caribbean. Burchfield also removed, for unknown reasons, many entries that had been added to the 1933 supplement. In 2012, an analysis by lexicographer Sarah Ogilvie revealed that many of these entries were foreign loan words, despite Burchfield's claim that he included more such words. The proportion was estimated from a sample calculation to amount to 17% of the foreign loan words and words from regional forms of English. Some of these had only a single recorded usage, but many had multiple recorded citations, and it ran against what was thought to be the established \"OED\" editorial practice and a perception that he had opened up the dictionary to \"World English\".\nSecond edition.\nBy the time the new supplement was completed, it was clear that the full text of the dictionary would need to be computerized. This would require retyping it, but from then on it would always be accessible for computer searching\u2014as well as for whatever new editions of the dictionary might be desired, starting with an integration of the supplementary volumes and the main text. Preparation for this process began in 1983, and editorial work started the following year under the administrative direction of Timothy J. Benbow, with John A. Simpson and Edmund S. C. Weiner as co-editors. In 2016, Simpson published his memoir chronicling his years at the OED: \"The Word Detective: Searching for the Meaning of It All at the Oxford English Dictionary \u2013 A Memoir\" (New York: Basic Books).\nThus began the \"New Oxford English Dictionary (NOED)\" project. In the United States, more than 120 typists of the International Computaprint Corporation (now Reed Tech) started keying in over 350,000,000 characters, their work checked by 55 proof-readers in England. Retyping the text alone was not sufficient; all the information represented by the complex typography of the original dictionary had to be retained, which was done by marking up the content in SGML. A specialized search engine and display software were also needed to access it. Under a 1985 agreement, some of this software work was done at the University of Waterloo, Canada, at the \"Centre for the New Oxford English Dictionary\", led by Frank Tompa and Gaston Gonnet; this search technology went on to become the basis for the Open Text Corporation. Computer hardware, database and other software, development managers, and programmers for the project were donated by the British subsidiary of IBM; the colour syntax-directed editor for the project, LEXX, was written by Mike Cowlishaw of IBM. The University of Waterloo, in Canada, volunteered to design the database. A. Walton Litz, an English professor at Princeton University who served on the Oxford University Press advisory council, was quoted in \"Time\" as saying \"I've never been associated with a project, I've never even heard of a project, that was so incredibly complicated and that met every deadline.\"\nBy 1989, the \"NOED\" project had achieved its primary goals, and the editors, working online, had successfully combined the original text, Burchfield's supplement, and a small amount of newer material, into a single unified dictionary. The word \"new\" was again dropped from the name, and the second edition of the \"OED\", or the \"OED2\", was published. The first edition retronymically became the \"OED1\".\nThe \"Oxford English Dictionary 2\" was printed in 20 volumes. Up to a very late stage, all the volumes of the first edition were started on initial letter boundaries. For the second edition, there was no attempt to start them on letter boundaries, and they were made roughly equal in size. The 20 volumes started with \"A\", \"B.B.C.\", \"Cham\", \"Creel\", \"Dvandva\", \"Follow\", \"Hat\", \"Interval\", \"Look\", \"Moul\", \"Ow\", \"Poise\", \"Quemadero\", \"Rob\", \"Ser\", \"Soot\", \"Su\", \"Thru\", \"Unemancipated\", and \"Wave\".\nThe content of the \"OED2\" is mostly just a reorganization of the earlier corpus, but the retypesetting provided an opportunity for two long-needed format changes. The headword of each entry was no longer capitalized, allowing the user to readily see those words that actually require a capital letter. Murray had devised his own notation for pronunciation, there being no standard available at the time, whereas the \"OED2\" adopted the modern International Phonetic Alphabet. Unlike the earlier edition, all foreign alphabets except Greek were transliterated.\nFollowing page 832 of Volume XX, \"Wave-Zyxt\", there is a 143-page separately paginated bibliography, a conflation of the OED 1st edition's published with the 1933 Supplement and that in Volume IV of the Supplement published in 1986.\nThe British quiz show \"Countdown\" awarded the leather-bound complete version to the champions of each series between its inception in 1982 and Series 63 in 2010. The prize was axed after Series 83, completed in June 2021, as it was considered out of date.\nWhen the print version of the second edition was published in 1989, the response was enthusiastic. Author Anthony Burgess declared it \"the greatest publishing event of the century\", as quoted by the \"Los Angeles Times\". \"Time\" dubbed the book \"a scholarly Everest\", and Richard Boston, writing for \"The Guardian\", called it \"one of the wonders of the world\".\nAdditions series.\nThe supplements and their integration into the second edition were a great improvement to the \"OED\" as a whole, but it was recognized that most of the entries were still fundamentally unaltered from the first edition. Much of the information in the dictionary published in 1989 was already decades out of date, though the supplements had made good progress towards incorporating new vocabulary. Yet many definitions contained disproven scientific theories, outdated historical information, and moral values that were no longer widely accepted. Furthermore, the supplements had failed to recognize many words in the existing volumes as obsolete by the time of the second edition's publication, meaning that thousands of words were marked as current despite no recent evidence of their use.\nAccordingly, it was recognized that work on a third edition would have to begin to rectify these problems. The first attempt to produce a new edition came with the \"Oxford English Dictionary Additions Series,\" a new set of supplements to complement the \"OED2\" with the intention of producing a third edition from them. The previous supplements appeared in alphabetical instalments, whereas the new series had a full A\u2013Z range of entries within each individual volume, with a complete alphabetical index at the end of all words revised so far, each listed with the volume number which contained the revised entry.\nHowever, in the end only three \"Additions\" volumes were published this way, two in 1993 and one in 1997, each containing about 3,000 new definitions. The possibilities of the World Wide Web and new computer technology in general meant that the processes of researching the dictionary and of publishing new and revised entries could be vastly improved. New text search databases offered vastly more material for the editors of the dictionary to work with, and with publication on the Web as a possibility, the editors could publish revised entries much more quickly and easily than ever before. A new approach was called for, and for this reason it was decided to embark on a new, complete revision of the dictionary.\n*?th impression (1994-02-10)\n*?th impression (1994-02-10)\n*?th impression (1997-10-09)\nThird edition.\nBeginning with the launch of the first \"OED Online\" site in 2000, the editors of the dictionary began a major revision project to create a completely revised third edition of the dictionary (\"OED3\"), expected to be completed in 2037 at a projected cost of circa \u00a334 million.\nRevisions were started at the letter \"M\", with new material appearing every three months on the \"OED Online\" website. The editors chose to start the revision project from the middle of the dictionary in order that the overall quality of entries be made more even, since the later entries in the \"OED1\" generally tended to be better than the earlier ones. However, in March 2008, the editors announced that they would alternate each quarter between moving forward in the alphabet as before and updating \"key English words from across the alphabet, along with the other words which make up the alphabetical cluster surrounding them\". With the relaunch of the \"OED Online\" website in December 2010, alphabetical revision was abandoned altogether.\nThe revision is expected roughly to double the dictionary in size. Apart from general updates to include information on new words and other changes in the language, the third edition brings many other improvements, including changes in formatting and stylistic conventions for easier reading and computerized searching, more etymological information, and a general change of focus away from individual words towards more general coverage of the language as a whole. While the original text drew its quotations mainly from literary sources such as novels, plays, and poetry, with additional material from newspapers and academic journals, the new edition will reference more kinds of material that were unavailable to the editors of previous editions, such as wills, inventories, account books, diaries, journals, and letters.\nJohn Simpson was the first chief editor of the \"OED3\". He retired in 2013 and was replaced by Michael Proffitt, who is the eighth chief editor of the dictionary.\nThe production of the new edition exploits computer technology, particularly since the inauguration in June 2005 of the \"Perfect All-Singing All-Dancing Editorial and Notation Application\", or \"Pasadena\". With this XML-based system, lexicographers can spend less effort on presentation issues such as the numbering of definitions. This system has also simplified the use of the quotations database, and enabled staff in New York to work directly on the dictionary in the same way as their Oxford-based counterparts.\nOther important computer uses include internet searches for evidence of current usage and email submissions of quotations by readers and the general public.\nNew entries and words.\n\"Wordhunt\" was a 2005 appeal to the general public for help in providing citations for 50 selected recent words, and produced antedatings for many. The results were reported in a BBC TV series, \"Balderdash and Piffle\". The \"OED\"'s readers contribute quotations: the department currently receives about 200,000 a year.\n\"OED\" currently contains over 500,000 entries. The online \"OED\" is updated on a quarterly basis, with the addition of new words and senses, and the revision of existing entries.\nFormats.\nCompact editions.\nIn 1971, the 13-volume \"OED1\" (1933) was reprinted as a two-volume \"Compact Edition\", by photographically reducing each page to one-half its linear dimensions; each compact edition page held four \"OED1\" pages in a four-up (\"4-up\") format. The two-volume letters were \"A\" and \"P\"; the first supplement was at the second volume's end. The \"Compact Edition\" included, in a small slip-case drawer, a Bausch &amp; Lomb magnifying glass to help in reading reduced type. Many copies were inexpensively distributed through book clubs. In 1987, the second supplement was published as a third volume to the \"Compact Edition\".\nThe 20-volume \"OED2\" (1989) was republished in 1991 as a compact edition (). The format was re-sized to one-third of original linear dimensions, a nine-up (\"9-up\") format requiring a stronger magnifying glass (included), but allowing publication of a single-volume dictionary. This version includes definitions of 500,000 words, in 290,000 main entries, with 137,000 pronunciations, 249,300 etymologies, 577,000 cross-references, and 2,412,000 illustrative quotations. It is accompanied by \"A User's Guide to the \"Oxford English Dictionary\"\" by Donna Lee Berg. After this version was published, however, book club offers commonly continued to sell the two-volume 1971 \"Compact Edition\".\nElectronic versions.\nOnce the dictionary was digitized and online, it was also available to be published on CD-ROM. The text of the first edition was made available in 1987. Afterward, three versions of the second edition were issued. Version 1 (1992) was identical in content to the printed second edition, and the CD itself was not copy-protected. Version 2 (1999) included the \"Oxford English Dictionary Additions\" of 1993 and 1997. These CD-ROM editions are for Microsoft Windows only.\nVersion 3.0 was released in 2002 with additional words from the \"OED3\" and software improvements. Version 3.1.1 (2007) added support for hard disk installation, so that the user does not have to insert the CD to use the dictionary. It has been reported that this version will work on operating systems other than Windows, using emulation programs. Version 4.0 of the CD was released in June 2009 and has applications for both Windows (7 and later) and MacOS X (10.4 and later). This version uses the CD drive for installation, running only from the hard drive.\nOn 14 March 2000, the \"Oxford English Dictionary Online\" (\"OED Online\") became available to subscribers. The online database containing the \"OED2\" is updated quarterly with revisions that will be included in the \"OED3\" (see above). The online edition is the most up-to-date version of the dictionary available. The \"OED\" website is not optimized for mobile devices, but the developers have stated that there are plans to provide an API to facilitate the development of interfaces for querying the \"OED\".\nThe price for an individual to use this edition is \u00a3100 or US$100 a year; consequently, most subscribers are large organizations such as universities. Some public libraries and companies have also subscribed, including public libraries in the United Kingdom, where access is funded by the Arts Council, and public libraries in New Zealand. Individuals who belong to a library which subscribes to the service are able to use the service from their own homes without charge.\n*Upgrade version for 3.0 ():\n*?th impression (2005-08-18)\n*Full version (/)\n*?th impression (2009-06-04)\n*Upgrade version for 2.0 and above (/): Supports Windows only.\n*?th impression (2009-07-15)\n*Print+CD-ROM version (): Supports Windows Vista and Mac OS).\n*?th impression (2009-11-16)\nRelationship to other Oxford dictionaries.\nThe \"OED\"'s utility and renown as a historical dictionary have led to numerous offspring projects and other dictionaries bearing the Oxford name, though not all are directly related to the \"OED\" itself.\nThe \"Shorter Oxford English Dictionary,\" originally started in 1902 and completed in 1933, is an abridgement of the full work that retains the historical focus, but does not include any words which were obsolete before 1700 except those used by Shakespeare, Milton, Spenser, and the King James Bible. A completely new edition was produced from the \"OED2\" and published in 1993, with revisions in 2002 and 2007.\nThe \"Concise Oxford Dictionary\" is a different work, which aims to cover current English only, without the historical focus. The original edition, mostly based on the \"OED1\", was edited by Francis George Fowler and Henry Watson Fowler and published in 1911, before the main work was completed. Revised editions appeared throughout the twentieth century to keep it up to date with changes in English usage.\n\"The Pocket Oxford Dictionary of Current English\" was originally conceived by F. G. Fowler and H. W. Fowler to be compressed, compact, and concise. Its primary source is the Oxford English Dictionary, and it is nominally an abridgement of the Concise Oxford Dictionary. It was first published in 1924.\nIn 1998 the \"New Oxford Dictionary of English\" (\"NODE\") was published. While also aiming to cover current English, \"NODE\" was not based on the \"OED\". Instead, it was an entirely new dictionary produced with the aid of corpus linguistics. Once \"NODE\" was published, a similarly brand-new edition of the \"Concise Oxford Dictionary\" followed, this time based on an abridgement of \"NODE\" rather than the \"OED\"; \"NODE\" (under the new title of the \"Oxford Dictionary of English\", or \"ODE\") continues to be principal source for Oxford's product line of current-English dictionaries, including the \"New Oxford American Dictionary\", with the \"OED\" now only serving as the basis for scholarly historical dictionaries.\nSpelling.\nThe \"OED\" lists British headword spellings (e.g., \"labour\", \"centre\") with variants following (\"labor\", \"center\", etc.). For the suffix more commonly spelt \"-ise\" in British English, OUP policy dictates a preference for the spelling \"-ize\", e.g., \"realize\" vs. \"realise\" and \"globalization\" vs. \"globalisation\". The rationale is etymological, in that the English suffix is mainly derived from the Greek suffix \"-\u03b9\u03b6\u03b5\u03b9\u03bd\", (\"-izein\"), or the Latin \"-iz\u0101re\". However, \"-ze\" is also sometimes treated as an Americanism insofar as the \"-ze\" suffix has crept into words where it did not originally belong, as with \"analyse\" (British English), which is spelt \"analyze\" in American English.\nReception and criticism.\nBritish prime minister Stanley Baldwin described the \"OED\" as a \"national treasure\". Author Anu Garg, founder of Wordsmith.org, has called it a \"lex icon\". Tim Bray, co-creator of Extensible Markup Language (XML), credits the \"OED\" as the developing inspiration of that markup language.\nHowever, despite its claims of authority, the dictionary has been criticized since the 1960s because of its scope, its claims to authority, its British-centredness and relative neglect of World Englishes, its implied but unacknowledged focus on literary language and, above all, its influence. The \"OED\", as a commercial product, has always had to steer a line between scholarship and marketing. In his review of the 1982 supplement, University of Oxford linguist Roy Harris writes that criticizing the \"OED\" is extremely difficult because \"one is dealing not just with a dictionary but with a national institution\", one that \"has become, like the English monarchy, virtually immune from criticism in principle\". He further notes that neologisms from respected \"literary\" authors such as Samuel Beckett and Virginia Woolf are included, whereas usage of words in newspapers or other less \"respectable\" sources hold less sway, even though they may be commonly used. He writes that the \"OED\"'s \"[b]lack-and-white lexicography is also black-and-white in that it takes upon itself to pronounce authoritatively on the rights and wrongs of usage\", faulting the dictionary's prescriptive rather than descriptive usage.\nTo Harris, this prescriptive classification of certain usages as \"erroneous\" and the complete omission of various forms and usages cumulatively represent the \"social bias[es]\" of the (presumably well-educated and wealthy) compilers. However, the \"Guide to the Third Edition of the OED\" has stated that \"\"Oxford English Dictionary\" is not an arbiter of proper usage, despite its widespread reputation to the contrary\" and that the dictionary \"is intended to be descriptive, not prescriptive\". The identification of \"erroneous and catachrestic\" usages is being removed from third edition entries, sometimes in favour of usage notes describing the attitudes to language which have previously led to these classifications. Another avenue of criticism is the dictionary's non-inclusion of etymologies for words of AAVE or African language origin such as \"jazz\", \"dig\" or \"badmouth\" (the latter two are possibly of Wolof and Mandinka languages, respectively). As of 2022, OUP is preparing a specialized \"Oxford Dictionary of African American English\" in collaboration with Harvard University's Hutchins Center for African and African American Research, with literary critic Henry Louis Gates Jr. being the project's editor-in-chief.\nHarris also faults the editors' \"donnish conservatism\" and their adherence to prudish Victorian morals, citing as an example the non-inclusion of \"various centuries-old 'four-letter words'\" until 1972. However, no English dictionary included such profanity, for fear of possible prosecution under British obscenity laws, until after the conclusion of the \"Lady Chatterley's Lover\" obscenity trial in 1960. The \"Penguin English Dictionary\" of 1965 was the first dictionary that included the word \"fuck\". Joseph Wright's \"English Dialect Dictionary\" had included \"shit\" in 1905.\nThe \"OED\"'s claims of authority have also been questioned by linguists such as Pius ten Hacken, who notes that the dictionary actively strives toward definitiveness and authority but can only achieve those goals in a limited sense, given the difficulties of defining the scope of what it includes.\nFounding editor James Murray was also reluctant to include scientific terms, despite their documentation, unless he felt that they were widely enough used. In 1902, he declined to add the word \"radium\" to the dictionary.\nResearch using the OED.\nThe \"OED\" has been used to support research in fields such as linguistics, psycholinguistics, and psychology. Examples include the extension of word meanings via metaphor, the evolution of measurement terms like \"foot\" from concrete to abstract meanings, and the identification of systematic patterns in word blends (e.g., \"brunch\" from a blend of \"breakfast\" and \"lunch\").\nThe \"OED\" in popular culture.\nThe 2020 novel \"The Dictionary of Lost Words\" by Pip Williams centres on the creation of the \"OED\", the fictional narrator spending much time in the Scriptorium as a child, the daughter of a fictional widowed lexicographer, and later becoming an assistant there. It has been adapted for the stage, and a television series is planned.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n1888\u20131933 Issue\nFull title of each volume: \"A New English Dictionary on Historical Principles: Founded Mainly on the Materials Collected by the Philological Society\"\n1933 Corrected re-issue\nFull title of each volume: \"The Oxford English Dictionary: Being a Corrected Re-issue with an Introduction, Supplement and Bibliography, of A New English Dictionary on Historical Principles: Founded Mainly on the Materials Collected by the Philological Society\""}
{"id": "22644", "revid": "7611264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22644", "title": "Ottonian dynasty", "text": "Saxon dynasty of German monarchs (919\u20131024)\nThe Ottonian dynasty () was a Saxon dynasty of German monarchs (919\u20131024), named after three of its kings and Holy Roman emperors, especially Otto the Great. It is also known as the Saxon dynasty after the family's origin in the German stem duchy of Saxony. The family itself is also sometimes known as the Liudolfings (), after its earliest known member Count Liudolf (d. 866) and one of its most common given names. The Ottonian rulers were successors of Conrad I, who was the only German king to rule in East Francia after the Carolingian dynasty.\nThe Ottonians are associated with the notable military success that transformed the political situation in contemporary Western Europe: \"It was the success of the Ottonians in molding the raw materials bequeathed to them into a formidable military machine that made possible the establishment of Germany as the preeminent kingdom in Europe from the tenth through the mid-thirteenth century.\" They are also associated with a notable cultural movement (especially new literary traditions) known as the Ottonian Renaissance.\nAfter the end of Ottonian rule in 1024, the Salian dynasty went on to occupy the Imperial throne for just over a century, until 1125.\nOrigins.\nIn the 9th century, the Saxon count Liudolf held large estates on the Leine river west of the Harz mountain range and in the adjacent Eichsfeld territory of Thuringia. His ancestors probably acted as \"ministeriales\" in the Saxon stem duchy, which had been incorporated into the Carolingian Empire after the Saxon Wars of Charlemagne. The family's substantial holdings in Thuringia suggest that they originated from that region, and their Saxon lands may have been granted as a reward for their service to the Carolingians. Liudolf married Oda, a member of the Frankish House of Billung. About 852 the couple together with Bishop Altfrid of Hildesheim founded Brunshausen Abbey, which, once relocated to Gandersheim, rose to a family monastery and burial ground.\nLiudolf already held the high social position of a Saxon \"dux\", documented by the marriage of his daughter Liutgard with Louis the Younger, son of the Carolingian king Louis the German in 869. Liudolf's sons Bruno and Otto the Illustrious ruled over large parts of Saxon Eastphalia, moreover, Otto acted as lay abbot of the Imperial abbey of Hersfeld with large estates in Thuringia. He married Hedwiga, a daughter of the Popponid (Elder Babenberg) duke Henry of Franconia. Otto possibly accompanied King Arnulf on his 894 campaign to Italy; the marriage of his daughter Oda with Zwentibold, Arnulf's illegitimate son, documents the efforts of the Carolingian ruler to win the mighty Saxon dynasty over as an ally. According to the Saxon chronicler Widukind of Corvey, upon the death of the last Carolingian king Louis the Child in 911 Otto was already a candidate for the East Frankish crown, which however passed to the Franconian duke Conrad I.\nUpon Otto's death in 912, his son Henry the Fowler succeeded him as Duke of Saxony. Henry had married Matilda of Ringelheim, a descendant of the legendary Saxon ruler Widukind and heiress to extended estates in Westphalia.\nReign.\nThe Ottonian kings Holy Roman emperors were:\nHenry I.\nAlthough never emperor, Henry the Fowler was arguably the founder of the imperial dynasty. While East Francia under the rule of the last Carolingian kings was ravaged by Hungarian invasions, he was chosen to be among the German dukes. Elected \"Rex Francorum\" in May 919, Henry abandoned the claim to dominate the whole disintegrating Carolingian Empire and, unlike his predecessor Conrad I, succeeded in gaining the support of the Franconian, Bavarian, Swabian and Lotharingian dukes. In 933 he led a German army to victory over the Hungarian forces at the Battle of Riade and campaigned both the land of the Polabian Slavs and the Duchy of Bohemia. Because he had assimilated so much power through his conquest, he was able to transfer power to his son Otto I.\nOtto I.\nOtto I, duke of Saxony upon the death of his father in 936, was elected king within a few weeks. He continued the work of unifying all of the German tribes into a single kingdom, greatly expanding the powers of the king at the expense of the aristocracy. Through strategic marriages and personal appointments, he installed members of his own family in the kingdom's most important duchies. This, however, did not prevent his relatives from entering into civil war: both Otto's brother Duke Henry I of Bavaria and his son Duke Liudolf of Swabia revolted against his rule. Otto was able to suppress their uprisings, in consequence, the various dukes, who had previously been co-equals with the king, were reduced to royal subjects under the king's authority. Otto's decisive victory over the Magyars at the Battle of Lechfeld in 955 ended the threat of Hungarian invasions and secured his hold over his kingdom.\nThe defeat of the pagan Magyars earned King Otto the reputation as the savior of Christendom and the epithet \"the Great\". He transformed the Church in Germany into a kind of proprietary church and major royal power base to which he donated charity and for the creation of which his family was responsible. By 961, Otto had conquered the Kingdom of Italy, which was a troublesome inheritance that none wanted, and extended his kingdom's borders to the north, east, and south. In control of much of central and southern Europe, the patronage of Otto and his immediate successors caused a limited cultural renaissance of the arts and architecture. He confirmed the 754 Donation of Pepin and, with recourse to the concept of \"translatio imperii\" in the succession of Charlemagne, proceeded to Rome to have himself crowned Holy Roman emperor by Pope John XII in 962. He even reached a settlement with the Byzantine emperor John I Tzimiskes by marrying his son and heir Otto II to John's niece Theophanu. In 968 he established the Archbishopric of Magdeburg at his long-time residence.\nOtto II.\nCo-ruler with his father since 961 and crowned emperor in 967, Otto II ascended the throne at the age of 18. By excluding the Bavarian line of Ottonians from the line of succession, he strengthened Imperial authority and secured his own son's succession to the Imperial throne. During his reign, Otto II attempted to annex the whole of Italy into the Empire, bringing him into conflict with the Byzantine emperor and with the Saracens of the Fatimid Caliphate. His campaign against the Saracens ended in 982 with a disastrous defeat at the Battle of Stilo. Moreover, in 983 Otto II experienced a Great Slav Rising against his rule.\nOtto II died in 983 at the age of 28 after a ten-year reign. Succeeded by his three-year-old son Otto III as king, his sudden death plunged the Ottonian dynasty into crisis. During her regency for Otto III, Empress Theophanu abandoned her late husband's imperialistic policy and devoted herself entirely to furthering her own agenda in Italy.\nOtto III.\nWhen Otto III came of age, he concentrated on securing the rule in the Italian domains, installing his confidants Bruno of Carinthia and Gerbert of Aurillac as popes. In 1000 he made a pilgrimage to the Congress of Gniezno in Poland, establishing the Archdiocese of Gniezno and confirming the royal status of the Piast ruler Boles\u0142aw I the Brave. Expelled from Rome in 1001, Otto III died at age 21 the next year, without an opportunity to reconquer the city.\nHenry II.\nThe childless Otto III was succeeded by Henry II, a son of Duke Henry II of Bavaria and thereby a member of the Bavarian line of the Ottonians. Duke of Bavaria since 995, he was crowned king on 7 June 1002. Henry II spent the first years of his rule consolidating his political power on the borders of the German kingdom. He waged several campaigns against Boles\u0142aw I of Poland and then moved successfully to Italy where he was crowned emperor by Pope Benedict VIII on 14 February 1014. He reinforced his rule by endowing and founding numerous dioceses, such as the Bishopric of Bamberg in 1007, intertwining the secular and ecclesiastical authority over the Empire. Henry II was canonized by Pope Eugene III in 1146.\nAs his marriage with Cunigunde of Luxembourg remained childless, the Ottonian dynasty became extinct with the death of Henry II in 1024. The crown passed to Conrad II of the Salian dynasty, great-grandson of Liutgarde, a daughter of Otto I. When King Rudolph III of Burgundy died without heirs on 2 February 1032, Conrad II successfully claimed also this kingship on the basis of an inheritance Emperor Henry II had extorted from the former in 1006, having invaded Burgundy to enforce his claim after Rudolph attempted to renounce it in 1016.\nOttonian rulership.\nHistorians have written extensively about how the Ottonian kings and emperors ruled their lands. For some historians, following in the wake of Karl Leyser, Ottonian government was primarily conducted through oral and ritual means, in which the written word took a back seat. Other historians, such as David Bachrach, have argued strongly for the continuing use of writing in administering the Ottonians' far-flung lands. Attention has recently focused on how the rulers took advantage of their royal estates, known as the fisc.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "22645", "revid": "43252809", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22645", "title": "Orkney", "text": "Archipelago, county and council area in northern Scotland\nOrkney (), also known as the Orkney Islands, is an archipelago off the north coast of mainland Scotland. The plural name the Orkneys is also sometimes used, but locals now consider it outdated. Part of the Northern Isles along with Shetland, Orkney is 10 miles (16\u00a0km) north of Caithness and has about 70 islands, of which 20 are inhabited. The largest island, the Mainland, has an area of , making it the sixth-largest Scottish island and the tenth-largest island in the British Isles. Orkney's largest settlement, and also its administrative centre, is Kirkwall.\nOrkney is one of the 32 council areas of Scotland, as well as a constituency of the Scottish Parliament, a lieutenancy area, and an historic county. The local council is Orkney Islands Council.\nThe islands have been inhabited for at least years, originally occupied by Mesolithic and Neolithic tribes and then by the Picts. Orkney was colonised and later annexed by the Kingdom of Norway in 875 and settled by the Norsemen. In 1472, the Parliament of Scotland absorbed the Earldom of Orkney into the Kingdom of Scotland, following failure to pay a dowry promised to James III of Scotland by the family of his bride, Margaret of Denmark.\nIn addition to the Mainland, most of the remaining islands are divided into two groups: the North Isles and the South Isles. The local climate is relatively mild and the soils are extremely fertile; most of the land is farmed, and agriculture is the most important sector of the economy. The significant wind and marine energy resources are of growing importance; the amount of electricity that Orkney generates annually from renewable energy sources exceeds its demand. Temperatures average in winter and in summer.\nThe local people are known as Orcadians; they speak a distinctive dialect of the Scots language and have a rich body of folklore. Orkney contains some of the oldest and best-preserved Neolithic sites in Europe; the \"Heart of Neolithic Orkney\" is a designated UNESCO World Heritage Site. Orkney also has an abundance of marine and avian wildlife.\nEtymology.\nPytheas of Massalia visited Britain \u2013 probably sometime between 322 and 285\u00a0BC \u2013 and described it as triangular in shape, with a northern tip called \"Orcas\".\nThis may have referred to Dunnet Head, from which Orkney is visible. Writing in the 1st century\u00a0AD, the Roman geographers Ptolemy and Pomponius Mela called the islands (Ancient Greek: \u038c\u03c1\u03ba\u03ac\u03b4\u03b5\u03c2), as did Tacitus in AD 98, claiming that his father-in-law Agricola had \"discovered and subjugated the Orcades hitherto unknown\" (although both Mela and Pliny had previously referred to the islands). The Byzantine John Tzetzes in his work \"Chiliades\" called the islands Orcades.\nEtymologists usually interpret the element as a Pictish tribal name meaning \"young pig\" or \"young boar\". Speakers of Old Irish referred to the islands as \"islands of the young pigs\". The archipelago is known as in modern Welsh and in modern Scottish Gaelic, the representing a fossilized prepositional case ending. Some earlier sources alternatively hypothesise that Orkney comes from the Latin , whale. The Anglo-Saxon monk Bede refers to the islands as in \"Ecclesiastical History of the English People\".\nNorwegian settlers arriving from the late ninth century reinterpreted \"orc\" as the Old Norse \"seal\" and added \"islands\" to the end, so the name became \"Seal Islands\". The plural suffix was later removed in English leaving the modern name \"Orkney\". According to the , Orkney was named after an earl called Orkan.\nThe Norse knew Mainland, Orkney as \"Mainland\" or as \"Horse Island\". The island is sometimes referred to as \"Pomona\" (or \"Pomonia\"), a name that stems from a 16th-century mistranslation by George Buchanan, which has rarely been used locally.\nUsage of the plural \"Orkneys\" dates from the 18th century or earlier and was used by for example Sir Walter Scott. From the mid-19th century onwards this plural form has fallen out of use in the local area although it is still often used, particularly by publications based outside Scotland.\nHistory.\nPrehistory.\nA charred hazelnut shell, recovered in 2007 during excavations in Tankerness on the Mainland, has been dated to 6820\u20136660 BC, indicating the presence of Mesolithic nomadic tribes. The earliest known permanent settlement is at Knap of Howar, a Neolithic farmstead on the island of Papa Westray, which dates from 3500 BC. The village of Skara Brae, Europe's best-preserved Neolithic settlement, is believed to have been inhabited from around 3100 BC. Other remains from that era include the Standing Stones of Stenness, the Maeshowe passage grave, the Ring of Brodgar and other standing stones. Many of the Neolithic settlements were abandoned around 2500 BC, possibly due to changes in the climate.\nIn September 2021, archaeologists announced the discovery of two polished stone balls in a 5500-year-old Neolithic burial tomb in Sanday. According to Dr Hugo Anderson, the second object was as the \"size of a cricket ball, perfectly spherical and beautifully finished\".\nDuring the Bronze Age, fewer large stone structures were built (although the great ceremonial circles continued in use) as metalworking was slowly introduced to Britain from Europe over a lengthy period. There are relatively few Orcadian sites dating from this era although there is the impressive Plumcake Mound near the Ring of Brodgar, and various island sites such as Tofts Ness on Sanday and the remains of two houses on Holm of Faray.\nIron Age.\nExcavations at Quanterness on the Mainland have revealed an Atlantic roundhouse built about 700 BC and similar finds have been made at Bu on the Mainland and Pierowall Quarry on Westray. The most impressive Iron Age structures of Orkney are the ruins of later round towers called \"brochs\" and their associated settlements such as the Broch of Burroughston and Broch of Gurness. The nature and origin of these buildings is a subject of debate. Other structures from this period include underground storehouses and aisled roundhouses, the latter usually in association with earlier broch sites.\nDuring the Roman invasion of Britain the \"King of Orkney\" was one of 11 British leaders who is said to have submitted to the Emperor Claudius in AD 43 at Camulodunum (modern Colchester). After the Agricolan fleet had come and gone, possibly anchoring at Shapinsay, direct Roman influence seems to have been limited to trade rather than conquest.\nPolemius Silvius wrote a list of Late Roman provinces, which Seeck appended to his edition of the Notitia Dignitatum. The list names six provinces in Roman Britannia: the sixth is the dubious \"Orcades provincia\", the possible existence of which recent researches re-evaluate.\nBy the late Iron Age, Orkney was part of the Pictish kingdom, and although the archaeological remains from this period are less impressive, the fertile soils and rich seas of Orkney probably provided the Picts with a comfortable living. The Dalriadic Gaels began to influence the islands towards the close of the Pictish era, perhaps principally through the role of Celtic missionaries, as evidenced by several islands bearing the epithet \"Papa\" in commemoration of these preachers. Before the Gaelic presence could establish itself the Picts were gradually dispossessed by the North Germanic peoples from the late 8th century onwards. The nature of this transition is controversial, and theories range from peaceful integration to enslavement and genocide. It has been suggested that an assault by forces from Fortriu in 681 in which Orkney was \"annihilated\" may have led to a weakening of the local power base and helped the Norse come to prominence.\nNorwegian rule.\nBoth Orkney and Shetland saw a significant influx of Norwegian settlers during the late 8th and early 9th centuries. Vikings made the islands the headquarters of their pirate expeditions carried out against Norway and the coasts of mainland Scotland. In response, Norwegian king Harald Fairhair (Harald H\u00e5rfagre) annexed the Northern Isles, comprising Orkney and Shetland, in 875 (it is clear that this story, which appears in the \"Orkneyinga Saga\", is based on the later voyages of Magnus Barelegs and some scholars believe it to be apocryphal). Rognvald Eysteinsson received Orkney and Shetland from Harald as an earldom as reparation for the death of his son in battle in Scotland, and then passed the earldom on to his brother Sigurd the Mighty. Sigurd went on to conquer northern parts of mainland Britain in the late 9th century, including Caithness and Sutherland.\nHowever, Sigurd's line barely survived him and it was Torf-Einarr, Rognvald's son by a slave, who founded a dynasty that controlled the islands for centuries after his death. He was succeeded by his son Thorfinn Skull-splitter and during this time the deposed Norwegian King Eric Bloodaxe often used Orkney as a raiding base before being killed in 954. Thorfinn's death and presumed burial at the broch of Hoxa, on South Ronaldsay, led to a long period of dynastic strife.\nInitially a pagan culture, detailed information about the turn to the Christian religion in the islands of Scotland during the Norse era is elusive. The \"Orkneyinga Saga\" suggests the islands were Christianised by Olaf Tryggvasson in 995 when he stopped at South Walls on his way from Ireland to Norway. The King summoned the \"jarl\" Sigurd the Stout and said, \"I order you and all your subjects to be baptised. If you refuse, I'll have you killed on the spot and I swear I will ravage every island with fire and steel.\" Unsurprisingly, Sigurd agreed and the islands became Christian at a stroke, receiving their own bishop in the early 11th century.\nThorfinn the Mighty was a son of Sigurd and a grandson of King Malcolm II of Scotland (\"M\u00e1el Coluim mac Cin\u00e1eda\"). Along with Sigurd's other sons he ruled Orkney during the first half of the 11th century and extended his authority over a small maritime empire stretching from Dublin to Shetland. Thorfinn died around 1065 and his sons Paul and Erlend succeeded him, fighting at the Battle of Stamford Bridge in 1066. Paul and Erlend quarrelled as adults and this dispute carried on to the next generation. The martyrdom of Magnus Erlendsson, who was killed in April 1116 by his cousin Haakon Paulsson, resulted in the building of St Magnus Cathedral, still today a dominating feature of Kirkwall.\nThe Scottish crown claimed the overlordship of the Caithness and Sutherland area from Norway in 1098. The jarls thereafter owed allegiance to the Scottish crown for their territory on mainland Britain, which they held as the Mormaer of Caithness, but owed allegiance to the Norwegian crown for Orkney and Shetland. In 1195, the jarls lost control of Shetland when it became a separate lordship.\nIn 1231 the line of Norse earls, unbroken since Rognvald, ended with Jon Haraldsson's murder in Thurso. The Earldom of Caithness was granted to Magnus, second son of the Earl of Angus, whom Haakon IV of Norway confirmed as Earl of Orkney in 1236. Around the same time, the earldom lost the southern part of its territory on mainland Britain when it was made the separate earldom of Sutherland.\nIn 1290, the death of the child princess Margaret, Maid of Norway in Orkney, en route to mainland Scotland, created a disputed succession that led to the Wars of Scottish Independence. In the 14th century the earls of Orkney also lost Caithness, after which the earldom just covered the islands of Orkney itself. In 1379 the earldom passed to the Sinclair family, who were also barons of Roslin near Edinburgh.\nEvidence of the Viking presence is widespread and includes the settlement at the Brough of Birsay, the vast majority of place names, and the runic inscriptions at Maeshowe.\nAbsorption by Scotland, and later Great Britain and the United Kingdom.\nIn 1468 Orkney and Shetland was pledged by Christian I, in his capacity as King of Norway, as security against the payment of the dowry of his daughter Margaret, betrothed to James III of Scotland. However, the money was never paid, and Orkney was absorbed by the Kingdom of Scotland in 1472.\nThe history of Orkney prior to this time is largely the history of the ruling aristocracy. From then on ordinary people emerge with greater clarity. An influx of Scottish entrepreneurs helped to create a diverse and independent community that included farmers, fishermen and merchants that called themselves \"comunitas Orcadie\" and who proved themselves increasingly able to defend their rights against their feudal overlords.\nFrom at least the 16th century boats from mainland Scotland and the Netherlands dominated the local herring fishery. There is little evidence of an Orcadian fleet until the 19th century, but it grew rapidly, and 700 boats were involved by the 1840s, with Stronsay and later Stromness becoming leading centres of development. White fish never became as dominant as in other Scottish ports.\nAgricultural improvements beginning in the 17th century resulted in the enclosure of the commons and ultimately in the Victorian era the emergence of large and well-managed farms using a five-shift rotation system and producing high-quality beef cattle.\nIn the 17th century Orcadians formed the overwhelming majority of employees of the Hudson's Bay Company in Canada. The harsh winter weather of Orkney and the Orcadian reputation for sobriety and their boat-handling skills made them ideal candidates for the rigours of the Canadian north. During this period, burning kelp briefly became a mainstay of the islands' economy. For example, on Shapinsay over of burned seaweed were produced per annum to make soda ash, bringing in \u00a320,000 to the local economy. The industry collapsed suddenly in 1830 after the removal of tariffs on imported alkali.\nIn 1707, as with the rest of Scotland, they became part of the Kingdom of Great Britain.\nDuring the 18th century Jacobite risings Orkney was largely Jacobite in its sympathies. At the end of the 1715 rebellion, a large number of Jacobites who had fled north from mainland Scotland sought refuge in Orkney and were helped on to safety in Sweden. In 1745, the Jacobite lairds on the islands ensured that Orkney remained pro-Jacobite in outlook and was a safe place to land supplies from Spain to aid their cause. Orkney was the last place in the British Isles that held out for the Jacobites and was not retaken by the British Government until 24 May 1746, over a month after the defeat of the main Jacobite army at Culloden.\nIn 1800, as with the rest of Scotland, the island became part of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland.\n20th century.\nOrkney was the site of a Royal Navy base at Scapa Flow, which played a major role in World War I and World War II. After the Armistice in 1918, the German High Seas Fleet was transferred in its entirety to Scapa Flow to await a decision on its future. The German sailors opened the seacocks and scuttled all the ships. Most ships were salvaged, but the remaining wrecks are now a favoured haunt of recreational divers. One month into World War II, a German U-boat sank the Royal Navy battleship in Scapa Flow. As a result, barriers were built to close most of the access channels; these had the additional advantage of creating causeways enabling travellers to go from island to island by road instead of being obliged to rely on ferries. The causeways were constructed by Italian prisoners of war, who also constructed the ornate Italian Chapel.\nThe navy base became run down after the war, eventually closing in 1957. The problem of a declining population was significant in the post-war years, though in the last decades of the 20th century, there was a recovery and life in Orkney focused on growing prosperity and the emergence of a relatively classless society. Orkney was rated as the best place to live in Scotland in both 2013 and 2014, and in 2019 the best place to live in the UK, according to the Halifax Quality of Life survey.\nOverview of population trends.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nIn the modern era, the population peaked in the mid-19th century at just over 32,000 and declined for a century thereafter to a low of fewer than 18,000 in the 1970s. Declines were particularly significant in the outlying islands, some of which remain vulnerable to ongoing losses. Although Orkney is in many ways very distinct from the other islands and archipelagos of Scotland these trends are very similar to those experienced elsewhere. The archipelago's population grew by 11% in the decade to 2011 as recorded by the census. During the same period Scottish island populations as a whole grew by 4% to 103,702.\nGenetic studies have shown that 25% of the gene pool of Orkney derives from Norwegian ancestors who occupied the islands in the 9th century.\nCurrent demographics.\nIn 2022 the census recorded a total population of 21,958 an increase of 2.85% since 2011 and of which 17,805 (81%) lived on the mainland.\nThe most numerous non-British residents were from Ireland (125 persons) and Poland (98 persons). 352 individuals were recorded as belonging to non-white ethnic groups of whom just over half were of Asian origin. \n36% of the population identified as Christian, with 27% adhering to the Church of Scotland and 2.7% being Roman Catholic. Just under 2% professed to another religion of which the largest group was 197 individuals recorded as pagan. 62% of the population stated they had no religion or did not provide an answer to this question. The main language of all but 238 individuals over the age of 3 was either English or Scots.\nGeography.\nOrkney is separated from the mainland of Scotland by the Pentland Firth, a seaway between Brough Ness on the island of South Ronaldsay and Duncansby Head in Caithness. Orkney lies between 58\u00b041\u2032 and 59\u00b024\u2032 north, and 2\u00b022\u2032 and 3\u00b026\u2032 west, measuring from northeast to southwest and from east to west, and covers .\nOrkney is separated from the Shetland Islands, a group further out, by a body of water called the Fair Isle Channel.\nThe islands are mainly low-lying except for some sharply rising sandstone hills on Mainland, Rousay and Hoy (where the tallest point in Orkney, Ward Hill, can be found) and rugged cliffs on some western coasts. Nearly all of the islands have lochs, but the watercourses are merely streams draining the high land. The coastlines are indented, and the islands themselves are divided from each other by straits generally called \"sounds\" or \"firths\".\nThe tidal currents, or \"roosts\" as some of them are called locally, off many of the isles are swift, with frequent whirlpools. The islands are notable for the absence of trees, which is partly accounted for by the strong winds.\nSettlements.\nOnly three settlements have a population of over 500; the towns of Kirkwall and Stromness and the village of Finstown.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Table alignment/tables.css\" /&gt;\nOther villages include Balfour, Dounby, Houton, Longhope, Lyness, Pierowall, St Margaret's Hope, and Whitehall.\nGeology.\nThe superficial rock of Orkney is almost entirely Old Red Sandstone, mostly of Middle Devonian age. As in the neighbouring mainland county of Caithness, this sandstone rests upon the metamorphic and igneous rocks of the Moine series, as may be seen on the Mainland, where a narrow strip is exposed between Stromness and Inganess, and again in the small island of Graemsay; they are represented by grey gneiss and granite.\nThe Middle Devonian is divided into three main groups. The lower part of the sequence, mostly Eifelian in age, is dominated by lacustrine beds of the lower and upper Stromness Flagstones that were deposited in Lake Orcadie. The later Rousay flagstone formation is found throughout much of the North and South Isles and East Mainland.\nThe Old Man of Hoy is formed from sandstone of the uppermost Eday Group that is up to thick in places. It lies unconformably upon steeply inclined flagstones, the interpretation of which is a matter of continuing debate.\nThe Devonian and older rocks of Orkney are cut by a series of WSW\u2013ENE to N\u2013S trending faults, many of which were active during deposition of the Devonian sequences. \nMiddle Devonian basaltic volcanic rocks are found on western Hoy, on Deerness in eastern Mainland and on Shapinsay. Correlation between the Hoy volcanics and the other two exposures has been proposed, but differences in chemistry mean this remains uncertain. Lamprophyre dykes of Late Permian age are found throughout Orkney.\nGlacial striation and the presence of chalk and flint erratics that originated from the bed of the North Sea demonstrate the influence of ice action on the geomorphology of the islands. Boulder clay is also abundant and moraines cover substantial areas.\nClimate.\nOrkney has a cool temperate climate that is remarkably mild and steady for such a northerly latitude, due to the influence of the warm waters of the Norwegian Current, a north-easterly extension of the North Atlantic Drift which is itself an extension of the Gulf Stream. The average temperature for the year is ; for winter and for summer .\nThe average annual rainfall varies from to . Winds are a key feature of the climate and even in summer there are almost constant breezes. In winter, there are frequent strong winds, with an average of 52 hours of gales being recorded annually.\nTo tourists, one of the fascinations of the islands is their \"nightless\" summers. On the longest day, the sun rises at 04:00 and sets at 22:29 BST and complete darkness is unknown. This long twilight is known in the Northern Isles as the \"simmer dim\". Winter nights are long. On the shortest day the sun rises at 09:05 and sets at 15:16. At this time of year the aurora borealis can occasionally be seen on the northern horizon during moderate auroral activity.\nThe first averages table below is for the largest settlement Kirkwall's weather station, the second is for the Loch of Hundland, a rural location to the northwest of Mainland.\nGovernance.\nThe local authority is the Orkney Islands Council, based at the Council Offices on School Place in Kirkwall.\nAdministrative history.\nOn its absorption into Scotland in 1472, the landholdings and jurisdictions of the old earldom of Orkney passed to the Scottish crown. The separate lordship of Shetland was absorbed into Scotland at the same time. More typically Scottish forms of administration were gradually introduced to the Northern Isles. The position of Sheriff of Orkney and Shetland was created in 1541. Orkney and Shetland retained their own legal systems until 1612, when the general laws of Scotland were applied.\nCommissioners of Supply were established in 1667 for each shire across Scotland. Unusually, despite being one shire, Orkney and Shetland were given separate bodies of commissioners. More local government functions were gradually given to the commissioners over time. At a court case in 1829, the Court of Session declined to rule on whether Orkney and Shetland were one county or two. They operated as one county for the purposes of the administration of justice, lieutenancy, and parliamentary constituencies, but operated as two counties for local government functions. Elected county councils were created in 1890 under the Local Government (Scotland) Act 1889, taking most of the functions of the commissioners (which were eventually abolished in 1930). The 1889 Act also directed that Orkney and Shetland were to be separate counties.\nOrkney County Council held its first meeting on 22 May 1890 at Kirkwall Sheriff Court, also known as County Buildings, on Watergate in Kirkwall, which had been completed in 1877 and also served as the meeting place of the commissioners of supply.\nLocal government was reformed in 1975 under the Local Government (Scotland) Act 1973, which replaced Scotland's counties, burghs and landward districts. In most of Scotland a two-tier structure of upper-tier regions and lower-tier districts was used, but a single-tier structure of island areas was used for Orkney, Shetland and the Western Isles. Further local government reform in 1996 introduced single-tier council areas across all of Scotland. The councils of the three island areas created in 1975 continued to provide the same services after 1996, but their areas were re-designated as council areas.\nParishes and communities.\nParishes existed from medieval times. From 1845 to 1894 they had parish boards and from 1894 to 1930 they had parish councils. They have had no administrative functions since 1930, but continue to be used for the presentation of statistics.\nOrkney's civil parishes are:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nEvie and Rendall were formerly separate parishes, but were united in the 16th century.\nCommunity councils.\nCommunity councils were created in 1975 as part of the wider reforms that year. They have no statutory powers, but serve as a representative body for their communities. Orkney Islands Council designates community council areas, but a community council is only formed if there is sufficient interest from the residents. Since a review in 2022, Orkney has comprised the following communities, all of which have community councils operating as at 2024:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nIslands.\nThe Mainland.\nThe Mainland is the largest island of Orkney. Both of Orkney's burghs, Kirkwall and Stromness, are on this island, which is also the heart of Orkney's transport system, with ferry and air connections to the other islands and to the outside world. The island is more heavily populated (75% of Orkney's population) than the other islands and has much fertile farmland. The Mainland is split into areas called East and West Mainland. These areas are determined by whether they lie east or west of Kirkwall. The bulk of the mainland lies west of Kirkwall, with comparatively little land east of Kirkwall.\nWest Mainland parishes are:\nStromness, Sandwick, Birsay, Harray, Stenness, Orphir, Evie, Rendall and Firth.\nEast Mainland Parishes are:\nSt Ola, Tankerness, St Andrews, Holm and Deerness.\nThe island is mostly low-lying (especially East Mainland) but with coastal cliffs to the north and west and two sizeable lochs: the Loch of Harray and the Loch of Stenness. The Mainland contains the remnants of numerous Neolithic, Pictish and Viking constructions. Four of the main Neolithic sites are included in the Heart of Neolithic Orkney World Heritage Site, inscribed in 1999.\nThe other islands in the group are classified as north or south of the Mainland. Exceptions are the remote islets of Sule Skerry and Sule Stack, which lie west of the archipelago, but form part of Orkney for local government purposes. In island names, the suffix \"a\" or \"ay\" represents the Norse \"ey\", meaning \"island\". Those described as \"holms\" are very small.\nThe North Isles.\nThe northern group of islands is the most extensive and consists of a large number of moderately sized islands, linked to the Mainland by ferries and by air services. Farming, fishing and tourism are the main sources of income for most of the islands.\nThe most northerly is North Ronaldsay, which lies beyond its nearest neighbour, Sanday. To the west is Westray, which has a population of 550. It is connected by ferry and air to Papa Westray, also known as \"Papay\". Eday is at the centre of the North Isles. The centre of the island is moorland and the island's main industries have been peat extraction and limestone quarrying.\nRousay, Egilsay and Gairsay lie north of the west Mainland across the Eynhallow Sound. Rousay is well known for its ancient monuments, including the Quoyness chambered cairn and Egilsay has the ruins of the only round-towered church in Orkney. Wyre to the south-east contains the site of Cubbie Roo's castle. Stronsay and Papa Stronsay lie much further to the east across the Stronsay Firth. Auskerry is south of Stronsay and has a population of only five. Shapinsay and its Balfour Castle are a short distance north of Kirkwall.\nOther small uninhabited islands in the North Isles group include Calf of Eday, Damsay, Eynhallow, Faray, Helliar Holm, Holm of Faray, Holm of Huip, Holm of Papa, Holm of Scockness, Kili Holm, Linga Holm, Muckle Green Holm, Rusk Holm and Sweyn Holm.\nThe South Isles.\nThe southern group of islands surrounds Scapa Flow. Hoy, to the west, is the second largest of the Orkney Isles and Ward Hill at its northern end is the highest elevation in the archipelago. The Old Man of Hoy is a well-known seastack. Graemsay and Flotta are both linked by ferry to the Mainland and Hoy, and the latter is known for its large oil terminal. South Walls has a 19th-century Martello tower and is connected to Hoy by the Ayre.\nBurray lies to the east of Scapa Flow and is linked by causeway to South Ronaldsay, which hosts cultural events such as the Festival of the Horse and the Boys' Ploughing Match on the third Saturday in August. It is also the location of the Neolithic Tomb of the Eagles. South Ronaldsay, Burray, Glimps Holm, and Lamb Holm are connected by road to the Mainland by the Churchill Barriers.\nUninhabited South Islands include Calf of Flotta, Cava, Copinsay, Corn Holm, Fara, Glimps Holm, Hunda, Lamb Holm, Rysa Little, Switha and Swona. The Pentland Skerries lie further south, closer to the Scottish mainland.\nPolitics.\nOrkney is represented in the House of Commons as part of the Orkney and Shetland constituency, which elects one Member of Parliament (MP), the current incumbent being Alistair Carmichael. This seat has been held by the Liberal Democrats or the former Liberal Party since 1950, longer than any other they represent in Great Britain.\nIn the Scottish Parliament the Orkney constituency elects one Member of the Scottish Parliament (MSP) by the first past the post system. The current MSP is Liam McArthur of the Liberal Democrats. Before McArthur the MSP was Jim Wallace, who was previously Deputy First Minister. Orkney is within the Highlands and Islands electoral region.\nThe Orkney Movement, a political party that supported devolution for Orkney from the rest of Scotland, contested the 1987 general election as the Orkney and Shetland Movement (a coalition of the Orkney movement and its equivalent for Shetland). The Scottish National Party chose not to contest the seat to give the movement a \"free run\". Their candidate, John Goodlad, came 4th with 3,095 votes, 14.5% of those cast, but the experiment has not been repeated.\nIn the 2014 Scottish independence referendum 67.2% of voters in Orkney voted no to the question \"Should Scotland be an independent country?\" This was the highest no vote by percentage in any council area in Scotland. Turnout for the referendum was at 83.7% in Orkney with 10,004 votes cast in the area against independence by comparison to 4,883 votes for independence. In the 2016 United Kingdom European Union membership referendum 63.2% of voters in Orkney voted Remain.\nIn 2022, as part of the Levelling Up White Paper, an \"Island Forum\" was proposed, which would allow local policymakers and residents in Orkney to work alongside their counterparts in Shetland, the Western Isles, Anglesey and the Isle of Wight on common issues, such as broadband connectivity, and provide a platform for them to communicate directly with the government on the challenges island communities face in terms of levelling up. In July 2023, Orkney Council investigated proposals to change its status, looking at options that included becoming a British Crown Dependency, a self-governing territory within the Kingdom of Norway or just staying in the United Kingdom.\nEconomy.\nThe percentage of the Orkney population who are economically active is consistently higher than the Scottish average. In 2023 it was 89.8% compared to 77.9% for the latter, in which year average unemployment was 1.6%.\nThe soil of Orkney is generally very fertile and most of the land is taken up by farms, agriculture being by far the most important sector of the economy and providing employment for a quarter of the workforce according to a 2008 report. More than 90% of agricultural land is used for grazing for sheep and cattle, with cereal production utilising about 4% () and woodland occupying only . 44% of Orkney businesses are in the agriculture, forestry and fishing sector.\n 90% of the islands' milk production goes towards the manufacture of Orkney Cheddar cheese.\nFishing has declined in importance, but still employed 238 individuals in 2023, just under 4% of the islands' total employment. The modern industry concentrating on herring, white fish, lobsters, crabs and other shellfish, and salmon fish farming.\nA 2009 report indicated the traditional sectors of the economy export beef, cheese, whisky, beer, fish and other seafood. In recent years there has been growth in other areas including tourism, food and beverage manufacture, jewellery, knitwear, and other crafts production, construction and oil transportation through the Flotta oil terminal. \nThere are three Scotch whisky distilleries in Orkney: Scapa, Highland Park and the Deerness Distillery, which opened in 2023. \nOther important sectors of the economy include manufacturing and construction, retailing, hotels and restaurants and public sector activities such as health and social work.\nAs of 2020 there are around 1,500 businesses on the island. More than 90% have fewer than 10 employees. [Estimates indicate] 11,000 jobs, of which around 5,000 are part-time ... There's not much manufacturing, beyond food and drink processing (think cheese and whisky), and apart from the Flotta oil terminal, it lacks big private employers ... Fisheries off Orkney are only half as important to employment as in Shetland, and farming is roughly twice as important.\nTourism.\nA report published in February 2020 stated that spending by visitors increased from \u00a349.5 million in 2017 to \u00a367.1 million in 2019, making this a significant sector of the economy. The primary attractions that encourage tourism include the \"Heart of Neolithic Orkney\" on the main island, defined as \"a group of 5,000-year-old sites that include the preserved village of Skara Brae and the Ring of Brodgar stone circle\". The Hoy area's landscape is also attractive to visitors, \"with its scattered woodland, steep valleys, high cliffs and the famous Old Man, a withered red sandstone sea stack\". In 2017, 62% of tourists to Orkney visited for its heritage. The UHI Archaeology Institute have led excavations at the Ness of Brodgar, contributing to tourism to the area and driving interest in archaeology.\nDuring most years, the islands are the home of several international festivals, including the Orkney International Science Festival in September, a folk festival in May, and the St Magnus International Arts Festival in June.\nThe volume of visitors arriving on ferries declined substantially in 2020, by 71%, due to the COVID-19 pandemic. A news report added that cruise ships also did not arrive and there were \"no day trippers and no holiday lets\" as of 25 April 2020. Several major events were cancelled: St Magnus Festival, Orkney Folk Festival, Stromness Shopping Week and the Agricultural Shows.\nPower.\nOrkney has significant wind and marine energy resources, and renewable energy has recently come into prominence. Although Orkney is connected to the mainland, it generates over 100% of its net power from renewables according to a 2015 report. This comes mainly from wind turbines situated across Orkney.\nThe European Marine Energy Centre (EMEC) is a research facility operating a grid-connected wave test site at Billia Croo, off the west coast of the Orkney Mainland, and a tidal power test site in the Fall of Warness, off the northern island of Eday. At the official opening of the Eday project the site was described as \"the first of its kind in the world set up to provide developers of wave and tidal energy devices with a purpose-built performance testing facility.\"\nDuring 2007 Scottish and Southern Energy plc in conjunction with the University of Strathclyde began the implementation of a Regional Power Zone in the Orkney archipelago, involving \"active network management\" that will make better use of existing infrastructure and allow a further 15\u00a0MW of new \"non-firm generation\" output from renewables onto the network. 1.5 MW of polymer electrolyte membrane electrolysis form a partial hydrogen economy for hydrogen vehicles and district heating, and grid batteries and electric vehicles also use local energy.\nOrkney has one of the highest uptakes of electric vehicles in the UK with more than 2% of the vehicles on the road being electric, as of 2019.\nHydrogen manufacturing.\nA March 2019 report by the BBC stated that \"Orkney creates more clean electricity than its inhabitants need. Even after exporting to the UK national grid, the islands' winds, waves and tides generate about 130% of the electricity its population needs \u2013 all of it from clean sources\". A report about sustainable energy in the islands listed two options. A new cable could be laid for exporting of energy to the mainland but another proposal has progressed rapidly since that time: making \"excess renewable power into another fuel \u2013 such as hydrogen \u2013 and then [storing] it\".\nIn May 2020, CNN published more specific information about the hydrogen plan:Orkney's success in creating hydrogen using clean energy demonstrates that it can be done at scale. The islands are already using hydrogen to power vehicles, and it will soon be used to heat a local primary school. Now, Orkney is hoping to use hydrogen fuel cells to power a seagoing vessel able to transport both goods and passengers.\nAdditional specific information about the status of the hydrogen scheme was published in late November 2020 by Orkney Islands Council. A few weeks earlier, another report indicated that the world's first hydrogen-fueled ferry was to be tested on the Orkney Islands, using \"a hydrogen/diesel dual fuel conversion system\", developed by a consortium known as the HyDIME project. Initially hydrogen was to power only the auxiliary engine but the plan calls for later using this fuel for the primary engine. The report suggested that \"if all goes well, hydrogen ferries could be sailing between Orkney's islands within six months\".\nKirkwall Airport in Orkney was scheduled \"to have its heat and power decarbonised through green hydrogen as part of a new project\" starting in 2021. A hydrogen combustion engine system was to be connected to the airport's heating system. The scheme planned to reduce the significant emissions that were created with older technology that heated buildings and water. This was part of the plan formulated by the Scottish government for the Highlands and Islands \"to become the world's first net zero aviation region by 2040\".\nHydrogen manufacturing is also planned for Shetland and will spread to other areas of Scotland that have access to clean electricity. To achieve that goal, the government announced an investment of \u00a3100 million in the hydrogen sector \"for the \u00a3180 million Emerging Energy Technologies Fund\".\nTransport.\nAir.\nHighland and Islands Airports operates the main airport in Orkney, Kirkwall Airport. Loganair provides services to the Scottish mainland (Aberdeen, Edinburgh, Glasgow and Inverness), as well as to Sumburgh Airport in Shetland.\nWithin Orkney, the council operates airports on most of the larger islands including Stronsay, Eday, North Ronaldsay, Westray, Papa Westray, Sanday, and Flotta. The shortest scheduled air service in the world, between the islands of Westray and Papa Westray, is scheduled at two minutes' duration.\nFerry.\nFerries serve both to link Orkney to the rest of Scotland, and also to link together the various islands of the Orkney archipelago. Ferry services operate between Orkney and the Scottish mainland and Shetland on the following routes:\nInter-island ferry services connect all the inhabited islands to Orkney Mainland and are operated by Orkney Ferries, a company owned by Orkney Islands Council. The isles of Westray, Papa Westray (or Papay), North Ronaldsay, Sanday, Eday, Stronsay, and Shapinsay are served from Kirkwall harbour, while the northern end of Hoy and Graemsay are served from Stromness harbour, the Lyness end of Hoy, as well as Longhope on South Walls, and Flotta are served from Houton on the south of the mainland, and Rousay, Egilsay and Wyre are served from Tingwall, in the Rendall area of the Orkney mainland. As well as this, the connects the village of Pierowall on Westray with Papa Westray - this provides a vital local service for schoolchildren on Papay as well as supplementing existing through sailings from Kirkwall.\nBus.\nLocal buses around the Orkney Mainland, as well as across the Churchill Barriers to Burray and South Ronaldsay, are operated by Stagecoach Highlands. There are also bus services on Sanday, Westray and Hoy &amp; Walls.\nIn 2021, the island's three-vehicle minibus service for disabled people was a target for hackers seeking a \u00a31,000 ransom in cryptocurrency.\nMedia.\nOrkney is served by a weekly local newspaper, \"The Orcadian\", published on Thursdays. It is first published in 1854 and part of the Orkney Media Group, formed out of a partnership with a competing newspaper, \"Orkney Today\", in 2007.\nA local BBC radio station, BBC Radio Orkney, the local opt-out of BBC Radio Scotland, broadcasts twice daily, with local news and entertainment. Orkney also had a commercial radio station, The Superstation Orkney, which broadcast to Kirkwall and parts of the mainland and also to most of Caithness until its closure in November 2014. MFR broadcasts throughout Orkney on an FM transmitter just outside Thurso. The community radio station Caithness FM also broadcasts to Orkney.\nOrkney is home to the Orkney Library and Archive, based in Kirkwall. The library service provides access to over 145,000 items. They have a wide range of fiction and non-fiction titles available for loan as well as audiobooks, maps, eBooks, music CDs, and DVDs. Orkney Library and Archive operates a Mobile Library Service that serves the rural parishes and islands of Orkney. The Mobile Library carries a wide range of books and audiobooks suitable for all ages and is completely free to use.\nLanguage, literature, and folklore.\nAt the beginning of recorded history, the islands were inhabited by the Picts, whose language was Brythonic. The Ogham script on the Buckquoy spindle-whorl is cited as evidence for the pre-Norse existence of Old Irish in Orkney.\nAfter the Norse occupation, the toponymy of Orkney became almost wholly West Norse. The Norse language changed into the local Norn, which lingered until the end of the 18th century, when it eventually died out. Norn was replaced by the Orcadian dialect of Insular Scots. This dialect is at a low ebb due to the pervasive influences of television, education, and the large number of incomers. However, attempts are being made by some writers and radio presenters to revitalise its use and the distinctive sing-song accent and many dialect words of Norse origin remain in use. The Orcadian word most frequently encountered by visitors is , meaning 'small', which may be derived from the French .\nOrkney has a rich folklore, and many of the former tales concern trows, an Orcadian form of troll that draws on the islands' Scandinavian connections. Local customs in the past included marriage ceremonies at the Odin Stone that formed part of the Stones of Stenness.\nThe best known literary figures from modern Orkney are the poet Edwin Muir, the poet and novelist George Mackay Brown, and the novelist Eric Linklater.\nLanguages.\nThe 2022 Scottish Census reported that out of 21,400 residents aged three and over, 8,278 (38.7%) considered themselves able to speak or read the Scots language. \nThe 2022 Scottish Census reported that out of 21,407 residents aged three and over, 177 (0.8%) considered themselves able to speak or read Gaelic. \nOrcadians.\nAn Orcadian is a native of Orkney, a term that reflects a strongly held identity with a tradition of understatement. Although the annexation of the earldom by Scotland took place over five centuries ago in 1472, some Orcadians regard themselves as Orcadians first and Scots second. However, in response to the national identity question in the 2011 Scotland Census, self-reported levels of Scottish identity in Orkney were in line with the national average.\nThe Scottish mainland is often referred to as \"Scotland\" in Orkney, with \"the mainland\" referring to Mainland, Orkney. The archipelago also has a distinct culture, with traditions of the Scottish Highlands such as tartan, clans, bagpipes not indigenous to the culture of the islands. However, at least two tartans with Orkney connections have been registered and a tartan has been designed for Sanday by one of the island's residents, and there are pipe bands in Orkney.\nNative Orcadians refer to the non-native residents of the islands as \"ferry loupers\" (\"loup\" meaning \"jump\" in the Scots language), a term that has been in use for nearly two centuries at least.\nNatural history.\nOrkney has an abundance of wildlife, especially of grey and common seals and seabirds such as puffins, kittiwakes, black guillemots (tysties), ravens, and great skuas (bonxies). Whales, dolphins, and otters are also seen around the coasts. Inland the Orkney vole, a distinct subspecies of the common vole introduced by Neolithic humans, is an endemic. There are five distinct varieties, found on the islands of Sanday, Westray, Rousay, South Ronaldsay, and the Mainland, all the more remarkable as the species is absent on mainland Britain.\nThe coastline is well known for its colourful flowers including sea aster, sea squill, sea thrift, common sea-lavender, bell and common heather. The Scottish primrose is found only on the coasts of Orkney and nearby Caithness and Sutherland. Although stands of trees are generally rare, a small forest named Happy Valley with 700 trees and lush gardens was created from a boggy hillside near Stenness during the second half of the 20th century.\nThe North Ronaldsay sheep is an unusual breed of domesticated animal, subsisting largely on a diet of seaweed, since they are confined to the foreshore for most of the year to conserve the limited grazing inland. The island was also a habitat for the Atlantic walrus until the mid-16th century.\nThe Orkney char (\"Salvelinus inframundus\") used to live in Heldale Water on Hoy and has not been observed since 1908, so is now considered to be extinct.\nStoat problem and solution.\nThe introduction of non-native stoats since 2010, a natural predator of the common vole and thus of the Orkney vole, was also harming native bird populations. NatureScot, Scotland's nature agency, provided these additional specifics:The introduction of a ground predator like the stoat to islands such as Orkney, where there are no native ground predators, is very bad news for Orkney's native species. Stoats are accomplished predators and pose a very serious threat to Orkney's wildlife, including: the native Orkney vole, hen harrier, short-eared owl and many ground nesting birds.\nIn 2018, a stoat eradication project was presented by NatureScot to be applied \"across Orkney Mainland, South Ronaldsay, Burray, Glimps Holm, Lamb Holm and Hunda, and the biosecurity activities delivered on the non-linked islands of the archipelago\". The Orkney Native Wildlife Project planned to use \"humane DOC150 and DOC200 traps\". The partners in the five-year project include RSPB Scotland, Scottish Natural Heritage and Orkney Islands Council. A report issued in October 2020 stated that over 5,000 traps had been deployed. Specifics were provided as to the locations.\nNot all was going well as of 15 January 2021, according to \"The Times\", which stated that the project \"has been hit by alleged sabotage after the destruction and theft of traps that have also killed and injured household pets and other animals\" but added that the \u00a36 million programme was supported by most islanders. Another news item stated that some of the traps had \"caught and killed family pets as well as hundreds of other animals\". A subsequent report confirmed that \"Police Scotland is investigating a number of incidents involving damage to and the theft of stoat traps in Orkney\".\nBy 2024 the Orkney Native Wildlife Project had spent \u00a37.9m trapping more than 6,300 stoats. Progress was impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic restrictions which prevented trapping in the 2020 breeding season.\nProtected areas.\nThere are 13 Special Protection Areas and 6 Special Areas of Conservation in Orkney. One of Scotland's 40 national scenic areas, the Hoy and West Mainland National Scenic Area, is also located in the islands. The seas to the northwest of Orkney are important for sand eels that provides a food source for many species of fish, seabirds, seals, whales and dolphins, and are now protected as Nature Conservation Marine Protected Area (NCMPA) that covers .\nFlag.\nA new flag for Orkney was adopted in 2007 following a public competition. It comprises a Nordic cross of blue and yellow on a red background. Previously the traditional flag of St Magnus (a red cross on a yellow background) had sometimes been used, but in 2001 it was ruled too similar to other flags to allow it to be formally registered as the area's flag.\nFreedom of Orkney.\nThe Freedom of Orkney is a ceremonial award issued by Orkney Islands Council. It can only be awarded twice during the term of any given Council, typically a period of five years. Its roots stretch back to the mid-15th century.\nRecipients include:\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nGeneral references.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "22646", "revid": "79711939", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22646", "title": "Orkneys", "text": ""}
{"id": "22647", "revid": "2259739", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22647", "title": "Hoy, Orkney", "text": "Island in the Orkney Islands group\nHoy (from Old Norse , meaning \"high island\") is an island in Orkney, Scotland, measuring \u2013 the second largest in the archipelago, after Mainland. A natural causeway, \"the Ayre\", links the island to the smaller South Walls; the two islands are treated as one entity by the UK census. Hoy is also the name of a hamlet in the northwest of the island.\nGeography.\nAt in extent, Hoy is the 12th largest of Scotland's islands. It is also the \"highest and wildest and wettest ( of annual rainfall) of all the Orkney islands\". \nThe Old Man of Hoy, a sea stack formed from Old Red Sandstone, can be found in the northwest on the Rackwick coast. It is one of the tallest stacks in the United Kingdom at a height of . The Old Man is popular with climbers, and was first climbed in 1966. Created by the erosion of a cliff through hydraulic action sometime after 1750, the stack is no more than a few hundred years old, and a painting from 1817 shows the stack with an arch at the bottom which has now further eroded and no longer remains. It may soon collapse into the sea.\nThe dramatic coastline of Hoy can be seen by visitors travelling to Orkney by ferry from the Scottish mainland. It has some of the highest sea cliffs in the UK at St John's Head, which reach .\nThe name Hoy comes from the Norse word \"H\u00e1ey\" meaning \"high island\". It is therefore not surprising that the island of Hoy is the most mountainous in the Orkney archipelago. The highest point on the island (and the whole archipelago) is in the north at Ward Hill, which stands at . There is a trig point at the summit.\nThe main settlements on the island are Lyness, Rackwick and Quoyness. Longhope is a village on neighbouring South Walls. A road linking Hoy to South Walls was constructed towards the end of the 19th century. Prior to that time the latter had only been accessible by land across the shingle beach of the Ayre at low tide. The status of South Walls is now considered by some writers as a peninsula attached to Hoy and by others as still being an island. For example neither the 2001 or 2011 censuses mention South Walls in their lists of inhabited islands and Haswell-Smith states that South Walls \"was an island\" until the causeway over the Ayre was constructed. The Gazetteer for Scotland states that it is \"a peninsula, sometimes described as an island.\" \nThe island is part of the Hoy and West Mainland National Scenic Area, one of 40 in Scotland.\nHistory.\nPrehistory.\nThe Dwarfie Stane lies in the north of the Rackwick valley and dates back to around 3000 BCE. It is unique in northern Europe, bearing similarity to Neolithic or Bronze Age tombs around the Mediterranean. The tomb has a small rectangular entrance and cleft, hence its name. \n19th century.\nThe two most northerly Martello Towers in the UK stand here, built in 1814 to defend merchant shipping in the natural harbour of Longhope against privateers commissioned by United States President James Madison, who declared war in 1812.\nWorld Wars.\nThe main naval base for the British fleet in both the First and Second World Wars, Scapa Flow, was at Lyness in the southeast of the island.\nDuring the early years of the Second World War, up to 12,000 personnel were based in and around Lyness to support the defences of the naval anchorage at Scapa Flow and the ships that used it. To support this huge population, hundreds of accommodation huts were built in a number of camps around Lyness. A large wharf was built (known as the Golden Wharf because of its huge cost) along with a series of piers and slipways. Offices, workshops, stores and recreational buildings were erected, including a cinema, a theatre and several churches. An earlier headquarters building was replaced in 1943 by an imposing concrete HQ and communications centre, also sited high on Wee Fea, which now serves as a hotel.\nLyness Royal Naval Cemetery is around inland from the naval base and has an area of around .\nDemographics.\nAlthough the population of Hoy is now only around 400, there was a much larger population in the past. In 1890 there were four schools on the island and four churches, suggesting a much larger population. Despite the larger population there was no paved road between the north of the island and the south, only a footpath. There was, however, an unsurfaced road between the two villages on the north of the isle; Rackwick and Moaness.\nTransport.\nFerry.\nOrkney Ferries operate two services to Hoy:\nBus.\nThe Hoy and Walls Community Bus provides a regular timetabled bus service across the islands of Hoy and Walls. The buses go from Moaness on Hoy to Hackness on South Walls, via Linksness, Lyness, North Walls, Brims, and Longhope.\nAirport.\nThere have been two airfields on South Walls, perhaps due to its connections with the navy. One on the southern coast (Snelsetter) which opened in August 1934 and was closed at the end of World War Two; it was used by military and civil aircraft, and now is open land. Another, just east of the causeway that links the two islands of Hoy and South Walls, opened in November 1972 and closed in 1993. It was used by civilian aircraft solely and was operated by the airline Loganair; it is also now open land, used as an emergency landing strip only. The first flight to a nearby island of Flotta on 1 March 1977 was recorded to have landed at Hoy.\nLonghope lifeboat station.\nA lifeboat has been on Hoy since 1874, at first housed in a prominent stone building close to the west end of the causeway that links the two islands of Hoy and South Walls. It was stationed there as it meant that the lifeboat could be dragged over wooden skids into the sea in either North Bay, giving access to Scapa Flow, or in Aith Hope, an offshoot of the notorious Pentland Firth to the south. The shed continued to serve as the base of the Longhope lifeboat until 1906.\nThe replacement lifeboat station stands slightly to the south of the original station cost \u00a32,700 to build in 1906 and was in use until 1999. On 17 March 1969 whilst based here, the lifeboat \"T.G.B.\" (ON 962) capsized while on service to the Liberian vessel \"Irene\". Her entire crew of eight lost their lives. This station is now the home of the Longhope Lifeboat Museum, which has on display lifeboat \"Thomas McCunn\", stationed here from 1933 to 1962.\nIn 2000 an Arun-class lifeboat, \"Sir Max Aitken II\" became the Longhope lifeboat. This class was designed to stay permanently afloat, and the decision was taken to move her to purpose-built moorings at Longhope pier. The lifeboats that have served here since have also been stationed at Longhope, including the current vessel the \"Helen Comrie\" (a Tamar-class lifeboat) and her predecessor \"The Queen Mother\", which was based here between 2004 and 2006. A station has been built where the lifeboat is moored at Longhope which is also the main harbour for boats to and from the island.\nIt is one of three lifeboat stations in Orkney, the others being Stromness Lifeboat Station, and Kirkwall Lifeboat Station.\nMythology.\nIn Norse mythology, Hoy hosted Hja\u00f0ningav\u00edg, the never-ending battle between He\u00f0in and H\u00f6gni.\nWildlife.\nHoy is an Important Bird Area.\nThe northern part of the island is an RSPB reserve due to its importance for birdlife, particularly great skuas and red-throated divers. It was sold to the RSPB by the Hoy Trust for a nominal amount.\n\"Anastrepta orcadensis\", a liverwort also known as Orkney Notchwort, was first discovered on Ward Hill by William Jackson Hooker in 1808.\nThe northern and western parts of Hoy, along with much of the adjoining sea area, is designated as a Special Protection Area due to its importance for nine breeding bird species: arctic skua, fulmar, great black-backed gull, great skua, guillemot, Black-legged kittiwake, peregrine falcon, puffin and red-throated diver. The area is important for its seabird assemblage, which regularly supports 120,000 individual seabirds during the breeding season.\nOne of Orkney's few woodlands is found on Hoy, and is among the most northerly areas of woodland in the UK. Patches of the woodland are scattered across the island. There is the remote possibility of locally extant Orkney charr (\"Salvelinus inframundus\") documented in 1908 at Heldale Water.\nIn popular culture.\nHoy is featured prominently in the 1984 music video for \"Here Comes The Rain Again\" by the Eurythmics.\nHoy has a performing arts theatre, the Gable End Theatre, which opened in 2000 and has a capacity of 75. The theatre is managed by the Hoy and Walls drama community.\nSome rather incongruous Art Deco structures nearby date from this period. The Arts and Crafts architect William Lethaby rebuilt Melsetter house for mountaineer Thomas Middlemore at the end of the 19th century, leaving untouched the adjacent barn which is probably mid-18th century.\nIn Poul Anderson's story \"The Bitter Bread\" the protagonist lives in secluded retirement on Hoy. There is a description of the island: \"Steep red and yellow cliffs, sea green in sunlight or gray under clouds until it breaks in whiteness and thunder, gulls riding a cold loud wind, inland the heather and a few gnarly trees across hills where sheep graze, a hamlet of rough and gentle Orkney folk an hour's walk away, my cat, my books, my rememberings.\"\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "22648", "revid": "2259739", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22648", "title": "Rousay", "text": "One of the Orkney Islands\nRousay (, ; meaning Rolf's Island) is a small, hilly island about north of Mainland, the largest island in the Orkney Islands of Scotland. It has been nicknamed \"Egypt of the north\", due to its archaeological diversity and importance.\nLike its neighbours Egilsay and Wyre, it can be reached by ro-ro ferry from Tingwall. This service is operated by Orkney Ferries, and can take up to 95 passengers (reduced to 50 in winter), and 10 cars. The ferry links the islands of Rousay, Egilsay, and Wyre with each other, and with the mainland of Orkney.\nDemographics.\nIn the 2022 census, Rousay had a population of 236. Most employment is in farming, fishing or fish-farming; craft businesses and seasonal tourism-related work are present.\nGeography.\nIt is separated from mainland Orkney by Eynhallow Sound. \nOne road circles the island, about long, and most arable land lies in the few hundred yards between it and the coastline. With an area of , it is the fifth largest of the Orkney Islands. Among several freshwater lochs on the island, the biggest is Muckle Water.\nNatural history.\nRousay is a 'Site of Special Scientific Interest' with notable cliff formations and wildflower colonies, and has an RSPB bird reserve. The hilliest Orkney island after Hoy, it offers good views of neighbouring islands from Blotchnifiold , and Keirfea or Knitchen (both over ). Archaeological remains are present, especially a cluster of sites connected by a footpath near the western shore.\nIts wildlife includes grey seals and European otters. Two sites, totaling some 630\u00a0ha, have been designated an Important Bird Area (IBA) by BirdLife International because they support breeding populations of moorland birds, including Arctic terns.\nHistory.\nHumans first made a Neolithic settlement at Rinyo. Other remnants include Bronze Age burnt mounds, Iron Age crannogs and brochs (the highest density anywhere in Scotland: three within of coastline), Viking boat burials, remains of a medieval church and a stately home at Trumland.\nOver 100 archaeological sites have been identified. Only a small fraction have been excavated and characterized. The most spectacular of the sites is the complex of Midhowe Broch and Midhowe Chambered Cairn. Blackhammer Chambered Cairn, Taversoe Tuick, and Knowe of Yarso chambered cairn are important tombs.\nRousay placenames reflect its Norse heritage. 'Hr\u00f3lfs-\u00f8y' or 'Hrolfsey' was based on the male name 'Hrolf' (Rolf). Hugh Marwick's work showed the name developing from 'Rollesay' in the 14th century, through 'Rolsay' in the 15th, and 'Rowsay' in the early 16th, with the spelling 'Rousay' first recorded in 1549.\nMost Rousay people earned their living from farming and/or fishing. In the 19th century, records reflect tradespeople supplying the needs of a rural community: blacksmiths and joiners, shoemakers and shopkeepers, with women making dresses and plaiting straw. Throughout the century, Rousay's landlords demanded high rents from crofters, many of whom became homeless in a series of clearances along the western coast, ordered by landowner George William Traill in the 1820s and 1830s.\nTraill's nephew General Sir Frederick Traill-Burroughs inherited much of the island and bought more. Traill-Burroughs built a large house at Trumland, designed by David Bryce of Edinburgh. From 1870 to 1883, improvements transformed the island: Trumland pier, island schools, a public market, the first steamship service, a post office, and the first resident doctor. He was known locally as \"the little general\" as he was a man of short stature. Poet Edwin Muir recalled in a memoir of his childhood seeing the little general walking around his estates.\nRousay's population in the mid-19th century was over 900, but emigration following land clearances reduced that to 627 by 1900, and half a century later it had fallen to 342. Depopulation accelerated, and in the next twenty years the number fell to 181, its lowest ever. From the 1970s onward new families settled on Rousay: most came from the south, especially from England. The population is now over 200.\nThe Yetnasteen stone is said to have once been a giant who revives every New Year at midnight and visits the Loch of Scockness to drink.\nEducation.\nA primary school enrolls 24 boys and girls aged 3 to 12. Once a child completes his/her primary education, they attend Kirkwall Grammar School or Stromness Academy.\nNotables.\nPoet Pauline Stainer spent two years on the island, and in 1999 published a collection of her poems about Rousay, \"Parable Island\".\nRobert C. Marwick (1922\u20132013) was a school teacher, headmaster and author born on Innister farm, in the Wasbister district. His publications about Rousay include \"From My Rousay Schoolbag\" (1995), \"Rousay Roots\" (1995) and \"In Dreams We Moor\" (2000).\nActor Graham Fellows owns a disused church there, which he intended to turn into an \"artists refuge\".\nLate artists' patron Margaret Gardiner spent a large part of her life there and in 1979 founded the Pier Art Gallery in Stromness.\nRousay Sound.\nRousay is separated from the neighbouring island of Egilsay by Rousay Sound. The sound experiences strong tides, which creates the perfect conditions for maerl beds to form. The maerl beds in turn provide a sheltered habitat for species such as peacock worms and various sponges, as well as small fish, shrimps, gobies and crabs. Since 2014 the sound, along with the neighbouring Wyre Sound (which separates Rousay from Wyre), has been designated as a Nature Conservation Marine Protected Area (NCMPA). Fishing activities are controlled within the MPA, and no dredging, beam trawling, demersal trawling or Seine fishing is permitted.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "22649", "revid": "1152308", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22649", "title": "Observation", "text": "Active acquisition of information from a primary source\nObservation in the natural sciences refers to the active acquisition of information from a primary source. It involves the act of noticing or perceiving phenomena and gathering data based on direct engagement with the subject of study.\nIn living organisms, observation typically occurs through the senses. In science, it often extends beyond unaided perception, involving the use of scientific instruments to detect, measure, and record data. This enables the observation of phenomena not accessible to human senses alone.\nObservations in science are typically categorized as either qualitative or quantitative:\nThe term \"observation\" may refer both to the process of observing and to the information recorded as a result of that process.\nScience.\nThe scientific method requires observations of natural phenomena to formulate and test hypotheses. The method involves an iterative series of steps intended to generate and refine scientific knowledge:\nEach step depends on reliable and reproducible observations, which form the basis for scientific reasoning and validation of results.\nObservations play a role in both the second and fifth steps of the scientific method. However, the principle of reproducibility requires that observations made by different individuals be comparable and consistent.\nHuman sense impressions are subjective and yield qualitative data, which are difficult to standardize, record, or compare across observers. To address this limitation, the use of measurement was developed as a means of producing objective, quantitative observations.\nMeasurement involves comparing the observed phenomenon to a standard unit, which may be defined by an artifact, a process, or a shared convention. This standard must be reproducible and accessible to all observers. The result of the measurement process is a numerical value that represents the number of standard units corresponding to the observation.\nBy reducing observations to numerical values, measurement enables consistent documentation and facilitates comparison. Two observations that yield the same measured value are considered equivalent within the resolution or precision of the process.\nHuman senses are limited in range and accuracy and are subject to errors in perception, such as those caused by optical illusions. These limitations affect the reliability and precision of unaided observations in scientific inquiry.\nTo overcome these limitations, various scientific instruments have been developed to extend and enhance human observational capabilities. Instruments such as weighing scales, clocks, telescopes, microscopes, thermometers, cameras, and tape recorders assist in making more accurate and consistent measurements of phenomena that are within the range of human perception.\nIn addition, some instruments make it possible to detect and record phenomena that are otherwise imperceptible to the senses. These include devices like indicator dyes, voltmeters, spectrometers, infrared cameras, oscilloscopes, interferometers, Geiger counters, and radio receivers. Such tools enable scientists to observe events and processes occurring beyond the limits of natural human perception.\nOne challenge encountered across scientific disciplines is that the act of observation can influence the process being observed, potentially altering the outcome. This phenomenon is known as the \"observer effect\". For instance, measuring the air pressure in an automobile tire typically requires letting out a small amount of air, which in turn changes the pressure being measured.\nIn many areas of science, the effects of observation can be minimized to negligible levels through the use of advanced and more precise instruments. These tools help ensure that the measurement process interferes as little as possible with the system under study.\nWhen considered as a physical process, all forms of observation\u2014whether performed by humans or instruments\u2014involve some form of amplification. As such, observation is a thermodynamically irreversible process that results in an increase in entropy.\nParadoxes.\nIn certain scientific fields, the results of observation vary depending on factors that are not typically significant in everyday experience. These variations are often illustrated through apparent \"paradoxes\", where an event appears different when observed from two distinct perspectives, seemingly contradicting \"common sense\".\nBiases.\nHuman senses do not function like an impartial recording device such as a video camcorder. Perception occurs through a complex, largely unconscious process of abstraction, in which certain elements of sensory input are selected and retained, while others are discarded. \nThis selection process depends on an internal model of the world\u2014referred to in psychology as a \"schema\"\u2014that is shaped by past experiences. Sensory information is interpreted and stored based on this schema. During recall, gaps in memory may be unconsciously filled with information consistent with the schema, a process known as \"reconstructive memory\".\nThe degree of attention given to different aspects of a perceptual experience is influenced by an individual's internal value system, which prioritizes information based on perceived importance. As a result, two individuals observing the same event may remember it differently, potentially disagreeing on factual details. This subjectivity is a known limitation of eyewitness testimony, which research has shown to be frequently unreliable.\nIn scientific practice, rigorous methods are employed to minimize such observational biases. These include careful documentation of experimental data, distinguishing clearly between raw observations and inferred conclusions, and implementing procedures such as blind and double blind experiment designs to control for subjective influence.\nSeveral of the more important ways observations can be affected by human psychology are given below.\nConfirmation bias.\nHuman observations are biased toward confirming the observer's conscious and unconscious expectations and view of the world; we \"see what we expect to see\". In psychology, this is called confirmation bias. Since the object of scientific research is the discovery of new phenomena, this bias can and has caused new discoveries to be overlooked; one example is the discovery of x-rays. It can also result in erroneous scientific support for widely held cultural myths, on the other hand, as in the scientific racism that supported ideas of racial superiority in the early 20th century.\nProcessing bias.\nModern scientific instruments frequently perform extensive processing of \"observations\" before the results are presented to human observers. With the increasing use of computerized instruments, it can be difficult to determine the boundary between the act of observation and the interpretation or conclusion drawn from that data.\nThis issue is particularly relevant in the context of digital image processing, where images used as experimental data in scientific publications are sometimes enhanced to emphasize specific features. While such enhancement can aid in highlighting relevant aspects of the data, it may also inadvertently reinforce the researcher's hypothesis, introducing a form of bias that is challenging to quantify.\nIn response, some journals have established explicit guidelines regarding permissible types of image processing in published research. To safeguard against processing bias, many computerized systems are designed to store copies of the unprocessed or \"raw\" data captured by sensors. Likewise, scientific best practices require that original, unaltered images used as research data be preserved and made available upon request.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "22652", "revid": "24902", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22652", "title": "Oftel", "text": "Former British regulatory body\nThe Office of Telecommunications (Oftel) (\"the telecommunications regulator\") was a department in the United Kingdom government, under civil service control, charged with promoting competition and maintaining the interests of consumers in the UK telecommunications market. It was set up under the Telecommunications Act 1984 after privatisation of the nationalised operator BT.\nOftel was accused by critics such as Freeserve of having been \"captured\" by BT, and of giving the dominant operator too much freedom to leverage its monopoly status in fixed line telephony into other markets such as ADSL.\nOn 29 December 2003, the duties of Oftel were inherited by Ofcom, which was the result of the consolidation of five separate British telecommunications, radio spectrum and broadcasting regulators.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "22653", "revid": "47878082", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22653", "title": "OCR", "text": "OCR may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "22654", "revid": "34074157", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22654", "title": "Ohio-class submarine", "text": "Class of US nuclear ballistic missile submarines\nThe \"Ohio\" class of nuclear-powered submarines includes the United States Navy's 14 ballistic missile submarines (SSBNs) and its 4 cruise missile submarines (SSGNs). Each displacing 18,750 tons submerged, the \"Ohio\"-class boats are the largest submarines ever built for the U.S. Navy and are capable of carrying 24 Trident II ballistic missiles or 22 tubes with 7 BGM-109 Tomahawk cruise missiles apiece. They are also the third-largest submarines ever built, behind the Russian Navy's Soviet era 48,000-ton , the last of which was retired in 2023, and 24,000-ton .\nLike their predecessors the and es, the \"Ohio\"-class SSBNs are part of the United States' nuclear-deterrent triad, along with U.S. Air Force strategic bombers and intercontinental ballistic missiles. The 14 SSBNs together carry about half of U.S. active strategic thermonuclear warheads. Although the Trident missiles have no preset targets when the submarines go on patrol, they can be given targets quickly, from the United States Strategic Command based in Nebraska, using secure and constant radio communications links, including very low frequency systems.\nAll the \"Ohio\"-class submarines, except for , are named for U.S. states, which U.S. Navy tradition had previously reserved for battleships and later cruisers. The \"Ohio\" class is to be gradually replaced by the beginning in 2031.\nDescription.\nThe \"Ohio\"-class submarine was designed for extended strategic deterrent patrols. Each submarine is assigned two complete crews, called the Blue crew and the Gold crew, each typically serving 70-to-90-day deterrent patrols. To decrease the time in port for crew turnover and replenishment, three large logistics hatches have been installed to provide large-diameter resupply and repair access. These hatches allow rapid transfer of supply pallets, equipment replacement modules, and machinery components, speeding up replenishment and maintenance of the submarines. Moreover, the \"stealth\" ability of the submarines was significantly improved over all previous ballistic-missile subs.\" Ohio\" was virtually undetectable in her sea trials in 1982, giving the U.S. Navy extremely advanced flexibility.\nThe class's design allows the boat to operate for about 15 years between major overhauls. These submarines are reported to be as quiet at their cruising speed of or more as the previous s at , although exact information remains classified. Fire control for their Mark 48 torpedoes is carried out by Mark 118 Mod 2 system, while the Missile Fire Control system is a Mark 98.\nThe \"Ohio\"-class submarines were constructed from sections of hull, with each four-deck section being in diameter. The sections were produced at the General Dynamics Electric Boat facility, Quonset Point, Rhode Island, and then assembled at its shipyard at Groton, Connecticut.\nThe US Navy has a total of 18 \"Ohio\"-class submarines which consist of 14 ballistic missile submarines (SSBNs), and four cruise missile submarines (SSGNs). The SSBN submarines provide the sea-based leg of the U.S. nuclear triad. Each SSBN submarine is armed with up to 20 Trident II submarine-launched ballistic missiles (SLBM). Each SSGN is capable of carrying 154 Tomahawk cruise missiles, plus a complement of Harpoon missiles to be fired through their torpedo tubes.\nHistory.\nThe \"Ohio\" class was designed in the 1970s to carry the concurrently designed Trident submarine-launched ballistic missile. The first eight \"Ohio\"-class submarines were armed at first with 24 Trident I C4 SLBMs. Beginning with the ninth Trident submarine, , the remaining boats were equipped with the larger, three-stage Trident II D5 missile. The Trident I missile carries eight multiple independently targetable reentry vehicles, while the Trident II missile carries 12, in total delivering more destructive power than the Trident I missile and with greater accuracy. Starting with in 2000, the Navy began converting its remaining ballistic missile submarines armed with C4 missiles to carry D5 missiles. This task was completed in mid-2008. The first eight submarines had their home ports at Bangor, Washington, to replace the submarines carrying Polaris A3 missiles that were then being decommissioned. The remaining 10 submarines originally had their home ports at Kings Bay, Georgia, replacing the Poseidon and Trident Backfit submarines of the Atlantic Fleet.\nSSBN/SSGN conversions.\nIn 1994, the Nuclear Posture Review study determined that, of the 18 \"Ohio\" SSBNs the U.S. Navy would be operating in total, 14 would be sufficient for the strategic needs of the U.S. The decision was made to convert four \"Ohio\"-class boats into SSGNs capable of conducting conventional land attack and special operations. As a result, the four oldest boats of the class\u2014\"Ohio\", \"Michigan\", \"Florida\", and \"Georgia\"\u2014progressively entered the conversion process in late 2002 and were returned to active service by 2008. The boats could thereafter carry 154 Tomahawk cruise missiles and 66 special operations personnel, among other capabilities and upgrades. The cost to refit the four boats was around US$1\u00a0billion (2008 dollars) per vessel. During the conversion of these four submarines to SSGNs (see below), five of the remaining submarines, , , , , and , were transferred from Kings Bay to Bangor. \nThe conversion modified 22 of the 24 diameter Trident missile tubes to contain large vertical launch systems, one configuration of which may be a cluster of seven Tomahawk cruise missiles. In this configuration, the number of cruise missiles carried could be a maximum of 154, the equivalent of what is typically deployed in a surface battle group. Other payload possibilities include new generations of supersonic and hypersonic cruise missiles, and Submarine Launched Intermediate Range Ballistic Missiles, unmanned aerial vehicles, the ADM-160 MALD, sensors for antisubmarine warfare or intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance missions, counter mine warfare payloads such as the AN/BLQ-11 Long-Term Mine Reconnaissance System, and the broaching universal buoyant launcher and stealthy affordable capsule system specialized payload canisters.\nThe missile tubes also have room for stowage canisters that can extend the forward deployment time for special forces. The other two Trident tubes are converted to swimmer lockout chambers. For special operations, the Dry Combat Submersible (which replaced the Advanced SEAL Delivery System), as well as the dry deck shelter, can be mounted on the lockout chamber and the boat will be able to host up to 66 special-operations sailors or Marines, such as Navy SEALs, or USMC MARSOC teams. Improved communications equipment installed during the upgrade allows the SSGNs to serve as a forward-deployed, clandestine Small Combatant Joint Command Center.\nOn 26 September 2002, the Navy awarded General Dynamics Electric Boat a US$442.9 million contract to begin the first phase of the SSGN submarine conversion program. Those funds covered only the initial phase of conversion for the first two boats on the schedule. Advance procurement was funded at $355 million in fiscal year 2002, $825 million in the FY 2003 budget and, through the five-year defense budget plan, at $936 million in FY 2004, $505 million in FY 2005, and $170 million in FY 2006. Thus, the total cost to refit the four boats is just under $700 million per vessel.\nIn November 2002, \"Ohio\" entered a dry-dock, beginning her 36-month refueling and missile-conversion overhaul. Electric Boat announced on 9 January 2006 that the conversion had been completed. The converted \"Ohio\" rejoined the fleet in February 2006, followed by \"Florida\" in April 2006. The converted \"Michigan\" was delivered in November 2006. The converted \"Ohio\" went to sea for the first time in October 2007. \"Georgia\" returned to the fleet in March 2008 at Kings Bay. These four SSGNs are expected to remain in service until about 2023\u20132026. At that point, their capabilities will be replaced with Virginia Payload Module-equipped .\nIn 2011, \"Ohio\"-class submarines carried out 28 deterrent patrols. Each patrol lasts around 70 days. Four boats are on station (\"hard alert\") in designated patrol areas at any given time. From January to June 2014, \"Pennsylvania\" carried out a 140-day-long patrol, the longest to date.\nMissile tube reduction.\nAs part of the New START treaty, four tubes on each SSBN were deactivated in 2017, reducing the number of missiles to 20 per boat.\nBoats in class.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReplacement.\nThe U.S. Department of Defense anticipated a continued need for a sea-based strategic nuclear force. The first of the current \"Ohio\"-class SSBNs was expected to be retired by 2029, so the replacement submarine would need to be seaworthy by that time. A replacement was expected to cost over $4 billion per unit compared to \"Ohio\"'s $2 billion. The U.S. Navy explored two options. The first option was a variant of the nuclear-powered attack submarines. The second option was a dedicated SSBN, either with a new hull or based on an overhaul of the current \"Ohio\" class.\nWith the cooperation of both Electric Boat and Newport News Shipbuilding, in 2007, the U.S. Navy began a cost-control study. Then in December 2008, the U.S. Navy awarded Electric Boat a contract for the missile compartment design of the \"Ohio\"-class replacement, worth up to $592 million. Newport News is expected to receive close to 4% of that project. In April 2009, U.S. Defense Secretary Robert M. Gates stated that the U.S. Navy was expected to begin such a program in 2010. The new vessel was scheduled to enter the design phase by 2014. If a new hull design was to be used, the program needed to be initiated by 2016 to meet the 2029 deadline.\nThe \"Columbia\" class was officially designated on 14 December 2016, by Secretary of the Navy Ray Mabus, and the lead submarine will be . The Navy wants to procure the first \"Columbia\"-class boat in FY2021, though it is not expected to enter service until 2031.\nIn 2020, Navy officials first publicly discussed the idea of extending the lives of select \"Ohio\"-class boats at the Naval Submarine League's 2020 conference. During the 2022 conference, Rear Admiral Scott Pappano, the program executive officer for strategic submarines, and Rear Admiral Douglas G. Perry, the director of undersea warfare on the Chief of Naval Operations' staff, discussed the \"Columbia\"-class program, and also touched on the possibility of finding \"Ohio\"-class boats that had sufficient remaining nuclear fuel and were in good enough material state to be given a further extension to their lives.\nIn popular culture.\nAs ballistic-missile submarines, the \"Ohio\" class has occasionally been portrayed in fiction books and films.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "22655", "revid": "5957417", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22655", "title": "Ossian", "text": "Purported author of a cycle of epic poems\nOssian (; Irish Gaelic/Scottish Gaelic: \"Oisean\") is the narrator and purported author of a cycle of epic poems published by the Scottish poet James Macpherson, originally as \"Fingal\" (1761) and \"Temora\" (1763), and later combined under the title \"The Poems of Ossian\". Macpherson claimed to have collected word-of-mouth material in Scottish Gaelic, said to be from ancient sources, and that the work was his translation of that material. Ossian is based on Ois\u00edn, son of Fionn mac Cumhaill (anglicised to Finn McCool), a legendary bard in Irish mythology. Contemporary critics were divided in their view of the work's authenticity, but the current consensus is that Macpherson largely composed the poems himself, drawing in part on traditional Gaelic poetry he had collected.\nThe work was internationally popular, translated into all the literary languages of Europe, and was highly influential both in the development of the Romantic movement and the Gaelic revival. Macpherson's fame was crowned by his burial among the literary giants in Westminster Abbey. W. P. Ker, in the \"Cambridge History of English Literature\", observes that \"all Macpherson's craft as a philological impostor would have been nothing without his literary skill.\"\nPoems.\nIn 1760, Macpherson published the English-language text \"Fragments of ancient poetry, collected in the Highlands of Scotland, and translated from the Gaelic or Erse language\". Later that year, he claimed to have obtained further manuscripts and in 1761 he claimed to have found an epic on the subject of the hero Fingal (with Fingal or \"Fionnghall\" meaning 'fair stranger' denoting hair or eye colour ), written by Ossian. According to Macpherson's prefatory material, his publisher, claiming that there was no market for these works except in English, required that they be translated. Macpherson published these alleged translations during the next few years, culminating in a collected edition, \"The Works of Ossian\", in 1765. The most famous of these Ossianic poems was \"Fingal\", written in 1761 and dated 1762.\nThe supposed original poems are translated into poetic prose, with short and simple sentences. The mood is epic, but there is no single narrative, although the same characters reappear. The main characters are Ossian himself, relating the stories when old and blind, his father Fingal (very loosely based on the Irish hero Fionn mac Cumhaill), his dead son Oscar (also with an Irish counterpart), and Oscar's lover Malvina (like Fiona a name invented by Macpherson), who looks after Ossian in his old age. Though the stories \"are of endless battles and unhappy loves\", the enemies and causes of strife are given little explanation and context.\nCharacters are given to killing loved ones by mistake, and dying of grief, or of joy. There is very little information given on the religion, culture or society of the characters, and buildings are hardly mentioned. The landscape \"is more real than the people who inhabit it. Drowned in eternal mist, illuminated by a decrepit sun or by ephemeral meteors, it is a world of greyness.\" Fingal is king of a region of south-west Scotland perhaps similar to the historical kingdom of D\u00e1l Riata and the poems appear to be set around the 3rd century, with the \"king of the world\" mentioned being the Roman Emperor; Macpherson and his supporters detected references to Caracalla (d. 217, as \"Caracul\") and Carausius (d. 293, as \"Caros\", the \"king of ships\").\nReception and influence.\nThe poems achieved international success. Napoleon and Diderot were prominent admirers, and Voltaire was known to have written parodies of them. Thomas Jefferson thought Ossian \"the greatest poet that has ever existed\", and planned to learn Gaelic so as to read his poems in the original. They were proclaimed as a Celtic equivalent of the Classical writers such as Homer. \"The genuine remains of Ossian\u00a0... are in many respects of the same stamp as the \"Iliad\"\", was Thoreau's opinion. Many writers were influenced by the works, including Walter Scott, and painters and composers chose Ossianic subjects.\nThe Hungarian national poet S\u00e1ndor Pet\u0151fi wrote a poem entitled \"Homer and Ossian\", comparing the two authors, of which the first verse reads:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nDespite its doubtful authenticity, the Ossian cycle popularized Celtic mythology across Europe, and became one of the earliest and most popular texts that inspired romantic nationalism over the following century. European historians agree that the Ossian poems and their vision of mythical Scotland spurred the emergence of enlightened patriotism on the continent and played a foundational role in the making of modern European nationalism.\nThe cycle had less impact in the British Isles. Samuel Johnson held it up as \"another proof of Scotch conspiracy in national falsehood\", while the Irish objected to what they saw as Macpherson's misappropriation of the Fenian Cycle of Irish mythology. David Hume eventually withdrew his initial support of Macpherson and quipped that he could not accept the claimed authenticity of the poems even if \"fifty bare-arsed Highlanders\" vouched for it. By the early 19th century, the cycle came to play a limited role in Scottish patriotic rhetoric.\nAuthenticity debate.\nThere were immediate disputes of Macpherson's claims on both literary and political grounds. Macpherson promoted a Scottish origin for the material, and was hotly opposed by Irish historians who felt that their heritage was being appropriated. However, both Scotland and Ireland shared a common Gaelic culture during the period in which the poems are set, and some Fenian literature common in both countries was composed in Scotland.\nSamuel Johnson, English author, critic, and biographer, was convinced that Macpherson was \"a mountebank, a liar, and a fraud, and that the poems were forgeries\". Johnson also dismissed the poems' quality. Upon being asked, \"But Doctor Johnson, do you really believe that any man today could write such poetry?\" he famously replied, \"Yes. Many men. Many women. And many children.\" Johnson is cited as calling the story of Ossian \"as gross an imposition as ever the world was troubled with\". In support of his claim, Johnson also called Gaelic the rude speech of a barbarous people, and said there were no manuscripts in it more than 100 years old. In reply, it was proved that the Advocates' Library at Edinburgh contained Gaelic manuscripts 500 years old, and one of even greater antiquity.\nIn response, as his words were spoken during the 18th-century golden age of Scottish Gaelic literature, Dr Johnson swiftly found himself reviled in Gaelic satirical poetry by, among many others, James MacIntyre, the Clan MacIntyre Tacksman of Glen Noe near Ben Cruachan, in (, \"A Song to Dr Johnson\"). Raonuill Dubh MacDh\u00f2mhnuill, the eldest son of Gaelic national poet Alasdair Mac Mhaighstir Alasdair and Clanranald tacksman of Laig, included MacIntyre's satire in the Gaelic poetry anthology called \"The Eigg Collection\", which was published at Edinburgh in 1776.\nScottish author Hugh Blair's 1763 \"A Critical Dissertation on the Poems of Ossian\" upheld the work's authenticity against Johnson's scathing criticism and from 1765 was included in every edition of \"Ossian\" to lend the work credibility. The work also had a timely resonance for those swept away by the emerging Romantic movement and the theory of the \"noble savage\", and it echoed the popularity of Burke's seminal \"A Philosophical Enquiry into the Origin of Our Ideas of the Sublime and Beautiful\" (1757).\nIn 1766, antiquarian and Celticist Charles O'Conor, a descendant of the Gaelic nobility of Ireland, dismissed Ossian's authenticity in a new chapter \"Remarks on Mr. Mac Pherson's translation of Fingal and Temora\" that he added to the second edition of his seminal history. In 1775, he expanded his criticism in a new book, \"Dissertation on the origin and antiquities of the antient Scots\".\nFaced with the controversy, the Committee of the Highland Society enquired after the authenticity of Macpherson's supposed original. It was because of these circumstances that the so-called Glenmasan manuscript (Adv. 72.2.3) came to light in the late 18th century, a compilation which contains the tale \"Oided mac n-Uisnig\". This text is a version of the Irish \"Longes mac n-Uislenn\" and offers a tale which bears some comparison to Macpherson's \"Darthula\", although it is radically different in many respects. Donald Smith cited it in his report for the committee.\nThe controversy raged on into the early years of the 19th century, with disputes as to whether the poems were based on Irish sources, on sources in English, on Gaelic fragments woven into his own composition as Johnson concluded, or largely on Scots Gaelic oral traditions and manuscripts as Macpherson claimed. In the late 19th century, it was demonstrated that the only \"original\" Gaelic manuscripts that Macpherson produced for the poems were in fact translations of his work from English. During the same period, Peter Hately Waddell defended the authenticity of the poems, arguing in \"Ossian and the Clyde\" (1875) that the poems contained topographical references that could not have been known to Macpherson.\nIn 1952, the Scottish literary scholar Derick Thomson investigated the sources for Macpherson's work and concluded that Macpherson had collected genuine Scottish Gaelic ballads, employing scribes to record those that were preserved orally and collating manuscripts, but, as a pioneer of mythopoeia, had adapted often contradictory accounts of the same legends into a coherent plotline by altering the original characters and ideas, and had also introduced a great deal of his own.\nAccording to historians Colin Kidd and James Coleman, \"Fingal\" (1761, dated 1762) was indebted to traditional Gaelic poetry composed in the 15th and 16th centuries, as well as to Macpherson's \"own creativity and editorial laxity\", while the second epic \"Temora\" (1763) was largely his own creation.\nNowadays, the work is considered a classic of found manuscript trope.\nTranslations and adaptations.\nOne poem was translated into French in 1762; by 1777, the whole corpus was translated. In the German-speaking states, Michael Denis made the first full translation in 1768\u20131769, inspiring the proto-nationalist poets Klopstock and Goethe, whose own German translation of a portion of Macpherson's work figures prominently in a climactic scene of \"The Sorrows of Young Werther\" (1774). Goethe's associate Johann Gottfried Herder wrote an essay titled \"Extract from a correspondence about Ossian and the Songs of Ancient Peoples\" (1773) in the early days of the \"Sturm und Drang\" movement.\nComplete Danish translations were made in 1790, and Swedish ones in 1794\u20131800. In Scandinavia and Germany, the Celtic nature of the setting was ignored or not understood; instead, Ossian was regarded as a Nordic or Germanic figure who became a symbol for nationalist aspirations. In 1799, the French general Jean-Baptiste Bernadotte named his only son Oscar after the character from Ossian, at the suggestion of Napoleon, the child's godfather and an admirer of Ossian. Bernadotte later was made King of Sweden and Norway. In 1844, his son became King Oscar I of Sweden and Norway, who was, in turn, succeeded by his sons Charles XV and Oscar II (d. 1907). \"Oscar\" being a royal name led to its becoming also a common male first name, especially in Scandinavia but also in other European countries.\nMelchiore Cesarotti was an Italian clergyman whose translation into Italian is said by many to improve on the original, and was a tireless promoter of the poems, in Vienna and Warsaw as well as Italy. It was his translation that Napoleon especially admired, and among others it influenced Ugo Foscolo, who was Cesarotti's pupil in the University of Padua.\nBritish composer Harriet Wainwright premiered her opera \"Comala\", based on text by Ossian, in London in 1792.\nThe first partial Polish translation of Ossian was made by Ignacy Krasicki in 1793. The complete translation appeared in 1838 by Seweryn Goszczy\u0144ski.\nBy 1800, Ossian was translated into Spanish and Russian, with Dutch following in 1805, and Polish, Czech and Hungarian in 1827\u20131833. The poems were as much admired in Hungary as in France and Germany; Hungarian J\u00e1nos Arany wrote \"Homer and Ossian\" in response, and several other Hungarian writers \u2013 Bar\u00f3ti Szab\u00f3, Csokonai, S\u00e1ndor Kisfaludy, Kazinczy, K\u00f6lcsey, Ferenc Toldy, and \u00c1gost Greguss, were also influenced by it.\nThe opera \"Ossian, ou Les bardes\" by Jean-Fran\u00e7ois Le Sueur (with the famous, multimedial scene of \"Ossian's Dream\") was a sell-out at the Paris Opera in 1804, and transformed the composer's career. The poems also exerted an influence on the burgeoning of Romantic music, and Franz Schubert in particular composed Lieder setting many of Ossian's poems. In 1829 Felix Mendelssohn was inspired to visit the Hebrides and composed the \"Hebrides Overture\", also known as \"Fingal's Cave\". His friend Niels Gade devoted his first published work, the concert overture \"Efterklange af Ossian\" (\"Echoes of Ossian\") written in 1840, to the same subject.\nGaelic studies.\nMacpherson's \"Ossian\" made a strong impression on Dugald Buchanan (1716\u20131768), a Perthshire poet whose celebrated \"Spiritual Hymns\" are written in a Scots Gaelic of a high quality that to some extent reflects the Classical Gaelic literary language once common to the bards of both Ireland and Scotland. Buchanan, taking the poems of \"Ossian\" to be authentic, was moved to revalue the genuine traditions and rich cultural heritage of the Gaels. At around the same time, he wrote to Sir James Clerk of Penicuik, the leading antiquary of the movement, proposing that someone should travel to the isles and western coast of Scotland and collect the work of the ancient and modern bards, in which alone he could find the language in its purity.\nMuch later, in the 19th and 20th centuries, this task was taken up by collectors such as Alexander Carmichael and Lady Evelyn Stewart Murray, and to be recorded and continued by the work of the School of Scottish Studies and the Scottish Gaelic Texts Society.\nIn art.\nSubjects from the Ossian poems were popular in the art of northern Europe, but at rather different periods depending on the country; by the time French artists began to depict Ossian, British artists had largely dropped him. Ossian was especially popular in Danish art, but also found in Germany and the rest of Scandinavia.\nBritain, Germany and Scandinavia.\nBritish artists began to depict the Ossian poems early on, with the first major work a cycle of paintings decorating the ceiling the \"Grand Hall\" of Penicuik House in Midlothian, built by Sir James Clerk, who commissioned the paintings in 1772. These were by the Scottish painter Alexander Runciman but were lost when the house burnt down in 1899, though drawings and etchings survive, and two pamphlets describing them were published in the 18th century. A subject from Ossian by Angelica Kauffman was shown in the Royal Academy Exhibition of 1773, and Ossian was depicted in \"Elysium\", part of the Irish painter James Barry's \"magnum opus\" decorating the Royal Society of Arts, at the Adelphi Buildings in London (still \"in situ\").\nWorks on paper by Thomas Girtin and John Sell Cotman have survived, though the Ossianic landscapes by George Augustus Wallis, which the Ossian fan August Wilhelm Schlegel praised in a letter to Goethe, seem to have been lost, as has a picture by J. M. W. Turner exhibited in 1802. Henry Singleton exhibited paintings, some of which were engraved and used in editions of the poems.\nA fragment by Novalis, written in 1789, refers to Ossian as an inspired, holy and poetical singer.\nThe Danish painter Nicolai Abildgaard, director of the Copenhagen Academy from 1789, painted several scenes from Ossian, as did his pupils, including Asmus Jacob Carstens. His friend Joseph Anton Koch painted a number of subjects, and two large series of illustrations for the poems, which never got properly into print; like many Ossianic works by Wallis, Carstens, Krafft and others, some of these were painted in Rome, perhaps not the best place to evoke the dim northern light of the poems. In Germany the request in 1804 to produce some drawings as illustrations so excited Philipp Otto Runge that he planned a series of 100, far more than asked for, in a style heavily influenced by the linear illustrations of John Flaxman; these remain as drawings only. Many other German works are recorded, some as late as the 1840s; word of the British scepticism over the Ossian poems was slow to penetrate the continent, or considered irrelevant.\nFrance.\nIn France, the enthusiasm of Napoleon for the poems accounts for most artistic depictions, and those by the most famous artists, but a painting exhibited in the Paris Salon of 1800 by Paul Duqueylar (now Mus\u00e9e Granet, Aix-en-Provence) excited \"Les Barbus\" (\"the Bearded Ones\"), a group of primitivist artists including Pierre-Maurice Quays (or Qua\u00ef) who promoted living in the style of \"early civilizations as described in Homer, Ossian, and the Bible\". Quays is reported as saying: \"Hom\u00e8re? Ossian? ... le soleil? la lune? Voil\u00e0 la question. En v\u00e9rit\u00e9, je crois que je pr\u00e9f\u00e8re la lune. C'est plus simple, plus grand, plus \"primitif\"\". (\"Homer? Ossian? ... the sun? the moon? That's the question. Truthfully I think I prefer the moon. It's more simple, more grand, more \"primitive\"\"). The same year, Napoleon was planning the renovation of the Ch\u00e2teau de Malmaison as a summer palace, and, though he does not seem to have suggested Ossianic subjects for his painters, two large and significant works were among those painted for the reception hall, for which six artists had been commissioned.\nThese were Girodet's painting of 1801\u201302 \"Ossian receiving the Ghosts of the French Heroes\", and \"Ossian Evoking ghosts on the Edge of the Lora\" (1801), by Fran\u00e7ois Pascal Simon G\u00e9rard. G\u00e9rard's original was lost in a shipwreck after being bought by the King of Sweden after the fall of Napoleon, but survives in three replicas by the artist (a further one in Berlin was lost in 1945). One is now at Malmaison (184.5 \u00d7 194.5\u00a0cm / 72.6 \u00d7 76.6 in), and the Kunsthalle Hamburg has another (180.5 \u00d7 198.5\u00a0cm). A watercolour copy by Jean-Baptiste Isabey was placed as frontispiece to Napoleon's copy of the poems.\nDuqueylar, Girodet and G\u00e9rard, like Johann Peter Krafft (above) and most of the \"Barbus\", were all pupils of David, and the clearly unclassical subjects of the Ossian poems were useful for emergent French Romantic painting, marking a revolt against David's Neoclassical choice of historical subject-matter. David's recorded reactions to the paintings were guarded or hostile; he said of Girodet's work: \"Either Girodet is mad or I no longer know anything of the art of painting\".\nGirodet's painting (still at Malmaison; 192.5 \u00d7 184\u00a0cm) was a \"succ\u00e8s de scandale\" when exhibited in 1802, and remains a key work in the emergence of French Romantic painting, but the specific allusions to the political situation that he intended it to carry were largely lost on the public, and overtaken by the Peace of Amiens with Great Britain, signed in 1802 between the completion and exhibition of the work. He also produced \"Malvina dying in the arms of Fingal\" (c. 1802), and other works.\nAnother pupil of David, Jean-Auguste-Dominique Ingres, was to depict Ossianic scenes over most of his long career. He made a drawing in 1809, when studying in Rome, and in 1810 or 1811 was commissioned to make two paintings, \"The Dream of Ossian\" and a classical scene, to decorate the bedroom Napoleon was to occupy in the Palazzo Quirinale on a visit to Rome. In fact the visit never came off and in 1835 Ingres repurchased the work, now in poor condition.\nThe American painter based in Paris Wilbur Winfield Woodward exhibited an Ossian at the 1880 Salon.\nEditions.\nNational Library of Scotland has 327 books and associated materials in its Ossian Collection. The collection was originally assembled by J. Norman Methven of Perth and includes different editions and translations of James Macpherson's epic poem 'Ossian', some with a map of the 'Kingdom of Connor'. It also contains secondary material relating to Ossianic poetry and the Ossian controversy. More than 200 items from the collection have been digitised.\nBelow are some other online editions of interest and recent works:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "22656", "revid": "48675909", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22656", "title": "Operand", "text": "Object of a mathematical operation, quantity on which an operation is performed\nIn mathematics, an operand is the object of a mathematical operation, i.e., it is the object or quantity that is operated on.\nUnknown operands in equalities of expressions can be found by equation solving.\nExample.\nThe following arithmetic expression shows an example of operators and operands:\nformula_1\nIn the above example, '+' is the symbol for the operation called addition.\nThe operand '3' is one of the inputs (quantities) followed by the addition operator, and the operand '6' is the other input necessary for the operation.\nThe result of the operation is 9. (The number '9' is also called the sum of the augend 3 and the addend 6.)\nAn operand, then, is also referred to as \"one of the inputs (quantities) for an operation\".\nNotation.\nExpressions as operands.\nOperands may be nested, and may consist of expressions also made up of operators with operands.\nformula_2\nIn the above expression '(3\u00a0+\u00a05)' is the first operand for the multiplication operator and '2' the second. The operand '(3\u00a0+\u00a05)' is an expression in itself, which contains an addition operator, with the operands '3' and '5'.\nRules of precedence affect which values form operands for which operators:\nformula_3\nIn the above expression, the multiplication operator has the higher precedence than the addition operator, so the multiplication operator has operands of '5' and '2'. The addition operator has operands of '3' and '5\u00a0\u00d7\u00a02'.\nPositioning of operands.\nDepending on the mathematical notation being used the position of an operator in relation to its operand(s) may vary. In everyday usage infix notation is the most common, however other notations also exist, such as the prefix and postfix notations. These alternate notations are most common within computer science.\nBelow is a comparison of three different notations \u2014 all represent an addition of the numbers '1' and '2'\nformula_4 (infix notation)\nformula_5 (prefix notation)\nformula_6 (postfix notation)\nInfix and the order of operation.\nIn a mathematical expression, the order of operation is carried out from left to right. Start with the leftmost value and seek the first operation to be carried out in accordance with the order specified above (i.e., start with parentheses and end with the addition/subtraction group). For example, in the expression\nformula_7,\nthe first operation to be acted upon is any and all expressions found inside a parenthesis. So beginning at the left and moving to the right, find the first (and in this case, the only) parenthesis, that is, (2\u00a0+\u00a022). Within the parenthesis itself is found the expression 22. The reader is required to find the value of 22 before going any further. The value of 22 is 4. Having found this value, the remaining expression looks like this:\nformula_8\nThe next step is to calculate the value of expression inside the parenthesis itself, that is, (2\u00a0+\u00a04)\u00a0=\u00a06. Our expression now looks like this:\nformula_9\nHaving calculated the parenthetical part of the expression, we start over again beginning with the left most value and move right. The next order of operation (according to the rules) is exponents. Start at the left most value, that is, 4, and scan your eyes to the right and search for the first exponent you come across. The first (and only) expression we come across that is expressed with an exponent is 22. We find the value of 22, which is 4. What we have left is the expression\nformula_10.\nThe next order of operation is multiplication. 4\u00a0\u00d7\u00a04 is 16. Now our expression looks like this:\nformula_11\nThe next order of operation according to the rules is division. However, there is no division operator sign (\u00f7) in the expression, 16\u00a0\u2212\u00a06. So we move on to the next order of operation, i.e., addition and subtraction, which have the same precedence and are done left to right.\nformula_12.\nSo the correct value for our original expression, 4\u00a0\u00d7\u00a022\u00a0\u2212\u00a0(2\u00a0+\u00a022), is 10.\nIt is important to carry out the order of operation in accordance with rules set by convention. If the reader evaluates an expression but does not follow the correct order of operation, the reader will come forth with a different value. The different value will be the incorrect value because the order of operation was not followed. The reader will arrive at the correct value for the expression if and only if each operation is carried out in the proper order.\nArity.\nThe number of operands of an operator is called its arity. Based on arity, operators are chiefly classified as nullary (no operands), unary (1 operand), binary (2 operands), ternary (3 operands). Higher arities are less frequently denominated through a specific terms, all the more when function composition or currying can be used to avoid them. Other terms include:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nComputer science.\nIn computer programming languages, the definitions of operator and operand are almost the same as in mathematics.\nIn computing, an operand is the part of a computer instruction which specifies what data is to be manipulated or operated on, while at the same time representing the data itself.\nA computer instruction describes an operation such as add or multiply X, while the operand (or operands, as there can be more than one) specify on which X to operate as well as the value of X.\nAdditionally, in assembly language, an operand is a value (an argument) on which the instruction, named by mnemonic, operates. The operand may be a processor register, a memory address, a literal constant, or a label. A simple example (in the x86 architecture) is\nMOV BX, AX\nwhere the value in register operand codice_1 is to be moved (codice_2) into register codice_3. Depending on the instruction, there may be zero, one, two, or more operands.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "22657", "revid": "1893804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22657", "title": "Order of magnitude", "text": "Scale of numbers with a fixed ratio\nIn a ratio scale based on powers of ten, the order of magnitude is a measure of the nearness of two figures. Two numbers are \"within an order of magnitude\" of each other if their ratio is between 1/10 and 10. In other words, the two numbers are within about a factor of 10 of each other.\nFor example, 1 and 1.02 are within an order of magnitude. So are 1 and 2, 1 and 9, or 1 and 0.2. However, 1 and 15 are not within an order of magnitude, since their ratio is 15/1 = 15 &gt; 10. The reciprocal ratio, 1/15, is less than 0.1, so the same result is obtained.\nDifferences in order of magnitude can be measured on a base-10 logarithmic scale in \"decades\" (i.e., factors of ten). For example, there is one order of magnitude between 2 and 20, and two orders of magnitude between 2 and 200. Each division or multiplication by 10 is called an order of magnitude. \nThis phrasing helps quickly express the difference in scale between 2 and 2,000,000: they differ by 6 orders of magnitude.\nExamples of numbers of different magnitudes can be found at Orders of magnitude (numbers).\nBelow are examples of different methods of partitioning the real numbers into specific \"orders of magnitude\" for various purposes. There is not one single accepted way of doing this, and different partitions may be easier to compute but less useful for approximation, or better for approximation but more difficult to compute.\nCalculating the order of magnitude.\nGenerally, the order of magnitude of a number is the smallest power of 10 used to represent that number. To work out the order of magnitude of a number formula_1, the number is first expressed in the following form:\nformula_2\nwhere formula_3, or approximately formula_4. Then, formula_5 represents the order of magnitude of the number. The order of magnitude can be any integer. The table below enumerates the order of magnitude of some numbers using this definition:\nThe geometric mean of formula_6 and formula_7 is formula_8, meaning that a value of exactly formula_8 (i.e., formula_10) represents a geometric \"halfway point\" within the range of possible values of formula_11.\nSome use a simpler definition where formula_12. This definition has the effect of lowering the values of formula_5 slightly:\nUses.\nOrders of magnitude are used to make approximate comparisons. If numbers differ by one order of magnitude, one number is about 10 times larger than the other. If values differ by two orders of magnitude, they differ by a factor of about 100. Two numbers of the same order of magnitude have roughly the same scale: the larger value is less than ten times the smaller value. The growing amounts of Internet data have led to addition of new SI prefixes over time, most recently in 2022.\nCalculating the order of magnitude by truncation.\nThe order of magnitude of a number is, intuitively speaking, the number of digits in it which are above the ones place. More precisely, the order of magnitude of a number can be defined in terms of the common logarithm, usually as the integer part of the logarithm, obtained by truncation. For example, the number has a logarithm (in base 10) of 6.602; its order of magnitude is 6. When truncating, a number of this order of magnitude is between 106 and 107. In a similar example, with the phrase \"seven-figure income\", the order of magnitude is the number of figures minus one, so it is very easily determined without a calculator to be 6. An order of magnitude is an approximate position on a logarithmic scale.\nOrder-of-magnitude estimate.\nAn order-of-magnitude estimate of a variable, whose precise value is unknown, is an estimate rounded to the nearest power of ten. For example, an order-of-magnitude estimate for a variable between about 3 billion and 30 billion (such as the human population of the Earth) is 10 billion. To round a number to its nearest order of magnitude, one rounds its logarithm to the nearest integer. Thus , which has a logarithm (in base 10) of 6.602, has 7 as its nearest order of magnitude, because \"nearest\" implies rounding rather than truncation. For a number written in scientific notation, this logarithmic rounding scale requires rounding up to the next power of ten when the multiplier is greater than the square root of ten (about 3.162). For example, the nearest order of magnitude for is 8, whereas the nearest order of magnitude for is 9. An order-of-magnitude estimate is sometimes also called a zeroth order approximation.\nNon-decimal orders of magnitude.\nAn order of magnitude is an approximation of the logarithm of a value relative to some contextually understood reference value, usually 10, interpreted as the base of the logarithm and the representative of values of magnitude one. Logarithmic distributions are common in nature and considering the order of magnitude of values sampled from such a distribution can be more intuitive. When the reference value is 10, the order of magnitude can be understood as the number of digits minus one in the base-10 representation of the value. Similarly, if the reference value is one of some powers of 2 since computers store data in a binary format, the magnitude can be understood in terms of the amount of computer memory needed to store that value.\nIrrational orders of magnitude.\nOther orders of magnitude may be calculated using bases other than integers. In the field of astronomy, the nighttime brightnesses of celestial bodies are ranked by \"magnitudes\" in which each increasing level is brighter by a factor of formula_14 greater than the previous level. Thus, a level being 5 magnitudes brighter than another indicates that it is a factor of formula_15 times brighter: that is, two base 10 orders of magnitude. \nThis series of magnitudes forms a logarithmic scale with a base of formula_16.\nBase 1,000,000 orders of magnitude.\nThe different decimal numeral systems of the world use a larger base to better envision the size of the number, and have created names for the powers of this larger base. The table shows what number the order of magnitude aim at for base 10 and for base . It can be seen that the order of magnitude is included in the number name in this example, because bi- means 2, tri- means 3, etc. (these make sense in the long scale only), and the suffix -illion tells that the base is . But the number names billion, trillion themselves (here with other meaning than in the first chapter) are not names of the \"orders of\" magnitudes, they are names of \"magnitudes\", that is the \"numbers\" etc.\nSI units in the table at right are used together with SI prefixes, which were devised with mainly base 1000 magnitudes in mind. The IEC standard prefixes with base 1024 were invented for use in electronic technology.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "22659", "revid": "22041646", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22659", "title": "Ockham", "text": "Occam or Ockham may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "22660", "revid": "10202399", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22660", "title": "Occam (programming language)", "text": "Concurrent programming language\noccam is a programming language which is concurrent and builds on the communicating sequential processes (CSP) process algebra, and shares many of its features. It is named after philosopher William of Ockham after whom Occam's razor is named.\nOccam is an imperative procedural language (such as Pascal). It was developed by David May and others at Inmos (trademark INMOS), advised by Tony Hoare, as the native programming language for their transputer microprocessors, but implementations for other platforms are available. The most widely known version is occam 2; its programming manual was written by Steven Ericsson-Zenith and others at Inmos.\nOverview.\nIn the following examples indentation and formatting are critical for parsing the code: expressions are terminated by the end of the line, lists of expressions need to be on the same level of indentation. This feature, named the off-side rule, is also found in other languages such as Haskell and Python.\nCommunication between processes work through named \"channels\". One process outputs data to a channel via codice_1 while another one inputs data with codice_2. Input and output cannot proceed until the other end is ready to accept or offer data. (In the \"not proceeding\" case it is often said that the process \"blocks\" on the channel. However, the program will neither spin nor poll; thus terms like \"wait\", \"hang\" or \"yield\" may also convey the behaviour; also in the context that it will not \"block\" other independent processes from running.) Examples (c is a variable):\n keyboard ? c\n screen ! c\ncodice_3 introduces a list of expressions that are evaluated sequentially. This is not implicit as it is in most other programming languages. Example:\n SEQ\n x := x + 1\n y := x * x\ncodice_4 begins a list of expressions that may be evaluated concurrently. Example:\n PAR\n p()\n q()\ncodice_5 specifies a list of \"guarded\" commands. The guards are a combination of a Boolean condition and an input expression, both optional. Each guard for which the condition is true and the input channel is ready is successful. One of the successful alternatives is selected for execution. Example:\n ALT\n count1 &lt; 100 &amp; c1 ? data\n SEQ\n count1 := count1 + 1\n merged ! data\n count2 &lt; 100 &amp; c2 ? data\n SEQ\n count2 := count2 + 1\n merged ! data\n status ? request\n SEQ\n out ! count1\n out ! count2\nThis will read data from channels c1 or c2 (whichever is ready) and pass it into a merged channel. If countN reaches 100, reads from the corresponding channel will be disabled. A request on the status channel is answered by outputting the counts to codice_6.\nLanguage revisions.\noccam 1.\n\"occam 1\" (released 1983) was a preliminary version of the language which borrowed from David May's work on EPL and Tony Hoare's CSP. This supported only the VAR data type, which was an integral type corresponding to the native word length of the target architecture, and arrays of only one dimension.\noccam 2.\n\"occam 2\" is an extension produced by Inmos Ltd in 1987 that adds floating-point support, functions, multi-dimensional arrays and more data types such as varying sizes of integers (INT16, INT32) and bytes.\nWith this revision, occam became a language able to express useful programs, whereas occam 1 was more suited to examining algorithms and exploring the new language (however, the occam 1 compiler was written in occam 1, so there is an existence proof that reasonably sized, useful programs could be written in occam 1, despite its limits).\noccam 2.1.\n\"occam 2.1\" was the last of the series of occam language developments contributed by Inmos. Defined in 1994, it was influenced by an earlier proposal for an occam 3 language (also referred to as \"occam91\" during its early development) created by Geoff Barrett at Inmos in the early 1990s. A revised Reference Manual describing occam 3 was distributed for community comment, but the language was never fully implemented in a compiler.\noccam 2.1 introduced several new features to occam 2, including:\nFor a full list of the changes see Appendix P of the https://.\noccam-\u03c0.\n\"occam-\u03c0\" is the common name for the occam variant implemented by later versions of the Kent Retargetable occam Compiler (KRoC). The addition of the symbol \"\u03c0\" (pi) to the occam name is an allusion to KRoC occam including several ideas inspired by the \u03c0-calculus. It contains several significant extensions to the occam 2.1 compiler, for example:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "22661", "revid": "51032355", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22661", "title": "October Revolution", "text": "Second of two 1917 revolutions in Russia\nThe October Revolution, also known as the Great October Socialist Revolution (in Soviet historiography), October coup, Bolshevik coup, or Bolshevik revolution, was the second of two revolutions in Russia in 1917. It was led by Vladimir Lenin's Bolsheviks as part of the broader Russian Revolution of 1917\u20131923. It began through an insurrection in Petrograd (now Saint Petersburg) on 7 November 1917 [O.S. 25 October]. It was the precipitating event of the Russian Civil War. The initial stage of the October Revolution, which involved the assault on Petrograd, occurred largely without any casualties.\nThe October Revolution followed and capitalised on the February Revolution earlier that year, which had led to the abdication of Nicholas II and the creation of the Russian Provisional Government. The provisional government, led by Alexander Kerensky, had taken power after Grand Duke Michael, the younger brother of Nicholas II, declined to take power. During this time, urban workers began to organize into councils (soviets) wherein revolutionaries criticized the provisional government and its actions. The provisional government remained unpopular, especially because it was continuing to fight in World War I, and had ruled with an iron fist throughout mid-1917 (including killing hundreds of protesters in the July Days). It declared the Russian Republic on 1 [N.S.\u00a014] September 1917.\nThe situation grew critical in late 1917 as the Directorate, led by the left-wing Party of Socialist-Revolutionaries (SRs), controlled the government. The far-left Bolsheviks were deeply unhappy with the government, and began spreading calls for a military uprising. On 10 [N.S.\u00a023] October 1917, the Petrograd Soviet, led by Leon Trotsky, voted to back a military uprising. On 24 October [N.S.\u00a06\u00a0November], the government closed numerous newspapers, and closed Petrograd, attempting to forestall the revolution; minor armed skirmishes ensued. The next day, a full-scale uprising erupted as a fleet of Bolshevik sailors entered the harbor and tens of thousands of soldiers rose up in support of the Bolsheviks. Bolshevik Red Guards under the Military-Revolutionary Committee began to occupy government buildings. In the early morning of 26 October [N.S.\u00a08\u00a0November], they captured the Winter Palace \u2014 the seat of the Provisional government located in Petrograd, then capital of Russia.\nAs the revolution was not universally recognized, the country descended into civil war, which lasted until late 1922 and led to the creation of the Soviet Union. The historiography of the event has varied. The victorious Soviet Union viewed it as a validation of its ideology and the triumph of the working class over capitalism. On the other hand, the western allies later intervened against the Bolsheviks in the civil war. The Revolution inspired many cultural works and ignited communist movements globally. October Revolution Day was a public holiday in the Soviet Union, marking its key role in the state's founding, and many communist parties around the world still celebrate it.\nEtymology.\nDespite occurring in November of the Gregorian calendar, the event is most commonly known as the \"October Revolution\" () because at the time Russia still used the Julian calendar. The event is sometimes known as the \"November Revolution\", after the Soviet Union modernized its calendar. To avoid confusion, both O.S. and N.S. dates have been given for events. For more details see Old Style and New Style dates. It was sometimes known as the Bolshevik Revolution, or the Communist Revolution.\nInitially the event was referred to as the \"October coup\" () or the \"Uprising of the 3rd\", as seen in contemporary documents, for example in the first editions of Lenin's complete works.\nBackground.\nFebruary Revolution.\nThe February Revolution had toppled Tsar Nicholas II of Russia and replaced his government with the Russian Provisional Government. However, the provisional government was weak and riven by internal dissension. It continued to wage World War I, which became increasingly unpopular. There was a nationwide crisis affecting social, economic, and political relations. Disorder in industry and transport had intensified, and difficulties in obtaining provisions had increased. Gross industrial production in 1917 decreased by over 36% of what it had been in 1914. In the autumn, as much as 50% of all enterprises in the Urals, the Donbas, and other industrial centers were closed down, leading to mass unemployment. At the same time, the cost of living increased sharply. Real wages fell to about 50% of what they had been in 1913. By October 1917, Russia's national debt had risen to 50 billion roubles. Of this, debts to foreign governments constituted more than 11 billion roubles. The country faced the threat of financial bankruptcy.\nGerman support.\nVladimir Lenin, who had been living in exile in Switzerland, with other dissidents organized a plan to negotiate a passage for them through Germany, with whom Russia was then at war. Recognizing that these dissidents could cause problems for their Russian enemies, the German government agreed to permit 32 Russian citizens, among them Lenin and his wife, to travel in a sealed train carriage through their territory.\nUpon his arrival in Petrograd on 3 April 1917, Lenin issued his April Theses that called on the Bolsheviks to take over the Provisional Government, usurp power, and end the war.\nUnrest by workers, peasants, and soldiers.\nThroughout June, July, and August 1917, it was common to hear working-class Russians speak about their lack of confidence in the Provisional Government. Factory workers around Russia felt unhappy with the growing shortages of food, supplies, and other materials. They blamed their managers or foremen and would even attack them in the factories. The workers blamed many rich and influential individuals for the overall shortage of food and poor living conditions. Workers saw these rich and powerful individuals as opponents of the Revolution and called them \"bourgeois\", \"capitalist\", and \"imperialist\".\nIn September and October 1917, there were mass strike actions by the Moscow and Petrograd workers, miners in the Donbas, metalworkers in the Urals, oil workers in Baku, textile workers in the Central Industrial Region, and railroad workers on 44 railway lines. In these months alone, more than a million workers took part in strikes. Workers established control over production and distribution in many factories and plants in a social revolution. Workers organized these strikes through factory committees. The factory committees represented the workers and were able to negotiate better working conditions, pay, and hours. Even though workplace conditions may have been increasing in quality, the overall quality of life for workers was not improving. There were still shortages of food and the increased wages workers had obtained did little to provide for their families.\nBy October 1917, peasant uprisings were common. By autumn, the peasant movement against the landowners had spread to 482 of 624 counties, or 77% of the country. As 1917 progressed, the peasantry increasingly began to lose faith that the land would be distributed to them by the Social Revolutionaries and the Mensheviks. Refusing to continue living as before, they increasingly took measures into their own hands, as can be seen by the increase in the number and militancy of the peasant's actions. Over 42% of all the cases of destruction (usually burning down and seizing property from the landlord's estate) recorded between February and October occurred in October. While the uprisings varied in severity, complete uprisings and seizures of the land were not uncommon. Less robust forms of protest included marches on landowner manors and government offices, as well as withholding and storing grains rather than selling them. When the Provisional Government sent punitive detachments, it only enraged the peasants. In September, the garrisons in Petrograd, Moscow, and other cities, the Northern and Western fronts, and the sailors of the Baltic Fleet declared through their elected representative body Tsentrobalt that they did not recognize the authority of the Provisional Government and would not carry out any of its commands.\nSoldiers' wives were key players in the unrest in the villages. From 1914 to 1917, almost 50% of healthy men were sent to war, and many were killed on the front, resulting in many females being head of the household. Often\u2014when government allowances were late and were not sufficient to match the rising costs of goods\u2014soldiers' wives sent masses of appeals to the government, which went largely unanswered. Frustration resulted, and these women were influential in inciting \"subsistence riots\"\u2014also referred to as \"hunger riots\", \"pogroms\", or \"baba riots\". In these riots, citizens seized food and resources from shop owners, who they believed to be charging unfair prices. Upon police intervention, protesters responded with \"rakes, sticks, rocks, and fists.\"\nAntiwar demonstrations.\nIn a diplomatic note of 1 May, the minister of foreign affairs, Pavel Milyukov, expressed the Provisional Government's desire to continue the war against the Central Powers \"to a victorious conclusion\", arousing broad indignation. On 1\u20134 May, about 100,000 workers and soldiers of Petrograd, and, after them, the workers and soldiers of other cities, led by the Bolsheviks, demonstrated under banners reading \"Down with the war!\" and \"All power to the soviets!\" The mass demonstrations resulted in a crisis for the Provisional Government. 1 July saw more demonstrations, as about 500,000 workers and soldiers in Petrograd demonstrated, again demanding \"all power to the soviets,\" \"down with the war,\" and \"down with the ten capitalist ministers.\" The Provisional Government opened an offensive against the Central Powers on 1 July, which soon collapsed. The news of the offensive's failure intensified the struggle of the workers and the soldiers.\nJuly days.\nOn 16 July, spontaneous demonstrations of workers and soldiers began in Petrograd, demanding that power be turned over to the soviets. The Central Committee of the Russian Social Democratic Labour Party provided leadership to the spontaneous movements. On 17 July, over 500,000 people participated in what was intended to be a peaceful demonstration in Petrograd, the so-called July Days. The Provisional Government, with the support of Socialist-Revolutionary Party-Menshevik leaders of the All-Russian Executive Committee of the Soviets, ordered an armed attack against the demonstrators, killing hundreds.\nA period of repression followed. On 5\u20136 July, attacks were made on the editorial offices and printing presses of \"Pravda\" and on the Palace of Kshesinskaya, where the Central Committee and the Petrograd Committee of the Bolsheviks were located. On 7 July, the government ordered the arrest and trial of Vladimir Lenin, who was forced to go underground, as he had done under the Tsarist regime. Bolsheviks were arrested, workers were disarmed, and revolutionary military units in Petrograd were disbanded or sent to the war front. On 12 July, the Provisional Government published a law introducing the death penalty at the front. The second coalition government was formed on 24 July, chaired by Alexander Kerensky and consisted mostly of Socialists. Kerensky's government introduced a number of liberal rights, such as freedom of speech, equality before the law, and the right to form unions and arrange labor strikes.\nIn response to a Bolshevik appeal, Moscow's working class began a protest strike of 400,000 workers. They were supported by strikes and protest rallies by workers in Kiev, Kharkov, Nizhny Novgorod, Ekaterinburg, and other cities.\nKornilov affair.\nIn what became known as the Kornilov affair, General Lavr Kornilov, who had been Commander-in-Chief since 18 July, with Kerensky's agreement directed an army under Aleksandr Krymov to march toward Petrograd to restore order. According to some accounts, Kerensky appeared to become frightened by the possibility that the army would stage a coup, and reversed the order. By contrast, historian Richard Pipes has argued that the episode was engineered by Kerensky. On 27 August, feeling betrayed by the government, Kornilov pushed on towards Petrograd. With few troops to spare at the front, Kerensky turned to the Petrograd Soviet for help. Bolsheviks, Mensheviks, and Socialist Revolutionaries confronted the army and convinced them to stand down. The Bolsheviks' influence over railroad and telegraph workers also proved vital in stopping the movement of troops. The political right felt betrayed, and the left was resurgent. The first direct consequence of Kornilov's failed coup was the formal abolition of the monarchy and the proclamation of the Russian Republic on 1 September.\nWith Kornilov defeated, the Bolsheviks' popularity in the soviets grew significantly, both in the central and local areas. On 31 August, the Petrograd Soviet of Workers and Soldiers Deputies\u2014and, on 5 September, the Moscow Soviet Workers Deputies\u2014adopted the Bolshevik resolutions on the question of power. The Bolsheviks were able to take over in Briansk, Samara, Saratov, Tsaritsyn, Minsk, Kiev, Tashkent, and other cities.\nRevolution.\nPlanning.\nOn 10 October 1917 (O.S.; 23 October, N.S.), the Bolsheviks' Central Committee voted 10\u20132 for a resolution saying that \"an armed uprising is inevitable, and that the time for it is fully ripe.\" At the Committee meeting, Lenin discussed how the people of Russia had waited long enough for \"an armed uprising,\" and it was the Bolsheviks' time to take power. Lenin expressed his confidence in the success of the planned insurrection. His confidence stemmed from months of Bolshevik buildup of power and successful elections to different committees and councils in major cities such as Petrograd and Moscow. Membership of the Bolshevik party had risen from 24,000 members in February 1917 to 200,000 members by September 1917.\nThe Bolsheviks created a revolutionary military committee within the Petrograd soviet, led by the Soviet's president, Leon Trotsky. The committee included armed workers, sailors, and soldiers, and assured the support or neutrality of the capital's garrison. The committee methodically planned to occupy strategic locations through the city, almost without concealing their preparations: the Provisional Government's President Kerensky was himself aware of them; and some details, leaked by Lev Kamenev and Grigory Zinoviev, were published in newspapers.\nOnset.\nIn the early morning of 24 October (O.S.; 6 November N.S.), a group of soldiers loyal to Kerensky's government marched on the printing house of the Bolshevik newspaper, \"Rabochiy put\" (\"Worker's Path\"), seizing and destroying printing equipment and thousands of newspapers. Shortly thereafter, the government announced the immediate closure of not only \"Rabochiy put\" but also the left-wing \"Soldat\", as well as the far-right newspapers \"Zhivoe slovo\" and \"Novaia Rus\". The editors and contributors of these newspapers were seen to be calling for insurrection and were to be prosecuted on criminal charges.\nIn response, at 9a.m. the Bolshevik Military Revolutionary Committee issued a statement denouncing the government's actions. At 10a.m., Bolshevik-aligned soldiers successfully retook the \"Rabochiy put\" printing house. Kerensky responded at approximately 3p.m. that afternoon by ordering the raising of all but one of Petrograd's bridges, a tactic used by the government several months earlier during the July Days. What followed was a series of sporadic clashes over control of the bridges, between Red Guard militias aligned with the Military-Revolutionary Committee and military units still loyal to the government. At approximately 5p.m. the Military-Revolutionary Committee seized the Central Telegraph of Petrograd, giving the Bolsheviks control over communications through the city.\nOn 25 October (O.S.; 7 November, N.S.) 1917, the Bolsheviks led their forces in the uprising in Petrograd (now St. Petersburg, then capital of Russia) against the Provisional Government. The event coincided with the arrival of a pro-Bolshevik flotilla\u2014consisting primarily of five destroyers and their crews, as well as marines\u2014in Petrograd harbor. At Kronstadt, sailors announced their allegiance to the Bolshevik insurrection. In the early morning, from its heavily guarded and picketed headquarters in Smolny Palace, the Military-Revolutionary Committee designated the last of the locations to be assaulted or seized. The Red Guards systematically captured major government facilities, key communication installations, and vantage points with little opposition. The Petrograd Garrison and most of the city's military units joined the insurrection against the Provisional Government. The insurrection was timed and organized to hand state power to the Second All-Russian Congress of Soviets of Workers' and Soldiers' Deputies, which began on this day.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAfter the majority of the petrograd Soviet passed into the hands of the Bolsheviks, [Trotsky] was elected its chairman and in that position organized and led the insurrection of October 25.\nLenin on the organization of the October Revolution, Vol.XIV of the \"Collected Works\".\nKerensky and the Provisional Government were virtually helpless to offer significant resistance. Railways and railway stations had been controlled by Soviet workers and soldiers for days, making rail travel to and from Petrograd impossible for Provisional Government officials. The Provisional Government was also unable to locate any serviceable vehicles. On the morning of the insurrection, Kerensky desperately searched for a means of reaching military forces he hoped would be friendly to the Provisional Government outside the city and ultimately borrowed a Renault car from the American embassy, which he drove from the Winter Palace, along with a Pierce Arrow. Kerensky was able to evade the pickets going up around the palace and to drive to meet approaching soldiers.\nAs Kerensky left Petrograd, Lenin wrote a proclamation \"To the Citizens of Russia\", stating that the Provisional Government had been overthrown by the Military-Revolutionary Committee. The proclamation was sent by telegraph throughout Russia, even as the pro-Soviet soldiers were seizing important control centers throughout the city. One of Lenin's intentions was to present members of the Soviet congress, who would assemble that afternoon, with a \"fait accompli\" and thus forestall further debate on the wisdom or legitimacy of taking power.\nAssault on the Winter Palace.\nA final assault against the Winter Palace\u2014against 3,000 cadets, officers, cossacks, and female soldiers\u2014was not vigorously resisted. The Bolsheviks delayed the assault because they could not find functioning artillery. At 6:15p.m., a large group of artillery cadets abandoned the palace, taking their artillery with them. At 8:00p.m., 200 cossacks left the palace and returned to their barracks.\nWhile the cabinet of the provisional government within the palace debated what action to take, the Bolsheviks issued an ultimatum to surrender. Workers and soldiers occupied the last of the telegraph stations, cutting off the cabinet's communications with loyal military forces outside the city. As the night progressed, crowds of insurgents surrounded the palace, and many infiltrated it. At 9:45p.m, the cruiser \"Aurora\" fired a blank shot from the harbor. Some of the revolutionaries entered the palace at 10:25p.m. and there was a mass entry 3 hours later.\nBy 2:10a.m. on 26 October, Bolshevik forces had gained control. The cadets and the 140 volunteers of the Women's Battalion surrendered rather than resist the 40,000 strong attacking force. After sporadic gunfire throughout the building, the cabinet of the Provisional Government surrendered, and were imprisoned in Peter and Paul Fortress. The only member who was not arrested was Kerensky himself, who had already left the palace.\nWith the Petrograd Soviet now in control of government, garrison, and proletariat, the Second All Russian Congress of Soviets held its opening session on the day, while Trotsky dismissed the opposing Mensheviks and the Socialist Revolutionaries (SR) from Congress.\nDybenko's disputed role.\nSome sources contend that as the leader of Tsentrobalt, Pavlo Dybenko played a crucial role in the revolt and that the ten warships that arrived at the city with ten thousand Baltic Fleet mariners were the force that took the power in Petrograd and put down the Provisional Government. The same mariners then dispersed by force the elected parliament of Russia, and used machine-gun fire against demonstrators in Petrograd, killing about 100 demonstrators and wounding several hundred. Dybenko in his memoirs mentioned this event as \"several shots in the air\". These are disputed by various sources, such as Louise Bryant, who claims that news outlets in the West at the time reported that the unfortunate loss of life occurred in Moscow, not Petrograd, and the number was much less than suggested above. As for the \"several shots in the air\", there is little evidence suggesting otherwise.\nLater Soviet portrayal.\nWhile the seizure of the Winter Palace happened almost without resistance, Soviet historians and officials later tended to depict the event in dramatic and heroic terms. The historical reenactment titled \"The Storming of the Winter Palace\" was staged in 1920. This reenactment, watched by 100,000 spectators, provided the model for official films made later, which showed fierce fighting during the storming of the Winter Palace, although, in reality, the Bolshevik insurgents had faced little opposition.\nLater accounts of the heroic \"storming of the Winter Palace\" and \"defense of the Winter Palace\" were propaganda by Bolshevik publicists. Grandiose paintings depicting the \"Women's Battalion\" and photo stills taken from Sergei Eisenstein's staged film depicting the \"politically correct\" version of the October events in Petrograd came to be taken as truth.\nHistorical falsification of political events such as the October Revolution and the Brest-Litovsk Treaty became a distinctive element of Stalin's regime. A notable example is the 1938 publication, \"History of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union (Bolsheviks)\", in which the history of the governing party was significantly altered and revised including the importance of the leading figures during the Bolshevik revolution. Retrospectively, Lenin's primary associates such as Zinoviev, Trotsky, Radek and Bukharin were presented as \"vacillating\", \"opportunists\" and \"foreign spies\" whereas Stalin was depicted as the chief discipline during the revolution. However, in reality, Stalin was considered a relatively unknown figure with secondary importance at the time of the event.\nIn his book, \"The Stalin School of Falsification\", Leon Trotsky argued that the Stalinist faction routinely distorted historical events and the importance of Bolshevik figures especially during the October Revolution. He cited a range of historical documents such as private letters, telegrams, party speeches, meeting minutes, and suppressed texts such as Lenin's Testament.\nOutcome.\nNew government established.\nLenin initially turned down the leading position of Chairman of the Council of People's Commissars when the Bolsheviks formed a new government, after the October Revolution in 1917, and suggested Trotsky for the position. However, Trotsky refused the position and other Bolsheviks insisted that Lenin assume principal responsibility which resulted in Lenin eventually accepting the role of chairman.\nThe Second Congress of Soviets consisted of 670 elected delegates: 300 were Bolsheviks and nearly 100 were Left Socialist-Revolutionaries, who also supported the overthrow of the Alexander Kerensky government. When the fall of the Winter Palace was announced, the Congress adopted a decree transferring power to the Soviets of Workers', Soldiers' and Peasants' Deputies, thus ratifying the Revolution.\nThe transfer of power was not without disagreement. The center and right wings of the Socialist Revolutionaries, as well as the Mensheviks, believed that Lenin and the Bolsheviks had illegally seized power and they walked out before the resolution was passed. As they exited, they were taunted by Trotsky who told them \"You are pitiful isolated individuals; you are bankrupts; your role is played out. Go where you belong from now on\u2014into the dustbin of history!\"\nThe following day, 26 October, the Congress elected a new cabinet of Bolsheviks, pending the convocation of a Constituent Assembly. This new Soviet government was known as the council (Soviet) of People's Commissars (Sovnarkom), with Lenin as a leader. Lenin allegedly approved of the name, reporting that it \"smells of revolution\". The cabinet quickly passed the Decree on Peace and the Decree on Land. This new government was also officially called \"provisional\" until the Assembly was dissolved.\nAnti-Bolshevik sentiment.\nThat same day, posters were pinned on walls and fences by the Socialist Revolutionaries, describing the takeover as a \"crime against the motherland\" and \"revolution\"; this signaled the next wave of anti-Bolshevik sentiment. The next day, the Mensheviks seized power in Georgia and declared it an independent republic; the Don Cossacks also claimed control of their government. The Bolshevik strongholds were in the cities, particularly Petrograd, with support much more mixed in rural areas. The peasant-dominated Left SR party was in coalition with the Bolsheviks. There were reports that the Provisional Government had not conceded defeat and were meeting with the army at the Front.\nAnti-Bolshevik sentiment continued to grow as posters and newspapers started criticizing the actions of the Bolsheviks and repudiated their authority. The executive committee of Peasants Soviets \"[refuted] with indignation all participation of the organized peasantry in this criminal violation of the will of the working class\". This eventually developed into major counter-revolutionary action, as on 30 October (O.S., 12 November, N.S.) when Cossacks, welcomed by church bells, entered Tsarskoye Selo on the outskirts of Petrograd with Kerensky riding on a white horse. Kerensky gave an ultimatum to the rifle garrison to lay down weapons, which was promptly refused. They were then fired upon by Kerensky's Cossacks, which resulted in 8 deaths. This turned soldiers in Petrograd against Kerensky as being the Tsarist regime. Kerensky's failure to assume authority over troops was described by John Reed as a \"fatal blunder\" that signaled the final end of his government. Over the following days, the battle against the anti-Bolsheviks continued. The Red Guard fought against Cossacks at Tsarskoye Selo, with the Cossacks breaking rank and fleeing, leaving their artillery behind. On 31 October 1917 (13 November, N.S.), the Bolsheviks gained control of Moscow after a week of bitter street-fighting. Artillery had been freely used, with an estimated 700 casualties. However, there was continued support for Kerensky in some of the provinces.\nAfter the fall of Moscow, there was only minor public anti-Bolshevik sentiment, such as the newspaper \"Novaya Zhizn\", which criticized the Bolsheviks' lack of manpower and organization in running their party, let alone a government. Lenin confidently claimed that there is \"not a shadow of hesitation in the masses of Petrograd, Moscow and the rest of Russia\" in accepting Bolshevik rule.\nGovernmental reforms.\nOn 10 November 1917 (23 November, N.S.), the government applied the term \"citizens of the Russian Republic\" to Russians, whom they sought to make equal in all possible respects, by the nullification of all \"legal designations of civil inequality, such as estates, titles, and ranks.\"\nThe long-awaited Constituent Assembly elections were held on 12 November (O.S., 25 November, N.S.) 1917. In contrast to their majority in the Soviets, the Bolsheviks only won 175 seats in the 715-seat legislative body, coming in second behind the Socialist Revolutionary Party, which won 370 seats, although the SR Party no longer existed as a whole party by that time, as the Left SRs had gone into coalition with the Bolsheviks from October 1917 to March 1918 (a cause of dispute of the legitimacy of the returned seating of the Constituent Assembly, as the old lists, were drawn up by the old SR Party leadership, and thus represented mostly Right SRs, whereas the peasant soviet deputies had returned majorities for the pro-Bolshevik Left SRs). The Constituent Assembly was to first meet on 28 November (O.S.) 1917, but its convocation was delayed until 5 January (O.S.; 18 January, N.S.) 1918 by the Bolsheviks. On its first and only day in session, the Constituent Assembly came into conflict with the Soviets, and it rejected Soviet decrees on peace and land, resulting in the Constituent Assembly being dissolved the next day by order of the Congress of Soviets.\nOn 16 December 1917 (29 December, N.S.), the government ventured to eliminate hierarchy in the army, removing all titles, ranks, and uniform decorations. The tradition of saluting was also eliminated.\nOn 20 December 1917 (2 January 1918, N.S.), the Cheka was created by Lenin's decree. These were the beginnings of the Bolsheviks' consolidation of power over their political opponents. The Red Terror began in September 1918, following a failed assassination attempt on Lenin. The French Jacobin Terror was an example for the Soviet Bolsheviks. Trotsky had compared Lenin to Maximilien Robespierre as early as 1904, when Trotsky was a critic of Lenin and his political opponent within the Marxist movement. In his book, \",\" Trotsky argued that the reign of terror began with the White Terror under the White Guard forces and the Bolsheviks responded with the Red Terror.\nThe Decree on Land ratified the actions of the peasants who throughout Russia had taken private land and redistributed it among themselves. The Bolsheviks viewed themselves as representing an alliance of workers and peasants signified by the Hammer and Sickle on the flag and the coat of arms of the Soviet Union.\nOther decrees:\nTimeline of the spread of Soviet power (Gregorian calendar dates).\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nRussian Civil War.\nBolshevik-led attempts to gain power in other parts of the Russian Empire were largely successful in Russia proper\u2014although the fighting in Moscow lasted for two weeks\u2014but they were less successful in ethnically non-Russian parts of the Empire, which had been clamoring for independence since the February Revolution. For example, the Ukrainian Rada, which had declared autonomy on 23 June 1917, created the Ukrainian People's Republic on 20 November, which was supported by the Ukrainian Congress of Soviets. This led to an armed conflict with the Bolshevik government in Petrograd and, eventually, a Ukrainian declaration of independence from Russia on 25 January 1918. In Estonia, two rival governments emerged: the Estonian Provincial Assembly, established in April 1917, proclaimed itself the supreme legal authority of Estonia on 28 November 1917 and issued the Declaration of Independence on 24 February 1918; but Soviet Russia recognized the executive committee of the Soviets of Estonia as the legal authority in the province, although the Soviets in Estonia controlled only the capital and a few other major towns.\nAfter the success of the October Revolution transformed the Russian state into a soviet republic, a coalition of anti-Bolshevik groups attempted to unseat the new government in the Russian Civil War from 1918 to 1922. In an attempt to intervene in the civil war after the Bolsheviks' separate peace with the Central Powers (Germany and the Ottoman Empire), the Allied Powers (the United Kingdom, France, Italy, the United States, and Japan) occupied parts of the Soviet Union for over two years before finally withdrawing. By the end of the violent civil war, Russia's economy and infrastructure were heavily damaged, and as many as 10 million perished during the war, mostly civilians. Millions became White \u00e9migr\u00e9s, and the Russian famine of 1921\u20131922 claimed up to five million victims. The United States did not recognize the new Russian government until 1933. The European powers recognized the Soviet Union in the early 1920s and began to engage in business with it after the New Economic Policy (NEP) was implemented.\nHistoriography.\nThere have been few events where the political opinions of researchers have influenced their historical research as significantly as the October Revolution. Generally, the historiography of the Revolution generally divides into three camps: Soviet-Marxist, Western-Totalitarian, and Revisionist.\nSoviet historiography.\nSoviet historiography of the October Revolution is intertwined with Soviet historical development. Many of the initial Soviet interpreters of the Revolution were themselves Bolshevik revolutionaries. Bolshevik figures such as Anatoly Lunacharsky, Moisei Uritsky and Dmitry Manuilsky agreed that Lenin's influence on the Bolshevik party was decisive but the October insurrection was carried out according to Trotsky's, not to Lenin's plan. After the initial wave of revolutionary narratives, Soviet historians worked within \"narrow guidelines\" defined by the Soviet government. The rigidity of interpretive possibilities reached its height under Stalin.\nSoviet historians of the Revolution interpreted the October Revolution as being about establishing the legitimacy of Marxist ideology and the Bolshevik government. To establish the accuracy of Marxist ideology, Soviet historians generally described the Revolution as the product of class struggle and that it was the supreme event in a world history governed by historical laws. The Bolshevik Party is placed at the center of the Revolution, as it exposes the errors of both the moderate Provisional Government and the spurious \"socialist\" Mensheviks in the Petrograd Soviet. Guided by Lenin's leadership and his firm grasp of scientific Marxist theory, the Party led the \"logically predetermined\" events of the October Revolution from beginning to end. The events were, according to these historians, logically predetermined because of the socio-economic development of Russia, where monopolistic industrial capitalism had alienated the masses. In this view, the Bolshevik party took the leading role in organizing these alienated industrial workers, and thereby established the construction of the first socialist state.\nAlthough Soviet historiography of the October Revolution stayed relatively constant until 1991, it did undergo some changes. Following Stalin's death, historians such as E. N. Burdzhalov and P.\u00a0V.\u00a0Volobuev published historical research that deviated significantly from the party line in refining the doctrine that the Bolshevik victory \"was predetermined by the state of Russia's socio-economic development\". These historians, who constituted the \"New Directions Group\", posited that the complex nature of the October Revolution \"could only be explained by a multi-causal analysis, not by recourse to the mono-causality of monopoly capitalism\". For them, the central actor is still the Bolshevik party, but this party triumphed \"because it alone could solve the preponderance of 'general democratic' tasks the country faced\" (such as the struggle for peace and the exploitation of landlords).\nDuring the late Soviet period, the opening of select Soviet archives during glasnost sparked innovative research that broke away from some aspects of Marxism\u2013Leninism, though the key features of the orthodox Soviet view remained intact.\nFollowing the turn of the 21st century, some Soviet historians began to implement an \"anthropological turn\" in their historiographical analysis of the Russian Revolution. This method of analysis focuses on the average person's experience of day-to-day life during the revolution, and pulls the analytical focus away from larger events, notable revolutionaries, and overarching claims about party views. In 2006, S. V. Iarov employed this methodology when he focused on citizen adjustment to the new Soviet system. Iarov explored the dwindling labor protests, evolving forms of debate, and varying forms of politicization as a result of the new Soviet rule from 1917 to 1920. In 2010, O. S. Nagornaia took interest in the personal experiences of Russian prisoners-of-war taken by Germany, examining Russian soldiers and officers' ability to cooperate and implement varying degrees of autocracy despite being divided by class, political views, and race. Other analyses following this \"anthropological turn\" have explored texts from soldiers and how they used personal war-experiences to further their political goals, as well as how individual life-structure and psychology may have shaped major decisions in the civil war that followed the revolution.\nWestern historiography.\n\"Totalitarian\" historians.\nDuring the Cold War, Western historiography of the October Revolution developed in direct response to the assertions of the Soviet view. As a result, Western historians exposed what they believed were flaws in the Soviet view, thereby undermining the Bolsheviks' original legitimacy, as well as the precepts of Marxism. The view which originated in the early years of the Cold War became known as \"traditionalist\" and \"totalitarian\" as well as \"Cold War\" historians for relying on concepts and interpretations rooted in the early years of the Cold War and even in the sphere Russian White \u00e9migr\u00e9s of the 1920s.\nThese \"traditionalist\" historians described the revolution as the result of a chain of contingent accidents. Examples of these accidental and contingent factors they say precipitated the Revolution included World War\u00a0I's timing, chance, and the poor leadership of Tsar Nicholas\u00a0II as well as that of liberal and moderate socialists. According to \"totalitarian\" historians, it was not popular support, but rather a manipulation of the masses, ruthlessness, and the party discipline of the Bolsheviks that enabled their triumph. For these historians, the Bolsheviks' defeat in the Constituent Assembly elections of November\u2013December 1917 demonstrated popular opposition to the Bolsheviks' revolution, as did the scale and breadth of the Civil War.\n\"Totalitarian\" historians saw the organization of the Bolshevik party as totalitarian. Their interpretation of the October Revolution as a violent coup organized by a totalitarian party which aborted Russia's experiment in democracy. Thus, Stalinist totalitarianism developed as a natural progression from Leninism and the Bolshevik party's tactics and organization. To these historians, Soviet Russia in 1917 was as totalitarian as the USSR under Joseph Stalin in 1930s. More to it, such historians have blamed Lenin and the Bolsheviks for inventing policies further implemented by totalitarian regimes of the 20th century, such as the Holocaust: for example, according to Richard Pipes, a prominent \"totalitarian\", \"The Stalinist and Nazi holocausts\" stemmed from Lenin's Red Terror and had \"much greater decorum\" than the latter.\n\"Revisionist\" historians.\nThe 1960s-1970s saw a rise of a young historians who opposed the \"totalitarian\" historians and began challenging, revising and refuting the dominant and accepted conceptions, as well as criticizing the bias towards the USSR and the Left in general; they lacked a full-fledged doctrine or philosophy of history, but were distinguished as \"revisionists\"; in contrast with the focus of \"totalitarian\" historians on \"politics\" \"from above\" and on personalities of the leaders of political movements, \"the one man\", the revisionists have produced \"history from below\" and put attention on social history. These historians tend to see a rupture between Stalinist totalitarianism and Leninism and refute the definition of the Revolution as a totalitarian coup carried out by a minority group; the 'revisionists' stress the genuinely 'popular' nature of the Bolshevik Revolution. According to Evan Mawdsley, \"the 'revisionist' school had been dominant from the 1970s\" in academic circles, and achieved \"some success\" in challenging the traditionalists; however, they continued to be criticized by \"totalitarians\" who accused them of \"Marxism\" and failing to see the primary reason of political events, the personality of the leaders. During the rise of the \"revisionists\", \"totalitarians\" retained popularity and influence outside academic circles, especially in politics and public spheres of the United States, where they supported harder policies towards the USSR: for example, Zbigniew Brzezinski served as National Security Advisor to President Jimmy Carter, while Richard Pipes headed the CIA group Team B; after 1991, their views have found popularity not only in the West, but also in the former USSR.\nEffect of the dissolution of the Soviet Union on historical research.\nThe dissolution of the Soviet Union affected historical interpretations of the October Revolution. Since 1991, increasing access to large amounts of Soviet archival materials has made it possible to re\u2011examine the October Revolution. Though both Western and Russian historians now have access to many of these archives, the effect of the dissolution of the USSR can be seen most clearly in the work of the latter. While the disintegration essentially helped solidify the Western and Revisionist views, post-USSR Russian historians largely repudiated the former Soviet historical interpretation of the Revolution. As Stephen Kotkin argues, 1991 prompted \"a return to political history and the apparent resurrection of totalitarianism, the interpretive view that, in different ways...revisionists sought to bury\".\nLegacy.\nThe October Revolution marks the inception of the first communist government in Russia, and thus the first large-scale and constitutionally ordained socialist state in world history. After this, the Russian Republic became the Russian SFSR, which later became the Soviet Union.\nThe October Revolution also made the ideology of communism influential on a global scale in the 20th century. Communist parties would start to form in many countries after 1917.\n\"Ten Days That Shook the World\", a book written by American journalist John Reed and first published in 1919, gives a firsthand exposition of the events. Reed died in 1920, shortly after the book was finished.\nDmitri Shostakovich wrote his \"Symphony No. 2 in B major\", Op. 14, and subtitled it \"To October\", for the 10th anniversary of the October Revolution. The choral finale of the work, \"To October\", is set to a text by Alexander Bezymensky, which praises Lenin and the revolution. The \"Symphony No. 2\" was first performed on 5 November 1927 by the Leningrad Philharmonic Orchestra and the Academy Capella Choir under the direction of Nikolai Malko.\nSergei Eisenstein and Grigori Aleksandrov's film \"\", first released on 20 January 1928 in the USSR and on 2 November 1928 in New York City, describes and glorifies the revolution, having been commissioned to commemorate the event.\nThe Hollywood film\", Reds,\" released in 1981 was based on Reed's account of the October Revolution and featured interviews with historical contemporaries from the period for the film.\nThe term \"Red October\" (\u041a\u0440\u0430\u0441\u043d\u044b\u0439 \u041e\u043a\u0442\u044f\u0431\u0440\u044c, \"Krasnyy Oktyabr\") has been used to signify the October Revolution. \"Red October\" was given to a steel factory that was made notable by the Battle of Stalingrad, a Moscow sweets factory that is well known in Russia, and a fictional Soviet submarine in both Tom Clancy's 1984 novel \"The Hunt for Red October\" and the 1990 film adaptation of the same name.\nThe date 7 November, the anniversary of the October Revolution according to the Gregorian Calendar, was the official national day of the Soviet Union from 1918 onward and still is a public holiday in Belarus and the breakaway territory of Transnistria. Communist parties both in and out of power celebrate 7 November as the date Marxist parties began to take power.\nThe Russian Revolution was perceived as a rupture with imperialism for various civil rights and decolonization struggles and providing a space for oppressed groups across the world. This was given further credence with the Soviet Union supporting many anti-colonial third world movements with financial funds against European colonial powers.\nExplanatory notes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "22665", "revid": "50084588", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22665", "title": "Opole Voivodeship", "text": "Voivodeship in Poland\nOpole Voivodeship ( , ), is the smallest and least populated voivodeship (province) of Poland. The province's name derives from that of the region's capital and largest city, Opole. It is part of Silesia. A relatively large German minority lives in the voivodeship, and the German language is co-official in 28 communes.\nOpole Voivodeship is bordered by Lower Silesian Voivodeship to the west, Greater Poland and \u0141\u00f3d\u017a Voivodeships to the north, Silesian Voivodeship to the east, and the Czech Republic (Olomouc Region and Moravian-Silesian Region) to the south.\nOpole Province's geographic location, economic potential, and its population's level of education make it an attractive business partner for other Polish regions (especially Lower Silesian and Silesian Voivodeships) and for foreign investors. Formed in 1997, the Prad\u011bd/Pradziad Euroregion with its headquarter in Prudnik has facilitated economic, cultural and tourist exchanges between the border areas of Poland and the Czech Republic.\nHistory.\nThe territory became part of the emerging Polish state in the 10th century, and later on, Brzeg, Namys\u0142\u00f3w, Niemodlin, Opole, Prudnik and Strzelce Opolskie were ducal seats of local lines of the Piast dynasty.\nOpole Voivodeship was created on January 1, 1999, out of the former Opole Voivodeship and parts of Cz\u0119stochowa Voivodeship, pursuant to the Polish local government reforms adopted in 1998.\nOriginally, the government, advised by prominent historians, had wanted to disestablish Opolskie and partition its territory between the Lower Silesian and Silesian Voivodeship (eastern Upper Silesia and western Lesser Poland). The plan was that Brzeg and Namys\u0142\u00f3w, as the Western part of the region, were to be transferred to Lower Silesia, while the rest was to become, along with a part of the Cz\u0119stochowa Voivodeship, an integral part of the new 'Silesian' region. However, the plans resulted in an outcry from the German minority population of Opole Voivodeship, who feared that should their region be abolished, they would lose all hope of regional representation (in the proposed Silesian Region, they would have formed a very small minority among a great number of ethnic Poles). To the surprise of many of the ethnic Germans in Opole however, the local Polish Silesian population and groups of ethnic Poles also rose up to oppose the planned reforms; this came about as a result of an overwhelming feeling of attachment to the voivodeships that were scheduled to be 'redrawn', as well as a fear of 'alienation' should one find themselves residing in a new, unfamiliar region.\nThe solution came in late 1999, when Olesno was, after 24 years apart, finally reunited with the Opole Voivodeship to form the new legally defined region. A historic moment came in 2006 when the town of Rad\u0142\u00f3w changed its local laws to make German, alongside Polish, the district's second official language, becoming the first town in the region to do so.\nGeography.\nThe voivodeship lies in southwestern Poland, the major part on the Silesian Lowland (). To the east, the region touches upon the Silesian Upland (Silesian Uplands, ) with the famous Saint Anne Mountain; the Sudetes range, the Opawskie Mountains, lies to the southwest. The Oder River cuts across the middle of the voivodeship. The northern part of the voivodeship, along the Ma\u0142a Panew River, is densely forested, while the southern part consists of arable land.\nThe region has the warmest climate in the country.\nProtected areas.\nProtected areas in Opole Voivodeship include the following three areas designated as Landscape Parks:\nAdministrative division.\nOpole Voivodeship is divided into 12 counties (powiats): 1 city county and 11 land counties. These are further divided into 71 gminas.\nThe counties are listed in the following table (ordering is by decreasing population).\nCities and towns.\nThe voivodeship contains 2 cities and 34 towns. These are listed below in descending order of population (as of 2019):\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;The Opole Voivodeship is the smallest region in the administrative makeup of the country in terms of both area and population.\nAbout 15% of the one million inhabitants of this voivodeship are ethnic Germans, which constitutes 90% of all ethnic Germans in Poland. Towns with particularly high concentrations of German speakers include: Strzelce Opolskie; Dobrodzien; Prudnik; G\u0142og\u00f3wek; and Gogolin. As a result, many areas are officially bilingual and the German language and culture play a significant role in education in the region. Ethnic Germans first came to this region during the Late Middle Ages. The area was once part of the Prussian province of Silesia. \nEconomy.\nThe Gross domestic product (GDP) of the province was 10.1 billion euros in 2018, accounting for 2.0% of Polish economic output. GDP per capita adjusted for purchasing power was 17,000 euros or 56% of the EU27 average in the same year. The GDP per employee was 66% of the EU average.\nThe Opole Voivodeship is an industrial as well as an agricultural region. With respect to mineral resources, of major importance are deposits of raw materials for building: limestone (Strzelce Opolskie), marl (near Opole), marble, and basalt. The favourable climate, fertile soils, and high farming culture contribute to the development of agriculture, which is among the most productive in the country.\nA total of nineteen industries are represented in the voivodeship. The most important are cement and lime, furniture, food, car manufacturing, and chemical industries. In 1997, the biggest production growth in the area was in companies producing wood and wood products, electrical equipment, machinery and appliances, as well as cellulose and paper products. In 1997, the top company in the region was Zak\u0142ady Azotowe S.A. in K\u0119dzierzyn-Ko\u017ale, whose income was over PLN 860 million. The voivodship's economy consists of more than 53,000 businesses, mostly small and medium-sized, employing over 332,000 people. Manufacturing companies employ over 89,000 people; 95.7% of all the region's business operate in the private sector.\nTourism.\nThe Opole Voivodeship is a green region with three large lakes: Turawskie, Nyskie, and Otmuch\u00f3w (the latter two are connected). The Opawskie Mountains between Prudnik and G\u0142ucho\u0142azy are extremely popular. The region also includes the castle in Brzeg, built during the reign of the Piast dynasty\u2014pearl of the Silesian Renaissance, the Franciscan monastery on top of G\u00f3ra \u015awi\u0119tej Anny (Saint Anne Mountain), as well as the medieval old town and defence fortifications in Paczk\u00f3w (referred to as the Polish Carcassonne), all designated Historic Monument of Poland. Kamie\u0144 \u015al\u0105ski with its Baroque palace hosts a sanctuary dedicated to Saint Hyacinth of Poland, who was born in the village. Other landmark palaces are located in Moszna, Narok, \u017byrowa, castles in Namys\u0142\u00f3w, Niemodlin, Otmuch\u00f3w, Pr\u00f3szk\u00f3w, and the preserved medieval Piast Tower in Opole.\nThere are several World War II memorials in the voivodeship, including at the site of the Blechhammer concentration camp and Stalag VIII-B prisoner-of-war camp, and at sites of German-perpetrated massacres. The village of Popiel\u00f3w hosts a small cemetery of the Commonwealth War Graves Commission, where two British soldiers are buried, who as prisoners-of-war were killed by a German guard during forced labour.\nInternational tourism.\nAccording to the Central Statistical Office of Poland, Opole Voivodeship is most frequently visited by international tourists from countries located in Europe (94.6%). The rank was followed by tourists from Asia, compromising 2.4% of the total international tourist figure, followed by that of North America at 1.8%. The general composition of international tourists visiting the Opole Voivodeship remains unchanged, with 46.2% of tourists heading from Germany.\nInternational tourists visiting Opole Voivodeship with an overnight stay according to country of permanent residence:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Bar chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\nIn 2015, a total of c. 90,800 overnight stays were hosted for international tourists, a figure making up 12.4% of the total amount of overnight stays for Opole Voivodeship. The majority (44.7%) of international overnight stays were hosted in the city of Opole, followed by K\u0119dzierzyn-Ko\u017ale County (9.9%) and Nysa County at (9.4%).\nTransportation.\nThe transport route from Germany to Ukraine, the A4, runs through Opole. The region has four border crossings, and direct rail connections to all important Polish cities, as well as to Frankfurt, Munich, Budapest, Kyiv, and the Baltic ports.\nUniversities.\nThere are three state-run universities in the region: the Opole University, the Opole University of Technology, and the Public Higher Medical Professional School in Opole. All of them are based in the voivodeship's capital. Among the region's private schools, the Opole School of Management and Administration has been certified as a degree-granting institution by the Ministry of National Education.\nSurnames.\nMost popular surnames in Opole Voivodeship:\nFormer Opole Voivodeships.\nOpole Voivodeship (1975\u20131999).\nOpole Voivodeship was also a unit of administrative division and local government in Poland between 1975 and 1998.\nMajor cities and towns (population in 1995):\nOpole Voivodeship (1950\u20131975).\nThis administrative region of the People's Republic of Poland (1950\u20131975) was created as a result of the partition of Katowice Voivodeship in 1950.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "22666", "revid": "50456160", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22666", "title": "Old Norse", "text": "North Germanic language\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Infobox/styles-images.css\" /&gt;\nOld Norse was a North Germanic language spoken in Scandinavia and in Norse settlements during the Viking Age and the early Middle Ages (approximately the 8th\u201314th centuries). It is the conventional term for the medieval West and East Scandinavian dialects (often labelled Old West Norse and Old East Norse) that developed from Proto-Norse and later evolved into the modern North Germanic languages, including Icelandic, Faroese, Norwegian, Danish, and Swedish.\nOld Norse is attested in runic inscriptions (written in the Younger Futhark) and in numerous medieval manuscripts written with the Latin alphabet; its literary corpus includes the Poetic Edda, the Prose Edda, the Icelandic sagas, skaldic verse, law codes, and religious texts. Contact between Old Norse speakers and other languages \u2014 particularly Old English and the Celtic languages \u2014 left a substantial legacy of loanwords and toponyms; many common English words such as \"egg\", \"knife\", \"sky\", and \"window\" derive from Old Norse.\nScholarly usage of the term \"Old Norse\" typically covers texts from the 11th to the 14th centuries, though periodization varies by region and by type of source (epigraphic, literary, or administrative).\nGeographical distribution.\nOld Icelandic was close to Old Norwegian, and together they formed Old West Norse, which was also spoken in Norse settlements in Greenland, the Faroes, Ireland, Scotland, the Isle of Man, northwest England (particularly Cumbria), and in Normandy. Old East Norse was spoken in Denmark, Sweden, Kievan Rus', eastern England, and Danish settlements in Normandy. The Old Gutnish dialect was spoken in Gotland and in various settlements in the East.\nIn the 11th century, Old Norse was the most widely spoken European language, ranging from Vinland in the West to the Volga River in the East. In Kievan Rus', it survived the longest in Veliky Novgorod, probably lasting into the 13th century there. The age of the Swedish-speaking population of Finland is strongly contested, but Swedish settlement had spread the language into the region by the time of the Second Swedish Crusade in the 13th century at the latest.\nModern descendants.\nThe modern descendants of the Old West Norse dialect are the West Scandinavian languages of Icelandic, Faroese, Norwegian, and the extinct Norn language of Orkney and Shetland, although Norwegian was heavily influenced by the East dialect, and is today more similar to East Scandinavian (Danish and Swedish) than to Icelandic and Faroese. The descendants of the Old East Norse dialect are the East Scandinavian languages of Danish, Swedish and \u00d6vdalian, although \u00d6vdalian was heavily influenced by the West Dialect, and is sometimes considered to form its own group.\nAmong these, the grammar of Icelandic, Faroese and \u00d6vdalian have changed the least from Old Norse in the last thousand years, though the pronunciations of Icelandic and Faroese both have changed considerably from Old Norse. With Danish rule of the Faroe Islands, Faroese has also been influenced by Danish.\nBoth Middle English (especially northern English dialects within the area of the Danelaw) and Early Scots (including Lowland Scots) were strongly influenced by Norse and contained many Old Norse loanwords. Consequently, Modern English (including Scottish English), inherited a significant proportion of its vocabulary directly from Norse.\nThe development of Norman French was also influenced by Norse. Through Norman, to a smaller extent, so was modern French.\nWritten modern Icelandic derives from the Old Norse phonemic writing system. Contemporary Icelandic-speakers can read Old Norse, which varies slightly in spelling as well as semantics and word order. However, pronunciation, particularly of the vowel phonemes, has changed at least as much in Icelandic as in the other North Germanic languages.\nFaroese retains many similarities but is influenced by Danish, Norwegian, and Gaelic (Scottish and/or Irish). Although Swedish, Danish and Norwegian have diverged the most, they still retain considerable mutual intelligibility. Speakers of modern Swedish, Norwegian and Danish can mostly understand each other without studying their neighboring languages, particularly if speaking slowly. The languages are also sufficiently similar in writing that they can mostly be understood across borders. This could be because these languages have been mutually affected by each other, as well as having a similar development influenced by Middle Low German.\nOther influenced languages.\nVarious languages unrelated to Old Norse and others not closely related have been heavily influenced by Norse, particularly the Norman language; to a lesser extent, Finnish and Estonian. Russian, Ukrainian, Belarusian, Lithuanian and Latvian also have a few Norse loanwords. The words \"Rus\" and \"Russia\", according to one theory, may be named after the Rus' people, a Norse tribe, probably from present-day east-central Sweden. The current Finnish and Estonian words for Sweden are and , respectively.\nA number of loanwords have been introduced into Irish, many associated with fishing and sailing. A similar influence is found in Scottish Gaelic, with over one hundred loanwords estimated to be in the language, many of which are related to fishing and sailing.\nPhonology.\nVowels.\nOld Norse vowel phonemes mostly come in pairs of long and short. The standardized orthography marks the long vowels with an acute accent. In medieval manuscripts, it is often unmarked but sometimes marked with an accent or through gemination.\nOld Norse had nasalized versions of all ten vowel qualities. These occurred as allophones of the vowels before nasal consonants and in places where a nasal had followed it in an older form of the word, before it was absorbed into a neighboring sound. If the nasal was absorbed by a stressed vowel, it would also lengthen the vowel. This nasalization also occurred in the other Germanic languages, but were not retained long. They were noted in the First Grammatical Treatise, and otherwise might have remained unknown. The First Grammarian marked these with a dot above the letter. This notation did not catch on, and would soon be obsolete. Nasal and oral vowels probably merged around the 11th century in most of Old East Norse. However, the distinction still holds in Dalecarlian dialects. The dots in the following vowel table separate the oral from nasal phonemes.\nNote: The open or open-mid vowels may be transcribed differently:\nSometime around the 13th century, (spelled \u27e8\u01eb\u27e9) merged with or in most dialects except Old Danish, and Icelandic where () merged with . This can be determined by their distinction within the 12th-century First Grammatical Treatise but not within the early 13th-century Prose Edda. The nasal vowels, also noted in the First Grammatical Treatise, are assumed to have been lost in most dialects by this time (but notably they are retained in Elfdalian and other dialects of Ovansiljan). See Old Icelandic for the mergers of (spelled \u27e8\u0153\u27e9) with (spelled \u27e8\u00e6\u27e9) and (spelled \u27e8\u0119\u27e9) with (spelled \u27e8e\u27e9).\nOld Norse had three diphthong phonemes: , , (spelled \u27e8ei\u27e9, \u27e8au\u27e9, \u27e8ey\u27e9 respectively). In East Norse these would monophthongize and merge with and , whereas in West Norse and its descendants the diphthongs remained.\nConsonants.\nOld Norse has six plosive phonemes, being rare word-initially and and pronounced as voiced fricative allophones between vowels except in compound words (e.g. ), already in the Proto-Germanic language (e.g. * &gt; between vowels). The phoneme was pronounced as after an or another and as before and . Some accounts have it as a voiced velar fricative in all cases, and others have that realisation only in the middle of words and between vowels (with it otherwise being realised ). The Old East Norse /\u0280/ was an apical consonant, with its precise position unknown; it is reconstructed as a palatal sibilant. It descended from Proto-Germanic *z and eventually developed into , as had already occurred in Old West Norse.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe pronunciation of \u27e8hv\u27e9 is unclear, but it may have been (the assumed Proto-Germanic pronunciation), or the similar phoneme . Unlike the three other digraphs, it was retained much longer in all dialects. Without ever developing into a voiceless sonorant in Icelandic, it instead underwent fortition to a plosive , which suggests that instead of being a voiceless sonorant, it retained a stronger frication. In some Icelandic dialects it is still preserved as or .\nAccent.\nOld Norse had a stress accent with primary stress generally on the first syllable of the word, a feature reflected particularly in the conservative modern descendants Icelandic and Faroese. Evidence from poetic metre, orthographic marks, and later phonological developments suggests that a contrastive prosodic feature\u2014often reconstructed as a pitch or tonal distinction\u2014was already forming in late Proto-Norse or early Old Norse. This system later contributed to the development of the modern Swedish and Norwegian tonal accents (traditionally called Accent 1 and Accent 2).\nThe emergence of these tonal contrasts is commonly linked to the interaction of syllable weight, vowel length changes, and the reduction of unstressed syllables during the Viking Age and early Middle Ages. The precise dating and mechanism of these prosodic changes remain debated among scholars. Some recent studies argue for a \u201cpeak delay\u201d model of tonal development rather than an inherited double-peaked melody, while others reinterpret the process as a later phonologization of earlier rhythmic contrasts.\nIcelandic and Faroese retained a primarily stress-based system and did not develop the two-way tonal accent distinction found across much of mainland Norway and Sweden, while Danish developed the related phenomenon of \"st\u00f8d\" in many varieties.\nPrimary stress in Old Norse falls on the word stem, so that would be pronounced . In compound words, secondary stress falls on the second stem (e.g. , ).\nOrthography.\nUnlike Proto-Norse, which was written with the Elder Futhark, runic Old Norse was originally written with the Younger Futhark, which had only 16 letters. Because of the limited number of runes, several runes were used for different sounds, and long and short vowels were not distinguished in writing. Medieval runes came into use some time later.\nAs for the Latin alphabet, there was no standardized orthography in use in the Middle Ages. A modified version of the letter wynn called vend was used briefly for the sounds , , and . Long vowels were sometimes marked with acutes but also sometimes left unmarked or geminated. The standardized Old Norse spelling was created in the 19th century and is, for the most part, phonemic. The most notable deviation is that the nonphonemic difference between the voiced and the voiceless dental fricative is marked. The oldest texts and runic inscriptions use \"\u00fe\" exclusively. Long vowels are denoted with acutes. Most other letters are written with the same glyph as the IPA phoneme's grapheme, except as shown in the above tables.\nPhonological processes.\nAblaut.\nAblaut patterns are groups of vowels which are swapped, or \"ablauted,\" in the nucleus of a word. Strong verbs ablaut the lemma's nucleus to derive the past forms of the verb. This parallels English conjugation, where, e.g., the nucleus of \"sing\" becomes \"sang\" in the past tense and \"sung\" in the past participle. Some verbs are derived by ablaut, as the present-in-past verbs do by consequence of being derived from the past tense forms of strong verbs.\nUmlaut.\nUmlaut or mutation is an assimilatory process acting on vowels preceding a vowel or semivowel of a different vowel backness. In the case of \"i\"-umlaut and \"\u0280\"-umlaut, this entails a fronting of back vowels, with retention of lip rounding. In the case of \"u\"-umlaut, this entails labialization of unrounded vowels. Umlaut is phonemic and in many situations grammatically significant as a side effect of losing the Proto-Germanic morphological suffixes whose vowels created the umlaut allophones.\nSome , , , , , , , and all were obtained by \"i\"-umlaut from , , , , , , , and respectively. Others were formed via \"\u0280\"-umlaut from , , , , and .\nSome , , , , and all , were obtained by \"u\"-umlaut from , , , , and , respectively. See Old Icelandic for information on .\n was obtained through a simultaneous \"u\"- and \"i\"-umlaut of . It appears in words like (', ', \"\"), from Proto-Germanic *, and commonly in verbs with a velar consonant before the suffix like &lt; *.\nOEN often preserves the original value of the vowel directly preceding runic (, ) while OWN receives \"\u0280\"-umlaut. Compare runic OEN ' with OWN ' (later '), ' 'glass', 'hare', 'pile of rocks'.\nU-umlaut.\n\"U\"-umlaut is more common in Old West Norse in both phonemic and allophonic positions, while it only occurs sparsely in post-runic Old East Norse and even in runic Old East Norse.\n &lt;templatestyles src=\"Citation/styles.css\"/&gt;^ Old Swedish orthography uses \u27e8\u00fe\u27e9 to represent both and . The change from Norse \u27e8\u00f0\u27e9 to Old Swedish \u27e8\u00fe\u27e9 represents only a change in orthography rather than a change in sound. Similarly \u27e8i\u27e9 is used in place of \u27e8j\u27e9. And thus changes from Norse \u27e8j\u27e9 to Old Swedish \u27e8i\u27e9 to Swedish \u27e8j\u27e9 should be viewed as a change in orthography.\n &lt;templatestyles src=\"Citation/styles.css\"/&gt;^ Represents the \"u\"-umlaut found in Swedish.\nThis is still a major difference between Swedish and Faroese and Icelandic today. Plurals of neuters do not have \"u\"-umlaut at all in Swedish, but in Faroese and Icelandic they do, for example the Faroese and Icelandic plurals of the word , and respectively, in contrast to the Swedish plural and numerous other examples. That also applies to almost all feminine nouns, for example the largest feminine noun group, the \"o\"-stem nouns (except the Swedish noun mentioned above), and even \"i\"-stem nouns and root nouns, such as Old West Norse (\"http://\" in Icelandic) in comparison with Modern and Old Swedish .\nBreaking.\nVowel breaking, or fracture, caused a front vowel to be split into a semivowel-vowel sequence before a back vowel in the following syllable. While West Norse only broke , East Norse also broke . The change was blocked by a , , or /\u0280/ preceding the potentially-broken vowel.\nSome or and or result from breaking of and respectively.\nAssimilation or elision of inflectional \"\u0280\".\nWhen a noun, pronoun, adjective, or verb has a long vowel or diphthong in the accented syllable and its stem ends in a single \"l\", \"n\", or \"s\", the \"r\" (or the elder \"r\"- or \"z\"-variant \"\u0280\") in an ending is assimilated. When the accented vowel is short, the ending is dropped.\nThe nominative of the strong masculine declension and some \"i\"-stem feminine nouns uses one such -r (\u0280). () becomes instead of ().\nThe verb 'to blow', has third person present tense ' '[he] blows' rather than (). Similarly, the verb 'to shine' had present tense third person ' (rather than , ) ; while 'to cool down' had present tense third person (rather than , ).\nThe rule is not absolute, with certain counter-examples such as 'friend', which has the synonym , yet retains the unabsorbed version, and 'giant', where assimilation takes place even though the root vowel, , is short.\nThe clusters */Cl\u0280, Cs\u0280, Cn\u0280, Cr\u0280/ cannot yield respectively, instead . The effect of this shortening can result in the lack of distinction between some forms of the noun. In the case of 'winter', the nominative and accusative singular and plural forms are identical. The nominative singular and nominative and accusative plural would otherwise have been OWN , OEN . These forms are impossible because the cluster */Cr\u0280/ cannot be realized as , nor as */Cr\u0280/, nor as */C\u0280\u02d0/. The same shortening as in also occurs in = 'salmon' (as opposed to , ), 'bottom' (as opposed to , ), and (as opposed to , ).\nFurthermore, wherever the cluster */r\u0280/ is expected to exist, such as in the male names , (supposedly , ), the result is apparently always rather than */r\u0280/ or */\u0280\u02d0/. This is observable in the Runic corpus.\nPhonotactics.\nBlocking of ii, uu.\nIn Old Norse, adjacent to , , their \"u\"-umlauts, and was not possible, nor adjacent to , , their \"i\"-umlauts, and . At the beginning of words, this manifested as a dropping of the initial (which was general, independent of the following vowel) or . Compare ON , , with English \"word, wolf, year\". In inflections, this manifested as the dropping of the inflectional vowels. Thus, + Dative case remains , and in Icelandic progressed to &gt; &gt; . The and of Proto-Germanic became and respectively in Old Norse, a change known as Holtzmann's law.\nEpenthesis.\nAn epenthetic vowel became popular by 1200 in Old Danish, 1250 in Old Swedish and Old Norwegian, and 1300 in Old Icelandic. An unstressed vowel was used which varied by dialect. Old Norwegian exhibited all three: was used in West Norwegian south of Bergen, as in , (older ); North of Bergen, appeared in , ; and East Norwegian used , , .\nGrammar.\nOld Norse was a moderately inflected language with high levels of nominal and verbal inflection. Most of the fused morphemes are retained in modern Icelandic, especially in regard to noun case declensions, whereas modern Norwegian in comparison has moved towards more analytical word structures.\nGender.\nOld Norse had three grammatical genders \u2013 masculine, feminine, and neuter. Adjectives or pronouns referring to a noun must mirror the gender of that noun, so that one says, \" but, \". As in other languages, the grammatical gender of an impersonal noun is generally unrelated to an expected natural gender of that noun. While indeed , 'man' is masculine, , 'woman', is feminine, and , 'house', is neuter, so also are and , for 'raven' and 'crow', masculine and feminine respectively, even in reference to a female raven or a male crow.\nAll neuter words have identical nominative and accusative forms, and all feminine words have identical nominative and accusative plurals.\nThe gender of some words' plurals does not agree with that of their singulars, such as and . Some words, such as , have multiple genders, evidenced by their determiners being declined in different genders within a given sentence.\nMorphology.\nNouns, adjectives, and pronouns were declined in four grammatical cases\u00a0\u2013 nominative, accusative, genitive, and dative\u00a0\u2013 in singular and plural numbers. Adjectives and pronouns were additionally declined in three grammatical genders. Some pronouns (first and second person) could have dual number in addition to singular and plural. The genitive was used partitively and in compounds and kennings (e.g., , 'the well of Ur\u00f0r' ; , 'the gibing of Loki').\nThere were several classes of nouns within each gender. The following is an example of the \"strong\" inflectional paradigms:\nThe numerous \"weak\" noun paradigms had a much higher degree of syncretism between the different cases : i.e. they had fewer forms than the \"strong\" nouns.\nA definite article was appended as a suffix that retained an independent declension : e.g., 'a troll' \u2013 'the troll', 'a hall' \u2013 'the hall', 'an arm' \u2013 'the arm'. This definite article, however, was a separate word and did not become attached to the noun before later stages of the Old Norse period.\nTexts.\nThe earliest inscriptions in Old Norse are runic, from the 8th century. Runes continued to be commonly used until the 15th century and have been recorded to be in use in some form as late as the 19th century in some parts of Sweden. With the conversion to Christianity in the 11th century came the Latin alphabet. The oldest preserved texts in Old Norse in the Latin alphabet date from the middle of the 12th century. Subsequently, Old Norse became the vehicle of a large and varied body of vernacular literature. Most of the surviving literature was written in Iceland. Best known are the Norse sagas, the Icelanders' sagas and the mythological literature, but there also survives a large body of religious literature, translations into Old Norse of courtly romances, classical mythology, and the Old Testament, as well as instructional material, grammatical treatises and a large body of letters and official documents.\nDialects.\nMost of the innovations that appeared in Old Norse spread evenly through the Old Norse area. As a result, the dialects were similar and considered to be the same language, a language that they sometimes called the Danish tongue (), sometimes Norse language (), as evidenced in the following two quotes from by Snorri Sturluson:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Verse translation/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\u2014\"Heimskringla\", Ynglinga saga \u00a7 20. \"Dau\u00f0i Dyggva\"\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Screen reader-only/styles.css\" /&gt;Translation:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Verse translation/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\u2014\"Heimskringla\", Saga Sigur\u00f0ar J\u00f3rsalafara, Eysteins ok \u00d3lafs \u00a7 35(34). \"Fr\u00e1 ve\u00f0jan Haralds ok Magn\u00fas\"\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Screen reader-only/styles.css\" /&gt;Translation:\nHowever, some changes were geographically limited and so created a dialectal difference between Old West Norse and Old East Norse.\nAs Proto-Norse evolved into Old Norse, in the 8th century, the effects of the umlauts seem to have been very much the same over the whole Old Norse area. But in later dialects of the language a split occurred mainly between west and east as the use of umlauts began to vary. The typical umlauts (for example &lt; ) were better preserved in the West due to later generalizations in the east where many instances of umlaut were removed (many archaic Eastern texts as well as eastern runic inscriptions however portray the same extent of umlauts as in later Western Old Norse).\nAll the while, the changes resulting in breaking (for example &lt; ) were more influential in the East probably once again due to generalizations within the inflectional system. This difference was one of the greatest reasons behind the dialectalization that took place in the 9th and 10th centuries, shaping an Old West Norse dialect in Norway and the Atlantic settlements and an Old East Norse dialect in Denmark and Sweden.\nOld West Norse and Old Gutnish did not take part in the monophthongization which changed () into , () and into , nor did certain peripheral dialects of Swedish, as seen in modern Ostrobothnian dialects. Another difference was that Old West Norse lost certain combinations of consonants. The combinations , , and were assimilated into , and in Old West Norse, but this phenomenon was limited in Old East Norse.\nHere is a comparison between the two dialects as well as Old Gutnish. It is a transcription from one of the Funbo Runestones in Sweden (U 990) from the eleventh century:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Interlinear/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe OEN original text above is transliterated according to traditional scholarly methods, wherein \"u\"-umlaut is not regarded in runic Old East Norse. Modern studies have shown that the positions where it applies are the same as for runic Old West Norse. An alternative and probably more accurate transliteration would therefore render the text in OEN as such:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;We\u00f0r ok \u00deegn ok Gunnarr r\u00e6istu st\u00e6in \u00feenna at Haursa, f\u01eb\u00f0ur sinn. Gu\u00f0 hialpi \u01ebnd hans (OEN)\nSome past participles and other words underwent \"i\"-umlaut in Old West Norse but not in Old East Norse dialects. Examples of that are Icelandic / and /, which in Swedish are / and /. This can also be seen in the Icelandic and Norwegian words \"sterkur\" and (\"strong\"), which in Swedish is as in Old Swedish. These differences can also be seen in comparison between Norwegian and Swedish.\nOld West Norse.\nOld West Norse is by far the best attested variety of Old Norse. The term \"Old Norse\" is often used to refer to Old West Norse specifically, in which case the broader subject receives another name, such as \"Old Scandinavian\". Another designation is Old West Nordic.\nThe combinations , , and mostly merged to , and in Old West Norse around the 7th century, marking the first distinction between the Eastern and Western dialects. The following table illustrates this:\nAn early difference between Old West Norse and the other dialects was that Old West Norse had the forms 'dwelling', 'cow' (Accusative case) and 'faith', whereas Old East Norse , and . Old West Norse was also characterized by the preservation of \"u\"-umlaut, which meant that, for example, Proto-Norse 'tooth', became and not as in post-runic Old East Norse ; OWN and runic OEN , while post-runic OEN 'goose'.\nThe earliest body of text appears in runic inscriptions and in poems composed c.\u2009900 by \u00dej\u00f3\u00f0\u00f3lfr of Hvinir (although the poems are not preserved in contemporary sources, but only in much later manuscripts). The earliest manuscripts are from the period 1150\u20131200 and concern legal, religious and historical matters. During the 12th and 13th centuries, Tr\u00f8ndelag and Western Norway were the most important areas of the Norwegian kingdom and they shaped Old West Norse as an archaic language with a rich set of declensions. In the body of text that has survived into the modern day from until c.\u20091300, Old West Norse had little dialect variation, and Old Icelandic does not diverge much more than the Old Norwegian dialects do from each other.\nOld Norwegian differentiated early from Old Icelandic by the loss of the consonant \"h\" in initial position before \"l\", \"n\" and \"r\"; thus whereas Old Icelandic manuscripts might use the form 'fist', Old Norwegian manuscripts might use .\nFrom the late 13th century, Old Icelandic and Old Norwegian started to diverge more. After c.\u20091350, the Black Death and following social upheavals seem to have accelerated language changes in Norway. From the late 14th century, the language used in Norway is generally referred to as Middle Norwegian.\nOld West Norse underwent a lengthening of initial vowels at some point, especially in Norwegian, so that OWN became , ONW &gt; , OIC &gt; .\nOld Icelandic.\nIn Iceland, initial before was lost: compare Icelandic with Danish , OEN . The change is shared with Old Gutnish.\nA specifically Icelandic sound, the long, \"u\"-umlauted A, spelled \u27e8\u01ea\u0301\u27e9 and pronounced , developed around the early 11th century. It was short-lived, being marked in the Grammatical Treatises and remaining until the end of the 12th century. It then merged back into ; as a result, long A is not affected by \"u\"-umlaut in Modern Icelandic.\n merged with during the 12th century, which caused to become an independent phoneme from and the written distinction of \u27e8\u27e9 for from medial and final \u27e8\u27e9 to become merely etymological.\nAround the 13th century, (, which had probably already lowered to ) merged to (). Thus, pre-13th-century (with \u27e8\u0153\u27e9) 'green' became spelled as in modern Icelandic (with \u27e8\u00e6\u27e9). The 12th-century Gray Goose Laws manuscripts distinguish the vowels, and so does the Codex Regius copy. However, the 13th-century Codex Regius copy of the Poetic Edda probably relied on newer or poorer quality sources, or both. Demonstrating either difficulty with or total lack of natural distinction, the manuscripts show separation of the two phonemes in some places, but they frequently confuse the letters chosen to distinguish them in others.\nTowards the end of the 13th century, () merged to ().\nOld Norwegian.\nAround the 11th century, Old Norwegian \u27e8\u27e9, \u27e8\u27e9, and \u27e8\u27e9 became \u27e8\u27e9, \u27e8\u27e9 and \u27e8\u27e9. It is debatable whether the \u27e8\u27e9 sequences represented a consonant cluster () or devoicing ().\nOrthographic evidence suggests that in a confined dialect of Old Norwegian, may have been unrounded before and that \"u\"-umlaut was reversed unless the \"u\" had been eliminated: , &gt; , .\nGreenlandic Norse.\nThis dialect of Old West Norse was spoken by Icelandic colonies in Greenland. When the colonies died out around the 15th century, the dialect went with it. The phoneme and some instances of merged to and so Old Icelandic became .\nText example.\nThe following text is from , an Alexander romance. The manuscript, AM 519 a 4to, is dated c.\u20091280. The facsimile demonstrates the sigla used by scribes to write Old Norse. Many of them were borrowed from Latin. Without familiarity with these abbreviations, the facsimile will be unreadable to many. In addition, reading the manuscript itself requires familiarity with the letterforms of the native script. The abbreviations are expanded in a version with normalized spelling like that of the standard normalization system. Compared to the spelling of the same text in Modern Icelandic, pronunciation has changed greatly, but spelling has changed little since Icelandic orthography was intentionally modelled after Old Norse in the 19th century.\nOld East Norse.\nOld East Norse or Old East Nordic between 800 and 1100 is called \"Runic Swedish\" in Sweden and \"Runic Danish\" in Denmark, but for geographical rather than linguistic reasons. Any differences between the two were minute at best during the more ancient stages of this dialect group. Changes had a tendency to occur earlier in the Danish region. Even today many Old Danish changes have still not taken place in modern Swedish. Swedish is therefore the more conservative of the two in both the ancient and the modern languages, sometimes by a profound margin. The language is called \"runic\" because the body of text appears in runes.\nRunic Old East Norse is characteristically conservative in form, especially Swedish (which is still true for modern Swedish compared to Danish). In essence it matches or surpasses the conservatism of post-runic Old West Norse, which in turn is generally more conservative than post-runic Old East Norse. While typically \"Eastern\" in structure, many later post-runic changes and trademarks of OEN had yet to happen.\nThe phoneme \"\u0280\", which evolved during the Proto-Norse period from \"z\", was still clearly separated from \"r\" in most positions, even when being geminated, while in OWN it had already merged with \"r\".\nThe Proto-Germanic phoneme /w/ was preserved in initial sounds in Old East Norse (w-), unlike in West Norse where it developed into . It survived in rural Swedish dialects in the provinces of Westro- and North Bothnia, Sk\u00e5ne, Blekinge, Sm\u00e5land, Halland, V\u00e4sterg\u00f6tland and south of Bohusl\u00e4n into the 18th, 19th and 20th century. It is still preserved in the Dalecarlian dialects in the province of Dalarna, Sweden, and in Jutlandic dialects in Denmark. The -phoneme did also occur after consonants (kw-, tw-, sw- etc.) in Old East Norse and did so into modern times in said Swedish dialects and in a number of others. Generally, the initial w-sound developed into in dialects earlier than after consonants where it survived much longer.\nIn summation, the -sound survived in the East Nordic tongues almost a millennium longer than in the West Norse counterparts, and does still subsist at the present.\nMonophthongization of &gt; and &gt; started in mid-10th-century Denmark. Compare runic OEN: , , , , ; with Post-runic OEN: , , , , ; OWN: , , , , ; from PN , , , + 'maidendom/ virginity', .\nFeminine \"o\"-stems often preserve the plural ending , while in OWN they more often merge with the feminine \"i\"-stems: (runic OEN) , , , versus OWN , and (Danish has mainly lost the distinction between the two stems, with both endings now being rendered as or alternatively for the \"o\"-stems ; modern Swedish , , ).\nVice versa, masculine \"i\"-stems with the root ending in either or tended to shift the plural ending to that of the \"ja\"-stems while OEN kept the original: , and versus OWN , and (modern Danish , , ; modern Swedish , , ).\nThe plural ending of \"ja\"-stems were mostly preserved while those of OWN often acquired that of the \"i\"-stems: , , versus OWN , \"bekkir\", (modern Swedish , , ).\nOld Danish.\nUntil the early 12th century, Old East Norse was very much a uniform dialect. It was in Denmark that the first innovations appeared that would differentiate Old Danish from Old Swedish () as these innovations spread north unevenly (unlike the earlier changes that spread more evenly over the East Norse area), creating a series of isoglosses going from Zealand to Svealand.\nIn Old Danish, merged with during the 9th century. From the 11th to 14th centuries, the unstressed vowels -\"a\", -\"o\" and -\"e\" (standard normalization -\"a\", -\"u\" and -\"i\") started to merge into -\"\u0259\", represented with the letter \u27e8e\u27e9. This vowel came to be epenthetic, particularly before \"-\u0280\" endings. At the same time, the voiceless stop consonants \"p\", \"t\" and \"k\" became voiced plosives and even fricative consonants. Resulting from these innovations, Danish has (cake), (tongues) and (guests) whereas (Standard) Swedish has retained older forms, , and (OEN , , ).\nMoreover, the Danish pitch accent shared with Norwegian and Swedish changed into \"st\u00f8d\" around this time.\nOld Swedish.\nAt the end of the 10th and early 11th century initial \"h-\" before \"l\", \"n\" and \"r\" was still preserved in the middle and northern parts of Sweden, and is sporadically still preserved in some northern dialects as \"g-\", e.g. (lukewarm), from . The Dalecarlian dialects developed independently from Old Swedish and as such can be considered separate languages from Swedish.\nText example.\nThis is an extract from , the Westrogothic law. It is the oldest text written as a manuscript found in Sweden and from the 13th century. It is contemporaneous with most of the Icelandic literature. The text marks the beginning of Old Swedish as a distinct dialect.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Verse translation/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\u2014V\u00e4stg\u00f6talagen\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Screen reader-only/styles.css\" /&gt;Translation:\nOld Gutnish.\nDue to Gotland's early isolation from the mainland, many features of Old Norse did not spread from or to the island, and Old Gutnish developed as an entirely separate branch from Old East and West Norse. For example, the diphthong in , and was not subject to anticipatory assimilation to as in e.g. Old Icelandic , and . Gutnish also shows dropping of in initial , which it shares with the Old West Norse dialects (except Old East Norwegian), but which is otherwise abnormal. Breaking was also particularly active in Old Gutnish, leading to e.g. versus mainland .\nText example.\nThe 'law of the Gutes' is the longest text surviving from Old Gutnish. Appended to it is a short texting dealing with the history of the Gotlanders. This part relates to the agreement that the Gotlanders had with the Swedish king sometime before the 9th century:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Verse translation/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Screen reader-only/styles.css\" /&gt;Translation:\nRelationship to other languages.\nRelationship to English.\nOld English and Old Norse were related languages. It is therefore not surprising that many words in Old Norse look familiar to English speakers : e.g., 'arm', 'foot', 'land', 'full', 'to hang', 'to stand'. This is because both English and Old Norse stem from a Proto-Germanic mother language. In addition, numerous common, everyday Old Norse words were adopted into the Old English language during the Viking Age. A few examples of Old Norse loanwords in modern English are (English/Viking Age Old East Norse), in some cases even displacing their Old English cognates:\nIn a simple sentence like 'They are both weak', the extent of the Old Norse loanwords becomes quite clear; compare Old East Norse with archaic pronunciation: with . The words \"they\" and \"weak\" are both borrowed from Old Norse, and the word \"both\" might also be a borrowing, though this is disputed (cf. German ). While the number of loanwords adopted from the Norse was not as numerous as that of Norman French or Latin, their depth and everyday nature make them a substantial and very important part of everyday English speech as they are part of the very core of the modern English vocabulary.\nTracing the origins of words like \"bull\" and \"Thursday\" is more difficult. \"Bull\" may derive from either or , while \"Thursday\" may be a borrowing or simply derive from the , which could have been influenced by the Old Norse cognate. The word \"are\" is from /, which stems back to Proto-Germanic as well as the Old Norse cognates.\nRelationship to modern Scandinavian languages.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\nGeneral citations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCleasby-Vigf\u00fasson citations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\nGeneral sources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nDictionaries.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nGrammars.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nOld Norse texts.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nLanguage learning resources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "22667", "revid": "50893860", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22667", "title": "Old English", "text": "Earliest historical form of English language\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Infobox/styles-images.css\" /&gt;\nOld English ( or , or ), or Anglo-Saxon, is the earliest recorded form of the English language, spoken in England and southern and eastern Scotland in the Early Middle Ages. It developed from the languages brought to Great Britain by Anglo-Saxon settlers in the mid-5th century, and the first Old English literature dates from the mid-7th century. After the Norman Conquest of 1066, English was replaced for several centuries by Anglo-Norman (a type of French) as the language of the upper classes. This is regarded as marking the end of the Old English era, since during the subsequent period the English language was heavily influenced by Anglo-Norman, developing into what is now known as Middle English in England and Early Scots in Scotland.\nOld English developed from a set of Anglo-Frisian or Ingvaeonic dialects originally spoken by Germanic tribes traditionally known as the Angles, Saxons and Jutes. As the Germanic settlers became dominant in England, their language replaced the languages of Roman Britain: Common Brittonic, a Celtic language; and Latin, brought to Britain by the Roman conquest. Old English had four main dialects, associated with particular Anglo-Saxon kingdoms: Kentish, Mercian, Northumbrian, and West Saxon. It was West Saxon that formed the basis for the literary standard of the later Old English period, although the dominant forms of Middle and Modern English would develop mainly from Mercian, and Scots from Northumbrian. The speech of eastern and northern parts of England was subject to strong Old Norse influence due to Scandinavian rule and settlement beginning in the 9th century.\nOld English is one of the West Germanic languages, with its closest relatives being Old Frisian and Old Saxon. Like other old Germanic languages, it is very different from Modern English and Modern Scots, and largely incomprehensible for Modern English or Modern Scots speakers without study. Within Old English grammar, the nouns, adjectives, pronouns, and verbs have many inflectional endings and forms, and word order is much freer. The oldest Old English inscriptions were written using a runic system, but from about the 8th century this was replaced by a version of the Latin alphabet.\nEtymology.\n, from which the word \"English\" is derived, means 'pertaining to the Angles'. The Angles were one of the Germanic tribes who settled in many parts of Britain in the 5th century. By the 9th century, all speakers of Old English, including those who claimed Saxon or Jutish ancestry, could be referred to as .\nThis name probably either derives from Proto-Germanic , which referred to narrowness, constriction or anxiety, perhaps referring to shallow waters near the coast, or else it may derive from a related word which could refer to curve or hook shapes including fishing hooks. Concerning the second option, it has been hypothesised that the Angles acquired their name either because they lived on a curved promontory of land shaped like a fishhook, or else because they were fishermen (anglers).\nHistory.\nOld English was not static, and its usage covered a period of 700 years, from the Anglo-Saxon settlement of Britain in the 5th century to the late 11th century, some time after the Norman Conquest. While indicating that the establishment of dates is an arbitrary process, Albert Baugh dates Old English from 450 to 1150, a period of full inflections, a synthetic language. Perhaps around 85% of Old English words are no longer in use, but those that survived are the basic elements of Modern English vocabulary.\nOld English is a West Germanic language, and developed out of North Sea Germanic dialects from the 5th century. It came to be spoken over most of the territory of the Anglo-Saxon kingdoms which became the Kingdom of England. This included most of present-day England, as well as part of what is now southeastern Scotland, which for several centuries belonged to the kingdom of Northumbria. Other parts of the island continued to use Celtic languages (Gaelic\u00a0\u2013 and perhaps some Pictish\u00a0\u2013 in most of Scotland, Medieval Cornish all over Cornwall and in adjacent parts of Devon, Cumbric perhaps to the 12th century in parts of Cumbria, and Welsh in Wales and possibly also on the English side of the Anglo-Welsh border); except in the areas of Scandinavian settlements, where Old Norse was spoken and Danish law applied.\nOld English literacy developed after the Christianisation of Anglo-Saxon England in the late 7th century. The oldest surviving work of Old English literature is \"C\u00e6dmon's Hymn\", which was composed between 658 and 680 but not written down until the early 8th century. There is a limited corpus of runic inscriptions from the 5th to 7th centuries, but the oldest coherent runic texts (notably the inscriptions on the Franks Casket) date to the early 8th century. The Old English Latin alphabet was introduced around the 8th century.\nWith the unification of several of the Anglo-Saxon kingdoms (outside the Danelaw) by Alfred the Great in the later 9th century, the language of government and literature became standardised around the West Saxon dialect (Early West Saxon). Alfred advocated education in English alongside Latin, and had many works translated into the English language; some of them, such as Pope Gregory I's treatise \"Pastoral Care\", appear to have been translated by Alfred himself. In Old English, typical of the development of literature, poetry arose before prose, but Alfred chiefly inspired the growth of prose.\nA later literary standard, dating from the late 10th century, arose under the influence of Bishop \u00c6thelwold of Winchester, and was followed by such writers as the prolific \u00c6lfric of Eynsham (\"the Grammarian\"). This form of the language is known as the \"Winchester standard\", or more commonly as Late West Saxon. It is considered to represent the \"classical\" form of Old English. It retained its position of prestige until the time of the Norman Conquest, after which English ceased for a time to be of importance as a literary language.\nThe history of Old English can be subdivided into:\nThe Old English period is followed by Middle English (1150\u20131500), Early Modern English (1500\u20131650) and finally Modern English (after 1650), and in Scotland Early Scots (before 1450), Middle Scots (c.\u20091450\u20131700) and Modern Scots (after 1700).\nDialects.\nJust as Modern English is not monolithic, Old English varied according to place. Despite the diversity of language of the Germanic-speaking migrants who established Old English in England and southeastern Scotland, it is possible to reconstruct proto-Old English as a fairly unitary language. For the most part, the differences between the attested regional dialects of Old English developed within England and southeastern Scotland, rather than on the Mainland of Europe. Although from the tenth century Old English writing from all regions tended to conform to a written standard based on Late West Saxon, in speech Old English continued to exhibit much local and regional variation, which remained in Middle English and to some extent Modern English dialects.\nThe four main dialectal forms of Old English were Mercian, Northumbrian, Kentish, and West Saxon. Mercian and Northumbrian are together referred to as \"Anglian\". In terms of geography the Northumbrian region lay north of the Humber River; the Mercian lay north of the Thames and south of the Humber River; West Saxon lay south and southwest of the Thames; and the smallest, Kentish region lay southeast of the Thames, a small corner of England. The Kentish region, settled by the Jutes from Jutland, has the scantest literary remains. The term \"West Saxon\" actually is represented by two different dialects: Early West Saxon and Late West Saxon. Hogg has suggested that these two dialects would be more appropriately named \"Alfredian Saxon\" and \"\u00c6thelwoldian Saxon\", respectively, so that the naive reader would not assume that they are chronologically related.\nEach of these four dialects was associated with an independent kingdom on the islands. Of these, Northumbria south of the Tyne, and most of Mercia, were overrun by the Vikings during the 9th century. The portion of Mercia that was successfully defended, and all of Kent, were then integrated into Wessex under Alfred the Great.\nFrom that time on, the West Saxon dialect (then in the form now known as Early West Saxon) became standardised as the language of government, and as the basis for the many works of literature and religious materials produced or translated from Latin in that period.\nThe later literary standard known as Late West Saxon (see ), although centred in the same region of the country, appears not to have been directly descended from Alfred's Early West Saxon. For example, the former diphthong tended to become monophthongised to in EWS, but to in LWS.\nDue to the centralisation of power and the destruction wrought by Viking invasions, there is relatively little written record of the non-West Saxon dialects after Alfred's unification. Some Mercian texts continued to be written, however, and the influence of Mercian is apparent in some of the translations produced under Alfred's programme, many of which were produced by Mercian scholars. Other dialects certainly continued to be spoken, as is evidenced by the continued variation between their successors in Middle and Modern English. In fact, what would become the standard forms of Middle English and of Modern English are descended from Mercian rather than West Saxon, while Scots developed from the Northumbrian dialect. It was once claimed that, owing to its position at the heart of the Kingdom of Wessex, the relics of Anglo-Saxon accent, idiom and vocabulary were best preserved in the dialect of Somerset.\nInfluence of other languages.\nThe language of the Anglo-Saxon settlers appears not to have been significantly affected by the native British Celtic languages which it largely displaced. The number of Celtic loanwords introduced into the language is very small, although dialect and toponymic terms are more often retained in western language contact zones (Cumbria, Devon, Welsh Marches and Borders and so on) than in the east. However, various suggestions have been made concerning possible influence that Celtic may have had on developments in English syntax in the post\u2013Old English period, such as the regular progressive construction and analytic word order, as well as the eventual development of the periphrastic auxiliary verb \"do\". These ideas have generally not received widespread support from linguists, particularly as many of the theorised Brittonicisms do not become widespread until the late Middle English and Early Modern English periods, in addition to the fact that similar forms exist in other modern Germanic languages.\nOld English contained a certain number of loanwords from Latin, which was the scholarly and diplomatic \"lingua franca\" of Western Europe. It is sometimes possible to give approximate dates for the borrowing of individual Latin words based on which patterns of sound change they have undergone. Some Latin words had already been borrowed into the Germanic languages before the ancestral Angles and Saxons left continental Europe for Britain. More entered the language when the Anglo-Saxons were converted to Christianity and Latin-speaking priests became influential. It was also through Irish Christian missionaries that the Latin alphabet was introduced and adapted for the writing of Old English, replacing the earlier runic system. Nonetheless, the largest transfer of Latin-based (mainly Old French) words into English occurred in the Middle English period.\nAnother source of loanwords was Old Norse, which came into contact with Old English via the Scandinavian rulers and settlers in the Danelaw from the late 9th\u00a0century, and during the rule of Cnut and other Danish kings in the early 11th\u00a0century. Many place names in eastern and northern England are of Scandinavian origin. Norse borrowings are relatively rare in Old English literature, being mostly terms relating to government and administration. The literary standard, however, was based on the West Saxon dialect, away from the main area of Scandinavian influence; the impact of Norse may have been greater in the eastern and northern dialects. Certainly in Middle English texts, which are more often based on eastern dialects, a strong Norse influence becomes apparent. Modern English contains many, often everyday, words that were borrowed from Old Norse, and the grammatical simplification that occurred after the Old English period is also often attributed to Norse influence.\nThe influence of Old Norse certainly helped move English from a synthetic language along the continuum to a more analytic word order, and Old Norse most likely made a greater impact on the English language than any other language. The eagerness of Vikings in the Danelaw to communicate with their Anglo-Saxon neighbours produced a friction that led to the erosion of the complicated inflectional word endings. Simeon Potter notes:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;No less far-reaching was the influence of Scandinavian upon the inflexional endings of English in hastening that wearing away and leveling of grammatical forms which gradually spread from north to south. It was, after all, a salutary influence. The gain was greater than the loss. There was a gain in directness, in clarity, and in strength.\nThe strength of the Viking influence on Old English appears from the fact that the indispensable elements of the language\u00a0\u2013 pronouns, modals, comparatives, pronominal adverbs (like \"hence\" and \"together\"), conjunctions and prepositions\u00a0\u2013 show the most marked Danish influence; the best evidence of Scandinavian influence appears in the extensive word borrowings because, as Jespersen indicates, no texts exist in either Scandinavia or Northern England from this time to give certain evidence of an influence on syntax. The effect of Old Norse on Old English was substantive, pervasive, and of a democratic character. Old Norse and Old English resembled each other closely like cousins, and with some words in common, speakers roughly understood each other; in time the inflections melted away and the analytic pattern emerged. It is most important to recognise that in many words the English and Scandinavian languages differed chiefly in their inflectional elements. The body of the word was so nearly the same in the two languages that only the endings would put obstacles in the way of mutual understanding. In the mixed population which existed in the Danelaw, these endings must have led to much confusion, tending gradually to become obscured and finally lost. This blending of peoples and languages resulted in \"simplifying English grammar\".\nPhonology.\nThe inventory of Early West Saxon surface phones is as follows:\nThe sounds enclosed in parentheses in the chart above are not considered to be phonemes:\nThe above system is largely similar to that of Modern English, except that (and for most speakers) have generally been lost, while the voiced affricate and fricatives (now also including ) have become independent phonemes, as has .\nThe open back rounded vowel was an allophone of short /\u0251/ which occurred in stressed syllables before nasal consonants (/m/ and /n/). It was variously spelt either \u27e8a\u27e9 or \u27e8o\u27e9.\nThe Anglian dialects also had the mid front rounded vowel , spelled \u27e8oe\u27e9, which had emerged from i-umlaut of . In West Saxon and Kentish, it had already merged with before the first written prose.\nOther dialects had different systems of diphthongs. For example, the Northumbrian dialect retained , which had merged with in West Saxon.\nSound changes.\nSome of the principal sound changes occurring in the pre-history and history of Old English were the following:\nGrammar.\nMorphology.\nNouns decline for five cases: nominative, accusative, genitive, dative, instrumental; three genders: masculine, feminine, neuter; and two numbers: singular, and plural; and are strong or weak. The instrumental is vestigial and only used with the masculine and neuter singular and often replaced by the dative. Only pronouns and strong adjectives retain separate instrumental forms. There is also sparse early Northumbrian evidence of a sixth case: the locative. The evidence comes from Northumbrian Runic texts (e.g. 'on the Cross').\nAdjectives agree with nouns in case, gender, and number, and can be either strong or weak. Pronouns and sometimes participles agree in case, gender, and number. First-person and second-person pronouns occasionally distinguish dual-number forms. The definite article and its inflections serve as a definite article (\"the\"), a demonstrative adjective (\"that\"), and demonstrative pronoun. Other demonstratives are (\"this\"), and (\"that over there\"). These words inflect for case, gender, and number. Adjectives have both strong and weak sets of endings, weak ones being used when a definite or possessive determiner is also present.\nVerbs conjugate for three persons: first, second, and third; two numbers: singular, plural; two tenses: present, and past; three moods: indicative, subjunctive, and imperative; and are strong (exhibiting ablaut) or weak (exhibiting a dental suffix). Verbs have two infinitive forms: bare and bound; and two participles: present and past. The subjunctive has past and present forms. Finite verbs agree with subjects in person and number. The future tense, passive voice, and other aspects are formed with compounds. Adpositions are mostly before but are often after their object. If the object of an adposition is marked in the dative case, an adposition may conceivably be located anywhere in the sentence.\nRemnants of the Old English case system in Modern English are in the forms of a few pronouns (such as \"I/me/mine\", \"she/her\", \"who/whom/whose\") and in the possessive ending \"-'s\", which derives from the masculine and neuter genitive ending \"-es\". The modern English plural ending \"-(e)s\" derives from the Old English \"-as\", but the latter applied only to \"strong\" masculine nouns in the nominative and accusative cases; different plural endings were used in other instances. Old English nouns had grammatical gender, while modern English has only natural gender. Pronoun usage could reflect either natural or grammatical gender when those conflicted, as in the case of the grammatically neuter (but naturally feminine) noun (), which meant \"woman\" (from , lit.\u2009'woman person' or 'female person') and became Modern English \"wife\".\nIn Old English's verbal compound constructions are the beginnings of the compound tenses of Modern English. Old English verbs include strong verbs, which form the past tense by altering the root vowel, and weak verbs, which use a suffix such as . As in Modern English, and peculiar to the Germanic languages, the verbs formed two great classes: weak (regular), and strong (irregular). Like today, Old English had fewer strong verbs, and many of these have over time decayed into weak forms. Then, as now, dental suffixes indicated the past tense of the weak verbs, as in \"work\" and \"worked\".\nSyntax.\nOld English syntax is similar to that of modern English. Some differences are consequences of the greater level of nominal and verbal inflection, allowing freer word order.\nOrthography.\nOld English was first written in runes, using the futhorc\u00a0\u2013 a rune set derived from the Germanic 24-character elder futhark, extended by five more runes used to represent Anglo-Saxon vowel sounds and sometimes by several more additional characters. From around the 8th century, the runic system came to be supplanted by a (minuscule) half-uncial script of the Latin alphabet introduced by Irish Christian missionaries. This was replaced by Insular script, a cursive and pointed version of the half-uncial script. This was used until the end of the 12th century when continental Carolingian minuscule (also known as \"Caroline\") replaced the insular.\nThe Latin alphabet of the time still lacked the letters \u27e8j\u27e9 and \u27e8w\u27e9, and there was no \u27e8v\u27e9 as distinct from \u27e8u\u27e9; moreover native Old English spellings did not use \u27e8k\u27e9, \u27e8q\u27e9 or \u27e8z\u27e9. The remaining 20 Latin letters were supplemented by 4 more: \u27e8\u00e6\u27e9 (, modern \"ash\") and \u27e8\u00f0\u27e9 (, now called eth or edh), which were modified Latin letters, and thorn \u27e8\u00fe\u27e9 and wynn \u27e8\u01bf\u27e9, which are borrowings from the futhorc. A few letter pairs were used as digraphs, representing a single sound. Also used was the Tironian note \u27e8\u204a\u27e9 (a character similar to the digit \u27e87\u27e9) for the conjunction \"and\". A common scribal abbreviation was a thorn with a stroke \u27e8\ua765\u27e9, which was used for the pronoun (\"that\"). Macrons over vowels were originally used not to mark long vowels (as in modern editions), but to indicate stress, or as abbreviations for a following \u27e8m\u27e9 or \u27e8n\u27e9.\nModern editions of Old English manuscripts generally introduce some additional conventions. The modern forms of Latin letters are used, including \u27e8g\u27e9 instead of insular \"G\", \u27e8s\u27e9 instead of insular \"S\" and long \"S\", and others which may differ considerably from the insular script, notably \u27e8e\u27e9, \u27e8f\u27e9 and \u27e8r\u27e9. Macrons are used to indicate long vowels, where usually no distinction was made between long and short vowels in the originals. (In some older editions an acute accent mark was used for consistency with Old Norse conventions.) Additionally, modern editions often distinguish between velar and palatal \u27e8c\u27e9 and \u27e8g\u27e9 by placing dots above the palatals: \u27e8\u010b\u27e9, \u27e8\u0121\u27e9. The letter wynn \u27e8\u01bf\u27e9 is usually replaced with \u27e8w\u27e9, but \u27e8\u00e6\u27e9, \u27e8\u00f0\u27e9 and \u27e8\u00fe\u27e9 are normally retained\u00a0\u2013 except when \u27e8\u00f0\u27e9 is replaced by \u27e8\u00fe\u27e9.\nIn contrast with modern English orthography, Old English spelling was reasonably regular, with a mostly predictable correspondence between letters and phonemes. There were not usually any silent letters\u00a0\u2013 in the word , for example, both the \u27e8c\u27e9 and \u27e8h\u27e9 were pronounced () unlike the \u27e8k\u27e9 and \u27e8gh\u27e9 in the modern \"knight\" ().\nDoubled consonants are geminated; the geminate fricatives \u27e8ff\u27e9, \u27e8ss\u27e9 and \u27e8\u00f0\u00f0\u27e9/\u27e8\u00fe\u00fe\u27e9/\u27e8\u00f0\u00fe\u27e9/\u27e8\u00fe\u00f0\u27e9 are always voiceless , , .\nLiterature.\nThe corpus of Old English literature is small but still significant, with some 400 surviving manuscripts. The pagan and Christian streams mingle in Old English, one of the richest and most significant bodies of literature preserved among the early Germanic peoples. In his supplementary article to the 1935 posthumous edition of Bright's \"Anglo-Saxon Reader\", James Hulbert writes:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;In such historical conditions, an incalculable amount of the writings of the Anglo-Saxon period perished. What they contained, how important they were for an understanding of literature before the Conquest, we have no means of knowing: the scant catalogues of monastic libraries do not help us, and there are no references in extant works to other compositions...How incomplete our materials are can be illustrated by the well-known fact that, with few and relatively unimportant exceptions, all extant Anglo-Saxon poetry is preserved in four manuscripts.\nSome of the most important surviving works of Old English literature are \"Beowulf\", an epic poem; the \"Anglo-Saxon Chronicle\", a record of early English history; the Franks Casket, an inscribed early whalebone artefact; and C\u00e6dmon's Hymn, a Christian religious poem. There are also a number of extant prose works, such as sermons and saints' lives, biblical translations, and translated Latin works of the early Church Fathers, legal documents, such as laws and wills, and practical works on grammar, medicine, and geography. Still, poetry is considered the heart of Old English literature. Nearly all Anglo-Saxon authors are anonymous, with a few exceptions, such as Bede and C\u00e6dmon. C\u00e6dmon, the earliest English poet known by name, served as a lay brother in the monastery at Whitby.\n\"Beowulf\".\nThe first example is taken from the opening lines of \"Beowulf\", a work with around 3,000 lines. This passage describes how Hrothgar's legendary ancestor Scyld was found as a baby, washed ashore, and adopted by a noble family. The translation is literal and represents the original poetic word order. As such, it is not typical of Old English prose. The modern cognates of original words have been used whenever practical to give a close approximation of the feel of the original poem.\nThe words in brackets are implied in the Old English by noun case and the bold words in brackets are explanations of words that have slightly different meanings in a modern context. \"What\" is used by the poet where a word like \"lo\" or \"behold\" would be expected. This usage is similar to \"what-ho!\", both an expression of surprise and a call to attention.\nEnglish poetry is based on stress and alliteration. In alliteration, the first consonant in a word alliterates with the same consonant at the beginning of another word, as with and . Vowels alliterate with any other vowel, as with and . In the text below, the letters that alliterate are bolded.\nHere is a natural enough Modern English translation, although the phrasing of the Old English passage has often been stylistically preserved, even though it is not usual in Modern English:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;What! We Spear-Danes in ancient days inquired about the glory of the kings of the nation, how the princes performed bravery.\nOften, Shield, the son of Sheaf, ripped away the meadbenches\nfrom many tribes' enemy bands \u2014 he terrified men!\nAfter destitution was first experienced (by him), he met with consolation for that; he grew under the clouds of the sky and flourished in adulation, until all of the neighbouring people had to obey him over the whaleroad, and pay tribute to the man. That was a good king!\nThe Lord's Prayer.\nThis text of the Lord's Prayer is presented in the standardised Early West Saxon dialect.\nCharter of Cnut.\nThis is a proclamation from Cnut to his earl Thorkell the Tall and the English people written in AD 1019. Unlike the previous two examples, this text is prose rather than poetry. For ease of reading, the passage has been divided into sentences while the pilcrows represent the original division.\nThe following is a natural Modern English translation, with the overall structure of the Old English passage preserved. Even though \"earl\" is used to translate its Old English cognate \"eorl\", \"eorl\" in Old English does not correspond exactly to \"earl\" of the later medieval period:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;King Cnut kindly greets his archbishops and his provincial bishops and Earl Thorkell, and all his earls, and all his people, both those with a weregild of 1,200 shillings and those with a weregild of 200 shillings, both ordained and layman, in England.\nAnd I declare to you, that I will be a kind lord, and faithful to God's laws and to proper secular law.\nI recalled the writings and words which the archbishop Lyfing brought to me from the Pope of Rome, that I must promote the worship of God everywhere, and suppress unrighteousness, and promote perfect peace with the power which God would give me.\nI never hesitated from my peace payments (e.g. to the Vikings) while you had strife at hand. But with God's help and my payments, that went away.\nAt that time, I was told that we had been harmed more than we liked; and I departed with the men who accompanied me into Denmark, from where the most harm has come to you; and I have already prevented it with God's help, so that from now on, strife will never come to you from there, while you regard me rightly and my life persists.\nDictionaries.\nEarly history.\nThe earliest history of Old English lexicography lies in the Anglo-Saxon period itself, when English-speaking scholars created English glosses on Latin texts. At first, these were often marginal or interlinear glosses; however, they soon came to be gathered into word-lists such as the \u00c9pinal-Erfurt, Leiden and Corpus Glossaries. Over time, these word-lists were consolidated and alphabetised to create extensive Latin\u2013Old English glossaries with some of the character of dictionaries, such as the Cleopatra Glossaries, the Harley Glossary and the Brussels Glossary. In some cases, the material in these glossaries continued to be circulated and updated in Middle English glossaries, such as the Durham Plant-Name Glossary and the Laud Herbal Glossary.\nOld English lexicography was revived in the early modern period, drawing heavily on Anglo-Saxons' own glossaries. The major publication at this time was William Somner's \"Dictionarium Saxonico-Latino-Anglicum\". The next substantial Old English dictionary was Joseph Bosworth's \"Anglo-Saxon Dictionary\" of 1838.\nModern.\nIn modern scholarship, the following dictionaries remain current:\nThough focused on later periods, the \"Oxford English Dictionary\", \"Middle English Dictionary\", \"Dictionary of the Older Scottish Tongue\", and \"Historical Thesaurus of English\" all also include material relevant to Old English.\nModern legacy.\nLike other historical languages, Old English has been used by scholars and enthusiasts of later periods to create texts either imitating Old English literature or deliberately transferring it to a different cultural context. Examples include Alistair Campbell and J. R. R. Tolkien. Ransom Riggs uses several Old English words, such as syndrigast (singular, peculiar), ymbryne (period, cycle), etc., dubbed as \"Old Peculiar\" ones. Advocates of linguistic purism in English often look to older forms of English, including Old English, as a means of either reviving old words or coining new ones.\nA number of websites devoted to Modern Paganism and historical reenactment offer reference material and forums promoting the active use of Old English. There is also an . However, one investigation found that many Neo-Old English texts published online bear little resemblance to the historical language and have many basic grammatical mistakes.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;"}
{"id": "22669", "revid": "50152764", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22669", "title": "Open cluster", "text": "Type of star cluster\nAn open cluster is a type of star cluster made of tens to a few thousand stars that were formed from the same giant molecular cloud and have roughly the same age. More than 1,100 open clusters have been discovered within the Milky Way galaxy, and many more are thought to exist. Each one is loosely bound by mutual gravitational attraction and becomes disrupted by close encounters with other clusters and clouds of gas as they orbit the Galactic Center. This can result in a loss of cluster members through internal close encounters and a dispersion into the main body of the galaxy. Open clusters generally survive for a few hundred million years, with the most massive ones surviving for a few billion years. In contrast, the more massive globular clusters of stars exert a stronger gravitational attraction on their members, and can survive for longer. Open clusters have been found only in spiral and irregular galaxies, in which active star formation is occurring.\nYoung open clusters may be contained within the molecular cloud from which they formed, illuminating it to create an H II region. Over time, radiation pressure from the cluster will disperse the molecular cloud. Typically, about 10% of the mass of a gas cloud will coalesce into stars before radiation pressure drives the rest of the gas away.\nOpen clusters are key objects in the study of stellar evolution. Because the cluster members are of similar age and chemical composition, their properties (such as distance, age, metallicity, extinction, and velocity) are more easily determined than they are for isolated stars. A number of open clusters, such as the Pleiades, the Hyades and the Alpha Persei Cluster, are visible with the naked eye. Some others, such as the Double Cluster, are barely perceptible without instruments, while many more can be seen using binoculars or telescopes. The Wild Duck Cluster, M11, is an example.\nHistorical observations.\nThe prominent open cluster the Pleiades, in the constellation Taurus, has been recognized as a group of stars since antiquity, while the Hyades (which also form part of Taurus) is one of the oldest open clusters. Other open clusters were noted by early astronomers as unresolved fuzzy patches of light. In his \"Almagest\", the Roman astronomer Ptolemy mentions the Praesepe Cluster, the Double Cluster in Perseus, the Coma Star Cluster and the Ptolemy Cluster, while the Persian astronomer Al-Sufi wrote of the Omicron Velorum cluster. However, it would require the invention of the telescope to resolve these \"nebulae\" into their constituent stars. Indeed, in 1603 Johann Bayer gave three of these clusters designations as if they were single stars.\nThe first person to use a telescope to observe the night sky and record his observations was the Italian scientist Galileo Galilei in 1609. When he turned the telescope toward some of the nebulous patches recorded by Ptolemy, he found they were not a single star, but groupings of many stars. For Praesepe, he found more than 40 stars. Where previously observers had noted only 6\u20137 stars in the Pleiades, he found almost 50. In his 1610 treatise \"Sidereus Nuncius\", Galileo Galilei wrote, \"the galaxy is nothing else but a mass of innumerable stars planted together in clusters.\" Influenced by Galileo's work, the Sicilian astronomer Giovanni Hodierna became possibly the first astronomer to use a telescope to find previously undiscovered open clusters. In 1654, he identified the objects now designated Messier 41, Messier 47, NGC 2362 and NGC 2451.\nIt was realized as early as 1767 that the stars in a cluster were physically related, when English naturalist Reverend John Michell calculated that the probability of even just one group of stars like the Pleiades being the result of a chance alignment as seen from Earth was just 1 in 496,000. Between 1774 and 1781, French astronomer Charles Messier published a catalogue of celestial objects that had a nebulous appearance similar to comets. This catalogue included 26 open clusters. In the 1790s, English astronomer William Herschel began an extensive study of nebulous celestial objects. He discovered that many of these features could be resolved into groupings of individual stars. Herschel conceived the idea that stars were initially scattered across space, but later became clustered together as star systems because of gravitational attraction. He divided the nebulae into eight classes, with classes VI through VIII being used to classify clusters of stars.\nThe number of clusters known continued to increase under the efforts of astronomers. Hundreds of open clusters were listed in the \"New General Catalogue\", first published in 1888 by the Danish\u2013Irish astronomer J. L. E. Dreyer, and the two supplemental Index Catalogues, published in 1896 and 1905. Telescopic observations revealed two distinct types of clusters, one of which contained thousands of stars in a regular spherical distribution and was found all across the sky but preferentially towards the center of the Milky Way. The other type consisted of a generally sparser population of stars in a more irregular shape. These were generally found in or near the galactic plane of the Milky Way. Astronomers dubbed the former globular clusters, and the latter open clusters. Because of their location, open clusters are occasionally referred to as \"galactic clusters\", a term that was introduced in 1925 by the Swiss-American astronomer Robert Julius Trumpler.\nMicrometer measurements of the positions of stars in clusters were made as early as 1877 by the German astronomer E. Sch\u00f6nfeld and further pursued by the American astronomer E. E. Barnard prior to his death in 1923. No indication of stellar motion was detected by these efforts. However, in 1918 the Dutch\u2013American astronomer Adriaan van Maanen was able to measure the proper motion of stars in part of the Pleiades cluster by comparing photographic plates taken at different times. As astrometry became more accurate, cluster stars were found to share a common proper motion through space. By comparing the photographic plates of the Pleiades cluster taken in 1918 with images taken in 1943, van Maanen was able to identify those stars that had a proper motion similar to the mean motion of the cluster, and were therefore more likely to be members. Spectroscopic measurements revealed common radial velocities, thus showing that the clusters consist of stars bound together as a group.\nThe first color\u2013magnitude diagrams of open clusters were published by Ejnar Hertzsprung in 1911, giving the plot for the Pleiades and Hyades star clusters. He continued this work on open clusters for the next twenty years. From spectroscopic data, he was able to determine the upper limit of internal motions for open clusters, and could estimate that the total mass of these objects did not exceed several hundred times the mass of the Sun. He demonstrated a relationship between the star colors and their magnitudes, and in 1929 noticed that the Hyades and Praesepe clusters had different stellar populations than the Pleiades. This would subsequently be interpreted as a difference in ages of the three clusters.\nFormation.\nThe formation of an open cluster begins with the collapse of part of a giant molecular cloud, a cold dense cloud of gas and dust containing up to many thousands of times the mass of the Sun. These clouds have densities that vary from 102 to 106 molecules of neutral hydrogen per cm3, with star formation occurring in regions with densities above 104 molecules per cm3. Typically, only 1\u201310% of the cloud by volume is above the latter density. Prior to collapse, these clouds maintain their mechanical equilibrium through magnetic fields, turbulence and rotation.\nMany factors may disrupt the equilibrium of a giant molecular cloud, triggering a collapse and initiating the burst of star formation that can result in an open cluster. These include shock waves from a nearby supernova, collisions with other clouds and gravitational interactions. Even without external triggers, regions of the cloud can reach conditions where they become unstable against collapse. The collapsing cloud region will undergo hierarchical fragmentation into ever smaller clumps, including a particularly dense form known as infrared dark clouds, eventually leading to the formation of up to several thousand stars. This star formation begins enshrouded in the collapsing cloud, blocking the protostars from sight but allowing infrared observation. In the Milky Way galaxy, the formation rate of open clusters is estimated to be one every few thousand years.\nThe hottest and most massive of the newly formed stars (known as OB stars) will emit intense ultraviolet radiation, which steadily ionizes the surrounding gas of the giant molecular cloud, forming an H II region. Stellar winds and radiation pressure from the massive stars begins to drive away the hot ionized gas at a velocity matching the speed of sound in the gas. After a few million years the cluster will experience its first core-collapse supernovae, which will also expel gas from the vicinity. In most cases these processes will strip the cluster of gas within ten million years, and no further star formation will take place. Still, about half of the resulting protostellar objects will be left surrounded by circumstellar disks, many of which form accretion disks.\nAs only 30 to 40 percent of the gas in the cloud core forms stars, the process of residual gas expulsion is highly damaging to the star formation process. All clusters thus suffer significant infant weight loss, while a large fraction undergo infant mortality. At this point, the formation of an open cluster will depend on whether the newly formed stars are gravitationally bound to each other; otherwise an unbound stellar association will result. Even when a cluster such as the Pleiades does form, it may hold on to only a third of the original stars, with the remainder becoming unbound once the gas is expelled. The young stars so released from their natal cluster become part of the Galactic field population.\nBecause most if not all stars form in clusters, star clusters are to be viewed as the fundamental building blocks of galaxies. The violent gas-expulsion events that shape and destroy many star clusters at birth leave their imprint in the morphological and kinematical structures of galaxies. Most open clusters form with at least 100 stars and a mass of 50 or more solar masses. The largest clusters can have over 104 solar masses, with the massive cluster Westerlund 1 being estimated at 5 \u00d7 104 solar masses and R136 at almost 5 x 105, typical of globular clusters. While open clusters and globular clusters form two fairly distinct groups, there may not be a great deal of intrinsic difference between a very sparse globular cluster such as Palomar 12 and a very rich open cluster. Some astronomers believe the two types of star clusters form via the same basic mechanism, with the difference being that the conditions that allowed the formation of the very rich globular clusters containing hundreds of thousands of stars no longer prevail in the Milky Way.\nIt is common for two or more separate open clusters to form out of the same molecular cloud. In the Large Magellanic Cloud, both Hodge 301 and R136 have formed from the gases of the Tarantula Nebula, while in our own galaxy, tracing back the motion through space of the Hyades and Praesepe, two prominent nearby open clusters, suggests that they formed in the same cloud about 600 million years ago. Sometimes, two clusters born at the same time will form a binary cluster. The best known example in the Milky Way is the Double Cluster of NGC 869 and NGC 884 (also known as h and \u03c7 Persei), but at least 10 more double clusters are known to exist. New research indicates the Cepheid-hosting M25 may constitute a ternary star cluster together with NGC 6716 and Collinder 394. Many more binary clusters are known in the Small and Large Magellanic Clouds\u2014they are easier to detect in external systems than in our own galaxy because projection effects can cause unrelated clusters within the Milky Way to appear close to each other.\nMorphology and classification.\nOpen clusters range from very sparse clusters with only a few members to large agglomerations containing thousands of stars. They usually consist of quite a distinct dense core, surrounded by a more diffuse 'corona' of cluster members. The core is typically about 3\u20134\u00a0light years across, with the corona extending to about 20\u00a0light years from the cluster center. Typical star densities in the center of a cluster are about 1.5 stars per cubic light year. For comparison, stellar density near the Sun is about 0.003 stars per cubic light year.\nOpen clusters are often classified according to a scheme developed by Robert Trumpler in 1930. The Trumpler scheme gives a cluster a three-part designation, with a Roman numeral from I-IV for little to very disparate, an Arabic numeral from 1 to 3 for the range in brightness of members (from small to large range), and \"p\", \"m\" or \"r\" to indication whether the cluster is poor, medium or rich in stars. An 'n' is appended if the cluster lies within nebulosity.\nUnder the Trumpler scheme, the Pleiades are classified as I3rn, and the nearby Hyades are classified as II3m.\nNumbers and distribution.\nThere are over 1,100 known open clusters in our galaxy, but the true total may be up to ten times higher than that. In spiral galaxies, open clusters are largely found in the spiral arms where gas densities are highest and so most star formation occurs, and clusters usually disperse before they have had time to travel beyond their spiral arm. Open clusters are strongly concentrated close to the galactic plane, with a scale height in our galaxy of about 180\u00a0light years, compared with a galactic radius of approximately 50,000\u00a0light years.\nIn irregular galaxies, open clusters may be found throughout the galaxy, although their concentration is highest where the gas density is highest. Open clusters are not seen in elliptical galaxies: Star formation ceased many millions of years ago in ellipticals, and so the open clusters which were originally present have long since dispersed.\nIn the Milky Way Galaxy, the distribution of clusters depends on age, with older clusters being preferentially found at greater distances from the Galactic Center, generally at substantial distances above or below the galactic plane. Tidal forces are stronger nearer the center of the galaxy, increasing the rate of disruption of clusters, and also the giant molecular clouds which cause the disruption of clusters are concentrated towards the inner regions of the galaxy, so clusters in the inner regions of the galaxy tend to get dispersed at a younger age than their counterparts in the outer regions.\nStellar composition.\nBecause open clusters tend to be dispersed before most of their stars reach the end of their lives, the light from them tends to be dominated by the young, hot blue stars. These stars are the most massive, and have the shortest lives, a few tens of millions of years. The older open clusters tend to contain more yellow stars.\nThe frequency of binary star systems has been observed to be higher within open clusters than outside open clusters. This is seen as evidence that single stars get ejected from open clusters due to dynamical interactions.\nSome open clusters contain hot blue stars which seem to be much younger than the rest of the cluster. These blue stragglers are also observed in globular clusters, and in the very dense cores of globulars they are believed to arise when stars collide, forming a much hotter, more massive star. However, the stellar density in open clusters is much lower than that in globular clusters, and stellar collisions cannot explain the numbers of blue stragglers observed. Instead, it is thought that most of them probably originate when dynamical interactions with other stars cause a binary system to coalesce into one star.\nOnce they have exhausted their supply of hydrogen through nuclear fusion, medium- to low-mass stars shed their outer layers to form a planetary nebula and evolve into white dwarfs. While most clusters become dispersed before a large proportion of their members have reached the white dwarf stage, the number of white dwarfs in open clusters is still generally much lower than would be expected, given the age of the cluster and the expected initial mass distribution of the stars. One possible explanation for the lack of white dwarfs is that when a red giant expels its outer layers to become a planetary nebula, a slight asymmetry in the loss of material could give the star a 'kick' of a few kilometres per second, enough to eject it from the cluster.\nBecause of their high density, close encounters between stars in an open cluster are common. For a typical cluster with 1,000 stars with a 0.5\u00a0parsec half-mass radius, on average a star will have an encounter with another member every 10 million years. The rate is even higher in denser clusters. These encounters can have a significant impact on the extended circumstellar disks of material that surround many young stars. Tidal perturbations of large disks may result in the formation of massive planets and brown dwarfs, producing companions at distances of 100\u00a0AU or more from the host star.\nEventual fate.\nMany open clusters are inherently unstable, with a small enough mass that the escape velocity of the system is lower than the average velocity of the constituent stars. These clusters will rapidly disperse within a few million years. In many cases, the stripping away of the gas from which the cluster formed by the radiation pressure of the hot young stars reduces the cluster mass enough to allow rapid dispersal.\nClusters that have enough mass to be gravitationally bound once the surrounding nebula has evaporated can remain distinct for many tens of millions of years, but, over time, internal and external processes tend also to disperse them. Internally, close encounters between stars can increase the velocity of a member beyond the escape velocity of the cluster. This results in the gradual 'evaporation' of cluster members.\nExternally, about every half-billion years or so an open cluster tends to be disturbed by external factors such as passing close to or through a molecular cloud. The gravitational tidal forces generated by such an encounter tend to disrupt the cluster. Eventually, the cluster becomes a stream of stars, not close enough to be a cluster but all related and moving in similar directions at similar speeds. The timescale over which a cluster disrupts depends on its initial stellar density, with more tightly packed clusters persisting longer. Estimated cluster half lives, after which half the original cluster members will have been lost, range from 150\u2013800 million years, depending on the original density.\nAfter a cluster has become gravitationally unbound, many of its constituent stars will still be moving through space on similar trajectories, in what is known as a stellar association, moving cluster, or moving group. Several of the brightest stars in the 'Plough' of Ursa Major are former members of an open cluster which now form such an association, in this case the Ursa Major Moving Group. Eventually their slightly different relative velocities will see them scattered throughout the galaxy. A larger cluster is then known as a stream, if we discover the similar velocities and ages of otherwise well-separated stars.\nStudying stellar evolution.\nWhen a Hertzsprung\u2013Russell diagram is plotted for an open cluster, most stars lie on the main sequence. The most massive stars have begun to evolve away from the main sequence and are becoming red giants; the position of the turn-off from the main sequence can be used to estimate the age of the cluster.\nBecause the stars in an open cluster are all at roughly the same distance from Earth, and were born at roughly the same time from the same raw material, the differences in apparent brightness among cluster members are due only to their mass. This makes open clusters very useful in the study of stellar evolution, because when comparing one star with another, many of the variable parameters are fixed.\nThe study of the abundances of lithium and beryllium in open-cluster stars can give important clues about the evolution of stars and their interior structures. While hydrogen nuclei cannot fuse to form helium until the temperature reaches about 10 million\u00a0K, lithium and beryllium are destroyed at temperatures of 2.5 million\u00a0K and 3.5 million\u00a0K respectively. This means that their abundances depend strongly on how much mixing occurs in stellar interiors. Through study of their abundances in open-cluster stars, variables such as age and chemical composition can be fixed.\nStudies have shown that the abundances of these light elements are much lower than models of stellar evolution predict. While the reason for this underabundance is not yet fully understood, one possibility is that convection in stellar interiors can 'overshoot' into regions where radiation is normally the dominant mode of energy transport.\nAstronomical distance scale.\nDetermining the distances to astronomical objects is crucial to understanding them, but the vast majority of objects are too far away for their distances to be directly determined. Calibration of the astronomical distance scale relies on a sequence of indirect and sometimes uncertain measurements relating the closest objects, for which distances can be directly measured, to increasingly distant objects. Open clusters are a crucial step in this sequence.\nThe closest open clusters can have their distance measured directly by one of two methods. First, the parallax (the small change in apparent position over the course of a year caused by the Earth moving from one side of its orbit around the Sun to the other) of stars in close open clusters can be measured, like other individual stars. Clusters such as the Pleiades, Hyades and a few others within about 500\u00a0light years are close enough for this method to be viable, and results from the Hipparcos position-measuring satellite yielded accurate distances for several clusters.\nThe other direct method is the so-called moving cluster method. This relies on the fact that the stars of a cluster share a common motion through space. Measuring the proper motions of cluster members and plotting their apparent motions across the sky will reveal that they converge on a vanishing point. The radial velocity of cluster members can be determined from Doppler shift measurements of their spectra, and once the radial velocity, proper motion and angular distance from the cluster to its vanishing point are known, simple trigonometry will reveal the distance to the cluster. The Hyades are the best-known application of this method, which reveals their distance to be 46.3\u00a0parsecs.\nOnce the distances to nearby clusters have been established, further techniques can extend the distance scale to more distant clusters. By matching the main sequence on the Hertzsprung\u2013Russell diagram for a cluster at a known distance with that of a more distant cluster, the distance to the more distant cluster can be estimated. The nearest open cluster is the Hyades: The stellar association consisting of most of the Plough stars is at about half the distance of the Hyades, but is a stellar association rather than an open cluster as the stars are not gravitationally bound to each other. The most distant known open cluster in our galaxy is Berkeley 29, at a distance of about 15,000\u00a0parsecs. Open clusters, especially super star clusters, are also easily detected in many of the galaxies of the Local Group and nearby: e.g., NGC 346 and the SSCs R136 and NGC 1569 A and B.\nAccurate knowledge of open cluster distances is vital for calibrating the period\u2013luminosity relationship shown by variable stars such as Cepheid stars, which allows them to be used as standard candles. These luminous stars can be detected at great distances, and are then used to extend the distance scale to nearby galaxies in the Local Group. Indeed, the open cluster designated NGC 7790 hosts three classical Cepheids. RR Lyrae variables are too old to be associated with open clusters, and are instead found in globular clusters.\nPlanets.\nThe stars in open clusters can host exoplanets, just like stars outside open clusters. For example, the open cluster NGC 6811 contains two known planetary systems, Kepler-66 and Kepler-67. Additionally, several hot Jupiters are known to exist in the Beehive Cluster.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "22670", "revid": "11292982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22670", "title": "Orange lodge", "text": ""}
{"id": "22673", "revid": "28903366", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22673", "title": "Orimulsion", "text": "Registered trademark name for a bitumen-based fuel\nOrimulsion is a registered trademark name for a bitumen-based fuel that was developed for industrial use by Intevep, the Research and Development Affiliate of Petroleos de Venezuela SA (PDVSA), following earlier collaboration on oil emulsions with BP.\nSource of the bitumen.\nLike coal and oil, bitumen occurs naturally and is obtained from the world's largest deposit in the Orinoco Belt in Venezuela. The deposit is estimated to be more than 1,300 billion barrels (190 billion m3) of bitumen, an amount approximately equivalent to the world's estimated proven oil reserves.\nPreparation.\nRaw bitumen has an extremely high viscosity and specific gravity between 8 and 10 API gravity at ambient temperatures, making it unsuitable for direct use in conventional power stations. Orimulsion is produced by mixing the bitumen with approximately 30% fresh water and a small amount of surfactant. The resulting mixture behaves similarly to fuel oil. Recently, an alcohol-based surfactant has replaced the original phenol-based version, improving the transport properties of the fuel and eliminating the health concerns associated with the phenol group of surfactants.\nAdvantages.\nAs a fuel for electricity generation, Orimulsion has a number of attractive characteristics:\nDisadvantages.\nWhile Orimulsion is little different to fuel oil in relation to environmental impacts when burnt, being similarly susceptible to pollution mitigation techniques, it is more problematic in spill situations. \nIf a spill occurs during shipping over water, the Orimulsion mixture de-emulsifies, causing the bitumen to separate and no longer remain in suspension.\nOrimulsion is classified as a non-Newtonian fluid, and if its temperature drops below 30 \u00b0C, it undergoes a process referred to as 'setting'. Once set, it becomes extremely difficult to pump, and restarting operations or restoring the flow through the pipeline becomes impossible.\nDecreasing usage.\nOrimulsion is currently used as a commercial boiler fuel in power plants worldwide, including countries such as Japan, Italy and China. Its usage was previously more widespread, and there was an increasing demand for it. However, following the Venezuelan general strike of 2002\u201303, many engineers from PDVSA were dismissed. Since Orimulsion had been highly regarded by these engineers, it lost favor among key political leaders. Consequently, the Venezuelan government has been attempting to gradually phase out the Orimulsion program, except for its sales to China. The Venezuelan government maintains close ties with China, similar to its relationship with Cuba. As a result, China continues to receive supplies of Orimulsion, while the rest of the world either had their supply terminated or is still in the process of winding down. Despite these developments, Orimulsion still holds great potential for domestic consumption.\nAnother reason given by current PDVSA management is that with rising crude oil prices, it has been found that mixing or diluting Orinoco bitumen (extra-heavy oil) with a lighter crude oil can make this blend more profitable as a crude oil on the world market than by selling it as Orimulsion. An example of this is the popular Merey blend (Orinoco bitumen and Mesa crude oil). ConocoPhillips along with PDVSA operate the Merey Sweeny (bpd) delayed coker, vacuum tower and related facilities at ConocoPhillips' refinery in Sweeny, Texas, U.S.A. for processing and upgrading heavy sour Merey crude oil.\nAir pollutant control technology that is commonly available can limit emissions from Orimulsion to levels considered \"Best Available Control Technology\", as defined by the United States Environmental Protection Agency.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "22674", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22674", "title": "Olorin", "text": ""}
{"id": "22676", "revid": "30056403", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22676", "title": "Oxfordian theory of Shakespeare authorship", "text": "Alternative Shakespeare authorship theory\nThe Oxfordian theory of Shakespeare authorship contends that Edward de Vere, 17th Earl of Oxford, wrote the plays and poems of William Shakespeare. While historians and literary scholars overwhelmingly reject alternative authorship candidates, including Oxford, public interest in the Oxfordian theory continues. After the 1920s, the Oxfordian theory became the most popular alternative Shakespeare authorship theory.\nThe convergence of documentary evidence of the type used by academics for authorial attribution \u2013 title pages, testimony by other contemporary poets and historians, and official records \u2013 sufficiently establishes Shakespeare's authorship for the overwhelming majority of Shakespeare scholars and literary historians, and no such documentary evidence links Oxford to Shakespeare's works. Oxfordians, however, reject the historical record and claim that circumstantial evidence supports Oxford\u2019s authorship, proposing that the contradictory historical evidence is part of a conspiracy that falsified the record to protect the identity of the real author. Scholarly literary specialists consider the Oxfordian method of interpreting the plays and poems as grounded in an autobiographical fallacy, and argue that using his works to infer and construct a hypothetical author's biography is both unreliable and logically unsound.\nOxfordian arguments rely heavily on biographical allusions; adherents find correspondences between incidents and circumstances in Oxford's life and events in Shakespeare's plays, sonnets, and longer poems. The case also relies on perceived parallels of language, idiom, and thought between Shakespeare's works and Oxford's own poetry and letters. Oxfordians claim that marked passages in Oxford's Bible can be linked to Biblical allusions in Shakespeare's plays. That no plays survive under Oxford's name is also important to the Oxfordian theory. Oxfordians interpret certain 16th- and 17th-century literary allusions as indicating that Oxford was one of the more prominent suppressed anonymous and/or pseudonymous writers of the day. Under this scenario, Shakespeare was either a \"front man\" or \"play-broker\" who published the plays under his own name or was merely an actor with a similar name, misidentified as the playwright since the first Shakespeare biographies of the early 1700s.\nThe most compelling evidence against the Oxfordian theory is de Vere's death in 1604, since the generally accepted chronology of Shakespeare's plays places the composition of approximately twelve of the plays after that date. Oxfordians respond that the annual publication of \"new\" or \"corrected\" Shakespeare plays stopped in 1604, and that the dedication to \"Shakespeare's Sonnets\" implies that the author was dead prior to their publication in 1609. Oxfordians believe the reason so many of the \"late plays\" show evidence of revision and collaboration is because they were completed by other playwrights after Oxford's death.\nHistory of the Oxfordian theory.\nThe theory that the works of Shakespeare were in fact written by someone other than William Shakespeare dates back to the mid-nineteenth century. In 1857, the first book on the topic, \"The Philosophy of the Plays of Shakspere Unfolded\", by Delia Bacon, was published. Bacon proposed the first \"group theory\" of Shakespearian authorship, attributing the works to a committee headed by Francis Bacon and including Walter Raleigh. De Vere is mentioned once in the book, in a list of \"high-born wits and poets\", who were associated with Raleigh. Some commentators have interpreted this to imply that he was part of the group of authors. Throughout the 19th century Bacon was the preferred hidden author. Oxford is not known to have been mentioned again in this context.\nBy the beginning of the twentieth century other candidates, typically aristocrats, were put forward, most notably Roger Manners, 5th Earl of Rutland, and William Stanley, 6th Earl of Derby. Oxford's candidacy as sole author was first proposed by J. Thomas Looney in his 1920 book \"Shakespeare Identified in Edward de Vere, 17th Earl of Oxford\". Following earlier anti-Stratfordians, Looney argued that the known facts of Shakespeare's life did not fit the personality he ascribed to the author of the plays. Like other anti-Stratfordians before him, Looney referred to the absence of records concerning Shakespeare's education, his limited experience of the world, his allegedly poor handwriting skills (evidenced in his signatures), and the \"dirt and ignorance\" of Stratford at the time. Shakespeare had a petty \"acquisitive disposition\", he said, while the plays made heroes of free-spending figures. They also portrayed middle and lower-class people negatively, while Shakespearian heroes were typically aristocratic. Looney referred to scholars who found in the plays evidence that their author was an expert in law, widely read in ancient Latin literature, and could speak French and Italian. Looney believed that even very early works such as \"Love's Labour's Lost\" implied that he was already a person of \"matured powers\", in his forties or fifties, with wide experience of the world. Looney considered that Oxford's personality fitted the one he deduced from the plays, and he also identified characters in the plays as detailed portraits of Oxford's family and personal contacts. Several characters, including Hamlet and Bertram (in \"All's Well that Ends Well\"), were, he believed, self-portraits. Adapting arguments earlier used for Rutland and Derby, Looney fitted events in the plays to episodes in Oxford's life, including his travels to France and Italy, the settings for many plays. Oxford's death in 1604 was linked to a drop-off in the publication of Shakespeare plays. Looney declared that the late play \"The Tempest\" was not written by Oxford, and that others performed or published after Oxford's death were most probably left incomplete and finished by other writers, thus explaining the apparent idiosyncrasies of style found in the late Shakespeare plays. Looney also introduced the argument that the reference to the \"ever-living poet\" in the 1609 dedication to Shakespeare's sonnets implied that the author was dead at the time of publication.\nSigmund Freud, the novelist Marjorie Bowen, and several 20th-century celebrities found the thesis persuasive, and Oxford soon overtook Bacon as the favoured alternative candidate to Shakespeare, though academic Shakespearians mostly ignored the subject. Looney's theory attracted a number of activist followers who published books supplementing his own and added new arguments, most notably Percy Allen, Bernard M. Ward, Louis P. B\u00e9n\u00e9zet and Charles Wisner Barrell. Mainstream scholar Steven W. May has noted that Oxfordians of this period made genuine contributions to knowledge of Elizabethan history, citing \"Ward's quite competent biography of the Earl\" and \"Charles Wisner Barrell's identification of Edward Vere, Oxford's illegitimate son by Anne Vavasour\" as examples. In 1921, Sir George Greenwood, Looney, and others founded The Shakespeare Fellowship, an organization originally dedicated to the discussion and promotion of ecumenical anti-Stratfordian views, but which later became devoted to promoting Oxford as the true Shakespeare.\nDecline and revival.\nAfter a period of decline of the Oxfordian theory beginning with World War II, in 1952 Dorothy and Charlton Greenwood Ogburn published the 1,300-page \"This Star of England\", which briefly revived Oxfordism. A series of critical academic books and articles, however, held in check any appreciable growth of anti-Stratfordism and Oxfordism, most notably \"The Shakespeare Ciphers Examined\" (1957), by William and Elizebeth Friedman, \"The Poacher from Stratford\" (1958), by Frank Wadsworth, \"Shakespeare and His Betters\" (1958), by Reginald Churchill, \"The Shakespeare Claimants\" (1962), by H. N. Gibson, and \"Shakespeare and his Rivals: A Casebook on the Authorship Controversy\" (1962), by George L. McMichael and Edgar M. Glenn. By 1968 the newsletter of The Shakespeare Oxford Society reported that \"the missionary or evangelical spirit of most of our members seems to be at a low ebb, dormant, or non-existent\". In 1974, membership in the society stood at 80. In 1979, the publication of an analysis of the Ashbourne portrait dealt a further blow to the movement. The painting, long claimed to be one of the portraits of Shakespeare, but considered by Barrell to be an overpaint of a portrait of the Earl of Oxford, turned out to represent neither, but rather depicted Hugh Hamersley.\nCharlton Ogburn Jr., was elected president of The Shakespeare Oxford Society in 1976 and kick-started the modern revival of the Oxfordian movement by seeking publicity through moot court trials, media debates, television and later the Internet, including Wikipedia, methods which became standard for Oxfordian and anti-Stratfordian promoters because of their success in recruiting members of the lay public. He portrayed academic scholars as self-interested members of an \"entrenched authority\" that aimed to \"outlaw and silence dissent in a supposedly free society\", and proposed to counter their influence by portraying Oxford as a candidate on equal footing with Shakespeare.\nIn 1985 Ogburn published his 900-page \"The Mysterious William Shakespeare: the Myth and the Reality\", with a Foreword by Pulitzer prize-winning historian David McCullough who wrote: \"[T]his brilliant, powerful book is a major event for everyone who cares about Shakespeare. The scholarship is surpassing\u2014brave, original, full of surprise... The strange, difficult, contradictory man who emerges as the real Shakespeare, Edward de Vere, 17th Earl of Oxford, is not just plausible but fascinating and wholly believable.\"\nBy framing the issue as one of fairness in the atmosphere of conspiracy that permeated America after Watergate, he used the media to circumnavigate academia and appeal directly to the public. Ogburn's efforts secured Oxford the place as the most popular alternative candidate.\nAlthough Shakespearian experts disparaged Ogburn's methodology and his conclusions, one reviewer, Richmond Crinkley, the Folger Shakespeare Library's former director of educational programs, acknowledged the appeal of Ogburn's approach, writing that the doubts over Shakespeare, \"arising early and growing rapidly\", have a \"simple, direct plausibility\", and the dismissive attitude of established scholars only worked to encourage such doubts. Though Crinkley rejected Ogburn's thesis, calling it \"less satisfactory than the unsatisfactory orthodoxy it challenges\", he believed that one merit of the book lay in how it forces orthodox scholars to reexamine their concept of Shakespeare as author. Spurred by Ogburn's book, \"[i]n the last decade of the twentieth century members of the Oxfordian camp gathered strength and made a fresh assault on the Shakespearean citadel, hoping finally to unseat the man from Stratford and install de Vere in his place.\"\nThe Oxfordian theory returned to public attention in anticipation of the late October 2011 release of Roland Emmerich's drama film \"Anonymous\". Its distributor, Sony Pictures, advertised that the film \"presents a compelling portrait of Edward de Vere as the true author of Shakespeare's plays\", and commissioned high school and college-level lesson plans to promote the authorship question to history and literature teachers across the United States. According to Sony Pictures, \"the objective for our Anonymous program, as stated in the classroom literature, is 'to encourage critical thinking by challenging students to examine the theories about the authorship of Shakespeare's works and to formulate their own opinions.' The study guide does not state that Edward de Vere is the writer of Shakespeare's work, but it does pose the authorship question which has been debated by scholars for decades\".\nVariant Oxfordian theories.\nAlthough most Oxfordians agree on the main arguments for Oxford, the theory has spawned schismatic variants that have not met with wide acceptance by all Oxfordians, although they have gained much attention.\nPrince Tudor theory.\nIn a letter written by Looney in 1933, he mentions that Allen and Ward were \"advancing certain views respecting Oxford and Queen Eliz. which appear to me extravagant &amp; improbable, in no way strengthen Oxford\u2019s Shakespeare claims, and are likely to bring the whole cause into ridicule.\" Allen and Ward believed that they had discovered that Elizabeth and Oxford were lovers and had conceived a child. Allen developed the theory in his 1934 book \"Anne Cecil, Elizabeth &amp; Oxford\". He argued that the child was given the name William Hughes, who became an actor under the stage-name \"William Shakespeare\". He adopted the name because his father, Oxford, was already using it as a pen-name for his plays. Oxford had borrowed the name from a third Shakespeare, the man of that name from Stratford-upon-Avon, who was a law student at the time, but who was never an actor \"or\" a writer. Allen later changed his mind about Hughes and decided that the concealed child was the Earl of Southampton, the dedicatee of Shakespeare's narrative poems. This secret history, which has become known as the Prince Tudor theory, was covertly represented in Oxford's plays and poems and remained hidden until Allen and Ward's discoveries. The narrative poems and sonnets had been written by Oxford for his son. \"This Star of England\" (1952) by Charlton and Dorothy Ogburn included arguments in support of this version of the theory. Their son, Charlton Ogburn Jr, agreed with Looney that the theory was an impediment to the Oxfordian movement and omitted all discussion about it in his own Oxfordian works.\nHowever, the theory was revived and expanded by Elisabeth Sears in \"Shakespeare and the Tudor Rose\" (2002), and Hank Whittemore in \"The Monument\" (2005), an analysis of Shakespeare's Sonnets which interprets the poems as a poetic history of Queen Elizabeth, Oxford, and Southampton. Paul Streitz's \"Oxford: Son of Queen Elizabeth I\" (2001) advances a variation on the theory: that Oxford himself was the illegitimate son of Queen Elizabeth by her stepfather, Thomas Seymour. Oxford was thus the half-brother of his own son by the queen. Streitz also believes that the queen had children by the Earl of Leicester. These were Robert Cecil, 1st Earl of Salisbury, Robert Devereux, 2nd Earl of Essex, Mary Sidney and Elizabeth Leighton.\nAttribution of other works to Oxford.\nAs with other candidates for authorship of Shakespeare's works, Oxford's advocates have attributed numerous non-Shakespearian works to him. Looney began the process in his 1921 edition of de Vere's poetry. He suggested that de Vere was also responsible for some of the literary works credited to Arthur Golding, Anthony Munday and John Lyly. Streitz credits Oxford with the Authorized King James Version of the Bible. Two professors of linguistics have claimed that de Vere wrote not only the works of Shakespeare, but most of what is memorable in English literature during his lifetime, with such names as Edmund Spenser, Christopher Marlowe, Philip Sidney, John Lyly, George Peele, George Gascoigne, Raphael Holinshed, Robert Greene, Thomas Phaer, and Arthur Golding being among dozens of further pseudonyms of de Vere. Ramon Jim\u00e9nez has credited Oxford with such plays as \"The True Tragedy of Richard III\" and \"Edmund Ironside\".\nGroup theories.\nGroup theories in which Oxford played the principal role as writer, but collaborated with others to create the Shakespeare canon, were adopted by a number of early Oxfordians. Looney himself was willing to concede that Oxford may have been assisted by his son-in-law William Stanley, 6th Earl of Derby, who perhaps wrote \"The Tempest\". B. M. Ward also suggested that Oxford and Derby worked together. In his later writings Percy Allen argued that Oxford led a group of writers, among whom was William Shakespeare. Group theories with Oxford as the principal author or creative \"master mind\" were also proposed by Gilbert Standen in \"Shakespeare Authorship\" (1930), Gilbert Slater in \"Seven Shakespeares\" (1931) and Montagu William Douglas in \"Lord Oxford and the Shakespeare Group\" (1952).\nCase against Oxfordian theory.\nMethodology of Oxfordian argument.\nSpecialists in Elizabethan literary history object to the methodology of Oxfordian arguments. In lieu of any evidence of the type commonly used for authorship attribution, Oxfordians discard the methods used by historians and employ other types of arguments to make their case, the most common being supposed parallels between Oxford's life and Shakespeare's works.\nAnother is finding cryptic allusions to Oxford's supposed play writing in other literary works of the era that to them suggest that his authorship was obvious to those \"in the know\". David Kathman writes that their methods are subjective and devoid of any evidential value, because they use a \"double standard\". Their arguments are \"not taken seriously by Shakespeare scholars because they consistently distort and misrepresent the historical record\", \"neglect to provide necessary context\" and are in some cases \"outright fabrication[s]\". One major evidential objection to the Oxfordian theory is Edward de Vere's 1604 death, after which a number of Shakespeare's plays are generally believed to have been written. In \"The Shakespeare Claimants\", a 1962 examination of the authorship question, H. N. Gibson concluded that \"...\u00a0on analysis the Oxfordian case appears to me a very weak one\".\nMainstream objections.\nMainstream academics have often argued that the Oxford theory is based on snobbery: that anti-Stratfordians reject the idea that the son of a mere tradesman could write the plays and poems of Shakespeare. The Shakespeare Oxford Society has responded that this claim is \"a substitute for reasoned responses to Oxfordian evidence and logic\" and is merely an \"ad hominem\" attack.\nMainstream critics further say that, if William Shakespeare were a fraud instead of the true author, the number of people involved in suppressing this information would have made it highly unlikely to succeed. And citing the \"testimony of contemporary writers, court records and much else\" supporting Shakespeare's authorship, Columbia University professor James S. Shapiro says any theory claiming that \"there must have been a conspiracy to suppress the truth of de Vere's authorship\" based on the idea that \"the very absence of surviving evidence proves the case\" is a logically fatal tautology.\nCircumstantial evidence.\nWhile no documentary evidence connects Oxford (or any alternative author) to the plays of Shakespeare, Oxfordian writers, including Mark Anderson and Charlton Ogburn, say that connection is made by considerable circumstantial evidence inferred from Oxford's connections to the Elizabethan theatre and poetry scene; the participation of his family in the printing and publication of the First Folio; his relationship with the Earl of Southampton (believed by most Shakespeare scholars to have been Shakespeare's patron); as well as a number of specific incidents and circumstances of Oxford's life that Oxfordians say are depicted in the plays themselves.\nTheatre connections.\nOxford was noted for his literary and theatrical patronage, garnering dedications from a wide range of authors. For much of his adult life, Oxford patronised both adult and boy acting companies, as well as performances by musicians, acrobats and performing animals, and in 1583, he was a leaseholder of the first Blackfriars Theatre in London.\nFamily connections.\nOxford was related to several literary figures. His mother, Margory Golding, was the sister of the Ovid translator Arthur Golding, and his uncle, Henry Howard, Earl of Surrey, was the inventor of the English or Shakespearian sonnet form.\nThe three dedicatees of Shakespeare's works (the earls of Southampton, Montgomery and Pembroke) were each proposed as husbands for the three daughters of Edward de Vere. \"Venus and Adonis\" and \"The Rape of Lucrece\" were dedicated to Southampton (whom many scholars have argued was the Fair Youth of the \"Sonnets\"), and the \"First Folio\" of Shakespeare's plays was dedicated to Montgomery (who married Susan de Vere) and Pembroke (who was once engaged to Bridget de Vere).\nOxford's Bible.\nIn the late 1990s, Roger A. Stritmatter conducted a study of the marked passages found in Edward de Vere's Geneva Bible, which is now owned by the Folger Shakespeare Library. The Bible contains 1,028 instances of underlined words or passages and a few hand-written annotations, most of which consist of a single word or fragment. Stritmatter believes about a quarter of the marked passages appear in Shakespeare's works as either a theme, allusion, or quotation. Stritmatter grouped the marked passages into eight themes. Arguing that the themes fitted de Vere's known interests, he proceeded to link specific themes to passages in Shakespeare. Critics have doubted that any of the underlinings or annotations in the Bible can be reliably attributed to de Vere and not the book's other owners prior to its acquisition by the Folger Shakespeare Library in 1925, as well as challenging the looseness of Stritmatter's standards for a Biblical allusion in Shakespeare's works and arguing that there is no statistical significance to the overlap.\nStratford connections.\nShakespeare's native Avon and Stratford are referred to in two prefatory poems in the 1623 First Folio, one of which refers to Shakespeare as \"Swan of Avon\" and another to the author's \"Stratford monument\". Oxfordians say the first of these phrases could refer to one of Edward de Vere's manors, Bilton Hall, near the Forest of Arden, in Rugby, on the River Avon. This view was first expressed by Charles Wisner Barrell, who argued that De Vere \"kept the place as a literary hideaway where he could carry on his creative work without the interference of his father-in-law, Burghley, and other distractions of Court and city life.\" Oxfordians also consider it significant that the nearest town to the parish of Hackney, where de Vere later lived and was buried, was also named Stratford. Mainstream scholar Irvin Matus demonstrated that Oxford sold the Bilton house in 1580, having previously rented it out, making it unlikely that Ben Jonson's 1623 poem would identify Oxford by referring to a property he once owned, but never lived in, and sold 43 years earlier. Nor is there any evidence of a monument to Oxford in Stratford, London, or anywhere else; his widow provided for the creation of one at Hackney in her 1613 will, but there is no evidence that it was ever erected.\nOxford's annuity.\nOxfordians also believe that Rev. Dr. John Ward's 1662 diary entry stating that Shakespeare wrote two plays a year \"and for that had an allowance so large that he spent at the rate of \u00a31,000 a year\" as a critical piece of evidence, since Queen Elizabeth I gave Oxford an annuity of exactly \u00a31,000 beginning in 1586 that was continued until his death. Ogburn wrote that the annuity was granted \"under mysterious circumstances\", and Anderson suggests it was granted because of Oxford's writing patriotic plays for government propaganda. However, the documentary evidence indicates that the allowance was meant to relieve Oxford's embarrassed financial situation caused by the ruination of his estate.\nOxford's travels and the settings of Shakespeare's plays.\nAlmost half of Shakespeare's plays are set in Italy, many of them containing details of Italian laws, customs, and culture which Oxfordians believe could only have been obtained by personal experiences in Italy, and especially in Venice. The author of \"The Merchant of Venice\", Looney believed, \"knew Italy first hand and was touched with the life and spirit of the country\". This argument had earlier been used by supporters of the Earl of Rutland and the Earl of Derby as authorship candidates, both of whom had also travelled on the continent of Europe. Oxfordian William Farina refers to Shakespeare's apparent knowledge of the Jewish ghetto, Venetian architecture and laws in \"The Merchant of Venice\", especially the city's \"notorious Alien Statute\". Historical documents confirm that Oxford lived in Venice, and travelled for over a year through Italy. He disliked the country, writing in a letter to Lord Burghley dated 24 September 1575, \"I am glad I have seen it, and I care not ever to see it any more\". Still, he remained in Italy for another six months, leaving Venice in March 1576. According to Anderson, Oxford definitely visited Venice, Padua, Milan, Genoa, Palermo, Florence, Siena and Naples, and probably passed through Messina, Mantua and Verona, all cities used as settings by Shakespeare. In testimony before the Venetian Inquisition, Edward de Vere was said to be fluent in Italian.\nHowever, some Shakespeare scholars say that Shakespeare gets many details of Italian life wrong, including the laws and urban geography of Venice. Kenneth Gross writes that \"the play itself knows nothing about the Venetian ghetto; we get no sense of a legally separate region of Venice where Shylock must dwell.\" Scott McCrea describes the setting as \"a nonrealistic Venice\" and the laws invoked by Portia as part of the \"imaginary world of the play\", inconsistent with actual legal practice. Charles Ross points out that Shakespeare's Alien Statute bears little resemblance to any Italian law. For later plays such as \"Othello\", Shakespeare probably used Lewes Lewknor's 1599 English translation of Gasparo Contarini's \"The Commonwealth and Government of Venice\" for some details about Venice's laws and customs.\nShakespeare derived much of this material from John Florio, an Italian scholar living in England who was later thanked by Ben Jonson for helping him get Italian details right for his play \"Volpone\". Keir Elam has traced Shakespeare's Italian idioms in \"Shrew\" and some of the dialogue to Florio's \"Second Fruits\", a bilingual introduction to Italian language and culture published in 1591. Jason Lawrence believes that Shakespeare\u2019s Italian dialogue in the play derives \"almost entirely\" from Florio\u2019s \"First Fruits\" (1578). He also believes that Shakespeare became more proficient in reading the language as set out in Florio\u2019s manuals, as evidenced by his increasing use of Florio and other Italian sources for writing the plays.\nOxford's education and knowledge of court life.\nIn 1567 Oxford was admitted to Gray's Inn, one of the Inns of Court which Justice Shallow reminisces about in \"Henry IV, Part 2\". Sobran observes that the Sonnets \"abound not only in legal terms \u2013 more than 200 \u2013 but also in elaborate legal conceits.\" These terms include: \"allege, auditor, defects, exchequer, forfeit, heirs, impeach, lease, moiety, recompense, render, sureties,\" and \"usage\". Shakespeare also uses the legal term \"quietus\" (final settlement) in Sonnet 134, the last Fair Youth sonnet.\nRegarding Oxford's knowledge of court life, which Oxfordians believe is reflected throughout the plays, mainstream scholars say that any special knowledge of the aristocracy appearing in the plays can be more easily explained by Shakespeare's life-time of performances before nobility and royalty, and possibly, as Gibson theorises, \"by visits to his patron's house, as Marlowe visited Walsingham.\"\nOxford's literary reputation.\nOxford's lyric poetry.\nSome of Oxford's lyric works have survived. Steven W. May, an authority on Oxford's poetry, attributes sixteen poems definitely, and four possibly, to Oxford noting that these are probably \"only a good sampling\" as \"both Webbe (1586) and Puttenham (1589) rank him first among the courtier poets, an eminence he probably would not have been granted, despite his reputation as a patron, by virtue of a mere handful of lyrics\".\nMay describes Oxford as a \"competent, fairly experimental poet working in the established modes of mid-century lyric verse\" and his poetry as \"examples of the standard varieties of mid-Elizabethan amorous lyric\". In 2004, May wrote that Oxford's poetry was \"one man's contribution to the rhetorical mainstream of an evolving Elizabethan poetic\" and challenged readers to distinguish any of it from \"the output of his mediocre mid-century contemporaries\". C. S. Lewis wrote that de Vere's poetry shows \"a faint talent\", but is \"for the most part undistinguished and verbose.\"\nComparisons to Shakespeare's work.\nIn the opinion of J. Thomas Looney, as \"far as forms of versification are concerned De Vere presents just that rich variety which is so noticeable in Shakespeare; and almost all the forms he employs we find reproduced in the Shakespeare work.\" Oxfordian Louis P. B\u00e9n\u00e9zet created the \"B\u00e9n\u00e9zet test\", a collage of lines from Shakespeare and lines he thought were representative of Oxford, challenging non-specialists to tell the difference between the two authors. May notes that Looney compared various motifs, rhetorical devices and phrases with certain Shakespeare works to find similarities he said were \"the most crucial in the piecing together of the case\", but that for some of those \"crucial\" examples Looney used six poems mistakenly attributed to Oxford that were actually written by Greene, Campion, and Greville. B\u00e9n\u00e9zet also used two lines from Greene that he thought were Oxford's, while succeeding Oxfordians, including Charles Wisner Barrell, have also misattributed poems to Oxford. \"This on-going confusion of Oxford's genuine verse with that of at least three other poets\", writes May, \"illustrates the wholesale failure of the basic Oxfordian methodology.\"\nAccording to a computerised textual comparison developed by the Claremont Shakespeare Clinic, the styles of Shakespeare and Oxford were found to be \"light years apart\", and the odds of Oxford having written Shakespeare were reported as \"lower than the odds of getting hit by lightning\". Furthermore, while the First Folio shows traces of a dialect identical to Shakespeare's, the Earl of Oxford, raised in Essex, spoke an East Anglian dialect. John Shahan and Richard Whalen condemned the Claremont study, calling it \"apples to oranges\", and noting that the study did not compare Oxford's songs to Shakespeare's songs, did not compare a clean unconfounded sample of Oxford's poems with Shakespeare's poems, and charged that the students under Elliott and Valenza's supervision incorrectly assumed that Oxford's youthful verse was representative of his mature poetry.\nJoseph Sobran's book, \"Alias Shakespeare\", includes Oxford's known poetry in an appendix with what he considers extensive verbal parallels with the work of Shakespeare, and he argues that Oxford's poetry is comparable in quality to some of Shakespeare's early work, such as \"Titus Andronicus\". Other Oxfordians say that de Vere's extant work is that of a young man and should be considered juvenilia, while May believes that all the evidence dates his surviving work to his early 20s and later.\nContemporary reception.\nFour contemporary critics praise Oxford as a poet and a playwright, three of them within his lifetime:\nMainstream scholarship characterises the extravagant praise for de Vere's poetry more as a convention of flattery than honest appreciation of literary merit. Alan Nelson, de Vere's documentary biographer, writes that \"[c]ontemporary observers such as Harvey, Webbe, Puttenham and Meres clearly exaggerated Oxford's talent in deference to his rank.\"\nPerceived allusions to Oxford as a concealed writer.\nBefore the advent of copyright, anonymous and pseudonymous publication was a common practice in the sixteenth century publishing world, and a passage in the \"Arte of English Poesie\" (1589), an anonymously published work itself, mentions in passing that literary figures in the court who wrote \"commendably well\" circulated their poetry only among their friends, \"as if it were a discredit for a gentleman to seem learned\" (Book 1, Chapter 8). In another passage 23 chapters later, the author (probably George Puttenham) speaks of aristocratic writers who, if their writings were made public, would appear to be excellent. It is in this passage that Oxford appears on a list of poets.\nAccording to Daniel Wright, these combined passages confirm that Oxford was one of the concealed writers in the Elizabethan court. Critics of this view argue that neither Oxford nor any other writer is here identified as a concealed writer, but as the first in a list of \"known\" modern writers whose works have already been \"made public\", \"of which number is first\" Oxford, adding to the publicly acknowledged literary tradition dating back to Geoffrey Chaucer. Other critics interpret the passage to mean that the courtly writers and their works are known within courtly circles, but not to the general public. In either case, neither Oxford nor anyone else is identified as a hidden writer or one that used a pseudonym.\nOxfordians argue that at the time of the passage's composition (pre-1589), the writers referenced were not in print, and interpret Puttenham's passage (that the noblemen preferred to 'suppress' their work to avoid the discredit of appearing learned) to mean that they were 'concealed'. They cite Sir Philip Sidney, none of whose poetry was published until after his premature death, as an example. Similarly, up to 1589 nothing by Greville was in print, and only one of Walter Raleigh's works had been published.\nCritics point out that six of the nine poets listed had appeared in print under their own names long before 1589, including a number of Oxford's poems in printed miscellanies, and the first poem published under Oxford's name was printed in 1572, 17 years before Puttenham's book was published. Several other contemporary authors name Oxford as a poet, and Puttenham himself quotes one of Oxford's verses elsewhere in the book, referring to him by name as the author, so Oxfordians misread Puttenham.\nOxfordians also believe other texts refer to the Edward de Vere as a concealed writer. They argue that satirist John Marston's \"Scourge of Villanie\" (1598) contains further cryptic allusions to Oxford, named as \"Mutius\". Marston expert Arnold Davenport believes that Mutius is the bishop-poet Joseph Hall and that Marston is criticising Hall's satires.\nThere is a description of the figure of Oxford in \"The Revenge of Bussy D'Ambois\", a 1613 play by George Chapman, who has been suggested as the Rival Poet of Shakespeare's Sonnets. Chapman describes Oxford as \"Rare and most absolute\" in form and says he was \"of spirit passing great / Valiant and learn\u2019d, and liberal as the sun\". He adds that he \"spoke and writ sweetly\" of both learned subjects and matters of state (\"public weal\").\nChronology of the plays and Oxford's 1604 death.\nFor mainstream Shakespearian scholars, the most compelling evidence against Oxford (besides the historical evidence for William Shakespeare) is his death in 1604, since the generally accepted chronology of Shakespeare's plays places the composition of approximately twelve of the plays after that date. Critics often cite \"The Tempest\" and \"Macbeth\", for example, as having been written after 1604.\nThe exact dates of the composition of most of Shakespeare's plays are uncertain, although David Bevington says it is a 'virtually unanimous' opinion among teachers and scholars of Shakespeare that the canon of late plays depicts an artistic journey that extends well beyond 1604. Evidence for this includes allusions to historical events and literary sources which postdate 1604, as well as Shakespeare's adaptation of his style to accommodate Jacobean literary tastes and the changing membership of the King's Men and their different venues.\nOxfordians say that the conventional composition dates for the plays were developed by mainstream scholars to fit within Shakespeare's lifetime and that no evidence exists that any plays were written after 1604. Anderson argues that all of the Jacobean plays were written before 1604, selectively citing non-Oxfordian scholars like Alfred Harbage, Karl Elze, and Andrew Cairncross to bolster his case. Anderson notes that from 1593 through 1603, the publication of new plays appeared at the rate of two per year, and whenever an inferior or pirated text was published, it was typically followed by a genuine text described on the title page as \"newly augmented\" or \"corrected\". After the publication of the Q1 and Q2 \"Hamlet\" in 1603, no new plays were published until 1608. Anderson observes that, \"After 1604, the 'newly correct[ing]' and 'augment[ing]' stops. Once again, the Shake-speare [\"sic\"] enterprise appears to have shut down\".\nNotable silences.\nBecause Shakespeare lived until 1616, Oxfordians question why, if he were the author, did he not eulogise Queen Elizabeth at her death in 1603 or Henry, Prince of Wales, at his in 1612. They believe Oxford's 1604 death provides the explanation. In an age when such actions were expected, Shakespeare also failed to memorialise the coronation of James I in 1604, the marriage of Princess Elizabeth in 1612, and the investiture of Prince Charles as the new Prince of Wales in 1613.\nAnderson contends that Shakespeare refers to the latest scientific discoveries and events through the end of the 16th century, but \"is mute about science after de Vere\u2019s [Oxford\u2019s] death in 1604\". He believes that the absence of any mention of the spectacular supernova of October 1604 or Kepler\u2019s revolutionary 1609 study of planetary orbits are especially noteworthy.\nThe move to the Blackfriars.\nProfessor Jonathan Bate writes that Oxfordians cannot \"provide any explanation for\u00a0... technical changes attendant on the King's Men's move to the Blackfriars theatre four years after their candidate's death\u00a0... Unlike the Globe, the Blackfriars was an indoor playhouse\" and so required plays with frequent breaks in order to replace the candles it used for lighting. \"The plays written after Shakespeare's company began using the Blackfriars in 1608, \"Cymbeline\" and \"The Winter's Tale\" for instance, have what most\u00a0... of the earlier plays do not have: a carefully planned five-act structure\". If new Shakespearian plays were being written especially for presentation at the Blackfriars' theatre after 1608, they could not have been written by Edward de Vere.\nOxfordians argue that Oxford was well acquainted with the Blackfriars Theatre, having been a leaseholder of the venue, and note that the \"assumption\" that Shakespeare wrote plays for the Blackfriars is not universally accepted, citing Shakespearian scholars such as A. Nicoll who said that \"all available evidence is either completely negative or else runs directly counter to such a supposition\" and Harley Granville-Barker, who stated \"Shakespeare did not write (except for Henry V) five-act plays at any stage of his career. The five-act structure was formalized in the First Folio, and is inauthentic\".\nShakespeare's late collaborations.\nFurther, attribution studies have shown that certain plays in the canon were written by two or three hands, which Oxfordians believe is explained by these plays being either drafted earlier than conventionally believed, or simply revised/completed by others after Oxford's death. Shapiro calls this a 'nightmare' for Oxfordians, implying a 'jumble sale scenario' for his literary remains long after his death.\nIdentification of earlier works with Shakespeare plays.\nSome Oxfordians have identified titles or descriptions of lost works from Oxford's lifetime that suggest a thematic similarity to a particular Shakespearian play and asserted that they were earlier versions. For example, in 1732, the antiquarian Francis Peck published in \"Desiderata Curiosa\" a list of documents in his possession that he intended to print someday. They included \"a pleasant conceit of Vere, earl of Oxford, discontented at the rising of a mean gentleman in the English court, circa 1580.\" Peck never published his archives, which are now lost. To Anderson, Peck's description suggests that this conceit is \"arguably an early draft of \"Twelfth Night\".\"\nContemporary references to Shakespeare as alive or dead.\nOxfordian writers say some literary allusions imply that the playwright and poet died prior to 1609, when \"Shake-Speares Sonnets\" appeared with the epithet \"our ever-living poet\" in its dedication. They claim that the phrase \"ever-living\" rarely, if ever, referred to a living person, but instead was used to refer to the eternal soul of the deceased. Bacon, Derby, Neville, and William Shakespeare all lived well past the 1609 publication of the Sonnets.\nHowever, Don Foster, in his study of Early Modern uses of the phrase \"ever-living\", argues that the phrase most frequently refers to God or other supernatural beings, suggesting that the dedication calls upon God to bless the living begetter (writer) of the sonnets. He states that the initials \"W. H.\" were a misprint for \"W. S.\" or \"W. SH\". Bate thinks it a misprint as well, but he thinks it \"improbable\" that the phrase refers to God and suggests that the \"ever-living poet\" might be \"a great dead English poet who had written on the great theme of poetic immortality\", such as Sir Philip Sidney or Edmund Spenser.\nJoseph Sobran, in \"Alias Shakespeare,\" argued that in 1607 William Barksted, a minor poet and playwright, implies in his poem \"Mirrha the Mother of Adonis\" that Shakespeare was already deceased. Shakespeare scholars explain that Sobran has simply misread Barksted\u2019s poem, the last stanza of which is a comparison of Barksted\u2019s poem to Shakespeare\u2019s \"Venus and Adonis\", and has mistaken the grammar also, which makes it clear that Barksted is referring to Shakespeare\u2019s \"song\" in the past tense, not Shakespeare himself. This context is obvious when the rest of the stanza is included.\nAgainst the Oxford theory are several references to Shakespeare, later than 1604, which imply that the author was then still alive. Scholars point to a poem written circa 1620 by a student at Oxford, William Basse, that mentioned the author Shakespeare died in 1616, which is the year Shakespeare deceased and not Edward de Vere.\nDates of composition.\n\"The Two Gentlemen of Verona\".\nTom Veal has noted that the early play \"The Two Gentlemen of Verona\" reveals no familiarity on the playwright's part with Italy other than \"a few place names and the scarcely recondite fact that the inhabitants were Roman Catholics.\" For example, the play's Verona is situated on a tidal river and has a duke, and none of the characters have distinctly Italian names like in the later plays. Therefore, if the play was written by Oxford, it must have been before he visited Italy in 1575. However, the play's principal source, the Spanish \"Diana Enamorada\", would not be translated into French or English until 1578, meaning that someone basing a play on it that early could only have read it in the original Spanish, and there is no evidence that Oxford spoke this language. Furthermore, Veal argues, the only explanation for the verbal parallels with the English translation of 1582 would be that the translator saw the play performed and echoed it in his translation, which he describes as \"not an impossible theory but far from a plausible one.\"\n\"Hamlet\".\nThe composition date of \"Hamlet\" has been frequently disputed. Several surviving references indicate that a Hamlet-like play was well-known throughout the 1590s, well before the traditional period of composition (1599\u20131601). Most scholars refer to this lost early play as the Ur-Hamlet; the earliest reference is in 1589. A 1594 performance record of \"Hamlet\" appears in Philip Henslowe's diary, and Thomas Lodge wrote of it in 1596.\nOxfordian researchers believe that the play is an early version of Shakespeare's own play, and point to the fact that Shakespeare's version survives in three quite different early texts, Q1 (1603), Q2 (1604) and F (1623), suggesting the possibility that it was revised by the author over a period of many years.\n\"Macbeth\".\nScholars contend that the composition date of \"Macbeth\" is one of the most overwhelming pieces of evidence against the Oxfordian position; the vast majority of critics believe the play was written in the aftermath of the Gunpowder Plot. This plot was brought to light on 5 November 1605, a year after Oxford died. In particular, scholars identify the porter's lines about \"equivocation\" and treason as an allusion to the trial of Henry Garnet in 1606. Oxfordians respond that the concept of \"equivocation\" was the subject of a 1583 tract by Queen Elizabeth's chief councillor (and Oxford's father-in-law) Lord Burghley, as well as of the 1584 \"Doctrine of Equivocation\" by the Spanish prelate Mart\u00edn de Azpilcueta, which was disseminated across Europe and into England in the 1590s.\n\"Coriolanus\".\nShakespearian scholar David Haley asserts that if Edward de Vere had written \"Coriolanus\", he \"must have foreseen the Midland Revolt grain riots [of 1607] reported in Coriolanus\", possible topical allusions in the play that most Shakespearians accept.\n\"The Tempest\".\nThe play that can be dated within a fourteen-month period is \"The Tempest\". This play has long been believed to have been inspired by the 1609 wreck at Bermuda, then feared by mariners as the \"Isle of the Devils\", of the flagship of the Virginia Company, the Sea Venture, while leading the Third Supply to relieve Jamestown in the Colony of Virginia. The Sea Venture was captained by Christopher Newport, and carried the Admiral of the company's fleet, Sir George Somers (for whom the archipelago would subsequently be named \"The Somers Isles\"). The survivors spent nine months in Bermuda before most completed the journey to Jamestown on 23 May 1610 aboard two new ships built from scratch. One of the survivors was the newly-appointed Governor, Sir Thomas Gates. Jamestown, then little more than a rudimentary fort, was found in such a poor condition, with the majority of the previous settlers dead or dying, that Gates and Somers decided to abandon the settlement and the continent, returning everyone to England. However, with the company believing all aboard the Sea Venture dead, a new governor, Baron De La Warr, had been sent with the Fourth Supply fleet, which arrived on 10 June 1610 as Jamestown was being abandoned.\nDe la Warr remained in Jamestown as Governor, while Gates returned to England (and Somers to Bermuda), arriving in September, 1610. The news of the survival of the Sea Venture's passengers and crew caused a great sensation in England. Two accounts were published: Sylvester Jordain's \"A Discovery of the Barmvdas, Otherwise Called the Ile of Divels\", in October, 1610, and \"A True Declaration of the Estate of the Colonie in Virginia\" a month later. The \"True Reportory of the Wrack, and Redemption of Sir Thomas Gates Knight\", an account by William Strachey dated 15 July 1610, returned to England with Gates in the form of a letter which was circulated privately until its eventual publication in 1625. Shakespeare had multiple contacts to the circle of people amongst whom the letter circulated, including to Strachey. \"The Tempest\" shows clear evidence that he had read and relied on Jordain and especially Strachey. The play shares premise, basic plot, and many details of the Sea Venture's wrecking and the adventures of the survivors, as well as specific details and linguistics. A detailed comparative analysis shows the \"Declaration\" to have been the primary source from which the play was drawn. This firmly dates the writing of the play to the months between Gates' return to England and 1 November 1611 (when the first recorded performance occurred).\nOxfordians have dealt with this problem in several ways. Looney expelled the play from the canon, arguing that its style and the \"dreary negativism\" it promoted were inconsistent with Shakespeare's \"essentially positivist\" soul, and so could not have been written by Oxford. Later Oxfordians have generally abandoned this argument; this has made severing the connection of the play with the wreck of the Sea Venture a priority amongst Oxfordians. A variety of attacks have been directed on the links. These include attempting to cast doubt on whether the \"Declaration\" travelled back to England with Gates, whether Gates travelled back to England early enough, whether the lowly Shakespeare would have had access to the lofty circles in which the \"Declaration\" was circulated, to understating the points of similarity between the Sea Venture wreck and the accounts of it, on the one hand, and the play on the other. Oxfordians have even claimed that the writers of the first-hand accounts of the real wreck based them on \"The Tempest\", or, at least, the same antiquated sources that Shakespeare, or rather Oxford, is imagined to have used exclusively, including Richard Eden's \"The Decades of the New Worlde Or West India\" (1555) and Desiderius Erasmus's \"Naufragium\"/\"The Shipwreck\" (1523). Alden Vaughan commented in 2008 that \"[t]he argument that Shakespeare could have gotten every thematic thread, every detail of the storm, and every similarity of word and phrase from other sources stretches credulity to the limits.\"\n\"Henry VIII\".\nOxfordians note that while the conventional dating for \"Henry VIII\" is 1610\u201313, the majority of 18th and 19th century scholars, including notables such as Samuel Johnson, Lewis Theobald, George Steevens, Edmond Malone, and James Halliwell-Phillipps, placed the composition of \"Henry VIII\" prior to 1604, as they believed Elizabeth's execution of Mary, Queen of Scots (the then king James I's mother) made any vigorous defence of the Tudors politically inappropriate in the England of James I. Though it is described as a new play by two witnesses in 1613, Oxfordians argue that this refers to the fact it was new on stage, having its first production in that year.\nOxfordian cryptology.\nAlthough searching Shakespeare's works for encrypted clues supposedly left by the true author is associated mainly with the Baconian theory, such arguments are often made by Oxfordians as well. Early Oxfordians found many references to Oxford's family name \"Vere\" in the plays and poems, in supposed puns on words such as \"ever\" (E. Vere). In \"The De Vere Code\", a book by English actor Jonathan Bond, the author believes that Thomas Thorpe's 30-word dedication to the original publication of Shakespeare's Sonnets contains six simple encryptions which conclusively establish de Vere as the author of the poems. He also writes that the alleged encryptions settle the question of the identity of \"the Fair Youth\" as Henry Wriothesley and contain striking references to the sonnets themselves and de Vere's relationship to Sir Philip Sidney and Ben Jonson.\nSimilarly, a 2009 article in the Oxfordian journal \"Brief Chronicles\" noted that Francis Meres in \"Palladis Tamia\" compares 17 named English poets to 16 named classical poets. Writing that Meres was obsessed with numerology, the authors propose that the numbers should be symmetrical, and that careful readers are meant to infer that Meres knew two of the English poets (viz., Oxford and Shakespeare) to actually be one and the same.\nParallels with the plays.\nLiterary scholars say that the idea that an author's work must reflect his or her life is a Modernist assumption not held by Elizabethan writers, and that biographical interpretations of literature are unreliable in attributing authorship. Further, such lists of similarities between incidents in the plays and the life of an aristocrat are flawed arguments because similar lists have been drawn up for many competing candidates, such as Francis Bacon and William Stanley, 6th Earl of Derby. Harold Love writes that \"The very fact that their application has produced so many rival claimants demonstrates their unreliability,\" and Jonathan Bate writes that the Oxfordian biographical method \"is in essence no different from the cryptogram, since Shakespeare's range of characters and plots, both familial and political, is so vast that it would be possible to find in the plays 'self-portraits' of\u00a0... anybody one cares to think of.\"\nDespite this, Oxfordians list numerous incidents in Oxford's life that they say parallel those in many of the Shakespeare plays. Most notable among these, they say, are certain similar incidents found in Oxford's biography and \"Hamlet\", and \"Henry IV, Part 1\", which includes a well-known robbery scene with uncanny parallels to a real-life incident involving Oxford.\n\"Hamlet\".\nMost Oxfordians consider \"Hamlet\" the play most easily seen as portraying Oxford's life story, though mainstream scholars say that incidents from the lives of other contemporary figures such as King James or the Earl of Essex, fit the play just as closely, if not more so.\nHamlet's father was murdered and his mother made an \"o'er-hasty marriage\" less than two months later. Oxfordians see a parallel with Oxford's life, as Oxford's father died at the age of 46 on 3 August 1562, although not before making a will six days earlier, and his stepmother remarried within 15 months, although exactly when is unknown.\nAnother frequently-cited parallel involves Hamlet's revelation in Act IV that he was earlier taken captive by pirates. On Oxford's return from Europe in 1576, he encountered a cavalry division outside of Paris that was being led by a German duke, and his ship was hijacked by pirates who robbed him and left him stripped to his shirt, and who might have murdered him had not one of them recognised him. Anderson notes that \"[n]either the encounter with Fortinbras' army nor Hamlet's brush with buccaneers appears in any of the play's sources \u2013 to the puzzlement of numerous literary critics.\"\nPolonius.\nSuch speculation often identifies the character of Polonius as a caricature of Lord Burghley, Oxford's guardian from the age of 12.\nIn the First Quarto the character was not named Polonius, but Corambis. Ogburn writes that \"Cor ambis\" can be interpreted as \"two-hearted\" (a view not independently supported by Latinists). He says the name is a swipe \"at Burghley's motto, \"Cor unum, via una\", or 'one heart, one way.'\" Scholars suggest that it derives from the Latin phrase \"crambe repetita\" meaning \"reheated cabbage\", which was expanded in Elizabethan usage to \"\"Crambe bis\" posita mors est\" (\"twice served cabbage is deadly\"), which implies \"a boring old man\" who spouts trite rehashed ideas. Similar variants such as \"Crambo\" and \"Corabme\" appear in Latin-English dictionaries at the time.\nBed trick.\nIn his \"Memoires\" (1658), Francis Osborne writes of \"the last great \"Earle of Oxford\", whose \"Lady\" was brought to his bed under the notion of his \"Mistris\", and from such a virtuous deceit she (Oxford's youngest daughter) is said to proceed\" (p.\u00a079).\nSuch a bed trick has been a dramatic convention since antiquity and was used more than 40 times by every major playwright in the Early Modern theatre era except for Ben Jonson. Thomas Middleton used it five times and Shakespeare and James Shirley used it four times. Shakespeare's use of it in \"All's Well That Ends Well\" and \"Measure for Measure\" followed his sources for the plays (stories by Boccaccio and Cinthio); nevertheless Oxfordians say that de Vere was drawn to these stories because they \"paralleled his own\", based on Osborne's anecdote.\nEarls of Oxford in the histories.\nOxfordians claim that flattering treatment of Oxford's ancestors in Shakespeare's history plays is evidence of his authorship. Shakespeare omitted the character of the traitorous Robert de Vere, 3rd Earl of Oxford in \"The Life and Death of King John\", and the character of the 12th Earl of Oxford is given a much more prominent role in \"Henry V\" than his limited involvement in the actual history of the times would allow. The 12th Earl is given an even more prominent role in the non-Shakespearian play \"The Famous Victories of Henry the fifth\". Some Oxfordians argue that this was another play written by Oxford, based on the exaggerated role it gave to the 11th Earl of Oxford.\nJ. Thomas Looney found John de Vere, 13th Earl of Oxford is \"hardly mentioned except to be praised\" in \"Henry VI, Part Three\"; the play ahistorically depicts him participating in the Battle of Tewkesbury and being captured. Oxfordians, such as Dorothy and Charlton Ogburn, believe Shakespeare created such a role for the 13th Earl because it was the easiest way Edward de Vere could have \"advertised his loyalty to the Tudor Queen\" and remind her of \"the historic part borne by the Earls of Oxford in defeating the usurpers and restoring the Lancastrians to power\". Looney also notes that in \"Richard III\", when the future Henry VII appears, the same Earl of Oxford is \"by his side; and it is Oxford who, as premier nobleman, replies first to the king's address to his followers\".\nNon-Oxfordian writers do not see any evidence of partiality for the de Vere family in the plays. Richard de Vere, 11th Earl of Oxford, who plays a prominent role in the anonymous \"The Famous Victories of Henry V\", does not appear in Shakespeare's \"Henry V\", nor is he even mentioned. In \"Richard III\", Oxford's reply to the king noted by Looney is a mere two lines, the only lines he speaks in the play. He has a much more prominent role in the non-Shakespearian play \"The True Tragedy of Richard III\". On these grounds the scholar Benjamin Griffin argues that the non-Shakespearian plays, the \"Famous Victories\" and \"True Tragedy\", are the ones connected to Oxford, possibly written for Oxford's Men. Oxfordian Charlton Ogburn Jr. argues that the role of the Earls of Oxford was played down in \"Henry V\" and \"Richard III\" to maintain Oxford's nominal anonymity. This is because \"It would not do to have a performance of one of his plays at Court greeted with ill-suppressed knowing chuckles.\"\nOxford's finances.\nIn 1577 the Company of Cathay was formed to support Martin Frobisher's hunt for the Northwest Passage, although Frobisher and his investors quickly became distracted by reports of gold at Hall\u2019s Island. With thoughts of an impending Canadian gold-rush and trusting in the financial advice of Michael Lok, the treasurer of the company, de Vere signed a bond for \u00a33,000 in order to invest \u00a31,000 and to assume \u00a32,000 worth \u2013 about half \u2013 of Lok's personal investment in the enterprise. Oxfordians say this is similar to Antonio in \"The Merchant of Venice\", who was indebted to Shylock for 3,000 ducats against the successful return of his vessels.\nOxfordians also note that when de Vere travelled through Venice, he borrowed 500 crowns from a Baptista Nigrone. In Padua, he borrowed from a man named Pasquino Spinola. In \"The Taming of the Shrew\", Kate's father is described as a man \"rich in crowns.\" He, too, is from Padua, and his name is Baptista Minola, which Oxfordians take to be a conflation of Baptista Nigrone and Pasquino Spinola.\nWhen the character of Antipholus of Ephesus in \"The Comedy of Errors\" tells his servant to go out and buy some rope, the servant (Dromio) replies, \"I buy a thousand pounds a year! I buy a rope!\" (Act 4, scene 1). The meaning of Dromio\u2019s line has not been satisfactorily explained by critics, but Oxfordians say the line is somehow connected to the fact that de Vere was given a \u00a31,000 annuity by the Queen, later continued by King James.\nMarriage and affairs.\nOxfordians see Oxford's marriage to Anne Cecil, Lord Burghley's daughter, paralleled in such plays as \"Hamlet\", \"Othello\", \"Cymbeline\", \"The Merry Wives of Windsor\", \"All's Well That Ends Well\", \"Measure for Measure\", \"Much Ado About Nothing\", and \"The Winter's Tale\".\nOxford's illicit congress with Anne Vavasour resulted in an intermittent series of street battles between the Knyvet clan, led by Anne's uncle, Sir Thomas Knyvet, and Oxford\u2019s men. As in \"Romeo and Juliet\", this imbroglio produced three deaths and several other injuries. The feud was finally put to an end only by the intervention of the Queen.\nOxford's criminal associations.\nIn May 1573, in a letter to Lord Burghley, two of Oxford's former employees accused three of Oxford's friends of attacking them on \"the highway from Gravesend to Rochester.\" In Shakespeare's \"Henry IV, Part 1\", Falstaff and three roguish friends of Prince Hal also waylay unwary travellers at Gad's Hill, which is on the highway from Gravesend to Rochester. Scott McCrea says that there is little similarity between the two events, since the crime described in the letter is unlikely to have occurred near Gad's Hill and was not a robbery, but rather an attempted shooting. Mainstream writers also say that this episode derives from an earlier anonymous play, \"The Famous Victories of Henry V\", which was Shakespeare's source. Some Oxfordians argue that \"The Famous Victories\" was written by Oxford, based on the exaggerated role it gave to the 11th Earl of Oxford.\nParallels with the sonnets and poems.\nIn 1609, a volume of 154 linked poems was published under the title \"SHAKE-SPEARES SONNETS\". Oxfordians believe the title (\"Shake-Speares Sonnets\") suggests a finality indicating that it was a completed body of work with no further sonnets expected, and consider the differences of opinion among Shakespearian scholars as to whether the Sonnets are fictional or autobiographical to be a serious problem facing orthodox scholars. Joseph Sobran questions why Shakespeare (who lived until 1616) failed to publish a corrected and authorised edition if they are fiction, as well as why they fail to match Shakespeare's life story if they are autobiographic. According to Sobran and other researchers, the themes and personal circumstances expounded by the author of the Sonnets are remarkably similar to Oxford's biography.\nThe Fair Youth, the Dark Lady, and the Rival Poet.\nThe focus of the 154 sonnet series appears to narrate the author's relationships with three characters: the Fair Youth, the Dark Lady or Mistress, and the Rival Poet. Beginning with Looney, most Oxfordians (exceptions are Percy Allen and Louis B\u00e9n\u00e9zet) believe that the \"Fair Youth\" referred to in the early sonnets refers to Henry Wriothesley, 3rd Earl of Southampton, Oxford's peer and prospective son-in-law. The Dark Lady is believed by some Oxfordians to be Anne Vavasour, Oxford's mistress who bore him a son out of wedlock. A case was made by the Oxfordian Peter R. Moore that the Rival Poet was Robert Devereux, Earl of Essex.\nSobran suggests that the so-called procreation sonnets were part of a campaign by Burghley to persuade Southampton to marry his granddaughter, Oxford's daughter Elizabeth de Vere, and says that it was more likely that Oxford would have participated in such a campaign than that Shakespeare would know the parties involved or presume to give advice to the nobility.\nOxfordians also assert that the tone of the poems is that of a nobleman addressing an equal rather than that of a poet addressing his patron. According to them, Sonnet 91 (which compares the Fair Youth's love to such treasures as high birth, wealth, and horses) implies that the author is in a position to make such comparisons, and the 'high birth' he refers to is his own.\nAge and lameness.\nOxford was born in 1550, and was between 40 and 53 years old when he presumably would have written the sonnets. Shakespeare was born in 1564. Even though the average life expectancy of Elizabethans was short, being between 26 and 39 was not considered old. In spite of this, age and growing older are recurring themes in the Sonnets, for example, in Sonnets 138 and 37. In his later years, Oxford described himself as \"lame\". On several occasions, the author of the sonnets also described himself as lame, such as in Sonnets 37 and 89.\nPublic disgrace.\nSobran also believes \"scholars have largely ignored one of the chief themes of the Sonnets: the poet's sense of disgrace\u00a0... [T]here can be no doubt that the poet is referring to something real that he expects his friends to know about; in fact, he makes clear that a wide public knows about it\u00a0... Once again the poet's situation matches Oxford's\u00a0... He has been a topic of scandal on several occasions. And his contemporaries saw the course of his life as one of decline from great wealth, honor, and promise to disgrace and ruin. This perception was underlined by enemies who accused him of every imaginable offense and perversion, charges he was apparently unable to rebut.\" Examples include Sonnets 29 and 112.\nAs early as 1576, Edward de Vere was writing about this subject in his poem \"Loss of Good Name\", which Steven W. May described as \"a defiant lyric without precedent in English Renaissance verse.\"\nLost fame.\nThe poems \"Venus and Adonis\" and \"Lucrece\", first published in 1593 and 1594 under the name \"William Shakespeare\", proved highly popular for several decades \u2013 with \"Venus and Adonis\" published six more times before 1616, while \"Lucrece\" required four additional printings during this same period. By 1598, they were so famous, London poet and sonneteer Richard Barnefield wrote:\n&lt;poem&gt;Shakespeare...\nWhose \"Venus\" and whose \"Lucrece\" (sweet and chaste)\nThy name in fame's immortal Book have plac't\nLive ever you, at least in Fame live ever:\nWell may the Body die, but Fame dies never.&lt;/poem&gt;\nDespite such publicity, Sobran observed, \"[t]he author of the Sonnets expects and hopes to be forgotten. While he is confident that his poetry will outlast marble and monument, it will immortalize his young friend, not himself. He says that his style is so distinctive and unchanging that 'every word doth almost tell my name,' implying that his name is otherwise concealed \u2013 at a time when he is publishing long poems under the name William Shakespeare. This seems to mean that he is not writing these Sonnets under that (hidden) name.\" Oxfordians have interpreted the phrase \"every word\" as a pun on the word \"every\", standing for \"e vere\" \u2013 thus telling his name. Mainstream writers respond that several sonnets literally do tell his name, containing numerous puns on the name Will[iam]; in sonnet 136 the poet directly says \"thou lov'st me for my name is Will.\"\nBased on Sonnets 81, 72, and others, Oxfordians assert that if the author expected his \"name\" to be \"forgotten\" and \"buried\", it would not have been the name that permanently adorned the published works themselves.\nCitations.\nUK and US editions of differ significantly in pagination; the citations here are to the UK edition so page numbers reflect that edition.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "22677", "revid": "32990417", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22677", "title": "Oxymoron", "text": "Figure of speech\nAn oxymoron (plurals: oxymorons and oxymora) is a figure of speech that juxtaposes concepts with opposite meanings within a word or in a phrase that is a self-contradiction. Examples would be \"bittersweet\" or \"cruel kindness\". As a rhetorical device, an oxymoron illustrates a point to communicate and reveal a paradox. A general meaning of \"contradiction in terms\" is recorded by the 1902 edition of the \"Oxford English Dictionary\".\nThe term \"oxymoron\" is first recorded as Latinized Greek ', in Maurus Servius Honoratus (c. AD 400); it is derived from the Greek word ' \"sharp, keen, pointed\" and \"dull, stupid, foolish\"; as it were, \"sharp-dull\", \"keenly stupid\", or \"pointedly foolish\". The word \"oxymoron\" is autological, i.e., it is itself an example of an oxymoron. The Greek compound word \"\", which would correspond to the Latin formation, does not appear in any Ancient Greek works prior to the formation of the Latin term.\nPhrases may also be presented as oxymorons for comic effect, such as comedian George Carlin's observation that the phrase \"military intelligence\" is an oxymoron.\nTypes and examples.\nOxymorons in the narrow sense are a rhetorical device used deliberately by the speaker and intended to be understood as such by the listener. In a more extended sense, the term \"oxymoron\" has also been applied to inadvertent or incidental contradictions, as in the case of \"dead metaphors\" (\"barely clothed\" or \"terribly good\"). Lederer (1990), in the spirit of \"recreational linguistics\", goes as far as to construct \"logological oxymorons\" such as reading the word \"nook\" composed of \"no\" and \"ok\" or the surname \"Noyes\" as composed of \"no\" plus \"yes\", or refers to some oxymoronic candidates as puns through the conversion of nouns into verbs, as in \"divorce court\", or \"press release\". He refers to potential oxymora such as \"war games\", \"peacekeeping missile\", \"United Nations\", and \"airline food\" as opinion-based, because some may disagree that they contain an internal contradiction.\nThere are a number of single-word oxymorons built from \"dependent morphemes\" (i.e. no longer a productive compound in English, but loaned as a compound from a different language), as with \"pre-posterous\" (lit. \"with the hinder part before\", compare \"hysteron proteron\", \"upside-down\", \"head over heels\", \"ass-backwards\" etc.) or \"sopho-more\" (an artificial Greek compound, lit. \"wise-foolish\").\nThe most common form of oxymoron involves an adjective\u2013noun combination of two words, but they can also be devised in the meaning of sentences or phrases. One classic example of the use of oxymorons in English literature can be found in this example from Shakespeare's \"Romeo and Juliet\", where Romeo strings together thirteen in a row:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nOther examples from English-language literature include: \"hateful good\" (Chaucer, translating \"odibile bonum\") \"proud humility\" (Spenser), \"darkness visible\" (Milton), \"beggarly riches\" (John Donne), \"damn with faint praise\" (Pope), \"expressive silence\" (Thomson, echoing Cicero's ), \n\"melancholy merriment\" (Byron), \"faith unfaithful\", \"falsely true\" (Tennyson), \"conventionally unconventional\", \"tortuous spontaneity\" (Henry James) \"delighted sorrow\", \"loyal treachery\", and \"scalding coolness\" (Hemingway).\nIn literary contexts, the author does not usually signal the use of an oxymoron, but in rhetorical usage, it has become common practice to advertise the use of an oxymoron explicitly to clarify the argument, as in:\n\"Voltaire [...] we might call, by an oxymoron which has plenty of truth in it, an 'Epicurean pessimist.'\" (\"Quarterly Review\" vol. 170 (1890), p. 289)\nIn this example, \"Epicurean pessimist\" would be recognized as an oxymoron in any case, as the core tenet of Epicureanism is equanimity (which would preclude any sort of pessimist outlook). However, the explicit advertisement of the use of oxymorons opened up a sliding scale of less than obvious construction, ending in the \"opinion oxymorons\" such as \"business ethics\".\nJ. R. R. Tolkien interpreted his own surname as derived from the Low German equivalent of \"dull-keen\" (High German \"\") which would be a literal equivalent of Greek \"oxy-moron\".\n\"Comical oxymoron\".\n\"Comical oxymoron\" is a humorous claim that something is an oxymoron. This is called an \"opinion oxymoron\" by Lederer (1990). The humor derives from implying that an assumption (which might otherwise be expected to be controversial or at least non-evident) is so obvious as to be part of the lexicon. An example of such a \"comical oxymoron\" is \"educational television\": the humor derives entirely from the claim that it is an oxymoron by the implication that \"television\" is so trivial as to be inherently incompatible with \"education\". In a 2009 article called \"Daredevil\", Garry Wills accused William F. Buckley of popularizing this trend, based on the success of the latter's claim that \"an intelligent liberal is an oxymoron\".\nExamples popularized by comedian George Carlin in 1975 include \"military intelligence\" (a play on the lexical meanings of the term \"intelligence\", implying that \"military\" inherently excludes the presence of \"intelligence\") and \"business ethics\" (similarly implying that the mutual exclusion of the two terms is evident or commonly understood rather than the partisan anti-corporate position).\nSimilarly, the term \"civil war\" is sometimes jokingly referred to as an \"oxymoron\" (punning on the lexical meanings of the word \"civil\").\nOther examples include \"honest politician\", \"affordable caviar\" (1993), \"happily married\" and \"Microsoft Works\" (2000).\nAntonym pairs.\nListing of antonyms, such as \"good and evil\", \"great and small\", etc., does not create oxymorons, as it is not implied that any given object has the two opposing properties simultaneously. In some languages, it is not necessary to place a conjunction like \"and\" between the two antonyms; such compounds (not necessarily of antonyms) are known as dvandvas (a term taken from Sanskrit grammar). For example, in Chinese, compounds like \u7537\u5973 (man and woman, male and female, gender), \u9670\u967d (yin and yang), \u5584\u60e1 (good and evil, morality) are used to indicate couples, ranges, or the trait that these are extremes of. The Italian \"pianoforte\" or \"fortepiano\" is an example from a Western language; the term is short for \"gravicembalo col piano e forte\", as it were \"harpsichord with a range of different volumes\", implying that it is possible to play both soft and loud (as well as intermediate) notes, not that the sound produced is somehow simultaneously \"soft and loud\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "22678", "revid": "47555821", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22678", "title": "OSS", "text": "OSS or Oss may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "22679", "revid": "33274195", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22679", "title": "Office of Strategic Services", "text": "1942\u20131945 US intelligence agency\nThe Office of Strategic Services (OSS) was the first intelligence agency of the United States, formed during World War II. The OSS was formed as an agency of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (JCS) to coordinate espionage activities behind enemy lines for all branches of the United States Armed Forces. Other OSS functions included the use of propaganda, subversion, and post-war planning.\nThe OSS was dissolved a month after the end of the war. Intelligence tasks were soon resumed and carried over by its successors, the Strategic Services Unit (SSU), the Department of State's Bureau of Intelligence and Research (INR), and the Central Intelligence Group (CIG), the intermediary precursor to the independent Central Intelligence Agency (CIA).\nOn December 14, 2016, the organization was collectively honored with a Congressional Gold Medal.\nOrigin.\nBefore the OSS, the various departments of the executive branch, including the State, Treasury, Navy, and War Departments, conducted American intelligence activities on an \"ad hoc\" basis, with no overall direction, coordination, or control. The US Army and US Navy had separate code-breaking departments: Signal Intelligence Service and OP-20-G. (A previous code-breaking operation of the State Department, the MI-8, run by Herbert Yardley, had been shut down in 1929 by Secretary of State Henry Stimson, deeming it an inappropriate function for the diplomatic arm, because \"gentlemen don't read each other's mail.\") The FBI was responsible for domestic security and anti-espionage operations.\nPresident Franklin D. Roosevelt was concerned about American intelligence deficiencies. On the suggestion of William Stephenson, the senior British intelligence officer in the western hemisphere, Roosevelt requested that William J. Donovan draft a plan for an intelligence service based on the British Secret Intelligence Service (MI6) and Special Operations Executive (SOE). Donovan envisioned a single agency responsible for foreign intelligence and special operations involving commandos, disinformation, partisan and guerrilla activities. Donovan worked closely with Australian-born British intelligence officer Charles Howard 'Dick' Ellis, who has been credited with writing the blueprint.\nSaid Ellis:\nI was soon requested to draft a blueprint for an American intelligence agency, the equivalent of BSC [British Security Co-ordination] and based on these British wartime improvisations... detailed tables of organisation were disclosed to Washington... among these were the organisational tables that led to the birth of General William Donovan's OSS.\nAfter submitting his (and Ellis's) work, \"Memorandum of Establishment of Service of Strategic Information\", Donovan was appointed \"Coordinator of Information\" on July 11, 1941, heading the new organization known as the Office of the Coordinator of Information (COI).\nEllis, described as Donovan's \"right-hand man\", \"effectively ran the organization\".\nWrites Fink:\nEllis was sent from New York by William Stephenson \"to Washington to open a sub-station to facilitate daily liaison with Donovan, who reciprocated by sending [future Director of Central Intelligence, DCI] Allen Welsh Dulles to liaise with BSC in the Rockefeller Center\". According to Thomas F. Troy, paraphrasing Stephenson, Ellis 'was the tradecraft expert, the organization man, the one who furnished Bill Donovan with charts and memoranda on running an intelligence organization\".\nDonovan had responsibilities but no actual powers and the existing US agencies were skeptical if not hostile to the British. Until some months after Pearl Harbor, the bulk of OSS intelligence came from the UK. British Security Co-ordination (BSC), under the direction of Ellis, trained the first OSS agents in Canada, until training stations were set up in the US with guidance from BSC instructors, who also provided information on how the SOE was arranged and managed. The British immediately made available their short-wave broadcasting capabilities to Europe, Africa, and the Far East and provided equipment for agents until American production was established.\nWrites Fink:\nWilliam Casey, who headed up OSS's Europe-based human-intelligence operations, the Secret Intelligence Branch, and went on to become director of the CIA, wrote in his autobiography, \"The Secret War Against Hitler\", that Ellis was not only writing blueprints but involved in on-the-ground, logistical programs: \"Dick Ellis, [an] experienced British pro, helped establish training centres, mostly around Washington.\" United States Assistant Secretary of State Adolf Berle commented: \"The really active head of the intelligence section in [William] Donovan's [OSS] group is [Ellis] ... in other words, [Stephenson's] assistant in the British intelligence [sic] is running Donovan's intelligence service.\"\nThe Office of Strategic Services was established by a Presidential military order issued by President Roosevelt on June 13, 1942, to collect and analyze strategic information required by the Joint Chiefs of Staff and to conduct special operations not assigned to other agencies. During the war, the OSS supplied policymakers with facts and estimates, but the OSS never had jurisdiction over all foreign intelligence activities. The FBI was left responsible for intelligence work in Latin America, and the Army and Navy continued to develop and rely on their own sources of intelligence.\nDonald Downes, who was developing counterintelligence capabilities in Washington, explained the situation in his memoir:\nEdgar Hoover was out for Donovan's scalp and any type of co-operation was pretty well one-sided. Not only OSS, but the British Secret Intelligence, many of whose investigations were bound to lead to America, were constantly being hounded by the FBI... A friend of ours in the Department of Justice had warned us that Edgar Hoover believed we were 'penetrating' embassies and that he was annoyed.\nActivities.\nOSS proved especially useful in providing a worldwide overview of the German war effort, its strengths and weaknesses. In direct operations it was successful in supporting Operation Torch in French North Africa in 1942, where it identified pro-Allied potential supporters and located landing sites. OSS operations in neutral countries, especially Stockholm, Sweden, provided in-depth information on German advanced technology. The Madrid station set up agent networks in France that supported the Allied invasion of southern France in 1944. Most famous were the operations in Switzerland run by Allen Dulles that provided extensive information on German strength, air defenses, submarine production, and the V-1 and V-2 weapons. It revealed some of the secret German efforts in chemical and biological warfare. Switzerland's station also supported resistance fighters in France, Austria and Italy, and helped with the surrender of German forces in Italy in 1945.\nFor the duration of World War II, the Office of Strategic Services was conducting multiple activities and missions, including collecting intelligence by spying, performing acts of sabotage, waging propaganda war, organizing and coordinating anti-Nazi resistance groups in Europe, and providing military training for anti-Japanese guerrilla movements in Asia, among other things. At the height of its influence during World War II, the OSS employed almost 24,000 people.\nFrom 1943 to 1945, the OSS played a major role in training Kuomintang troops in China and Burma, and recruited Kachin and other indigenous irregular forces for sabotage as well as guides for Allied forces in Burma fighting the Japanese Army. Among other activities, the OSS helped arm, train, and supply resistance movements in areas occupied by the Axis powers during World War II, including Mao Zedong's Red Army in China (known as the Dixie Mission) and the Viet Minh in French Indochina. OSS officer Archimedes Patti played a central role in OSS operations in French Indochina and met frequently with Ho Chi Minh in 1945.\nOne of the greatest accomplishments of the OSS during World War II was its penetration of Nazi Germany by OSS operatives. The OSS was responsible for training German and Austrian individuals for missions inside Germany. Some of these agents included exiled communists and Socialist party members, labor activists, anti-Nazi prisoners-of-war, and German and Jewish refugees. The OSS also recruited and ran one of the war's most important spies, the German diplomat Fritz Kolbe.\nFrom 1943 the OSS was in contact with the Austrian resistance group around Kaplan Heinrich Maier. As a result, plans and production facilities for V-2 rockets, Tiger tanks and aircraft (Messerschmitt Bf 109, Messerschmitt Me 163 Komet, etc.) were passed on to Allied general staffs in order to enable Allied bombers to get accurate air strikes. The Maier group informed very early about the mass murder of Jews through its contacts with the Semperit factory near Auschwitz. The group was gradually dismantled by the German authorities because of a double agent who worked for both the OSS and the Gestapo. This uncovered a transfer of money from the Americans to Vienna via Istanbul and Budapest, and most of the members were executed after a People's Court hearing.\nIn 1943, the Office of Strategic Services set up operations in Istanbul. Turkey, as a neutral country during the Second World War, was a place where both the Axis and Allied powers had spy networks. The railroads connecting central Asia with Europe, as well as Turkey's close proximity to the Balkan states, placed it at a crossroads of intelligence gathering. The goal of the OSS Istanbul operation called Project Net-1 was to infiltrate and extenuate subversive action in the old Ottoman and Austro-Hungarian Empires.\nThe head of operations at OSS Istanbul was a banker from Chicago named Lanning \"Packy\" Macfarland, who maintained a cover story as a banker for the American lend-lease program. Macfarland hired Alfred Schwarz, an Austrian businessman (* 25. April 1904 in Prost\u011bjov, Austria-Hungary; \u2020 13. August 1988 in Lucerne, Switzerland) who came to be known as \"Dogwood\" and ended up establishing the Dogwood information chain. Dogwood in turn hired a personal assistant named Walter Arndt and established himself as an employee of the Istanbul Western Electrik Kompani. Through Schwarz and Arndt the OSS was able to infiltrate anti-fascist groups in Austria, Hungary, and Germany. Schwarz was able to convince Romanian, Bulgarian, Hungarian, and Swiss diplomatic couriers to smuggle American intelligence information into these territories and establish contact with elements antagonistic to the Nazis and their collaborators. Couriers and agents memorized information and produced analytical reports; when they were not able to memorize effectively they recorded information on microfilm and hid it in their shoes or hollowed pencils. Through this process information about the Nazi regime made its way to Macfarland and the OSS in Istanbul and eventually to Washington.\nWhile the OSS \"Dogwood-chain\" produced a lot of information, its reliability was increasingly questioned by British intelligence. By May 1944, through collaboration between the OSS, British intelligence, Cairo, and Washington, the entire Dogwood-chain was found to be unreliable and dangerous. Planting phony information into the OSS was intended to misdirect the resources of the Allies. Schwarz's Dogwood-chain, which was the largest American intelligence gathering tool in occupied territory, was shortly thereafter shut down.\nThe OSS purchased Soviet code and cipher material (or Finnish information on them) from \u00e9migr\u00e9 Finnish army officers in late 1944. Secretary of State Edward Stettinius, Jr., protested that this violated an agreement President Roosevelt made with the Soviet Union not to interfere with Soviet cipher traffic from the United States. General Donovan might have copied the papers before returning them the following January, but there is no record of Arlington Hall receiving them, and CIA and NSA archives have no surviving copies. This codebook was in fact used as part of the Venona decryption effort, which helped uncover large-scale Soviet espionage in North America.\nRYPE was the codename of the airborne unit who was dropped in the Norwegian mountains of Sn\u00e5sa on March 24, 1945, to carry out sabotage actions behind enemy lines. From the base at the Gjefsj\u00f8en mountain farm, the group conducted successful railroad sabotages, with the intention of preventing the withdrawal of German forces from northern Norway. Operasjon Rype was the only U.S. operation on German-occupied Norwegian soil during WW2. The group consisted mainly of Norwegian Americans recruited from the 99th Infantry Battalion. Operasjon Rype was led by William Colby.\nThe OSS sent four teams of two under Captain Stephen Vinciguerra (codename \"Algonquin\", teams Alsace, Poissy, S&amp;S and Student), with Operation Varsity in March 1945 to infiltrate and report from behind enemy lines, but none succeeded. Team S&amp;S had two agents in Wehrmacht uniforms and a captured K\u03cbbelwagen; to report by radio. But the K\u03cbbelwagen was put out of action while in the glider; three tires and the long-range radio were shot up (German gunners were told to attack the gliders not the tow planes).\nWeapons and gadgets.\nThe OSS espionage and sabotage operations produced a steady demand for highly specialized equipment. General Donovan invited experts, organized workshops, and funded labs that later formed the core of the Research &amp; Development Branch. Boston chemist Stanley P. Lovell became its first head, and Donovan humorously called him his \"Professor Moriarty\". Throughout the war years, the OSS Research &amp; Development successfully adapted Allied weapons and espionage equipment, and produced its own line of novel spy tools and gadgets, including silenced pistols, lightweight sub-machine guns, \"Beano\" grenades that exploded upon impact, explosives disguised as lumps of coal (\"Black Joe\") or bags of Chinese flour (\"Aunt Jemima\"), acetone time delay fuses for limpet mines, compasses hidden in uniform buttons, playing cards that concealed maps, a 16mm Kodak camera in the shape of a matchbox, tasteless poison tablets (\"K\" and \"L\" pills), and cigarettes laced with tetrahydrocannabinol acetate (an extract of Indian hemp) to induce uncontrollable chattiness.\nThe OSS also developed innovative communication equipment such as wiretap gadgets, electronic beacons for locating agents, and the \"Joan-Eleanor\" portable radio system that made it possible for operatives on the ground to establish secure contact with a plane that was preparing to land or drop cargo. The OSS Research &amp; Development also printed fake German and Japanese-issued identification cards, and various passes, ration cards, and counterfeit money.\nOn August 28, 1943, Stanley Lovell was asked to make a presentation in front of a hostile Joint Chiefs of Staff, who were skeptical of OSS plans beyond collecting military intelligence and were ready to split the OSS between the Army and the Navy. While explaining the purpose and mission of his department and introducing various gadgets and tools, he reportedly casually dropped into a waste basket a Hedy, a panic-inducing explosive device in the shape of a firecracker, which shortly produced a loud shrieking sound followed by a deafening boom. The presentation was interrupted and did not resume since everyone in the room fled. In reality, the Hedy, jokingly named after Hollywood movie star Hedy Lamarr for her ability to distract men, later saved the lives of some trapped OSS operatives.\nNot all projects worked. Some ideas were odd, such as a failed attempt to use insects to spread anthrax in Spain. Stanley Lovell was later quoted saying, \"It was my policy to consider any method whatever that might aid the war, however unorthodox or untried\".\nIn 1939, a young physician named Christian J. Lambertsen developed an oxygen rebreather set (the Lambertsen Amphibious Respiratory Unit) and demonstrated it to the OSS\u2014after already being rejected by the U.S. Navy\u2014in a pool at the Shoreham Hotel in Washington D.C., in 1942. The OSS not only bought into the concept, they hired Lambertsen to lead the program and build up the dive element for the organization. His responsibilities included training and developing methods of combining self-contained diving and swimmer delivery including the Lambertsen Amphibious Respiratory Unit for the OSS \"Operational Swimmer Group\". Growing involvement of the OSS with coastal infiltration and water-based sabotage eventually led to creation of the OSS Maritime Unit.\nHeadquarters and field offices.\nThe bulk of the OSS, after the expansion out of and away from COI, eventually found itself headquartered at a complex near 23rd Street and E Street in Washington, D.C. This complex was unassuming, appearing to be a mix of normal government offices and apartment buildings to nearby residents and office workers. It is known as the \"Navy Hill Complex,\" \"Potomac Hill Complex,\" and the \"E Street Complex.\" The OSS Society and State Department have engaged in efforts with the National Park Service to add the Headquarters complex to the National Register of Historic Places.\nTraining facilities.\nAt Camp X, near Whitby, Ontario, an \"assassination and elimination\" training program was operated by the British Special Operations Executive, assigning exceptional masters in the art of knife-wielding combat, such as William E. Fairbairn and Eric A. Sykes, to instruct trainees. Many members of the Office of Strategic Services also were trained there. It was dubbed \"the school of mayhem and murder\" by George Hunter White who trained at the facility in the 1940's.\nBeginning in January 1941, Colonel Millard Preston Goodfellow, creator and Director of the Special Operations Branch (at this time still known as SA/G within the COI), negotiated with the National Park Service to obtain three tracts of land to be dedicated as training camps for both SA/G and SA/B. In March, he assigned Garland H. Williams to be the Training Director of these facilities.\nCommander N.G.A Woolley was loaned to COI by the British Navy and helped Donovan and Goodfellow to organize underwater training and craft landing.\nFrom these incipient beginnings, the Office of Strategic Services opened camps in the United States, and finally abroad. Prince William Forest Park (then known as Chopawamsic Recreational Demonstration Area) was the site of an OSS training camp that operated from 1942 to 1945. Area \"C\", consisting of approximately , was used extensively for communications training, whereas Area \"A\" was used for training some of the OGs (Operational Groups). Catoctin Mountain Park, now the location of Camp David, was the site of OSS training Area \"B\" where the first Special Operations, or SO, were trained. Special Operations was modeled after Great Britain's Special Operations Executive, which included parachute, sabotage, self-defense, weapons, and leadership training to support guerrilla or partisan resistance. Considered most mysterious of all was the \"cloak and dagger\" Secret Intelligence, or SI branch. Secret Intelligence employed \"country estates as schools for introducing recruits into the murky world of espionage. Thus, it established Training Areas E and RTU-11 (\"the Farm\") in spacious manor houses with surrounding horse farms.\" Morale Operations training included psychological warfare and propaganda. The Congressional Country Club (Area F) in Bethesda, Maryland, was the primary OSS training facility. The Facilities of the Catalina Island Marine Institute at Toyon Bay on Santa Catalina Island, Calif., are composed (in part) of a former OSS survival training camp. The National Park Service commissioned a study of OSS National Park training facilities by Professor John Chambers of Rutgers University.\nThe main OSS training camps abroad were located initially in Great Britain, French Algeria, and Egypt; later as the Allies advanced, a school was established in southern Italy. In the Far East, OSS training facilities were established in India, Ceylon, and then China. The London branch of the OSS, its first overseas facility, was at 70 Grosvenor Street, W1. In addition to training local agents, the overseas OSS schools also provided advanced training and field exercises for graduates of the training camps in the United States and for Americans who enlisted in the OSS in the war zones. The most famous of the latter was Virginia Hall in France.\nThe OSS's Mediterranean training center in Cairo, Egypt, known to many as the \"Spy School\", was a lavish palace belonging to King Farouk's brother-in-law, called \"Ras el Kanayas\". It was modeled after the SOE's training facility STS 102 in Haifa, Palestine. Americans whose heritage stemmed from Italy, Yugoslavia, and Greece were trained at the \"Spy School\" and also sent for parachute, weapons, and commando training, and Morse code and encryption lessons at STS 102. After completion of their spy training, these agents were sent back on missions to the Balkans and Italy where their accents would not pose a problem for their assimilation.\nPersonnel.\nOSS soldiers were primarily inducted from the United States Armed Forces. Among the few foreign nationals were Prince Serge Obolensky and other displaced people from the former czarist Russia.\nDonovan sought independent thinkers, saying. \"I'd rather have a young lieutenant with enough guts to disobey a direct order than a colonel too regimented to think for himself.\" Seeking intelligent, quick-witted people who could think out-of-the box, he chose them from all walks of life, backgrounds, without distinction to culture or religion. Inspired by Britain's Special Operations Executive, he had clinical psychologists evaluate OSS candidates, including at Station S in northern Virginia near today's Dulles International Airport, whose records describe a quest for independent thought, effective intelligence, and interpersonal skills. In months, he formed an organization that soon rivalled Great Britain's Secret Intelligence Service. One such agent was Ivy League polyglot and Jewish American baseball catcher Moe Berg, who played 15 seasons in the major leagues. As a Secret Intelligence agent, he was dispatched to seek information on German physicist Werner Heisenberg and his knowledge on the atomic bomb. One of the most highly decorated and flamboyant OSS soldiers was US Marine Colonel Peter Ortiz. Enlisting early in the war, as a French Foreign Legionnaire, he went on to join the OSS and to be the most highly decorated US Marine in the OSS during World War II. Julia Child, who later authored cookbooks, worked directly under Donovan.\nRen\u00e9 Joyeuse M.D., MS, FACS was a Swiss, French and American soldier, physician and researcher, who distinguished himself as an agent of Allied intelligence in German-occupied France during World War II. He received the US Army Distinguished Service Cross for his actions with the OSS, after the war he became a Physician, Researcher and was a co-founder of The American Trauma Society.\n\"Jumping Joe\" Savoldi (code name Sampson) was recruited by the OSS in 1942 because of his hand-to-hand combat and language skills as well as his deep knowledge of the Italian geography and Benito Mussolini's compound. He was assigned to the Special Operations Branch and took part in missions in North Africa, Italy, and France during 1943\u20131945. \n One of the forefathers of today's commandos was Navy Lieutenant Jack Taylor. He was sequestered by the OSS early in the war and had a long career behind enemy lines.\nTaro and Mitsu Yashima, both Japanese political dissidents who were imprisoned in Japan for protesting its militarist regime, worked for the OSS in psychological warfare against the Japanese Empire.\nNisei linguists\nIn late 1943, a representative from OSS visited the 442nd Infantry Regiment looking to recruit volunteers willing to undertake \"extremely hazardous assignment.\" All selected were Nisei. The recruits were assigned to OSS Detachments 101 and 202, in the China-Burma-India Theater. \"Once deployed, they were to interrogate prisoners, translate documents, monitor radio communications, and conduct covert operations... Detachment 101 and 102's clandestine operations were extremely successful.\"\nThe names of all 13,000 OSS personnel and documents of their OSS service were closely guarded secrets until they were released by the US National Archives on August 14, 2008. Among the 24,000 names were those of Sterling Hayden, Milton Wolff, Carl C. Cable, Julia Child, Ralph Bunche, Arthur Goldberg, Saul K. Padover, Arthur Schlesinger, Jr., Bruce Sundlun, William Colby, Ren\u00e9 Joyeuse, and John Ford. The 750,000 pages in the 35,000 personnel files include applications of people who were not recruited or hired, as well as the service records of those who served.\nWomen in the OSS.\nOf the estimated 13,000 people who served in the OSS during World War II, more than 4,000 were women. Their work in a wide range of roles\u2014espionage, intelligence analysis, research, communications, cartography, clerical work, and more\u2014contributed to the organization's wartime success and helped shift gender norms in the decades that followed. Among them were Julia Child, who served in Washington, D.C., Ceylon, and China, where she handled the movement of classified documents in India;Marion A. Frieswyk, who as the first female intelligence cartographer for the Cartography Section helped create high-precision maps used in Allied military operations; and Eloise Page, William Donovan's secretary, nicknamed the \"Iron Butterfly\" for her manner and rank.\nMany worked on black propaganda in the MO department. Some gained internal renown as \"glamour girls\", such as Virginia Hall, singer Marlene Dietrich, Betty McIntosh, and Barbara Lauwers. In \"Sisterhood of Spies\", McIntosh reflects on the women's ability to \"understand gossip in a way men never could\". Lauwers worked on Operation Sauerkraut, which dispatched OSS to Allied prisoner-of-war camps to find and train German and Czech POWs to travel back across enemy lines to spread black propaganda meant to dismay Axis troops. Black propaganda for psychological effect was one of Donovan's key initiatives, inspired by the Nazis. Lauwers created the \"League of Lonely War Women\" to demoralize German soldiers: it spoke of a \"custom\" under which German soldiers on leave could find companionship by pinning a heart to their lapel, implying that the wives and partners of soldiers were being unfaithful at home.\nMany women had familial or spousal connection to the war effort Jane Hutton-Smith, wife and daughter to military officers, worked as the Washington manager of Far East MO, and trained field agents in spreading propaganda against Japanese soldiers. Her weekly Rumour Mill session with the staff involved spreading \"devastating lies\" about the wellbeing of the families of Japanese soldiers, creating misinformation on planned attacks, and disrupting \"puppet\" relations between Japan and China. She and her colleagues generally spoke Japanese, Russian, or had other linguistic skills.\nWomen served as liaisons with resistance groups in France, Yugoslavia, and elsewhere, shaping U.S. relations with these nations during and after the war. Hall helped organize, supply and train the French resistance. Novelist Mary Bancroft acted as a liaison between OSS officer Allen Dulles and German resistance groups.\nOSS women had direct engagement with foreign nationals and Allied counterparts, shaping wartime diplomacy and postwar foreign policy by building trust with international partners and establishing precedents for female involvement in foreign service, which had long-term soft power affects. Many went to work for the CIA or State Department.\nDissolution into other agencies.\nOn September 20, 1945, President Harry S. Truman signed Executive Order 9621, terminating the OSS. Due to administrative error, the order only allowed the agency ten days to close. The State Department took over the Research and Analysis Branch (R&amp;A); it became the Bureau of Intelligence and Research, The War Department took over the Secret Intelligence (SI) and Counter-Espionage (X-2) Branches, which were then housed in the new Strategic Services Unit (SSU). Brigadier General John Magruder (formerly Donovan's Deputy Director for Intelligence in OSS) became the new SSU director. He oversaw the liquidation of the OSS and managed the institutional preservation of its clandestine intelligence capability.\nIn January 1946, President Truman created the Central Intelligence Group (CIG), which was the direct precursor to the CIA. SSU assets, which now constituted a streamlined \"nucleus\" of clandestine intelligence, were transferred to the CIG in mid-1946 and reconstituted as the Office of Special Operations (OSO). The National Security Act of 1947 established the Central Intelligence Agency, which then took up some OSS functions. The direct descendant of the paramilitary component of the OSS is the CIA Special Activities Division.\nToday, the joint-branch United States Special Operations Command, founded in 1987, uses the same spearhead design on its insignia, as homage to its indirect lineage. The Defense Intelligence Agency currently manages the OSS' mandate to provide strategic military intelligence to the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the Secretary of Defense and to coordinate human espionage activities across the United States Armed Forces (through the Defense Clandestine Service) and was awarded status as an OSS Heritage organization by the OSS Society.\nBranches.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nDetachments.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;"}
{"id": "22680", "revid": "1584593", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22680", "title": "Oda Nobunaga", "text": "Japanese samurai and warlord (1534\u20131582)\n was a Japanese \"daimy\u014d\" and one of the leading figures of the Sengoku and Azuchi-Momoyama periods. He was the and regarded as the first \"Great Unifier\" of Japan. He is sometimes referred as the \"Demon Daimy\u014d\" and \"Demon King of the Sixth Heaven\".\nNobunaga was an influential figure in Japanese history and is regarded as one of the three great unifiers of Japan, along with his retainers, Toyotomi Hideyoshi and Tokugawa Ieyasu. Nobunaga paved the way for the successful reigns of Hideyoshi and Ieyasu by consolidating power, as head of the very powerful Oda clan, through a series of wars against other \"daimy\u014d\" beginning in the 1560s. The period when Nobunaga and Hideyoshi were in power is called the Azuchi\u2013Momoyama period. The name \"Azuchi\u2013Momoyama\" comes from the fact that Nobunaga's castle, Azuchi Castle, was located in Azuchi, Shiga; while Fushimi Castle, where Hideyoshi lived after his retirement, was located in Momoyama.\nNobunaga emerged as the most powerful \"daimy\u014d\", overthrowing the nominally ruling shogun Ashikaga Yoshiaki and dissolving the Ashikaga Shogunate in 1573. He conquered most of Honshu by 1580, and defeated the Ikk\u014d-ikki in the 1580s. Nobunaga's rule was noted for innovative military tactics, fostering of free trade, reforms of Japan's civil government, and the start of the Momoyama historical art period, but also for the brutal suppression of those who refused to cooperate or yield to his demands. \nNobunaga committed during the Honn\u014d-ji Incident in 1582, when his retainer Akechi Mitsuhide ambushed and trapped him in a temple in Kyoto. Nobunaga was succeeded by Toyotomi Hideyoshi, who along with Tokugawa Ieyasu completed his campaign of national unification shortly afterward.\nEarly life (1534\u20131551).\nOda Nobunaga was born on 23 June 1534 in Nagoya, Owari Province, and was the heir of Oda Nobuhide, the head of the powerful Oda clan and a deputy (military governor), and his lawful wife Dota Gozen. Nobunaga was previously thought to have been born in Nagoya Castle, but in recent years the theory that he was born in Shobata Castle has become more accepted. Nobunaga was given the childhood name of , and through his childhood and early teenage years became well known for his bizarre behavior.\nNobunaga mostly spent his time between the age of 13 (the age of maturity at the time) and 18 in hunting, riding, practicing archery and shooting arquebus (still a novelty in Japan at the time), but also wrestling, swimming, watching sumo and visiting taverns and brothels with his friends. He also showed complete disdain for formal clothing and proper social behavior of a lord, wearing sleeveless bathrobes and short trousers tied with hemp rope in public, eating melons while riding backwards on his horse, and often dancing in female clothing in taverns, gaining the nickname \"The Fool of Owari\".\nNobunaga was given Nagoya Castle by his father at the age of 8 and lived there for 13 years until he took Kiyosu Castle at the age of 21. He had one or two older brothers, but they were illegitimate sons. As the first legitimate son, Nobunaga was intended to succeed Nobuhide as leader of the Oda clan, and so he was separated from his mother and given special education. Four kar\u014d (chief retainers), Hayashi Hidesada, Hirate Masahide, Aoyama Nobumasa, and Nait\u014d Sh\u014dsuke (or Katsusuke), were assigned to train and educate him for his future role.\nNobunaga came to manhood and took the name Oda Sabur\u014d Nobunaga in 1546. He then led the forces of the Oda clan against rival Kira and Ohama in Mikawa for his first campaign in 1547.\nIn 1548 or 1549, Nobuhide made peace with Sait\u014d D\u014dsan, lord of Mino Province (which had previously been hostile to Owari) through a political marriage between his son Nobunaga and D\u014dsan's daughter, N\u014dhime. Nobunaga took N\u014dhime as his lawful wife, and D\u014dsan became Nobunaga's father-in-law. Nobunaga also became involved in government affairs at this time, gaining valuable political experience and insight.\nUnification of Owari (1551\u20131560).\nSuccession crisis.\nIn 1551, Oda Nobuhide died unexpectedly. It has been said that Nobunaga acted outrageously during his funeral, throwing ceremonial incense at the altar. Although Nobunaga was Nobuhide's legitimate heir, a succession crisis occurred when some of the Oda clan opposed him. Nobunaga assembled a force of 1,000 men and used them to intimidate and dissuade his enemies, thus preventing a serious disruption in the transfer of power.\nSensing weakness, the \"daimy\u014d\" Imagawa Yoshimoto sent an army under the command of Imagawa Sessai to lay siege to the castle at Anj\u014d, where Oda Nobuhiro, Nobunaga's older brother, was living. To save his life, Nobunaga was compelled to turn over a hostage held by his clan at Honsh\u014dji temple, nine-year-old Matsudaira Takechiyo \u2013 later known as Tokugawa Ieyasu \u2013 an exchange that helped solidify an alliance between other rival clans. Nobuhiro, frustrated by his low standing in the Oda clan, later plotted against Nobunaga with the assistance of another rival, Sait\u014d Yoshitatsu; Nobunaga learned of the plot but chose to forgive his brother's conduct.\nIn early 1552, barely several months after his father's death, one of Oda's senior retainers, Yamaguchi Noritsugu and his son Yamaguchi Noriyoshi defected to the Imagawa clan. In response, Nobunaga attacked Noritsugu, but was defeated by Noriyoshi's forces at the Battle of Akatsuka. Nobunaga retreated and left contested lands in eastern Owari under Imagawa control.\nConsolidation of clan leadership.\nIn spring 1552, Nobunaga faced a new challenge when his uncle, Oda Nobutomo, attacked Nobunaga's domain with the support of Shiba Yoshimune, governor of Owari province. Nobunaga repelled the attack and burned the outskirts of his uncle's castle at Kiyosu to discourage further attempts. However, Nobutomo was spared any serious punishment.\nIn 1553, Hirate Masahide, who had been one of Nobunaga's closest advisors and mentors, committed \"seppuku\". It is generally believed that he did so to admonish Nobunaga, but the actual motive is unclear. Yoshimune tipped off Nobunaga that Nobutomo planned to assassinate him; Yoshimune was subsequently captured and put to death on Nobutomo's orders. Nobunaga mobilized his forces to blockade Kiyosu castle and set up a lengthy siege.\nIn 1554, Nobunaga finally achieved victory over the Imagawa clan at the Battle of Muraki Castle, reclaiming the lands he had lost to them. After securing eastern Owari, Nobunaga then turned his attention back to the siege at Kiyosu, where he eventually defeated Nobutomo and forced him to die by \"seppuku\".\nIn 1556, Sait\u014d Yoshitatsu raised an army against his father, Sait\u014d D\u014dsan, who was slain in combat at the Battle of Nagara-gawa. Nobunaga set out to Oura in Mino with troops to rescue his father-in-law, but immediately withdrew upon hearing of D\u014dsan's death. Thereafter, Yoshitatsu usurped his father's title and became lord of Mino.\nThe loss of the Sait\u014d clan's support further undermined faith in Nobunaga's leadership; key retainers such as Hayashi Hidesada, Hayashi Michitomo, and Shibata Katsuie soon turned on him. They raised an army to support his brother Nobuyuki (Nobukatsu), who was highly regarded within the Oda clan. Nobunaga defeated the rebels at the Battle of Ino, but at the plea of his birth mother, Dota Gozen, pardoned them. Despite his brother Michitomo's death in battle, Hidesada pledged his loyalty to Nobunaga and resumed serving him, while Katsuie chose to remain in Nobuyuki's service.\nIn 1557, however, Nobuyuki conspired with Oda Nobuyasu, lord of Iwakura Castle, to plot another rebellion. Shibata, disgusted by Nobuyuki's treachery and disloyalty, secretly warned Nobunaga. Nobunaga falsely claimed to have fallen ill and had Nobuyuki and his entourage assassinated when they came to visit him. It is said that either Kawajiri Hidetaka or Ikeda Tsuneoki carried out Nobuyuki's murder.\nIn 1558, Nobunaga sent an army to successfully protect Suzuki Shigeteru, lord of Terabe Castle, during the Siege of Terabe. Shigeteru had defected to Nobunaga's side from Imagawa Yoshimoto, a \"daimy\u014d\" from Suruga Province and one of the most powerful men in the T\u014dkaid\u014d region. In July 1558, he defeated his cousin, Oda Nobukata, deputy governor of northern Owari at Battle of Ukino.\nBy 1559, Nobunaga had captured and destroyed Iwakura Castle, eliminated all opposition within the Oda clan, and established his uncontested rule in Owari Province.\nRise to power (1560\u20131568).\nConflict with Imagawa.\nImagawa Yoshimoto was a long-time opponent of Nobunaga's father, and had sought to expand his domain into Oda territory in Owari. In 1560, Imagawa Yoshimoto gathered an army of 25,000 men, and marched toward the capital city of Kyoto, with the pretext of aiding the frail Ashikaga Shogunate. The Matsudaira clan also joined Yoshimoto's forces. \nThe Imagawa forces quickly overran the border fortresses of Washizu and Matsudaira forces led by Matsudaira Motoyasu took Marune Fortress from the Oda clan. Against this, the Oda clan could rally an army of only 2,000 to 3,000 men. Some of his advisors suggested that he take refuge at Kiyosu Castle and wait out a siege by the Imagawa, but Nobunaga refused, stating that \"only a strong offensive policy could make up for the superior numbers of the enemy\", and calmly ordered a counterattack against Yoshimoto.\nBattle of Okehazama.\nIn June 1560, Nobunaga's scouts reported that Yoshimoto was resting at the narrow gorge of Dengaku-Kazama, ideal for a surprise attack, and that the Imagawa army was celebrating their victories over the Washizu and Marune fortresses. While Yoshimoto viewed victory ahead, Nobunaga's forces marched to the Atsuta Shrine, a fortified temple overlooking the Imagawa camp. Later, Nobunaga moved to Zensho-ji fort, set up a decoy army there, marched rapidly behind Yoshimoto's camp, and attacked after a terrific thunderstorm. Yoshimoto was killed by two Oda samurai. With his victory in this battle, Oda Nobunaga gained greatly in prestige, and many samurai and warlords pledged fealty to him.\nKinoshita T\u014dkichir\u014d, who would eventually become Toyotomi Hideyoshi, probably participated in the battle, but nothing is recorded from that time. His exploits were first recorded in the Mino Campaign.\nAlliance with Matsudaira (later Tokugawa) and Takeda.\nRapidly weakening in the wake of this battle, the Imagawa clan no longer exerted control over the Matsudaira clan. In 1561, an alliance was forged between Oda Nobunaga and Matsudaira Motoyasu (who would become Tokugawa Ieyasu), despite the decades-old hostility between the two clans. Nobunaga also formed an alliance with Takeda Shingen through the marriage of his daughter to Shingen's son.\nMino campaign.\nIn 1561, Sait\u014d Yoshitatsu, Nobunaga's brother-in-law, died suddenly of illness and was succeeded by his son, Nobunaga's nephew, Sait\u014d Tatsuoki. Yoshitatsu murdered his father and brothers to become daimy\u014d, and Nobunaga had attempted to avenge the murder of his father-in-law numerous times. Nobunaga's nephew Tatsuoki was young and much less effective as a ruler and military strategist than his father and grandfather. Taking advantage of this situation, Nobunaga moved his base to Komaki Castle and started his campaign in Mino Province, defeating Tatsuoki in both the Battle of Moribeand the Battle of Jushijo in June that same year.\nBy convincing Sait\u014d retainers to abandon their incompetent and foolish master, Nobunaga significantly weakened the Sait\u014d clan. In 1564, Oda Nobunaga dispatched his retainer, Kinoshita T\u014dkichir\u014d, to bribe many of the warlords in the Mino area to support the Oda clan. In 1566, Nobunaga charged Kinoshita with building Sunomata Castle on the bank of the Sai River opposite Sait\u014d territory to serve as a staging point for the Oda forces and to intimidate, surprise, and demoralize the enemy.\nIn 1567, the Mino Triumvirate (\u897f\u7f8e\u6fc3\u4e09\u4eba\u8846, Nishi-Mino Sanninsh\u016b)--three samurai generals, Inaba Ittetsu, And\u014d Michitari, and Ujiie Bokuzen, who served the Sait\u014d clan--agreed to change sides and join the forces of Oda Nobunaga. Their combined forces mounted a victorious final attack at the Siege of Inabayama Castle. \nAfter taking possession of the castle, Nobunaga changed the name of both Inabayama Castle and the surrounding town to Gifu. Nobunaga derived the term \"Gifu\" from the legendary Mount Qi (\u5c90\u5c71 \"Qi\" in Standard Chinese) in China, on which the Zhou dynasty is fabled to have started. Nobunaga revealed his ambition to conquer the whole of Japan and also started using a new personal seal that read Tenka Fubu (\u5929\u4e0b\u5e03\u6b66), literally \"All under heaven, spreading military force\", or more idiomatically, \"All the world by force of arms\". Remains of Nobunaga's residence in Gifu can be found today in Gifu Park.\nIse campaign, Omi campaign, and march to Kyoto.\nFollowing Nobunaga's conquest of Mino Province in 1567, Nobunaga sent Takigawa Kazumasu on a campaign comprising two invasions of Ise Province in 1567 and 1568 that defeated numerous families of Ise (Ise was ruled nominally by the Kitabatake clan and Kanbe clan). After Nobunaga controlled Ise, his son, Oda Nobutaka was installed as the head of the Kanbe clan. Later in 1569, head of Kitabatake clan, Kitabatake Tomonori, adopted Nobunaga's second son Oda Nobukatsu.\nNobunaga also arranged for Oichi, his sister, to marry rival warlord Azai Nagamasa from Omi Province in an effort to cement an alliance. Nobunaga desired peaceful relations with the Azai clan because of their strategic position between the Oda clan's land and the capital, Kyoto.\nIn 1568, Ashikaga Yoshiaki and Akechi Mitsuhide, as Yoshiaki's bodyguard, went to Gifu to ask Nobunaga to start a campaign toward Kyoto. Yoshiaki was the brother of the murdered 13th shogun of the Ashikaga Shogunate, Yoshiteru, who had been killed by the Miyoshi \"tannins\" (three chiefs of the Miyoshi clan, Miyoshi Nagayuki, Miyoshi Masayasu and Iwanari Tomomichi). Yoshiaki wanted revenge against the killers who had already set up a puppet shogun, Ashikaga Yoshihide.\nNobunaga agreed to install Yoshiaki as the new shogun and, grasping the opportunity to enter Kyoto, started his campaign. An obstacle in southern \u014cmi Province was the Rokkaku clan, led by Rokkaku Yoshikata, who refused to recognize Yoshiaki as shogun and was ready to go to war to defend Yoshihide. In response, Nobunaga launched a rapid attack on Ch\u014dk\u014d-ji Castle, driving the Rokkaku clan out of their castles. (Later in 1570, the Rokkaku tried to retake the castle, but they were driven back by Oda forces led by Shibata Katsuie), Other forces led by Niwa Nagahide defeated the Rokkaku on the battlefield and entered Kannonji Castle, before resuming Nobunaga's march to Kyoto. \nThe approaching Oda army influenced the Matsunaga clan to submit to the future shogun. The \"daimy\u014d\" Matsunaga Hisahide kept his title by making this decision to ally his clan with Oda and the new shogun.\nOn 9 November 1568, Nobunaga entered Kyoto, drove out the Miyoshi clan, who had supported the 14th shogun and who fled to Settsu, and installed Yoshiaki as the 15th shogun of the Ashikaga Shogunate. However, Nobunaga refused the title of shogun's deputy (Kanrei), or any appointment from Yoshiaki, even though Nobunaga had great respect for the Emperor \u014cgimachi.\nUnification of Japan (1568\u20131582).\nConflict with Asakura, Ashikaga and Azai.\nAfter installing Yoshiaki as shogun, Nobunaga forced Yoshiaki to call all \"daimy\u014d\" to come to Kyoto and attend the court banquet. Asakura Yoshikage, head of the Asakura clan and regent of Ashikaga Yoshiaki, refused, which prompted Nobunaga to declare Asakura Yoshikage as a rebel.\nSiege of Kanegasaki.\nIn early 1570, Nobunaga then raised an army and marched on the Asakura clan's domain in Echizen. Nobunaga besieged Kanagasaki Castle. This action created a conflict between Nobunaga and shogun Ashikaga Yoshiaki. Yoshiaki secretly started an \"anti-Nobunaga alliance\", conspiring with other \"daimy\u014d\" to get rid of Nobunaga. Azai Nagamasa, to whom Nobunaga's sister Oichi was married, broke the alliance with the Oda clan to honor the Azai-Asakura alliance, which had lasted for three generations. \nWith the help of the Rokkaku clan, Miyoshi clan, and the Ikk\u014d-ikki, the anti-Nobunaga alliance sprang into full force, taking a heavy toll on the Oda clan. After Nobunaga found himself facing both the Asakura and Azai forces and when defeat looked certain, Nobunaga decided to retreat from Kanagasaki, which he did successfully.\nBattle of Anegawa.\nIn July 1570, the Oda-Tokugawa allies laid siege to Yokoyama Castle and Odani Castle in \u014cmi Province. Later, the combined Azai-Asakura force marched out to confront Nobunaga. Nobunaga advanced to the southern bank of the Anegawa River.\nThe following morning, 30 July 1570, the battle began. Tokugawa Ieyasu joined his forces with Nobunaga, with the Oda and Azai clashing on the Anegawa east river while Tokugawa and Asakura grappled on the west of the river. The battle turned into a melee fought in the middle of the shallow Anegawa River. \nFor a time, Nobunaga's forces fought the Azai upstream, while the Tokugawa warriors fought the Asakura downstream. After the Tokugawa forces finished off the Asakura, they turned and hit the Azai's right flank. The troops of the Mino Triumvirate, who had been held in reserve, then came forward and hit the Azai left flank. Soon both the Oda and Tokugawa forces defeated the combined forces of the Asakura and Azai clans.\nEnd of Asakura and Azai clan.\n1573 represented the end of Azai and Asakura clans, as Nobunaga successfully destroyed the Azai and Asakura clans by driving them both to the point that their clan leaders committed suicide. After destroying Ichij\u014ddani Castle, the castle home of Asakura Yoshikage, then pursuing Yoshikage to the Rokub\u014d-kensh\u014d monastery, where Yoshikage killed himself, Nobunaga then finished off the Azai clan at the Siege of Odani Castle.\nIkk\u014d-ikki Campaigns.\nNobunaga faced a significant threat from the Ikk\u014d-ikki, a resistance movement centered around the J\u014ddo Shinsh\u016b sect of Buddhism. The Ikk\u014d-ikki began as a cult association for self-defense, but popular antipathy against the samurai due to the constant violence of the Sengoku period caused their numbers to swell. By the time of Nobunaga's rise to power, the Ikk\u014d-ikki was a major organized armed force opposed to samurai rule in Japan. \nIn August 1570, Nobunaga launched the Ishiyama Hongan-ji War against the Ikk\u014d-ikki, while simultaneously fighting against his samurai rivals. In May 1571, Nobunaga besieged Nagashima, a series of Ikk\u014d-ikki fortifications in Owari Province, beginning the Sieges of Nagashima. However, Nobunaga's first siege of Nagashima ended in failure, as his trusted general Shibata Katsuie was severely wounded and many of his samurai were lost before retreating. Despite this defeat, Nobunaga was inspired to launch another siege, the Siege of Mount Hiei.\nSiege of Mount Hiei.\nThe Enryaku-ji temple on Mount Hiei was an issue for Nobunaga. The monastery's (warrior monks) of the Tendai school were aiding his opponents in the Azai-Asakura alliance and the temple was close to his base of power. In September 1571, Nobunaga preemptively attacked the Enryaku-ji temple, then besieged Mount Hiei and razed it. \nIn the process of making their way to the Enryaku-ji temple, Nobunaga's forces destroyed and burnt all buildings, killing monks, laymen, women, and children and eliminating anyone who had previously escaped their attack. It is said that \"The whole mountainside was a great slaughterhouse and the sight was one of unbearable horror.\" \nFall of Nagashima.\nIn July 1573, after the successful siege of Mount Hiei, Nobunaga besieged Nagashima a second time, personally leading a sizable force with many arquebusiers. However, a rainstorm rendered his arquebuses inoperable while the Ikk\u014d-ikki's own arquebusiers could fire from covered positions. Nobunaga himself was almost killed and forced to retreat, with the second siege being considered his greatest defeat.\nIn 1574, Nobunaga launched a third siege of Nagashima as his general Kuki Yoshitaka began a naval blockade and bombardment of Nagashima, allowing him to capture the outer forts of Nakae and Yanagashima as well as part of the Nagashima complex. The sieges of Nagashima finally ended when Nobunaga's men completely surrounded the complex and set fire to it, killing the remaining tens of thousands of defenders and inflicting tremendous losses to the Ikk\u014d-ikki.\nFall of Ishiyama Hongan-ji.\nSimultaneously, Nobunaga had been besieging the Ikk\u014d-ikki's main stronghold at Ishiyama Hongan-ji in present-day Osaka. Nobunaga's Siege of Ishiyama Hongan-ji began to slowly make some progress, but the M\u014dri clan of the Ch\u016bgoku region broke his naval blockade and started sending supplies into the strongly fortified complex by sea. As a result, in 1577, Nobunaga ordered Takigawa Kazumasu to suppress Ikko-ikki at Kii Province, Hashiba Hideyoshi to conquer the Ch\u016bgoku region from the Mori clan, before advancing upon the Mori clan in Nagato Province, Akechi Mitsuhide to pacify Tanba Province, Kuki Yoshitaka to support attack from the sea, and Nobunaga eventually blocked the M\u014dri's supply lines.\nIn 1580, ten years after the siege of Ishiyama Hongan-ji began, the son of Chief Abbot K\u014dsa surrendered the fortress to Nobunaga after their supplies were exhausted, and they received an official request from the Emperor to do so. Nobunaga spared the lives of Ishiyama Hongan-ji's defenders but expelled them from Osaka and burnt the fortress to the ground. Although the Ikk\u014d-ikki continued to make a last stand in Kaga Province, Nobunaga's capture of Ishiyama Hongan-ji crippled them as a major military force.\nConflict with Takeda.\nOne of the strongest rulers in the anti-Nobunaga alliance was Takeda Shingen, who had formerly been an ally of the Oda clan. At the apex of the anti-Nobunaga coalition, in 1572, Takeda Shingen ordered Akiyama Nobutomo, one of the \"Twenty-Four Generals\" of Shingen, to attack Iwamura castle. Nobunaga's aunt, Lady Otsuya, conspiring against the Oda clan, surrendered the castle to the Takeda, and married Nobutomo. Nobunaga was shocked by Shingen's betrayal, and his rage was immense. His letter to Uesugi Kenshin was filled with angry words, stating, \"Shingen knows nothing of a samurai's honor,\" \"This grudge will never cease,\" and \"I will never reconcile with Shingen, now or in the future.\"\nIn the same year, Shingen decided to make a drive for Kyoto at the urging of the shogun Ashikaga Yoshiaki, starting with invading Tokugawa territory. Nobunaga, tied down on the western front, sent lackluster aid to Tokugawa Ieyasu, who suffered defeat at the Battle of Mikatagahara in early 1573. However, after the battle, Tokugawa's forces launched night raids and convinced Takeda of an imminent counter-attack, thus saving the vulnerable Tokugawa with the bluff. This would play a pivotal role in Tokugawa's philosophy of strategic patience in his campaigns with Nobunaga. Shortly thereafter, the Takeda forces were neutralized after Shingen died in April 1573.\nBattle of Nagashino.\nIn 1575, Takeda Katsuyori, son of Takeda Shingen, moved to Tokugawa territory, attacked Yoshida castle and later besieged Nagashino Castle. Katsuyori, angered when Okudaira Sadamasa rejoined the Tokugawa, had originally conspired with Oga Yashiro to take the Tokugawa-controlled Okazaki Castle, the capital of Mikawa Province. This plot failed. Tokugawa Ieyasu appealed to Nobunaga for help and Nobunaga personally led an army of about 30,000 men to the relief of Nagashino Castle. The combined force of 38,000 men under Oda Nobunaga and Tokugawa Ieyasu devastated the Takeda clan at the Battle of Nagashino, the greatest defeat of the Takeda clan.\nConventionally, the \"Battle of Nagashino\" was regarded as a historic defeat in which Takeda Katsuyori ordered his cavalry to charge recklessly into a horse guard fence where arquebusiers were waiting for them, losing many Takeda officers and soldiers. Moreover, it has been said that Nobunaga developed a new battle strategy called \"three-stage shooting\", in which arquebusiers were arranged in several rows with the front row firing a volley, and then making way for the second row to fire. Once the second row had fired and made way for the third row, the first row had reloaded and were ready to fire again. This way the Oda could keep a relatively steady rate of musket fire.\nHowever, this was a theory developed by the Imperial Japanese Army General Staff based on Oze Hoan's Shinch\u014d Ki and T\u014dyama Nobuharu's S\u014dken Ki, which are war chronicles. Later, as research based on documents, letters, and Ota Gy\u016bichi's \"Shinch\u014d K\u014dki\" progressed, many errors were pointed out. It is now believed that it was mainly the logistics in Nobunaga's hands that determined the winner.\nEnd of Takeda clan.\nThe end of the Takeda clan came in 1582 when Oda Nobutada and Tokugawa Ieyasu forces conquered Shinano and Kai Province. Takeda Katsuyori was defeated at the Battle of Tenmokuzan and then committed suicide.\nEnd of the Ashikaga Shogunate.\nIn early 1573, Yoshiaki initiated a siege against Nobunaga under the directive of the monk Kennyo. Takeda Shingen and Asakura Yoshikage tried to subdue Yoshiaki. Azai Nagamasa, Matsunaga Hisahide, Sanninshu Miyoshi, Miyoshi Yoshitsugu, and others also participated in the siege against Nobunaga. Although the siege initially cornered Nobunaga's forces, it failed, as it was interrupted by the death of Takeda Shingen.\nIn mid 1573, when Yoshiaki began a revolt in Kyoto, he requested the help of the Matsunaga clan and allied with them. Yoshiaki and the Matsunaga clan gathered an army in Makishima castle in April and again in July which is when the revolt started. This angered Nobunaga, who invaded Kyoto. However, when Matsunaga Hisahide saw the hope for success was not achieved he returned to Nobunaga to fight the Miyoshi.\nNobunaga's entry into Kyoto presented him with a situation very different from that from which he had come. Nobunaga reportedly set fire to Kyoto, which forced Yoshiaki to retreat. He focused on Ashikaga Yoshiaki, who had openly declared hostility more than once, despite the Imperial Court's intervention. Nobunaga was able to defeat Yoshiaki's forces, and the power of the Ashikaga was effectively destroyed on 27 August 1573, when Nobunaga drove Yoshiaki out of Kyoto and sent him into exile. Yoshiaki became a Buddhist monk, shaving his head and taking the name \"Sho-san\", which he later changed to \"Rei-o In\", bringing the Ashikaga Shogunate to an end.\nImperial Court appointments.\nAfter the Ashikaga Shogunate came to end, the authority of the Imperial Court of Emperor \u014cgimachi also began to weaken. This trend reversed after Oda Nobunaga entered Kyoto in a show of allegiance that indicated that the Emperor had the Oda clan's support.\nIn 1574, Nobunaga was appointed to a rank of Lower Third Rank () of the Imperial Court and made a Court Advisor (). Court appointments would continue to be lavished on a nearly annual basis, possibly in hope of placating him. Nobunaga acquired many official titles, including Major Counselor (), General of the Right of the Imperial Army (), and Minister of the Right () in 1576.\nConstruction of Azuchi Castle.\nAzuchi Castle was built from 1576 to 1579 on Mount Azuchi on the eastern shore of Lake Biwa in \u014cmi Province. Nobunaga intentionally built Azuchi Castle close enough to Kyoto that he could watch over and guard the approaches to the capital. Azuchi Castle's location was also strategically advantageous in managing the communications and transportation routes between Nobunaga's greatest foes - Uesugi to the north, the Takeda in the east, and the M\u014dri to the west. The castle and its nearby town were depicted on the so-called Azuchi Screens, which Oda Nobunaga gave to Pope Gregory XIII, who displayed them in the Vatican collections.\nConflict with the M\u014dri Clan.\nThe fundamental policy of the M\u014dri clan was \"to avoid conflict with Nobunaga\" and in the early 1570s, even when issues arose, they continued a cautious diplomacy to prevent any decisive confrontations. However, when Terumoto placed Ashikaga Yoshiaki under his protection, war between the two families became inevitable. The M\u014dri were drawn into the Ishiyama Hongan-ji War, Nobunaga's siege of a religious stronghold in Settsu, which he had begun in 1570. beginning with the Battle of Kizugawaguchi in 1576.\nBattles of Kizugawaguchi.\nTerumoto turned to the vaunted M\u014dri navy. In 1576, First Battle of Kizugawaguchi Nobunaga's 'admiral', Kuki Yoshitaka, had cut the Honganji's sea-lanes and sat in blockade off the coast. Terumoto ordered his fleet, commanded by Murakami Takeyoshi, to make for the waters off Settsu and, once there, the navy inflicted an embarrassing defeat on Kuki and opened the Honganji's supply lines.\nLater in 1578, at Second Battle of Kizugawaguchi, K\u00fbki Yoshitaka defeated Takeyoshi and drove the M\u014dri away. Nobunaga also send Hashiba Hideyoshi to conquer the Ch\u016bgoku region from the Mori clan. A further attempt by the M\u014dri to break the blockade the following year was turned back, and in 1580 the Honganji surrendered.\nConflict with Uesugi.\nThe conflict between Oda and Uesugi was precipitated by Uesugi intervention in the domain of the Hatakeyama clan in Noto Province, an Oda client state. This event provoked the Uesugi incursion, a \"coup d'\u00e9tat\" led by the pro-Oda general Ch\u014d Tsugutsura, who killed Hatakeyama Yoshinori, the lord of Noto and replaced him with Hatakeyama Yoshitaka as a puppet ruler. In response, Uesugi Kenshin, the head of the Uesugi clan, mobilized an army and led it into Noto against Tsugutsura. Consequently, Nobunaga sent an army led by Shibata Katsuie and some of his most experienced generals to attack Kenshin. They clashed at the Battle of Tedorigawa in Kaga Province in 1577.\nBattle of Tedorigawa.\nIn November 1577, the Battle of Tedorigawa took place near the Tedori River in Kaga Province. Kenshin tricked Nobunaga's forces into launching a frontal attack across the Tedorigawa and defeated him. Having suffered the loss of 1,000 men, the Oda forces withdrew south. The result was a decisive Uesugi victory, and Nobunaga considered ceding the northern provinces to Kenshin, but Kenshin's sudden death in early 1578 caused a succession crisis that ended the Uesugi's movement to the south.\nLater in 1578, after the death of Uesugi Kenshin, Nobunaga send Shibata Katsuie, Maeda Toshiie and Sasa Narimasa to conquer Hokuriku region from Uesugi.\nTensh\u014d Iga War.\nThe was two invasions of Iga province by the Oda clan during the Sengoku period. The province was conquered by Oda Nobunaga in 1581 after an unsuccessful attempt in 1579 by his son Oda Nobukatsu. \nThe name of the war is derived from the era name Tensh\u014d (1573\u201392), the era during which it occurred. Other names for the campaign include or . Oda Nobunaga himself toured the conquered province in early November 1581, and then withdrew his troops, placing control in Nobukatsu's hands.\nBy the 1580s, Nobunaga was the most powerful lord in Japan, controlling 20 provinces in central Japan: Owari, Mino, Omi, Iga, Ise, Yamato, Yamashiro, Kawachi, Wakasa, Settsu, Echizen, Hida, Kaga, Noto, Tango, Tanba, Harima, Inaba, Tajima, and H\u014dki.\nDeath.\nBy 1582, Nobunaga was at the height of his power and, as the most powerful warlord, the \"de facto\" leader of Japan. Oda Nobunaga and Tokugawa Ieyasu finally occupied Shinano and Kai Provinces, defeated the Takeda at the Battle of Tenmokuzan, destroying the clan and resulting in Takeda Katsuyori fleeing from the battle before committing suicide with his wife while being pursued by Oda forces. \nBy this point, Nobunaga was preparing to launch invasions into Etchu Province, Shikoku and M\u014dri clan domain. Nobunaga's former sandal-bearer, Hashiba Hideyoshi, invaded Bitch\u016b Province and laid siege to Takamatsu Castle. The castle was vital to the M\u014dri clan, and losing it would have left M\u014dri's home domain vulnerable. More reinforcements led by M\u014dri Terumoto arrived to relieve the siege, prompting Hideyoshi to ask in turn for reinforcements from Nobunaga. \nNobunaga immediately ordered his leading generals and also Akechi Mitsuhide to prepare their armies, with the overall expedition to be led by Nobunaga. Nobunaga left Azuchi Castle for Honn\u014d-ji, a temple in Kyoto he frequented when visiting the city, where he was to hold a tea ceremony. Hence, Nobunaga only had 30 pages with him, while his son Oda Nobutada had brought 2,000 of his cavalrymen.\nHonn\u014d-ji incident.\nMitsuhide, aware that Nobunaga was nearby and unprotected for his tea ceremony, saw an opportunity to act. At that time, Mitsuhide is said to have announced to his troops that \"The enemy awaits at Honn\u014d-ji!\" (\u6575\u306f\u672c\u80fd\u5bfa\u306b\u3042\u308a, Teki wa Honn\u014d-ji ni ari). But this is a later creation. In reality, Mitsuhide kept the target of the attack secret from his troops so that information would not leak out.\nOn 21 June 1582, before dawn, the Akechi army surrounded the Honn\u014d-ji temple with Nobunaga present, while another unit of Akechi troops was sent to My\u014dkaku-ji. Although Nobunaga and his servants resisted the unexpected intrusion, they were soon overwhelmed. Nobunaga also fought back for a while before retreating, and after letting the court ladies escape, he committed in one of the inner rooms.\nAfter capturing Honn\u014d-ji, Mitsuhide attacked Nobutada, the eldest son and heir of Nobunaga, who also died by suicide.\nMitsuhide searched for Nobunaga's body but could not find it. As a result, he was unable to prove Nobunaga's death, thus neither providing justification for his rebellion nor gaining support from those who doubted Nobunaga's death.\nLater, when Nobunaga's retainer Toyotomi Hideyoshi learnt of his lord's death, he intercepted Mitsuhide's messenger trying to deliver a letter to the M\u014dri clan, informing them of Nobunaga's death and requesting an alliance, and withheld information. Hideyoshi managed to pacify the M\u014dri by demanding the suicide of Shimizu Muneharu in exchange for ending his siege of Takamatsu Castle, which the M\u014dri accepted. He then turned back to Kyoto with his forces in a swift forced march known as the \"Ch\u016bgoku \u014cgaeshi\".\nMitsuhide failed to establish his position after Nobunaga's death, and Oda forces under Hideyoshi defeated his army at the Battle of Yamazaki in July 1582. During a losing battle, Mitsuhide was killed in an instance of \" ochimusha-gari \" (\u843d\u3061\u6b66\u8005\u72e9\u308a), a medieval Japanese custom in which local samurai, farmers and bandits hunt fleeing samurai for bounty and the valuables on their person.\nHideyoshi continued and completed Nobunaga's conquest of Japan within the following decade.\nPost-death events.\nDeath and succession.\nThe goal of national unification and a return to the comparative political stability of the earlier Muromachi period was widely shared by the multitude of autonomous \"daimy\u014d\" during the Sengoku period. Oda Nobunaga was the first for whom this goal seemed attainable. He controlled most of Honshu shortly before his death in the Honn\u014d-ji Incident of 1582.\nAfter the incident, Mitsuhide declared to the world that he would rule over Nobunaga's territory, but was soon defeated by Toyotomi Hideyoshi. The loss of his position and power so quickly gave rise to the idiom .\nLater, Hideyoshi succeeded in regaining Oda's territory and wrested control of it from the Oda clan, further expanding his dominion greatly. And when he was appointed to the highest rank of kuge, Kanpaku, despite being a common-born samurai, and in 1590, eight years after the incident, he achieved the unification of Japan.\nThe nature of the succession of power through the three \"daimy\u014d\" is reflected in a well-known Japanese idiom:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Nobunaga pounds the national rice cake, Hideyoshi kneads it, and in the end, Ieyasu sits down and eats it.\nThe changing character of power through Nobunaga, Hideyoshi, and Ieyasu is reflected in another well-known idiom:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;poem&gt;Nobunaga said: \"Little bird, sing. If you don't sing, I will kill you\".\nHideyoshi said: \"Little bird, sing. If you don't sing, I will make you sing\".\nIeyasu said: \"Little bird, sing. If you don't sing, I will wait for you to sing\".&lt;/poem&gt;\nAll three were born within eight years of each other (1534 to 1542), started their careers as samurai, and finished them as statesmen. Nobunaga inherited his father's domain at the age of 17, and quickly gained control of Owari Province through . Hideyoshi started his career in Nobunaga's army as an but quickly rose up through the ranks as a samurai. Ieyasu initially fought against Nobunaga as the heir of a rival \"daimy\u014d\", but later expanded his own inheritance through a profitable alliance with Nobunaga.\nLater plans.\nIn 1579, Nobunaga's resignation from his posts as Udaijin (Minister of the Right) and Ukonoe no daisho (Right general of the Imperial Guard) baffled the Imperial Court. This was because Nobunaga, who was on the verge of unifying the country, did not hold an official position that could shake the authority of the Imperial Court.\nTherefore, in May 1582, the Imperial Court sent a message to Nobunaga, offering him a government position of his choice among Sei-i Taish\u014dgun, Kanpaku and Daj\u014d-daijin. However, Nobunaga did not give a clear reply and the 'Honnoji Incident' took place, so it remains unclear what kind of government scheme Nobunaga had in mind. \nIn 1582, Nobunaga was posthumously promoted and given the title of Daj\u014d-daijin and the court rank of . More than 300 years later, in 1917, he was further promoted and given the rank of .\nIn the addendum to Lu\u00eds Fr\u00f3is's 1582 \"Annals of Japan\" (on Nobunaga's death), it is stated that Nobunaga intended to conquer China. According to Fr\u00f3is, Nobunaga intended to organise a large fleet after the unification of Japan and to have his sons divide and rule the territory. However, there is no such statement in Japanese sources, and many researchers doubt its authenticity.\nAccording to Lu\u00eds Fr\u00f3is's \"History of Japan\", Nobunaga attempted to deify himself in his later years by building S\u014dken-ji in part of Azuchi Castle and installing a stone called Bonsan as a deity to replace him. Frois, a Christian, attributes this to Nobunaga's arrogance which drove him to the madness of wanting to be worshipped on earth, and the Honn\u014d-ji Incident was his punishment. \nMany researchers doubt the authenticity of Frois's description, as there is no mention of this in the Japanese sources. However, the existence of Bonsan itself is mentioned in \"Shinch\u014d K\u014dki\". As for the reason for his self-deification, it is thought that it was to give legitimacy to those with Oda family blood to rule the country, with a view to establishing a hereditary shogunate after the unification of the country. Later, after their deaths, Hideyoshi and Ieyasu directed themselves to be worshipped as deities, with Hideyoshi being deified as Toyokuni daimy\u014djin and Ieyasu as T\u014dsh\u014d Daigongen. \nIn Japan, there have been no small number of persons who have become gods since ancient times. However, they were deified by others after they died as human beings, whereas these three are unique in that they willingly tried to become gods before they died.\nThe Imperial Court and the Ashikaga Shogunate.\nNobunaga led a large army to Kyoto in honour of Ashikaga Shogun Yoshiaki and re-established the Muromachi Shogunate, under which he extended his power into the Kinai region. The conventional theory is that Nobunaga aimed from the outset to overthrow the Muromachi shogunate and clan system and, with Yoshiaki at the top, to seize real power himself, that is to establish a puppet government. In recent years, however, a theory has emerged that Nobunaga and Yoshiaki were good partners and that the final breakdown was due to Yoshiaki's betrayal of Nobunaga, and that Nobunaga did not originally intend to overthrow the Muromachi shogunate.\nAs for the Imperial Court, it was conventionally believed that Nobunaga tried to put pressure on the Imperial Court and destroy the existing order. In recent years, however, it has begun to be thought that Nobunaga may have consistently valued the Emperor and the Imperial Court. For the emperors and court nobles, who had lost their territories to the samurais and were forced to live in poverty without access to financial resources, Nobunaga was a reliable daimy\u014d who made huge donations, and for Nobunaga, his links with the imperial court helped to improve the Oda clan's image.\nPolicies.\nAfter conquering Owari and Mino, Nobunaga used the seal of to promote his vision with a view to unifying the country. \"Tenkafubu\" means \"spreading military power throughout the world\", and it is the idea of ruling the country peacefully, in other words, ending the Warring States period and restoring peace and order.\nStarting with the matchlock gun, Nobunaga paved the way for unifying the country through a chain of innovations, from the development of military technology and new weapons, to the international supply chain for importing raw materials for ammunition, to the development of domestic distribution networks, to the way the territory was governed. Those innovations were supported by the financial resources obtained through his economic plans.\nOda Nobunaga is known for his implementation of a series of innovative policies, such as the abolition of the barrier posts within his domain, thus allowing the freer passage of goods, and promotion of , an economic policy that aimed to revitalize commerce by allowing people to do business anywhere in the castle town, whereas previously they could only do business in designated areas. Rakuza attacked the privileges of the guilds and monopoly trade associations called Za, favoring free business.\nAt that time, samurai families controlled the farmlands and farmers, while temples, shrines, and court nobles controlled the commerce and distribution industry by controlling the Ichi (market) and Za (trade guilds). Nobunaga knew that his grandfather and father had gained wealth from the water transportation of Ise Bay by taking control of Tsushima and Atsuta ports. He himself also promoted the commercialization of his territory by increasing the circulation of goods and money through the above policies. Nobunaga's promotion of raku-ichi raku-za was intended to deprive temples, shrines and court nobles of their privileges and allow the warrior class to dominate the territory in all areas. In addition, the funds required to obtain the soldiers, guns, and other items that supported the unification of the country were obtained through this.\nNobunaga also ordered the construction and improvement of roads and bridges of the Kinai region. He built bridges across inlets and rivers, chiseled out rocks to make steep roads more gradual, widened roads to three and a half meters, and planted pine trees and willows on both sides of them. Nobunaga developed not only land transportation, but also maritime transportation, including the waterways of Lake Biwa and the sea routes of Ise Bay and the Seto Inland Sea. These measures enabled not only the free passage of people but also the free transportation of goods, thus facilitating distribution. The development of logistics brought benefits not only economically but also militarily, allowing soldiers and munitions to be delivered to the battlefield quickly and reliably.\nIn general, Nobunaga thought in terms of \"unifying factors\", in the words of George Sansom.\nThe Sengoku Daimy\u014d of the time did not change their strongholds, and had to return to their home after each battle, making it difficult for the Takeda, Uesugi, and other clans far from Kyoto to go to Kyoto. However, Nobunaga continued to move his stronghold as his territory expanded in order to control Kyoto, which was essential for unifying the country.\nHe moved from one base to another, from Shobata, Kiyosu, Komakiyama, Gifu, and Azuchi, and his castle in Osaka, the diplomatic and economic center of East Asia, was under construction shortly before his death. He always based his seats of power in the nodes of regional distribution and ensured the maintenance of public peace in the area, thereby promoting the development of the local economy and the concentration of capital in the cities.\nBacked by his enormous economic power, Nobunaga overwhelmed his opponents by building stone-wall castles such as Komakiyama Castle and Azuchi Castle, which consumed more labor and financial resources than conventional castles, and by constructing economic cities (castle towns) connected to them. Nobunaga thus politically extended his power throughout the country through civil engineering projects such as the construction of castles. Toyotomi Hideyoshi followed suit and built Ishigakiyama Castle and Osaka Castle.\nNobunaga implemented financial reforms that introduced a new monetary system. In 1569, the \"Oda Nobunaga Eiroku 12 Law\" was enacted, which is regarded by some as the beginning of early modern monetary policy in Japan. It was an epoch-making attempt to \"increase the volume of money in circulation\" and \"prevent the inflow of bad money\" at the same time. A fixed exchange rate system was introduced, and coins, which had been mixed in disorderly fashion, were clearly defined as standard coins and deteriorated coins. The Oda Clan's guarantee gave value to coins that were considered degraded coins in other regions, revived many coins that had been excluded from trade, and stabilised commercial transactions. At the same time, by differentiating the value of coins according to their exchange rate, the government prevented an excessive influx of deteriorated coins.\nNobunaga also used gold and silver as currency to trade in high-value commodities. Nobunaga himself played a role in expanding the circulation of gold and silver by using gold and silver for purchases in .\nOne of the attainments of Nobunaga's government, which aimed to unify the country, was the , which began in earnest in 1580, starting with the Kinai region. It was an administrative measure that required the daimy\u014d under his command to submit their harvest in the form of kokudaka figures. This was succeeded by Toyotomi Hideyoshi's .\nWhen asked by the Emperor and the Muromachi Shogun to assume the post of Vice Shogun, and offered the post of kanrei, which was effectively the highest rank in samurai society, Nobunaga declined and instead requested permission to rule directly over three of Japan's largest distribution centres, Sakai (Izumi province), Kusatsu and \u014ctsu (\u014cmi Province).\nWhat Nobunaga sought from the merchants of Sakai was their enormous wealth, as well as their expertise in the Nanban trade and their own trade routes to obtain raw materials for guns and gunpowder. Nobunaga took Imai S\u014dky\u016b, an upstart merchant from Sakai, under his control. Imai established Japan's first comprehensive military industry and supported Nobunaga's unification of Japan by mass-producing guns and securing an exclusive trading route for the import of potassium nitrate, a raw material for gunpowder that was not produced in Japan. Tsuda S\u014dgy\u016b, a key figure in Sakai's self-governing organization, also severed ties with Hongan-ji and submitted to Nobunaga.\nNobunaga demanded a large amount of war funds from Sakai. Sakai merchants initially refused, but were persuaded by S\u014dky\u016b and S\u014dgy\u016b to accept it. Thus, Nobunaga obtained Sakai without fighting. Imai S\u014dky\u016b, Tsuda S\u014dgy\u016b, and Sen S\u014deki (later Sen no Rikyu) were appointed as Nobunaga's tea masters and secured their positions as political merchants.\nNobunaga made personnel decisions based on ability and results, not titles. Until then, the family culture of warlords had been one of respecting family lineage and passing down positions from generation to generation, but Nobunaga made a major shift to a personnel system based on merit. It is known that Hashiba Hideyoshi came from a poor peasant background in Owari, while Akechi Mitsuhide came from a samurai background in Mino, but had spent a long time as a poor ronin. These two men caught up with and eventually overtook Nobunaga's old vassals, including Shibata Katsuie, Niwa Nagahide, Sakuma Nobumori, and others. Among the Oda vassals, Mitsuhide was the first to become \"the lord of one province and one castle\", and the second was Hideyoshi. This was unthinkable for other Sengoku Daimy\u014d.\nMilitary.\nMilitarily, Nobunaga changed the way war was fought in Japan. An unprecedented military revolution was taking place in Japan at the time. Through a military revolution using the new technology of matchlock guns, he ended the Sengoku period of decentralization and moved Japan into the early modern era of centralization. Nobunaga was the first of the other sengoku daimyo to own and use a large number of firearms from an early date.\nHe changed the perception that matchlock guns, commonly known as , were unsuitable for actual combat due to their short range and inability to fire continuously, to the perception that they were invincible weapons by deploying in large numbers firing them all at once.\nLocal historiography \"Kunitomo Teppoki\" states that Nobunaga had already recognised the potential of guns in 1549, six years after they were introduced to Japan, and put Hashimoto Ippa in charge of gun production, and that 500 guns were completed in 1550. \"Shinch\u014d K\u014dki\" also mentions that he learnt marksmanship from Hashimoto Ippa around 1550.\nFour years later, in 1554, he fielded guns for the first time at the Battle of Muraki Castle, where Nobunaga replaced his guns one after the other and fired them himself, taking the fort in a single day. The Battle of Nagashino in 1575 is famous for the continuous firing of guns, but Nobunaga had already carried it out 21 years earlier.\nDocuments left behind in Sakai, which was under the direct control of Nobunaga, describing the manufacture of guns reveal that Japan had already become the world's leading gun power, with mass production based on a division of labour for each part. Radiological analysis also revealed that Japanese-made guns using the Japanese sword forging technique were more stable in strength and more powerful because they contained fewer impurities.\nAlthough a mass production system for guns had been established, there was still no daimy\u014d capable of providing a stable supply of ammunition. Nobunaga was the first to make this possible by establishing an international supply chain to import raw materials for ammunition from China and Southeast Asia through Portuguese merchants, which he facilitated by putting international port cities such as Sakai under his direct control and protecting the Jesuits. Later, during the Tokugawa period, Japan exported large quantities of no longer needed firearms to the Netherlands, along with swords and other weapons.\nNobunaga had the previously disparate spear lengths aligned to 3 ken (about ) or 3 and a half ken (about ). The spear lengths used in the Sengoku period were generally 2 ken (). However, when Nobunaga was a teenager, he saw his comrades beating each other with spears in a mock battle and had his army replace their own spears with longer ones, as short spears were useless.\nThe way spears were used in those days was for miscellaneous soldiers under Ashigaru with long spears to form a line and advance, swinging their spears down from above as if they were striking rather than stabbing. This alone was powerful enough, and if the long spearmen formed a with their spearheads facing forward, they could sufficiently counter cavalry units, so the effect was enormous.\nNobunaga introduced civil engineering not only in the political field but also in the military field by turning the battlefield into a large-scale civil engineering project. This was clearly beyond the scope of preparations for a favorable outcome of the war. He invaded enemy territory in force, mobilizing construction workers, carpenters, blacksmiths, founders, miners, and others to construct roads and build tsunagi-jiro (linking castles). In attacking castles, he adopted the tsukejiro (attaching castle) strategy of building numerous fortifications around enemy castles and narrowing the siege while moving. Toyotomi Hideyoshi took charge of the works as a field supervisor under Nobunaga and later took over his methods.\nNobunaga is thought to have favored gambling tactics such as surprise attacks because of the Battle of Okehazama, but in reality, he preferred to use overwhelming military power to overpower his opponents.\nNobunaga tried to create a standing army by implementing the separation of soldiers and farmers. Samurais at that time were half-farmers and half-soldiers who spent most of their time as farmers, and only fought at the behest of their lords, who were also the owners of the farmland, in times of war. Therefore, they could not fight much during the busy farming season from summer to autumn.\nNobunaga, on the other hand, attempted to separate soldiers from farmers, although not as thoroughly as Toyotomi Hideyoshi later did. Each time Nobunaga moved his base of operations, he promoted the concentration of his vassals under his castles. As a result, the separation of troops and agriculture was promoted, allowing for planned group training and the formation of army units of different types , such as firearms units and cavalry units.\nDaimyo's bodyguards and messengers were called , and Nobunaga divided them into two groups. One group had a red Horo (cloak) on their backs, so they were called , and the other had a black Horo (cloak) on their backs, so they were called . The leader of Akahoro-sh\u016b was Maeda Toshiie and the leader of Kurohoro-sh\u016b was Sassa Narimasa.\nNobunaga placed great importance on intelligence warfare. After the Battle of Okehazama, he most highly valued Yanada Masatsuna, who reported every movement of the Imagawa forces that day, rather than the samurais who actually defeated Yoshimoto.\nNobunaga adopted a system of area armies, which enabled him to react in multiple regions simultaneously, and operated it in a large scale.\nNobunaga's army had a firm rule, known as the , whereby all vassals, including ashigaru and lower-ranking ones, were to be put to death if they stole even a single penny. In those days, it was common practice for sengoku daimy\u014d such as Takeda and Uesugi to allow their vassals to raid nearby villages to pillage them if they won a battle, fighting for the loot to be gained. \nIt was also common, after the battle was over, for traffickers to set up markets to sell the captured people. However, Nobunaga forbade the soldiers under his command from looting and violence against the people. On the contrary, food and other supplies were bought for a price. \nFurthermore, he took a tough attitude towards roadside bandits who stood in the way of trade. As a result, after Nobunaga united Owari, security improved to the extent that merchants could take naps on the roadside. These actions enabled Nobunaga to gain the support of the people and move towards unifying the country. Strict military discipline was inherited by Toyotomi Hideyoshi and Tokugawa Ieyasu, who recognized it as an important factor in gaining public support.\nNobunaga is said to have used six armored ships in the Second Battle of Kizugawaguchi in 1578.\nNobunaga, who suffered a heavy blow at the First Battle of the Kizugawaguchi from a h\u014draku-hiya of the Murakami Suigun, the core of the Mori Suigun, ordered Kuki Yoshitaka to build iron-armoured ships to repel the Mori Suigun attempting to bring provisions and other supplies to the Osaka Hongan-ji.\nThey are thought to have been large wooden ships, Atakebune, covered with iron plates, with cannons on the front and arrows and guns on the sides, with two or three tiers of turrets on the upper deck. However, as no actual ships have survived and historical documents are inadequately described, there are many theories about the appearance and structure of iron-armoured ships. Some believe that they were not actually iron-armoured ships, but simply European-style black ships, or that they may not have been completely covered with iron plates, but only important parts were covered with iron. It is also said that iron-armoured ships were intended to intimidate rather than attack, and could not move much themselves, and were more fortress-like ships floating on the sea.\nIn Tamon'in Eishun's \"Tamon'in Diary\", there are passages which state that the ship was \"a ship of iron\" and \"prepared to prevent guns (bullets) from going through\", and this is the only historical document that provides evidence that the ship was armoured with iron plates. Some argue that since \"Tamon'in Diary\" is a primary historical source, its account should be trusted, but it is only hearsay and was not witnessed by Eishun himself. On the other hand, the Jesuit missionary Organtino, who actually observed the ships, wrote in his report that it resembled a Portuguese ship and was surprised that such a ship had been built in Japan. If they were similar to the Portuguese ships of the time (galleons), it is assumed that they would have been very different from Atakebune, a keelless riverboat. The ships were also said to be equipped with three cannons and numerous elaborate and large long guns. \"Shinch\u014d K\u014dki\" (manuscript) mentions that \"big guns\" were powerful in naval battles, but does not say whether they were actually iron-armoured.\nCulture.\nNobunaga initiated a period in Japanese art history known as Fushimi, or the Azuchi-Momoyama period, in reference to the area south of Kyoto. He built extensive gardens and castles which were themselves great works of art. Azuchi Castle included a seven-story Tenshukaku, which included a treasury filled with gold and precious objects. Works of art included paintings on movable screens (\"by\u014dbu\"), sliding doors (\"fusuma\"), and walls by Kan\u014d Eitoku.\nNobunaga promoted the tea ceremony. Not only that, he is said to have built trust with his subordinates by successfully using the system for political use of the tea ceremony, which Toyotomi Hideyoshi later named .\nHe actively promoted the value of the tea ceremony in samurai society, giving it a value equal to the fiefdom and rank he received from his lord. He transformed the values of the samurai through the following three actions.\nNobunaga held tea ceremonies with limited participants and showed his authority by displaying his tea utensils, making it known that the tea ceremony was a samurai ritual. He forbade his vassals to hold tea ceremonies, but allowed those who made special achievements to hold tea ceremonies by giving them tea utensils. The vassals then began to take pleasure in Nobunaga's bestowal of specialties and to feel great honor in being allowed to hold tea ceremonies. Thus, among the warriors, the specialty tea utensils and the holding of tea ceremonies became of special value, and they began to covet tea utensils more than the territory given to them by their lord.\nNobunaga was famous for his great love of sumo, and frequently held sumo tournaments at J\u014draku-ji in Azuchi between 1570 and 1581, the year before his death.\nIn the beginning, the tournament attracted braggarts from all over \u014cmi Province, but gradually it began to draw from Kyoto and other regions. The largest tournament was held in 1578 at Mount Azuchi, with 1,500 participants.\nThe main reason for organising the tournament was, of course, that Nobunaga was a great lover of sumo. But there was also the practical advantage of selecting young men of good physique and martial prowess, and the aim was to demonstrate Nobunaga's authority by putting on a big show, while at the same time relieving popular discontent by providing entertainment.\nRegarding the relationship between Nobunaga and sumo, there is a theory that the Yumitorishiki (bow-twirling ceremony) and the format in which sumo wrestlers are divided into East and West and judged by a gy\u014dji (sumo referee) were born out of the sumo tournament organised by Nobunaga. \nShaving the sakayaki became a fashionable hairstyle that townspeople began to imitate, and became established in the Edo period. It is said that this has made the use of razor blades commonplace for the general public.\nReligion.\nNobunaga did not actively believe in any particular god or Buddha himself; according to Jesuit scholar Lu\u00eds Fr\u00f3is he told people there was no afterlife but he did not deny that he was an adherent of Hokke-sh\u016b, and it was common for him to pray for victory and to visit temples and shrines. He never denied or suppressed the beliefs of others for any reason, and was even willing to help and shelter them if they asked for help. Nobunaga rather respected them as long as they did not associate with the various daimy\u014ds or meddle in politics like fixers, but rather devoted themselves to their main task as religious people. In fact, for temples and shrines that do not go beyond their main religious duties, he made donations, paid for repairs to facilities, and relieved them of their territories.\nIt is sometimes said that Nobunaga hated Buddhism because of his wars with Hongan-ji, his suppression of Ikk\u014d-ikki, his fire attack against Mt. Hiei and his attacks on Mt. K\u014dya, but this appears to be a misconception. It is true that he showed no mercy, even to monks, but this was not because he hated Buddhism. There is a saying that if you kill a monk, you will be cursed for seven generations, but unlike most daimy\u014ds of the time, Nobunaga simply did not have such a taboo. Nobunaga only fought Buddhist forces as thoroughly as he had fought other Sengoku Daimy\u014ds, and while it is true that he killed thousands of monks and tens of thousands of believers, he never forbade their faith itself. Nobunaga would forgive them if they complied with his advice to surrender, but if they did not, he would send a large army to massacre them and try to suppress them through fear. \nNobunaga attempted to isolate the Osaka Hongan-ji by exterminating the Ikk\u014d-ikki in various parts of the country. Nobunaga's massacre is generally criticized, but there is also the view that Nobunaga had no choice but to massacre them as a result of Hongan-ji Temple's request for thorough resistance from its followers. In the case of Mount Hiei and Mount Koya, they were attacked because they had joined the daimy\u014ds who were hostile to Nobunaga or sheltered defeated soldiers.\nNobunaga gave some liberty to the Jesuits to preach Christianity and sheltered their activities in Japan. One reason for this decision was because the use of matchlocks, which were necessary for warfare, was impossible without the Nanban trade, and because the Nanban trade required Jesuit mediation and diplomacy with Portugal. Although domestic production of guns themselves had already begun, nitre for the gunpowder and lead for the bullets were rarely produced in Japan at the time, so the only way to secure large quantities was to obtain those brought in from overseas by Portuguese merchant ships. The Jesuits also actively backed Nobunaga because of his tolerance to their mission and they considered him to be the closest person to unifying the country, and so they could use his help to curb the Buddhist influence as a common rival.\nPersonality and reputation.\nPersonality.\nLu\u00eds Fr\u00f3is described Nobunaga in his \"History of Japan\" as \"of medium height and lean build, with a thin moustache and a very clear voice\". Regarding his height, in \"Jesuit Japan Correspondence \u2013 Lu\u00eds Fr\u00f3is Letter\" of 1 June 1568, he also describes him as \"tall and lean, with a very high voice\".\nHis height is estimated to be 5 shaku 5 or 6 sun () tall based on a life-size seated wooden statue of him left at Daitoku-ji and the armour he is said to have used.\nAccording to Fr\u00f3is, he had great understanding and clear judgment, disdained gods, Buddha and other idols, and did not believe in any pagan divination. His sect was the Lotus sect, but he preached in high spirits that there is no creator of the universe, that the spirit is not immortal, and that nothing exists after death, and there are no awards or punishments in the afterlife.\nHe was extremely fond of warfare, devoted to the practice of martial arts, and was coarse. He was arrogant but honourable, strict in righteousness and enjoyed the deeds of justice and mercy. When others insulted him, he did not hesitate to punish them, but in certain matters he showed amiability and mercy.\nHe was also temperamental, though not greedy, and could be prone to temper tantrums. He was secretive in his decisions and extremely cunning in his strategies. He was magnanimous and patient, even when the fortunes of war seemed to be against him. He had a somewhat melancholy shadow, but when it came to difficult schemes, he was fearless, and people followed his orders in everything.\nHe was seldom disciplined, rarely swayed by the advice of his vassals, and was extremely feared and respected by all. He despised all the daimy\u014d of Japan and spoke to them condescendingly, as if they were his subordinate retainers, and the people obeyed him as if he were an absolute monarch. On the other hand, he also spoke cordially with a very lowly and despised servant.\nHe did not drink, ate sparingly, did not sleep much and was an early riser. He liked his house to be clean and was meticulous in his instructions on various matters. When talking to people, he disliked long conversations and lengthy preliminaries. He particularly liked the famous vessels of the tea ceremony, good horses, swords and falconry. He also loved watching people perform sumo naked in front of him, regardless of status.\nNobunaga's many great achievements were also thanks to the education of his father, Nobuhide. Originally, Nobuhide was only one of the three magistrates of Kiyosu, rather than the whole of Owari, but he gained so much power that he overpowered the Shugodai who ruled Owari. Nobuhide was not only a brilliant military man, but was also a well-known cultural figure in Kyoto. However, he believed that doing the same thing as himself at the turn of the age would no longer work, did not give Nobunaga the same education as himself at all. Nobuhide let Nobunaga do only what he wanted to do and what he was good at. As a result, he had no complexes about anything or anyone.\nA letter left by Luis Frois states that in response to a letter from Takeda Shingen signed , Nobunaga signed back . Takeda Shingen cited Nobunaga's Fire Attack against Mount Hiei, the head temple of the Tendai sect, as the reason for his hostility to Nobunaga, and to emphasise this and gain support from Buddhist forces, he took the name of Tendai Zasu, indicating that he was the head of Enryaku-ji. In reality, however, Shingen was not a Tendai Zasu or even a believer in the Tendai sect, and it is said that Nobunaga may have referred to himself as the Demon King to mock Shingen's own choice of title.\nReputation in youth.\nThe young Nobunaga was famous for his bizarre outfit and eccentric behaviour, and people called him . At that time, he was dressed in his yukatabira sleeves removed, half hakama with a flint pouch and others hanging from it, his hair tied into a chasen-mage with crimson or light green threads, a sword in a vermilion sheath, and all his attendants carried vermilion arms. He also devoured fruits and mochi standing up without caring about the public gaze in the streets, or walked in a dishevelled manner, leaning on others or hanging on their shoulders.\nNobunaga had no particular pastimes, but practised horsemanship in the morning and evening, and from spring to summer he would go into the river to practice water drills. He also learnt archery from Ichikawa Daisuke, marksmanship from Hashimoto Ippa and military tactics from Hirata Sanmi. Also at that time, he watched a mock battle using bamboo spears and said that spears could not be used if they were too short, so he had all his spears replaced with longer ones of 3 ken () or 3 and a half ken ().\nAt the funeral of his father Nobuhide, his younger brother Nobuyuki (Nobukatsu) wore a formal kataginu and long hakama and burnt incense according to etiquette, while Nobunaga came without long hakama, with his hair tied in a chasen-mage, a tachi sword and a wakizashi with a long handle wrapped in straw rope. He then grabbed some powdered incense, threw it at the tablets and walked away.\nAt a meeting between Nobunaga and his father-in-law, Saito D\u014dsan, D\u014dsan sneaked a peek to determine what kind of man his son-in-law was before they actually met. Then Nobunaga appeared with his hair tied up in a chasen-mage with a light green flat cord, wearing a yukatabira with one sleeve off, a tachi sword and wakizashi with gold and silver flakes pasted on the sheath and the long handle wrapped in straw rope, a thick taro stem rope as an arm band, seven or eight flint pouches and gourds hanging around his waist like monkey trainers, and a half hakama made of four pieces of tiger and leopard leather. According to \"Rojin Zatsuwa\", a compilation of stories by local elders, he also had a large picture of a penis dyed on the back of his yukatabira. On the other hand, he was accompanied by a large contingent of a peculiarly organized force of 500 long spearmen and 500 archers and matchlock troops. D\u014dsan went to the meeting place in his regular clothes, thinking that he would not need formal attire if he were to meet such a fool, but Nobunaga changed back into his haori and long hakama, and for the first time in his life, he appeared in formal attire with his hair neatly folded in futatsu-ori. On the way home, D\u014dsan's retainers laughed at him, saying, \"Nobunaga was a fool after all\", but D\u014dsan replied, \"That is why I am frustrated. My children will be under the command of that fool in the future\", he said with a bitter look on his face.\nChanges in public opinion.\nNowadays Oda Nobunaga is one of Japan's most popular historical figures. Despite his brutal image, Nobunaga is widely recognised for his appeal as an innovator who more than compensated for his shortcomings. However, the image of Nobunaga has changed significantly during the Edo period, from the Meiji to the early Sh\u014dwa era, and since World War II.\nOda Nobunaga's reputation in the Edo period was rather negative overall. The biggest hero of the time was Tokugawa Ieyasu, the founder of the Edo Shogunate, but he had a surprisingly low public profile, as he was deified and could not be easily treated in popular culture. The most popular figure among the common people was Hideyoshi, who rose from peasant to ruler of the country.\nIn the late Edo period, he finally received high praise in Rai San'y\u014d's \"Nihon Gaishi\" (1827). However, San'y\u014d evaluated Nobunaga from the perspective of imperial ideology more than he evaluated his military strategies. San'y\u014d interpreted Nobunaga's project to unify the whole country as being in the interests of the Emperor.\nIn the Meiji era, Nobunaga was still not highly regarded. This changed in the Taish\u014d era when the journalist Tokutomi Soh\u014d took up Nobunaga's innovations and gave him high praise for his continuous firing of guns and the abolition of customs checkpoints. However, what Soh\u014d considered most important was still Nobunaga as a kinnoka (imperialist) who ended the shogunate government that lasted from Kamakura to Muromachi and emphasized the imperial court. With militarism on the rise, academism also encouraged the image of Nobunaga as an innovator and loyalist.\nOn the other hand, the General Staff of the former Imperial Japanese Army studied the battles of Okehazama and Nagashino, and highly evaluated Nobunaga as a tactician.\nHowever, after the Second World War, as a result of the elimination of the imperialist view of history, it came to be thought that Nobunaga should be seen simply as a military commander and a politician. This is because the research style had changed from one based on war tales, such as \"Hoan Shinch\u014d Ki\", to one based on ancient documents. Gradually, Nobunaga's progressive nature began to be discussed and his image as the \"favourite of the times\" took root. As a result, the pre-war image of Nobunaga as an imperialist disappeared and a new image of Nobunaga as a revolutionary who destroyed the old order and challenged established authority emerged. However, the latest research, perhaps as a reaction to this, has shown a marked tendency to believe that Nobunaga did not uproot the existing system but came to terms with vested interests and promoted gradual reforms, and some assess that he was in fact a conservative daimy\u014d.\nIn popular culture.\nIn recent years, Nobunaga appears frequently in fiction and continues to be portrayed in many different anime, manga, video games, and cinematic films, very often wearing a Western-style mustache and a red European cape allegedly gifted to him. However, it was after World War II that Oda Nobunaga became popular.\nNobunaga had previously appeared as Toyotomi Hideyoshi's lord in various \"Taik\u014dki\" in which Hideyoshi played a leading role, such as \"Ehon Taik\u014dki\" published in the Edo period and Yoshikawa Eiji's historical novel \"Shinsho Taik\u014dki\", written during World War II, but in short he was a supporting character.\nNobunaga was often portrayed as a tyrant in variations of the \"Taik\u014dki\", where his lack of virtue and narrow-mindedness were often emphasised, although his abilities were appreciated.\nThe post-War image of Nobunaga began with writer Sakaguchi Ango's \"Oda Nobunaga\". He described Nobunaga as a rationalist to the bone.\nNobunaga first gained popularity in Japan with the hit film \"F\u016b-unji: Oda Nobunaga\" (1959), an adaptation of the novel \"Oda Nobunaga\" (1955\u201360) by historical novelist Yamaoka S\u014dhachi.\nThe popularity of Nobunaga was determined by the success of Shiba Ry\u014dtar\u014d's novel \"Kunitori Monogatari\" (1963\u20131966). Shiba positioned Nobunaga as a revolutionary with a clear will, a rarity in Japanese history, and established an image of Nobunaga in which light and shadow coexisted, not only evaluating his innovativeness but also criticising his brutality.\nHowever, he was not yet absolutely popular at the start of the serialisation and was a double starring with Akechi Mitsuhide. On the contrary, the original protagonist was his father-in-law, Saito D\u014dsan, and Nobunaga was not planned to appear. However, due to its popularity, Shiba was not allowed to finish the series and had no choice but to bring out Nobunaga and make it a two-part series.\nIn 1973, a Taiga drama based on this story was made.\nNobunaga is not the protagonist in Kurosawa Akira's film \"Kagemusha\" (1980), but he is the originator of the image of him in current fictional works, wearing a mustache, a cloak and western armour and drinking red wine.\nMayumura Taku's SF novel \"\" (1977\u20131978) is the originator of the plot in which a modern man travels back in time to the Sengoku period and meets Oda Nobunaga, and was made into an anime in 1986.\nThe anime \"Y\u014dt\u014dden\" (1987\u20131988) was the forerunner of the type of work in which the 'Demon King' Nobunaga stands in the way of the protagonists.\nIn video games, the branding of Nobunaga began in the 1980s with Koei's \"Nobunaga's Ambition\" series.\nAnd it was not until the 21st century that Nobunaga played the role of the Demon King in the video game world, starting with Capcom's \"Onimusha\" (2001) and \"Sengoku Basara\" (2005) and Koei's \"Samurai Warriors\" (2004). The \"Samurai Warriors\" design for Nobunaga is also seen in Pok\u00e9mon Conquest (2012), known in Japan as \"Pok\u00e9mon + Nobunaga's Ambition\"\nBy contrast, in the novel \"The Samurai's Tale\" by Erik Christian Haugaard, he is portrayed as an antagonist \"known for his merciless cruelty\".\nHistorical representations in video games (mostly Western-made strategy or action titles) include ', ', \"Throne of Darkness\", the eponymous \"Nobunaga's Ambition\" series, as well as \"Civilization V\", \"\", \"Nioh\", and \"Nioh 2\".\nKamenashi Kazuya of the Japanese pop group KAT-TUN wrote and performed a song titled \"1582\" which is written from the perspective of Mori Ranmaru during the coup at Honn\u014d temple.\nNobunaga has also been portrayed in fiction, such as when the figure of Nobunaga influences a story or inspires a characterization. In James Clavell's novel \"Sh\u014dgun\", the character Goroda is a pastiche of Nobunaga. In the film \"Sengoku Jieitai 1549\", Nobunaga is killed by time-travelers.\nNobunaga also appears as a major character in the eroge \"Sengoku Rance\" and is a playable character in \"Pok\u00e9mon Conquest\", with his partner Pok\u00e9mon being Hydreigon, Rayquaza and Zekrom.\nPortraits and statues.\nThe most famous portrait of Oda Nobunaga is (Kamishimo style) by Kan\u014d Motohide, a National Important Cultural Property, owned by Ch\u014dk\u014d-ji in Toyota City, Aichi Prefecture. Another important cultural property is (Sokutai style) in the collection of the Kobe City Museum.\nThere are also two other portraits, one in kamishimo and the other in sokutai, painted by Kan\u014d Eitoku, one of the leading painters of the Azuchi\u2013Momoyama period. A 2011 survey revealed that the kamishimo used for the memorial service had been redrawn from the original painting. The picture on the front is sober, but the first picture on the back remained in coloring is a gorgeous design with different colors on the left and right of the kosode, and an extra sword. Both ends of the mustache, which were sloppily lowered in the front painting, were raised on the reverse side, giving the face a dignified appearance. It is speculated that Toyotomi Hideyoshi, who came to power after Nobunaga's death, ordered the redrawing to make Nobunaga look weak.\nThe wooden statue of Lord Oda Nobunaga, owned by S\u014dken-in of Daitoku-ji, is a seated statue of Nobunaga wearing ceremonial clothes and a sword, approximately 115\u00a0cm tall. It is said that this is one of the two wooden statues carved out of fragrant wood (agarwood) for the first anniversary of Nobunaga's death, and the other was placed in the coffin in place of Nobunaga's body, which could not be found. The ashes of the burned wooden statue were buried in place of Nobunaga's body in the Bodaiji built at Daitoku-ji.\nAlong with Tokugawa Ieyasu, Toyotomi Hideyoshi, and Tokugawa Mitsukuni, a gold-painted statue of Nobunaga was constructed at the entrance of the Endoji Shopping Arcade in Nagoya in 2013. In 2019, it was subjected to vandalism as the statue was found without his left arm.\nFamily.\nNobunaga first claimed that the Oda clan was descended from the Fujiwara clan, and later claimed descent from of the Taira clan. According to the official genealogy of the Oda clan, after Taira no Sukemori was killed in the Battle of Dannoura in 1185, Taira no Chikazane, the son of Sukemori and a concubine, was entrusted to a Shinto priest at a Shinto Shrine in Otanosho in the Echizen province. This Chikazane became the founder of the Oda clan.\nAccording to modern theories, there is no evidence that the Oda clan was descended from the Taira clan, and there is a theory that they were actually descended from the Inbe clan, who were Shinto priests in Otanosho. One theory as to why Nobunaga came to claim descent from the Taira clan is that he justified his own seizure of power by exploiting . In other words, the idea was that the Minamoto clan, the shogun of the Kamakura shogunate, the H\u014dj\u014d clan, descended from the Taira clan (\"Shikken\" of the Kamakura shogunate), the Ashikaga clan, descended from the Minamoto clan (shogun of the Ashikaga shogunate), and the Oda clan, descended from the Taira clan, were destined to seize power in that order.\nHowever, there are theories that question whether the people of that time really believed in this idea, and whether the Hojo clan was really descended from the Taira clan.\nImmediate family.\nNobunaga was the eldest legitimate son of Oda Nobuhide, a minor warlord from Owari Province, and Tsuchida Gozen, who was also the mother to three of his brothers (Nobuyuki, Nobukane, and Hidetaka) and two of his sisters (Oinu and Oichi).\nDescendants.\nNobunaga married N\u014dhime, the daughter of Sait\u014d D\u014dsan, in a political marriage, but records indicate that they had no children.\nIt was his concubines, including Lady Ikoma (commonly known as Kitsuno), Lady Saka, Ky\u014dun'in (Onabe no kata), Y\u014dkan'in, Jitoku'in, Lady Hijikata, and My\u014dk\u014d'in gave birth to his children.\nKitsuno and Onabe's became Nobunaga's concubines after her husband was killed in battle, and Onabe had two sons with her former husband.\nKitsuno bore Nobunaga's heir Nobutada and his second son Nobukatsu, and Saka bore his third son Nobutaka.\nAfter the death of Nobunaga and Nobutada, Nobukatsu and Nobutaka fought for Nobunaga's succession, and finally Nobutada's son Hidenobu (Sanp\u014dshi) succeeded the head of the Oda clan.\nOther relatives.\nOne of Nobunaga's younger sisters, Oichi, gave birth to three daughters. These three nieces of Nobunaga became involved with important historical figures. Chacha (also known as Lady Yodo), the eldest, became the mistress of Toyotomi Hideyoshi. O-Hatsu married Ky\u014dgoku Takatsugu. The youngest, O-go, married the son of Tokugawa Ieyasu, Tokugawa Hidetada (the second shogun of the Tokugawa shogunate). O-go's daughter Senhime married her cousin Toyotomi Hideyori, Lady Yodo's son.\nNobunaga's nephew was Tsuda Nobuzumi, the son of Nobuyuki. Nobuzumi married Akechi Mitsuhide's daughter and was killed after the Honn\u014d-ji coup by Nobunaga's third son, Nobutaka, who suspected him of being involved in the plot.\nLater descendants.\nNobunaga's granddaughter Oyu no Kata, by his son Oda Nobuyoshi, married Tokugawa Tadanaga.\nNobunari Oda, a retired figure skater, claims to be a 17th-generation direct descendant of Nobunaga, and the ex-monk celebrity Mud\u014d Oda also claims descent from the Sengoku period warlord, but their claims have not been verified.\n Famous sword by sword smith 'Kunishige'. A Japanese national treasure. 'Heshikiri' means press and cut and is said to derive from an anecdote about Nobunaga pressing and cutting a chabozu who had been rude to him, including the entire cupboard in which he hid.\n A trophy from the Battle of Okehazama, which belonged to Imagawa Yoshimoto when he was killed. This sword was owned by Nobunaga, then passed to Hideyoshi and Ieyasu, and was called 'the famous sword that ruled the whole country'.\n Matsunaga Hisahide donated it to Oda Nobunaga. It is said that it was burned down in the Honn\u014d-ji Incident.\n D\u014djigiri is one of the Five Swords under Heaven (\u5929\u4e0b\u4e94\u5263) made by H\u014dki Yasutsuna, this was the legendary sword with which Minamoto no Yorimitsu killed the boy-faced oni Shuten-d\u014dji (\u9152\u5451\u7ae5\u5b50) living near Mount Oe. It was presented to Oda Nobunaga by the Ashikaga family and was subsequently in the possession of Toyotomi Hideyoshi and Tokugawa Ieyasu.\n means \" cutter\". In this case is a contraction of (\u5f13\u7c60\u624b), the arm guard used by a samurai archer. This name comes from an episode in which Asakura Ujikage cut an opposing samurai's in the Battle of Toji in Kyoto. Oda Nobunaga gained possession of this sword and had it shortened to its present length.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "22682", "revid": "31854479", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22682", "title": "Vector fonts", "text": ""}
{"id": "22684", "revid": "1298421761", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22684", "title": "Otto Wilhelm Hermann Abich", "text": "German mineralogist and geologist (1806\u20131886)\nOtto Wilhelm Hermann Abich (11 December 1806\u00a0\u2013 1 July 1886) was a German mineralogist and geologist who was among the first to conduct scientific studies in the Caucasus region and has been called the \"Father of Caucasian Geology\". He worked briefly at the Imperial University of Dorpat and then travelled as part of the Corps of Mining Engineers of the Russian Empire. He collected minerals and fossils across the regions in which he travelled including Armenia, Persia, Italy and Daghestan.\nBiography.\nAbich was the son of mining officer Heinrich Carl Wilhelm and his wife Johanna Wilhemine, daughter of the chemist Martin Klaproth. He was born in Berlin and initially went to study law at Heidelberg University but gave it up after two years and transferred to the natural sciences at Berlin university where his teachers included Alexander von Humboldt, Christian Leopold von Buch and Carl Ritter. He also studied philosophy under Georg Hegel and history under Leopold Ranke. His doctoral thesis in 1831 was in Latin. His earliest scientific work is related to spinels and other minerals. Following a recommendation by von Buch, he made special studies of fumaroles, of the mineral deposits around volcanic vents, and of the structure of volcanoes, travelling to Vesuvius, Aetna, Stromboli and Lipari around 1833-34. In 1842 he was appointed professor of mineralogy in the Imperial University of Dorpat. He worked for the Russian Empire and became a member of the Petersburg Academy of Sciences in 1853. His absence from Dorpat led to his being removed from the university and being placed in the Corps of Mining Engineers under M. S. Vorontsov. He travelled to the Caucasus, Daghestan, Armenia and northern Persia. Residing for some time at Tiflis, he investigated the geology of the Armenian Highland (this term was introduced by Abich) and Caucasus. In 1844 and 1845 he ascended Ararat volcano several times, studied the geological event of 1840 that was centered on Ararat (Akori village). He discovered some Miocene mammal fossils in Maragha. At the age of 50 he married Adelaide (Adele) daughter of chemist Hermann Heinrich Hess. In 1877 he retired to Vienna, where he published two volumes on his geological explorations in the Caucasus. He received the Constantine gold medal of the Imperial Russian Geographical Society for this, and a third volume was published posthumously, edited by Eduard Suess, with a biography. He died in Vienna from appendicitis and according to his wishes, he was cremated and the ashes buried in his mother's grave in Koblenz. The mineral Abichite was named after him.\nPublications.\nAbich published more than 190 papers. The following are some of the major writings, both book and papers in journals, of Abich:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "22685", "revid": "28438", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22685", "title": "Organization of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union", "text": "How the ruling Marxist-Leninist party was structured across the Eurasian power\nThe organization of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union was based on the principles of democratic centralism.\nThe governing body of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union (CPSU) was the Party Congress, which initially met annually but whose meetings became less frequent, particularly under Joseph Stalin (dominant from the late 1920s to 1953). Party Congresses would elect a Central Committee which, in turn, would elect a Politburo and a Secretariat. Under Stalin, the most powerful position in the party became the General Secretary, who was elected by the Politburo and Secretariat. In 1952 the \"Politburo\" became the \"Presidium\".\nIn theory, supreme power in the party was invested in the Party Congress. However, in practice the power structure became reversed and, particularly after the death of Lenin in January 1924, supreme power became the domain of the General Secretary.\nHigher levels.\nIn the late Soviet Union the CPSU incorporated the communist parties of the 15 constituent republics (the communist branch of the Russian SFSR was established in 1990). Before 1990 the communist party organization in Russian oblasts, autonomous republics and some other major administrative units were subordinated directly to the CPSU Central Committee.\nLower levels.\nAt lower levels, the organizational hierarchy was managed by Party Committees, or partkoms (\u043f\u0430\u0440\u0442\u043a\u043e\u043c). A partkom was headed by the elected \"partkom bureau secretary\" (\"partkom secretary\", \u0441\u0435\u043a\u0440\u0435\u0442\u0430\u0440\u044c \u043f\u0430\u0440\u0442\u043a\u043e\u043c\u0430). At enterprises, institutions, kolkhozes, etc., they were called as such, i.e., \"partkoms\". At higher levels the Committees were abbreviated accordingly: obkoms (\u043e\u0431\u043a\u043e\u043c) at oblast (zone) levels (known earlier as gubkoms (\u0433\u0443\u0431\u043a\u043e\u043c) for guberniyas), raikoms (\u0440\u0430\u0439\u043a\u043e\u043c) at raion (district) levels (known earlier as ukoms (\u0443\u043a\u043e\u043c) for uyezds), gorkom (\u0433\u043e\u0440\u043a\u043e\u043c) at city levels, etc.\nThe same terminology (\"raikom\", etc.) was used in the organizational structure of Komsomol.\nThe bottom level of the Party was the primary party organization (\u043f\u0435\u0440\u0432\u0438\u0447\u043d\u0430\u044f \u043f\u0430\u0440\u0442\u0438\u0439\u043d\u0430\u044f \u043e\u0440\u0433\u0430\u043d\u0438\u0437\u0430\u0446\u0438\u044f) or party cell (\u043f\u0430\u0440\u0442\u0438\u0439\u043d\u0430\u044f \u044f\u0447\u0435\u0439\u043a\u0430). It was created within any organizational entity of any kind where there were at least three communists. The management of a cell was called party bureau/partbureau (\u043f\u0430\u0440\u0442\u0438\u0439\u043d\u043e\u0435 \u0431\u044e\u0440\u043e, \u043f\u0430\u0440\u0442\u0431\u044e\u0440\u043e). A partbureau was headed by the elected bureau secretary (\u0441\u0435\u043a\u0440\u0435\u0442\u0430\u0440\u044c \u043f\u0430\u0440\u0442\u0431\u044e\u0440\u043e).\nAt smaller party cells, secretaries were regular employees of the corresponding plant/hospital/school/etc. Sufficiently large party organizations were usually headed by an exempt secretary, who drew his salary from the Party money.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "22686", "revid": "11290120", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22686", "title": "Oromo people", "text": "Cushitic ethnic group\nThe Oromo people (, ) are a Cushitic ethnic group native to the Oromia region of Ethiopia and parts of Northern Kenya. They speak the Oromo language (also called \"Afaan Oromoo\"), which is part of the Cushitic branch of the Afroasiatic language family.\nThey are one of the largest ethnic groups in Ethiopia. According to the last Ethiopian census of 2007, the Oromo numbered 25,488,344 people or 34.5% of the Ethiopian population. Recent estimates have the Oromo comprising 45,000,000 people, or 35.8% of the total Ethiopian population estimated at 116,000,000.\nThe Oromo were originally nomadic, semi-pastoralist people who later would conquer large swaths of land during their expansions. After the settlement, they would establish kingdoms in the Gibe regions and assimilating the natives. The Oromo people traditionally used the \"gadaa\" system as the primary form of governance. A leader is elected by the \"gadaa\" system and their term lasts eight years, with an election taking place at the end of those eight years. Although most modern Oromos are Muslims or Christians, about 3% practice Waaqeffanna, the native ancient Cushitic monotheistic religion of Oromos.\nOrigins and nomenclature.\nHistorical linguistics and comparative ethnology studies suggest that the Oromo people probably originated around the lakes Lake Chew Bahir and Lake Chamo. They are a Cushitic people and prior to their expansions, they inhabited only the region of what is now modern-day north Kenya and southern Ethiopia. The aftermath of the sixteenth century Ethiopian\u2013Adal war led Oromos to move to the north. While Oromo people have lived in the region for a long time, the ethnic mixture of peoples who have lived here is unclear. The Oromos increased their numbers through assimilation (\"Meedhicca\", \"Mogasa\" and \"Gudifacha\"), as well as the inclusion of mixed peoples (\"Gabbaro\"). The native names of the territories were replaced by the name of the Oromo clans who settled on it while the indigenous people were assimilated.\nAccording to Herbert S. Lewis, both the Oromo and the Somali people originated in southern Ethiopia but the Somali expanded to the east and north much earlier than the Oromo, and the Oromo lived only in southern Ethiopia and northern Kenya until the Oromo expansion began about 1530. Historical evidence suggests that the Oromo people were already established in the southern highlands in or before the 15th century and that at least some Oromo people were interacting with other Ethiopian ethnic groups. According to Alessandro Triulzi, the interactions and encounters between Oromos and Nilo-Saharan groups likely began very early.\nSubsequent colonial era documents mention and refer to the Oromo people as \"Galla\", which has now developed derogatory connotations, but these documents were generally written by members of other ethnic groups. The term Galla was in use for Oromo people by the Abyssinians, Arabs, and Nilotic people. The original meaning of the term is heavily disputed. An outdated but popular theory among European historians during the 19th century regarding the origin of the term was the belief that it derives from the Hebrew (\u05d7\u05dc\u05d1) and Greek (G\u00e1la), \"milk\", due to the outdated belief that the Oromos were lost white men. This name theory was especially popular among German historians who once believed that the Oromo were related to the ancient Gallic tribe in France. Another outdated theory of its origin comes from the belief that the Oromos rejected the offer to convert to Islam by Muhammad as their official religion, thus the prophet giving them the name Qal la or \u0647\u0648 \u0642\u0627\u0644 \u0644\u0627 meaning \"he said no\". Some sources claim it was a term for a river and a forest, as well as for the pastoral people established in the highlands of southern Ethiopia. This historical information, according to Mohammed Hassen, is consistent with the written and oral traditions of the Somalis. Others, such as the International African Institute, suggests that it is an Oromo word (adopted by neighbors), for there is a word, , meaning 'wandering' or 'to go home' in their language. Canadian philosophical professor, Claude Sumner, stated that the French explorer and Ethiopian traveler, Antoine Thomson d'Abbadie, claimed that the term had derived from an Oromo war cry whilst the Oromos were fighting on battlefields. The word Oromo is derived from meaning '[The] Children of Orma', or 'Sons of Men'. According to an alternative interpretation provided by Hugh Chisholm, 'Ilm Orma' translates to \"son of a stranger.\"\nHistory.\nThe earliest recorded mention of the Oromos comes from the Italian (Venetian) cartographer Fra Mauro, who notes a \"Galla\" River south of the Awash River, in his famous \"Mappomondo\", or map of the world, completed in 1460. This reference indicates that the Oromos inhabited this area of southern Ethiopia for at least a century and a half before their expansion north. All aspects of Oromo life was governed by the \"Gadaa\" system, a political and ritual system based on an egalitarian ethos, age grade social organization and highly structured institutions. Under Gadaa, every eight years, the Oromo would choose by consensus nine leaders known as (the nine Borana assemblies). A leader elected by the gadaa system remains in power only for 8 years, with an election taking place at the end of those 8 years. Whenever an dies while exercising his functions, (the symbol of power) passes to his wife and she keeps the bokkuu and proclaims the laws.\nThe first detailed history of the Oromo people comes from the Ethiopian monk Bahrey who wrote \"Zenahu la Galla\", or \"History of the Galla\" in 1593. They are also mentioned in the records left by Abba Paulos, Joao Bermudes, Jer\u00f3nimo Lobo, Galawdewos, Sarsa Dengel and others. These records suggest that the Oromo were a pastoralist people who began to move in large numbers into the central highlands of Ethiopia from their cradleland in the plains of southern Ethiopia during the 16th century. This large scale expansion is referred to as the \"Great Oromo Migrations\". Prior to this movement, the Oromos were divided into two major confederations, the \"Boorana\" and the \"Barento\", who lived in the west and east of the Rift Valley respectively. The Barento moved in an eastern direction, eventually settling in today's Arsi, Bale, Hararghe and Wollo regions. Whereas the Boorana trekked northwest, settling in the regions of Shewa, Illubabor and Welega.\nAccording to Richard Pankhurst, a British-born Ethiopian historian, this expansion is linked to the attempted conquest of the Ethiopian Empire by Imam Ahmad ibn Ibrahim, which created a political and military vacuum that allowed the Oromo to move relatively unhindered into both the Ethiopian Empire and the Adal Sultanate. Further, they acquired horses and their system helped coordinate Oromo cavalry warriors which enabled them to fight very effectively. Bahrey argues the success of the Oromos in battle was because all Oromo men were trained as warriors, while in Ethiopia only a small section of the population were warriors, the rest uninvolved in the defense of their country. The military discipline of the Oromos was noted in the memoirs of the self-proclaimed Patriarch of Ethiopia, Jo\u00e3o Bermudes, who observed that during the invasion of Dawaro, the Oromos \"did not come on without order like barbarians, but advanced collected in bodies, like squadrons.\"\nThe early 16th and 17th century witnessed the gradual integration of the Oromo into the Ethiopian Empire. Emperor Susenyos I, who came to power with Oromo support, did much to integrate them into the political establishment of the Christian state. Having grown up among the Oromo, he was fluent in their language and admired their way of life. He employed Oromo warriors, military tactics and combat formations against his rivals for the throne. Once in power, he filled high level offices with his Oromo supporters and settled various Oromo groups throughout much of Gojjam and Begemder. Under Susenyos's successors, many Oromos would continue to rise to positions of prominence in imperial service, and for a period even change the official language of the empire from Amharic to Oromiffa during the rule of the half-Oromo emperor Iyoas I. They would establish dynasties such as the Yejju dynasty that would be de facto rulers of Ethiopian Empire from 1784 to 1853 during the Zemene Mesafint, they would particularly have control over the provinces of Begemder and Gojjam. Another Oromo dynasty that would rise in the northern Ethiopian highlands was the Islamic Warra Himano (1580\u20131916), which transformed Wollo into a veritable Islamic state in the heartland of Christian Ethiopia. The Warra Himano would convert many Amhara Christians to Islam during its rule, and at the zenith of its power, the Warra Himano had their hegemony accepted in the various parts of Wollo: Ambasel, Qallu, Borena, Wore-Illu and Amhara Sayint. Notable rulers such as Ras Mikael of Wollo and the uncrowned emperor of Ethiopia, Lij Iyasu (1913\u20131916), descend from this ruling family.\nIn the late 16th century the Oromos had settled in the territories south of the Abay river in western Ethiopia. Within 60 years of their arrival, five Oromo states would emerge in the Gibe region, such as Gera, Gomma, Gumma, Jimma and Limmu-Ennarea. These states arose through the transformation of pastoralism to agriculture due to the fertile and adequately watered land of the region. This increased the importance of agriculture and led to the subsequent rise of a land owning class. The rich natural environment produced commodities that were in high demand and lead to the rise of a strong merchant class. These changes allowed the gadaa officials to acquire more authority and convert their elective offices into permeant monarchical institutions. In the eastern part of the country, especially in Arsi, Bale and Hararghe, the Oromo had remained predominantly pastoralists until the late 19th century. Only the Oromo who lived within the immediate periphery of the city of Harar adopted agriculture as their primary occupation, mostly to engage in trade with the inhabitants of the walled city. According to oral and literary evidence, certain Somali and Oromo clans fought each other throughout the sixteenth, seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, particularly near their eastern borders.\nThe French traveler, Charles-Xavier Rochet d'H\u00e9ricourt, visited Ethiopia in 1863, and was greeted by Sahle Selassie, the ruler of Shewa. During his time there, he observed the different ethnicities within Ethiopia, one of which were the Oromo people. He described them as such:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"[The] Galla breed is the most beautiful in Africa; it is not originally from Abyssinia; she came there by invasion, as we will see below in the history that I will give of the Kingdom of Choa (Shewa). The Gallas are, in general, well built, they have a tall figure, a broad and raised forehead, an aquiline nose, a well-cut mouth, a copper complexion rather than black; their hair is braided into small braids which float around their heads, and mix something graceful with the expressive and noble character of their physiognomy: accustomed, from their most tender youth, to ride horses, to carry the butcher and the spear, they are excellent horsemen and insensitive to the harshest fatigue; full of courage and valor in combat, they showed themselves, in their fields, skillful and laborious farmers: this great nation, because we can call it that could led by an enterprising leader, make itself master of the whole of Africa.\"\nIn the last quarter of the 19th century, the Oromo tribes and kingdoms fell under the rule of Menelik II of Shewa. Beginning in the 1870s, the Kingdom of Shewa annexed one Oromo territory after the other with unpreceded speed owing to the modern weapons acquired from the international arms trade and the disunity among various Oromo groups. The manner this conquest was carried out determined the form of administrations that was subsequently set up in the newly conquered areas. In areas where the Shewans encountered resistance, such as Arsi, the conquering generals were installed as governors and the Amhara soldiers or \"neftenya\" settled the region in military garrisons known as \"katamas\" which later become the administrative centers for Shewan rule. These officials and soldier-settlers lived off the land of the locals, who soon became serfs to the Shewan aristocrats. In the areas were the Oromos submitted peacefully, such as the Kingdom of Jimma, the indigenous rulers were made tributaries to the crown but were allowed to self-govern themselves with minimal interference from the central government. During Haile Selassie's rule, many Oromos lost their autonomous status granted to them by Menelik, Haile Selassie abolished the semi-independent status of many Oromo states and began to undergo a period of centralization. Pastoralists were evicted to make way for mechanized farming and the few members of the educated Oromo class were prevented from holding powerful positions, instead being held by assimilated or Amharized Oromo notables. Despite the great contribution of the Oromo regions to the Ethiopian economy, Oromos areas were left out of the modernization projects during the reign of Haile Selassie.\nThis discontent emanating from the political marginalization, economic exploitation and the cultural domination of the Oromo led to the rise of the Mecha and Tulama Self-Help Association in 1963, ostensibly for organizing Oromo self-help, but in fact to promote Oromo identity and fight the marginalization of the Oromo. The Mecha and Tulama Association was soon disbanded by the government, but its impact was significant. The movement raised the consciousness of the Oromo regarding the significance of their own cultural and historical contributions and their status as a people within the Ethiopian state.\nDemographics.\nThe Oromos are the largest ethnic group in Ethiopia (35.8% of the population), numbering about 40 million. They are predominantly concentrated in the Oromia Region in central Ethiopia, the largest region in the country by both population and area. They speak Afaan Oromoo, the official language of Oromia. Oromos constitute the third most populous ethnic group among Africans as a whole and the most populous among Horners specifically.\nOromo also have a notable presence in northern Kenya in the Marsabit County, Isiolo County and Tana River County totaling to about 656,636: 276,236 Borana, 141,200 Gabra, 158,000 Orma, 45,200 Sakuye, 20,000 Waata, and 16,000 Munyo Yaya. There are also Oromo in the former Wollo and Tigray provinces of Ethiopia.\nSubgroups.\nThe Oromo consist of two major branches that break down into an assortment of clan families. From west to east: the Borana Oromo, also called the \"Booranaa\", are a semi-pastoralist group living in southern Oromia and northern Kenya. The Borana inhabit the Borena Zone of the Oromia Region of Ethiopia and the former Northern Frontier District (now northern Kenya) of Northern Kenya. They speak a dialect of Afaan Oromo, the Oromo language.\nBarentu/Barentoo or (older) \"Baraytuma\" is the other moiety of the Oromo people. The Barentu Oromo inhabit the eastern parts of the Oromia Region in the Zones of West Hararghe, Arsi Zone, Bale Zone, Dire Dawa city, the Jijiga Zone of the Somali Region, Administrative Zone 3 of the Afar Region, Oromia Zone of the Amhara Region, and are also found in the Raya Azebo Aanaas in the Tigray Region.\nLanguage.\nOromo is written with Latin characters known as \"Qubee\". The Sapalo script was invented by the Oromo scholar Sheikh Bakri Sapalo (also known by his birth name, Abubaker Usman Odaa) during the 1950s. Oromo serves as one of the official languages of Ethiopia and is also the working language of several of the states within the Ethiopian federal system including Oromia, Harari and Dire Dawa regional states and of the Oromia Zone in the Amhara Region. It is a language of primary education in Oromia, Harari, Dire Dawa, Benishangul-Gumuz and of the Oromia Zone in the Amhara Region. It is used as an internet language for federal websites along with Tigrinya.\nMore than 35% of Ethiopia's population are Oromo mother-tongue speakers, which makes it the most widely spoken primary language in Ethiopia. It is also the most widely spoken Cushitic language and the fourth-most widely spoken language of Africa, after Arabic, Hausa and Swahili. Oromo is spoken as a first language by more than 40 million Oromo people in Ethiopia and by an additional half-million in parts of northern and eastern Kenya. It is also spoken by smaller numbers of emigrants in other African countries, such as South Africa, Libya, Egypt and Sudan.\nBesides first language speakers, a number of members of other ethnicities who are in contact with the Oromo speak it as a second language, such as the Omotic-speaking Bambassi and the Nilo-Saharan-speaking Kwama in western Ethiopia.\nReligion.\nThe Oromo followed their traditional religion, Waaqeffanna, and were resistant to religious conversion before assimilation in sultanates and Christian kingdoms. The influential 30-year war from 1529 to 1559 between the three parties \u2013 the Waaqeffanna, the Christians and the Muslims \u2013 dissipated the political strengths of all three. The religious beliefs of the Oromo people evolved in this socio-political environment. In the 19th century and first half of the 20th century, Protestant or Catholic missionaries' efforts spread Christianity among the Oromo. Organizations included the Sudan Interior Mission, the Bible Churchmen's Missionary Society, the Seventh-Day Adventists, the United Presbyterian Mission of the US, the Church Mission to the Jews, Evangeliska Fosterlands-Stiftelsen, Bibeltrogna V\u00e4nner, and the Hermannsburg Mission.\nIn the mid and late 19th century, the Ethiopian emperors were faced with widespread rifts and disputes in the Ethiopian Orthodox Tewahedo Church and crippling ethnic and religious divisions that plagued the empire and exposed it to the intervention and meddling of neighboring Muslims (especially Egypt and the Ottoman Empire) and European powers. The emperors that ruled in that period, Tewodros II, Yohannes IV, and Menelik II, thus strove to suppress disunion and schism both within and without the Ethiopian Church and were often intolerant towards other religions. The Wollo Oromo, the Arsi Oromo, and the Tulama Oromo were among those who violently clashed with the Ethiopian expansion in the region in the 19th century and the empire's attempts at enforcing unity through the propagation of Orthodox Christianity, as the majority of these groups were not Christian but Muslims.\nIn the 2007 Ethiopian census for Oromia region, which included Oromo and some non-Oromo residents, there was a total of 13,107,963 followers of Christianity (8,204,908 Orthodox, 4,780,917 Protestant, 122,138 Catholic), 12,835,410 followers of Islam, 887,773 followers of traditional religions, and 162,787 followers of other religions. Accordingly, the Oromia region is approximately 40% to 45% Christian (8,204,908 or 30.4% Orthodox, 4,780,917 or 17.7% Protestant, 122,138 Catholic), 55% to 60% Muslim and 3.3% followers of traditional religions.\nAccording to a 2016 estimate by James Minahan, about half of the Oromo people are Sunni Muslim, a third are Ethiopian Orthodox, and the rest are mostly Protestants or follow their traditional religious beliefs. The traditional religion is more common in southern Oromo populations and Christianity more common in and near the urban centers, while Islam is more common near the Somali border and in the north.\nCuisine.\nOromo dishes.\nThe Oromo cuisine consists of various vegetable and meat side dishes and entr\u00e9es. Pork is typically not in Oromo cuisine, as it is considered taboo for Orthodox Oromos and Muslim Oromos who make up over 90% of the population combined, unlike with Catholics among others. Oromo people are believed to be one of the first to have cultivated coffee in Ethiopia and recognise its energizing effect.\nCulture.\nGadaa.\nOromo people have governed themselves in accordance with the Gadaa system long before the 16th century. The system regulates the political, economic, social and religious activities of the community. Oromo were traditionally a culturally homogeneous society with genealogical ties. A male born in the Oromo clan went through five stages of eight years, where his life established his role and status for consideration to a \"Gadaa\" office. Every eight years, the Oromo would choose by consensus nine leaders for the office. A leader elected by the \"Gadaa\" system remains in power only for eight years, with an election taking place at the end of those eight years.\nThere are three \"Gadaa\" organs of governance: Gadaa Council, Gadaa General Assembly (), and the Qallu Assembly. The Gadaa Council is considered the collective achievement of the members of the Gadaa class. It is responsible for coordinating irreecha. The Gadaa General Assembly is the legislative body of the Gadaa government, while the Qallu Assembly is the religious institution.\nCalendar.\nThe Oromo people developed a lunisolar calendar; different geographically and religiously distinct Oromo communities use the same calendar. This calendar is sophisticated and similar to ones found among the Chinese, the Hindus and the Mayans. It was tied to the traditional religion of the Oromos, and used to schedule the \"Gadaa\" system of elections and power transfer.\nThe Borana Oromo calendar system was once thought to be based upon an earlier Cushitic calendar developed around 300 BC found at Namoratunga. Reconsideration of the Namoratunga site led astronomer and archaeologist Clive Ruggles to conclude that there is no relationship. The new year of the Oromo people, according to this calendar, falls in the month of October. The calendar has no weeks but a name for each day of the month. It is a lunar-stellar calendar system.\nOromumma.\nSome modern authors such as Gemetchu Megerssa have proposed the concept of , or 'Oromoness' as a cultural common between Oromo people. The word is derived by combining \"Oromo\" with the Arabic term \"ummah\" (community). However, according to Terje \u00d8steb\u00f8 and other scholars, this term is a neologism from the late 1990s and its link Oromo ethno-nationalism and Salafi Islamic discourse has been questioned, in their disagreement with Christian Amhara and other ethnic groups.\nThe Oromo people, depending on their geographical location and historical events, have variously converted to Islam, to Christianity, or remained with their traditional religion (Waaqeffanna). According to Gemetchu Megerssa, the subjective reality is that \"neither traditional Oromo rituals nor traditional Oromo beliefs function any longer as a cohesive and integral symbol system\" for the Oromo people, not just regionally but even locally. The cultural and ideological divergence within the Oromo people, in part from their religious differences, is apparent from the constant impetus for negotiations between broader Oromo spokespersons and those Oromo who are Ahl al-Sunna followers, states Terje \u00d8steb\u00f8. The internally evolving cultural differences within the Oromos have led some scholars such as Mario Aguilar and Abdullahi Shongolo to conclude that \"a common identity acknowledged by all Oromo in general does not exist\".\nSocial stratification.\nOromo people regionally developed social stratification consisting of four hierarchical strata. The highest strata were the nobles called the ; below them were the (some 17th- to 19th-century Ethiopian texts refer them as the ). Below these two upper castes were the despised castes of artisans, and at the lowest level were the slaves.\nIn the Islamic Kingdom of Jimma, the Oromo society's caste strata predominantly consisted of endogamous, inherited artisanal occupations. Each caste group has specialized in a particular occupation such as iron working, carpentry, weapon making, pottery, weaving, leather-working and hunting.\nEach caste in the Oromo society had a designated name. For example, were smiths, were potters, were tanners and leatherworkers, were weavers, were beekeepers and honey-makers, and were hunters and foragers. While slaves were a stratum within the society, many Oromos, regardless of caste, were sold into slavery elsewhere. By the 19th century, Oromo slaves were sought after and a major part of slaves sold in Gondar and Gallabat slave markets at Ethiopia-Sudan border, as well as the Massawa and Tajura markets on the Red Sea. There was also a large slave market at al Hudaydah on the coast of Yemen.\nLivelihood.\nThe Oromo people are engaged in many occupations. The southern Oromo (specifically the Borana Oromo) are largely pastoralists who raise goats and cattle. Other Oromo groups have a more diverse economy which includes agriculture and work in urban centers. Some Oromo also sell many products and food items like coffee beans (coffee being a favorite beverage among the Oromo) at local markets.\nContemporary era.\nHuman rights issues.\nIn December 2009, a 96-page report titled \"Human Rights in Ethiopia: Through the Eyes of the Oromo Diaspora\", compiled by the Advocates for Human Rights, documented human rights violations against the Oromo in Ethiopia under three successive regimes: the Ethiopian Empire under Haile Selassie, Marxist Derg and the Ethiopian People's Revolutionary Democratic Front (EPRDF), dominated by members of the Tigrayan People's Liberation Front (TPLF) and which was accused to have arrested approximately 20,000 suspected OLF members, to have driven most OLF leadership into exile, and to have effectively neutralized the OLF as a political force in Ethiopia.\nAccording to the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, the Oromia Support Group (OSG) recorded 594 extrajudicial killings of Oromos by Ethiopian government security forces and 43 disappearances in custody between 2005 and August 2008.\nStarting in November 2015, during a wave of mass protests, mainly by Oromos, over the expansion of the municipal boundary of the city of Addis Ababa into Oromia, over 500 people have been killed and many more have been injured, according to human-rights advocates and independent monitors. The protests have since spread to other ethnic groups and encompass wider social grievances. Ethiopia declared a state of emergency in response to Oromo and Amhara protests in October 2016.\nWith the rising political unrest, there was ethnic violence involving the Oromo such as the Oromo\u2013Somali clashes between the Oromo and the ethnic Somalis, leading to up to 400,000 displaced in 2017. Gedeo\u2013Oromo clashes between the Oromo and the Gedeo people in the south of the country and continued violence in the Oromia-Somali border region led to Ethiopia having the largest number of people in the world fleeing their homes in 2018, with 1.4 million newly displaced people. In September 2018, in the minority protest that took place in Oromia near Addis Ababa, 23 people were killed following the deaths of 43 Oromos in the Addis Ababa neighborhood of Saris Abo. Some have blamed the rise in ethnic violence in the Oromia Special Zone Surrounding Finfinne on the Prime Minister Abiy Ahmed for giving space to groups formerly banned by previous Tigrayan-led governments, such as the Oromo Liberation Front and Ginbot 7.\nProtests broke out across Ethiopia, chiefly in the Oromia region, following the assassination of musician Hachalu Hundessa on 29 June 2020, leading to the deaths of at least 200 people. On 30 June 2020, a statue of former Ethiopian emperor Haile Selassie in London was destroyed by Oromo protestors in response to the killing of popular singer Hachalu Hundessa and grievances of the Oromo language being banned from education, and the use in administration under the Haile Selassie regime.\nPolitical organizations.\nThe Oromo have played a major role in the internal dynamics of Ethiopia. Accordingly, Oromos played major roles in all three main political movements in Ethiopia (centralist, federalist and secessionist) during the 19th and 20th century. In addition to holding high powers during the centralist government and the monarchy, the Raya Oromos in the Tigray regional state played a major role in the Weyane revolt, challenging Emperor Haile Selassie I 's rule in the 1940s. Simultaneously, both federalist and secessionist political forces developed inside the Oromo community.\nAt present a number of ethnic-based political organizations have been formed to promote the interests of the Oromo. The first was the Mecha and Tulama Self-Help Association was founded in January 1963, but was disbanded by the government after several increasingly tense confrontations in November 1966. Later groups include the Oromo Liberation Front (OLF), Oromo Federalist Democratic Movement (OFDM), the United Liberation Forces of Oromia (ULFO), the Islamic Front for the Liberation of Oromia (IFLO), the Oromia Liberation Council (OLC), the Oromo National Congress (ONC, recently changed to OPC) and others. Another group, the Oromo People's Democratic Organization (OPDO), is one of the four parties that form the ruling Ethiopian People's Revolutionary Democratic Front (EPRDF) coalition. The ONC, for example, was part of the United Ethiopian Democratic Forces coalition that challenged the EPRDF in the Ethiopian general elections of 2005.\nSeveral of these groups seek to create an independent Oromo nation, some using armed force. Meanwhile, the ruling OPDO and several opposition political parties in the Ethiopian parliament believe in ethnic federalism. However, most Oromo opposition parties in Ethiopia condemn the economic and political inequalities in the country. Progress toward independence started in the 1960s and 70s, but progress has been slow aside from the creation of Oromo-focused banks, notably the Oromo-owned Awash International Bank in 1994 and the Oromia Bank (formerly Oromia National Bank) established in 2008.\nRadio broadcasts began in the Oromo language in Somalia in 1960 on Radio Mogadishu. Within Kenya there has been radio broadcasting in Oromo (in the Borana dialect) on the Voice of Kenya since at least the 1980s. Broadcasting in Oromo began in Ethiopia during the 1974 revolution, in which Radio Harar began broadcasting. The first private Afaan Oromoo newspaper in Ethiopia, \"Jimma Times\", also known as , was recently established, but it has faced a lot of harassment and persecution from the Ethiopian government since its beginning. Abuse of Oromo media is widespread in Ethiopia and reflective of the general oppression Oromos face in the country.\nVarious human rights organizations have publicized the government persecution of Oromos in Ethiopia for decades. In 2008, the OFDM opposition party condemned the government's indirect role in the death of hundreds of Oromos in western Ethiopia. According to Amnesty International, \"between 2011 and 2014, at least 5000 Oromos have been arrested based on their actual or suspected peaceful opposition to the government. These include thousands of peaceful protestors and hundreds of opposition political party members. The government anticipates a high level of opposition in Oromia, and signs of dissent are sought out and regularly, sometimes pre-emptively, suppressed. In numerous cases, actual or suspected dissenters have been detained without charge or trial, killed by security services during protests, arrests and in detention.\"\nAccording to Amnesty International, there is a sweeping repression in the Oromo region of Ethiopia. On 12 December 2015, the German broadcaster Deutsche Welle reported violent protests in the Oromo region of Ethiopia in which more than 20 students were killed. According to the report, the students were protesting against the government's re-zoning plan named 'Addis Ababa Master Plan'.\nOn 2 October 2016, between 55 and 300 festival-goers were massacred at the most sacred and largest event among the Oromo, the Irreechaa cultural thanksgiving festival. In one day, dozens were killed and many injured. Every year, millions of Oromos gather in Bishoftu for this annual celebration. That year Ethiopian security forces responded to peaceful protests by firing tear gas and live bullets at over two million people surrounded by a lake and cliffs. In the week that followed, angry youth attacked government buildings and private businesses. On 8 October, the government responded with an abusive and far-reaching state of emergency, which was lifted in August 2017. During the state of emergency, security forces arbitrarily detained over 21,000 people.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "22687", "revid": "1319155520", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22687", "title": "Oral history", "text": "History taken verbally and recorded or transcribed\nOral history is the collection and study of historical information from\npeople, families, important events, or everyday life using audiotapes, videotapes, or transcriptions of planned interviews. These interviews are conducted with people who participated in or observed past events and whose memories and perceptions of these are to be preserved as an aural record for future generations. Oral history strives to obtain information from different perspectives and most of these cannot be found in written sources. \"Oral history\" also refers to information gathered in this manner and to a written work (published or unpublished) based on such data, often preserved in archives and large libraries. Knowledge presented by oral history is unique in that it shares the tacit perspective, thoughts, opinions and understanding of the interviewee in its primary form.\nThe term is sometimes used in a more general sense to refer to the study of information about past events that witnesses told anybody else, but professional historians usually consider this to be the study of oral tradition or \"traditional oral history\" due to the source receiving the information aurally.\nOverview.\nIt is believed that the term \"oral history\" originates with Joe Gould, a homeless man living in New York City who solicited donations by claiming that he was working on a massive manuscript called \"An Oral History of Our Time\", which he said consisted of thousands of recorded conversations on various topics. Although he was known to have a history of mental illness and violence, Gould was beloved by some writers in Greenwich Village, including Ezra Pound and E. E. Cummings. His writing, supposedly excerpts from this \"Oral History\", was published in elite literary magazines, and he was eventually profiled in \"The New Yorker\".\nOne of the earliest academic oral history projects was Columbia University's Oral History Research Office, which was established in 1948 by Professor Allan Nevins. It consists of almost 8,000 taped memoirs and nearly 1,000,000 pages of transcript; it is the oldest and still largest organized oral history programs in the world.\nOral history has become an international movement in historical research. This is partly attributed to the development of information technology, which allowed a method rooted in orality to contribute to research, particularly the use of personal testimonies made in a wide variety of public settings. For instance, oral historians have discovered the endless possibilities of posting data and information on the Internet, making them readily available to scholars, teachers, and ordinary people. This reinforced the viability of oral history since the new modes of transmission allowed history to get off archival shelves and reach the larger community.\nOral historians in different countries have approached the collection, analysis, and dissemination of oral history in different modes. There are many ways of creating and studying oral histories even within individual national contexts.\nAccording to the \"Columbia Encyclopedia\":, the accessibility of tape recorders in the 1960s and 1970s led to oral documentation of the era's movements and protests. Following this, oral history has increasingly become a respected record type. Some oral historians now also account for the subjective memories of interviewees due to the research of Italian historian Alessandro Portelli and his associates.\nOral histories are also used in many communities to document the experiences of survivors of tragedies. Following the Holocaust, there has emerged a rich tradition of oral history, particularly of Jewish survivors. The United States Holocaust Memorial Museum has an extensive archive of over 70,000 oral history interviews. There are also several organizations dedicated specifically to collecting and preserving oral histories of survivors. Oral history as a discipline has fairly low barriers to entry, so it is an act in which laypeople can readily participate. In his book https://, Donald Ritchie wrote that \"oral history has room for both the academic and the layperson. With reasonable training... anyone can conduct a useable oral history.\" This is especially meaningful in cases like the Holocaust, where survivors may be less comfortable telling their story to a journalist than they would be to a historian or family member.\nIn the United States, there are several organizations dedicated to doing oral history which are not affiliated with universities or specific locations. StoryCorps is one of the most well-known of these: following the model of the Federal Writers\u2019 Project created as part of the Works Progress Administration, StoryCorps\u2019 mission is to record the stories of Americans from all walks of life. On contrast to the scholarly tradition of oral history, StoryCorps subjects are interviewed by people they know. There are a number of StoryCorps initiatives that have targeted specific populations or problems, following in the tradition of using oral history as a method to amplify voices that might otherwise be marginalized.\nThe development of digital databases with their text-search tools is one of the important aspects to the technology-based oral historiography. These made it easier to collect and disseminate oral history since access to millions of documents on national and international levels can be instantaneous.\nGrowth and development.\nIn Europe.\nGreat Britain and Ireland.\nSince the early 1970s, oral history in Britain has grown from being a method in folklore studies (see for example the work of the School of Scottish Studies in the 1950s) to becoming a key component in community histories. Oral history continues to be an important means by which non-academics can actively participate in the compilation and study of history. Practitioners in a wide range of academic disciplines have also developed the method into a way of recording, understanding, and archiving narrated memories. Influences have included women's history and labour history.\nIn Britain, the Oral History Society has played a key role in facilitating and developing the use of oral history.\nA more complete account of the history of oral history in Britain and Northern Ireland can be found at \"Making Oral History\" on the Institute of Historical Research's website.\nThe Bureau of Military History conducted over 1700 interviews with veterans of the First World War and Irish revolutionary period in Ireland. The documentation was released for research in 2003.\nDuring 1998 and 1999, 40 BBC local radio stations recorded personal oral histories from a broad cross-section of the population for \"The Century Speaks\" series. The result was 640 half-hour radio documentaries, broadcast in the final weeks of the millennium, and one of the largest single oral history collections in Europe, the Millennium Memory Bank (MMB). The interview-based recordings are held by the British Library Sound Archive in the oral history collection.\nIn one of the largest memory projects anywhere, the BBC in 2003-06 invited its audiences to send in recollections of the home front in the Second World War. It put 47,000 of the recollections online, along with 15,000 photographs.\nIn Italy.\nAlessandro Portelli is an Italian oral historian. He is known for his work which compared workers' experiences in Harlan County, Kentucky and Terni, Italy. Other oral historians have drawn on Portelli's analysis of memory, identity, and the construction of history.\nIn post-Soviet/Eastern bloc states.\nBelarus.\nAs of 2015[ [update]], since the government-run historiography in modern Belarus almost fully excludes repression during the epoch when Belarus was part of the Soviet Union, only private initiatives cover the oral memories of the Belarusians. Citizens' groups in Belarus use the methods of oral history and record narrative interviews on video; the Virtual Museum of Soviet Repression in Belarus presents a full virtual museum with intense use of oral history.\nCzech Republic.\nCzech oral history began to develop beginning in the 1980s with a focus on social movements and political activism. The practice of oral history and any attempts to document stories prior to this is fairly unknown. The practice of oral history began to take shape in the 1990s. In 2000, The Oral History Center (COH) at the Institute of Contemporary History, Academy of Sciences, Czech Republic (AV \u010cR) was established with the aim of \"systematically support the development of oral history methodology and its application in historical research\".\nIn 2001, Post Bellum, a nonprofit organization, was established to \"documents the memories of witnesses of the important historical phenomenons of the 20th century\" within the Czech Republic and surrounding European countries. Post Bellum works in partnership with Czech Radio and Institute for the Study of Totalitarian Regimes. Their oral history project \"Memory of Nation\" was created in 2008 and interviews are archived online for user access. As of January 2015, the project has more than 2100 published witness accounts in several languages, with more than 24,000 pictures.\nOther projects, including articles and books have been funded by the Czech Science Foundation (AV \u010cR) including:\nThese publications aim to demonstrate that oral history contributes to the understanding of human lives and history itself, such as the motives behind the dissidents' activities, the formation of opposition groups, communication between dissidents and state representatives and the emergence of ex-communist elites and their decision-making processes.\nOral history centers in the Czech Republic emphasize educational activities (seminars, lectures, conferences), archiving and maintaining interview collections, and providing consultations to those interested in the method.\nIn Spain.\nBecause of repression in Francoist Spain (1939\u201375), the development of oral history in Spain was quite limited until the 1970s. It became well-developed in the early 1980s, and often had a focus on the Civil War years (1936\u201339), especially regarding the ones who lost the war and whose stories had been suppressed. At the University of Barcelona, Professor Mercedes Vilanova was a leading scholar, who combined oral history with her interest in quantification and social history. Barcelona scholars sought to integrate oral sources with traditional written sources to create mainstream, not ghettoized, historical interpretations. They sought to give a public voice to neglected groups, such as women, illiterates, political leftists, and ethnic minorities. In 1987, at Universidade De Santiago de Compostela, Marc Wouters and Isaura Varela started an oral history project focused on the Spanish Civil War, exile, and migration. The project explored victims of the war and the Francoist Dictatorship and includes 2100 interviews and 800 hours of audio.\nIn the United States.\nOral history began with a focus on national leaders in the United States, but has expanded to include groups representing the entire population. In Britain, the influence of 'history from below' and interviewing people who had been 'hidden from history' was more influential. In both countries, elite oral history has emerged as an important strand. Scientists, for example, have been covered in numerous oral history projects. Doel (2003) discusses the use of oral interviews by scholars as primary sources, He lists major oral history projects in the history of science begun after 1950. Oral histories, he concludes, can augment the biographies of scientists and help spotlight how their social origins influenced their research. Doel acknowledges the common concerns historians have regarding the validity of oral history accounts. He identifies studies that used oral histories successfully to provide critical and unique insight into otherwise obscure subjects, such as the role scientists played in shaping US policy after World War II. Interviews furthermore can provide road maps for researching archives, and can even serve as a fail-safe resource when written documents have been lost or destroyed. Roger D. Launius (2003) shows the huge size and complexity of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) oral history program since 1959. NASA systematically documented its operations through oral histories. They can help to explore broader issues regarding the evolution of a major federal agency. The collection consists primarily of oral histories conducted by scholars working on books about the agency. Since 1996, it has included oral histories of senior NASA administrators and officials, astronauts, and project managers, part of a broader project to document the lives of key agents. Launius emphasizes efforts to include such less-well-known groups within the agency as the Astrobiology Program, and to collect the oral histories of women in NASA.\nFolklore roots and ordinary people.\nContemporary oral history involves recording or transcribing eyewitness accounts of historical events. Some anthropologists started collecting recordings (at first especially of Native American folklore) on phonograph cylinders in the late 19th century. In the 1930s, the Federal Writers' Project\u2014part of the Works Progress Administration (WPA)\u2014sent out interviewers to collect accounts from various groups, including surviving witnesses of the Civil War, slavery, and other major historical events. The Library of Congress also began recording traditional American music and folklore onto acetate discs. With the development of audio tape recordings after World War II, the task of oral historians became easier.\nIn 1946, David P. Boder, a professor of psychology at the Illinois Institute of Technology in Chicago, traveled to Europe to record long interviews with \"displaced persons\"\u2014most of them Holocaust survivors. Using the first device capable of capturing hours of audio\u2014the wire recorder\u2014Boder came back with the first recorded Holocaust testimonials and in all likelihood the first recorded oral histories of significant length.\nOver some forty years, Fran Leeper Buss interviewed marginalized women such as Jesusita Aragon, a traditionally trained midwife, and Maria Elena Lucas a migrant farm worker activist, using transcripts of the interviews to write their life stories.\nMany state and local historical societies have oral history programs. Sinclair Kopp (2002) reported on the Oregon Historical Society's program. It began in 1976 with the hiring of Charles Digregorio, who had studied at Columbia with Nevins. Thousands of sound recordings, reel-to-reel tapes, transcriptions, and radio broadcasts have made it one of the largest collections of oral history on the Pacific Coast. In addition to political figures and prominent businessmen, the Oregon Historical Society has done interviews with minorities, women, farmers, and other ordinary citizens, who have contributed extraordinary stories reflecting the state's cultural and social heritage. Hill (2004) encourages oral history projects in high school courses. She demonstrates a lesson plan that encourages the study of local community history through interviews. By studying grassroots activism and the lived experiences of its participants, her high school students came to appreciate how African Americans worked to end Jim Crow laws in the 1950s.\nMark D. Naison (2005) describes the Bronx African American History Project (BAAHP), an oral community history project developed by the Bronx County Historical Society. Its goal was to document the histories of black working- and middle-class residents of the South Bronx neighborhood of Morrisania in New York City since the 1940s.\nIn Asia.\nSyria.\nKatharina Lange studied the tribal histories of Syria. The oral histories in this area could not be transposed into tangible, written form due to their positionalities, which Lange describes as \"taking sides\". The positionality of oral history could lead to conflict and tension. The tribal histories are typically narrated by men. While histories are also told by women, they are not accepted locally as \"real history\". Oral histories often detail the lives and feats of ancestors.\nGenealogy is a prominent subject in the area. According to Lange, the oral historians often tell their own personalized genealogies to demonstrate their credibility, both in their social standing and their expertise in the field.\nPalestine.\nOral sources have established themselves as a vital, diverse, and adaptable source of information for the study of Palestinian history. Researchers benefited from the material contributions of oral studies to studies examining a wide range of topics, including folktales, food and clothing, linguistics and toponymy, genealogy, agricultural activities, and religious cult. Furthermore, due to the dearth of extant indigenous documentation, oral histories continue to play a crucial role in Palestinian academics' continuous efforts to narrate significant moments in Palestine's history. Researchers engaged in a flurry of methodological discussions as Palestinian oral history research reached its zenith in the latter quarter of the 20th century. Some of these researchers published their recommendations in manuals specifically designed to standardize and inform oral history research within the Palestinian context.\nNotable Palestinian oral history projects include the American University of Beirut's Palestinian Oral History Archive (https://), and the https://, Columbia University's http:// in New York, Duke University's Palestinian Oral History Project, the Palestinian Rural History Project (PRHP), https://, and Zochrot.\nChina.\nThe rise of oral history is a new trend in historical studies in China that began in the late twentieth century. Some oral historians, stress the collection of eyewitness accounts of the words and deeds of important historical figures and what really happened during those important historical events, which is similar to common practice in the west, while the others focus more on important people and event, asking important figures to describe the decision making and details of important historical events. In December 2004, the Chinese Association of Oral History Studies was established. The establishment of this institution is thought to signal that the field of oral history studies in China has finally moved into a new phase of organized development.\nUzbekistan.\nFrom 2003 to 2004, Professors Marianne Kamp and Russell Zanca researched agricultural collectivization in Uzbekistan in part by using oral history methodology to fill in gaps in information missing from the Central State Archive of Uzbekistan. The goal of the project was to learn more about life in the 1920s and 1930s to study the impact of the Soviet Union's conquest. 20 interviews each were conducted in the Fergana valley, Tashkent, Bukhara, Khorezm, and Kashkadarya regions. Their interviews uncovered stories of famine and death that had not been widely known outside of local memory in the region.\nSoutheast Asia.\nWhile oral tradition is an integral part of ancient Southeast Asian history, oral history is a relatively recent development. Since the 1960s, oral history has been accorded increasing attention on institutional and individual levels, representing \"history from above\" and \"history from below\".\nIn Oral History and Public Memories, Blackburn writes about oral history as a tool that was used \"by political elites and state-run institutions to contribute to the goal of national building\" in postcolonial Southeast Asian countries. Blackburn draws most of his examples of oral history as a vehicle for \"history from above\" from Malaysia and Singapore.\nIn terms of \"history from below\", various oral history initiatives are being undertaken in Cambodia in an effort to record lived experiences from the rule of the Khmer Rouge regime while survivors are still living. These initiative take advantage of crowdsourced history to uncover the silences imposed on the oppressed.\nSouth Asia.\nTwo prominent and ongoing oral history projects out of South Asia stem from time periods of ethnic violence that were decades apart: 1947 and 1984.\nThe 1947 Partition Archive was founded in 2010 by Guneeta Singe Bhalla, a physicist in Berkeley, California, who began conducting and recording interviews \"to collect and preserve the stories of those who lived through this tumultuous time, to make sure this great human tragedy isn't forgotten\". https://\nThe Sikh Diaspora Project was founded in 2014 by Brajesh Samarth, senior lecturer in Hindi-Urdu at Emory University in Atlanta, when he was a lecturer at Stanford University in California. The project focuses on interviews with members of the Sikh diaspora in the U.S. and Canada, including the many who migrated after the 1984 massacre of Sikhs in India.\nIn Oceania.\nAustralia.\nHazel de Berg began recording Australian writers, artists, musicians and others in the Arts community in 1957. She conducted nearly 1300 interviews. Together with the National Library of Australia, she was a pioneer in the field in Australia, working together for twenty-seven years.\nIn December 1997, in response to the first recommendation of the \"Bringing Them Home: Report of the National Inquiry into the Separation of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Children from Their Families\" report, the Australian Government announced funding for the National Library to develop and manage an oral history project. The Bringing Them Home Oral History Project (1998\u20132002) collected and preserved the stories of Indigenous Australians and others involved in or affected by the child removals resulting in the Stolen Generations. Other contributors included missionaries, police and government administrators.\nThere are now many organisations and projects all over Australia involved in recording oral histories from Australians of all ethnicities and in all walks of life. Oral History Victoria support an annual Oral history award as part of the Victorian Community History Awards held annually to recognise the contributions made by Victorians in the preservation of the state's history, published during the previous year.\nAcademia and institutions.\nIn 1948, Allan Nevins, a Columbia University historian, established the Columbia Oral History Research Office, now known as the Columbia Center for Oral History Research, with a mission of recording, transcribing, and preserving oral history interviews. The Regional Oral History Office was founded in 1954 as a division of the University of California, Berkeley's Bancroft Library. In 1967, American oral historians founded the Oral History Association, and British oral historians founded the Oral History Society in 1969. In 1981, Mansel G. Blackford, a business historian at Ohio State University, argued that oral history was a useful tool to write the history of corporate mergers. More recently, Harvard Business School launched the Creating Emerging Markets project, which \"explores the evolution of business leadership in Africa, Asia, and Latin America throughout recent decades\" through oral history. \"At its core are interviews, many on video, by the School's faculty with leaders or former leaders of firms and NGOs who have had a major impact on their societies and enterprises across three continents.\" There are now numerous national organizations and an International Oral History Association, which hold workshops and conferences and publish newsletters and journals devoted to oral history theory and practices. Specialized collections of oral history sometimes have archives of widespread global interest; an example is the Lewis Walpole Library in Farmington, Connecticut, a department of the University Library of Yale.\nMethods.\nHistorians, folklorists, anthropologists, human geographers, sociologists, journalists, linguists, and many others employ some form of interviewing in their research. Although multi-disciplinary, oral historians have promoted common ethics and standards of practice, most importantly the attaining of the \"informed consent\" of those being interviewed. Usually this is achieved through a deed of gift, which also establishes copyright ownership that is critical for publication and archival preservation.\nOral historians generally prefer to ask open-ended questions and avoid leading questions that encourage people to say what they think the interviewer wants them to say. Some interviews are \"life reviews\", conducted with people at the end of their careers. Other interviews focus on a specific period or a specific event in people's lives, such as in the case of war veterans or survivors of a hurricane.\nFeldstein (2004) considers oral history to be akin to journalism, Both are committed to uncovering truths and compiling narratives about people, places, and events. Felstein says each could benefit from adopting techniques from the other. Journalism could benefit by emulating the exhaustive and nuanced research methodologies used by oral historians. The practice of oral historians could be enhanced by utilizing the more sophisticated interviewing techniques employed by journalists, in particular, the use of adversarial encounters as a tactic for obtaining information from a respondent.\nThe first oral history archives focused on interviews with prominent politicians, diplomats, military officers, and business leaders. By the 1960s and '70s, influenced by the rise of new social history, interviewing began to be employed more often when historians investigated history from below. Whatever the field or focus of a project, oral historians attempt to record the memories of many different people when researching a given event. Interviewing a single person provides a single perspective. People misremember events or distort their accounts for various reasons. By interviewing widely, oral historians seek points of agreement among many different sources, and also record the complexity of the issues. The nature of memories is as much a part of the practice of oral history as are the stories collected.\nArchaeology.\nArchaeologists sometimes conduct oral history interviews to learn more about unknown artifacts. Oral interviews can provide narratives, social meaning, and contexts for objects. When describing the use of oral histories in archaeological work, Paul Mullins emphasizes the importance of using these interviews to replace \"it-narratives\". It-narratives are the voices from objects themselves rather than people; according to Mullins, these lead to narratives that are often \"sober, pessimistic, or even dystopian\".\nOral history interviews were used to provide context and social meaning in the Overstone excavation project in Northumberland. Overstone consists of a row of four cottages. The excavation team, consisting of Jane Webster, Louise Tolson, Richard Carlton, and volunteers, found the discovered artifacts difficult to identify. The team first took the artifacts to an archaeology group, but the only person with knowledge about a found fragment recognized the fragment from a type of pot her mother had. This inspired the team to conduct group interviews volunteers who grew up in households using such objects. The team took their reference collection of artifacts to the interviews in order to trigger the memories of volunteers, revealing a \"shared cultural identity\".\nLegal interpretations.\nIn 1997, the Supreme Court of Canada, in the \"Delgamuukw v. British Columbia\" trial, ruled that, in the context of \"Aboriginal title\" claims, oral histories were just as important as written testimony.\nWriters who use oral history have often discussed its relationship to historical truth. Gilda O'Neill writes in \"Lost Voices\", an oral history of East End hop-pickers: \"I began to worry. Were the women's, and my, memories true or were they just stories? I realised that I had no 'innocent' sources of evidence \u2013 facts. I had, instead, the stories and their tellers' reasons for remembering in their own particular ways.' Duncan Barrett, one of the co-authors of \"The Sugar Girls\" describes some of the perils of relying on oral history accounts: \"On two occasions, it became clear that a subject was trying to mislead us about what happened \u2013 telling a self-deprecating story in one interview, and then presenting a different, and more flattering, version of events when we tried to follow it up. ... often our interviewees were keen to persuade us of a certain interpretation of the past, supporting broad, sweeping comments about historical change with specific stories from their lives.\" Alessandro Portelli argues that oral history is valuable nevertheless: \"it tells us less about events as such than about their meaning [...] the unique and precious element which oral sources force upon the historian ... is the speaker's subjectivity.\"\nRegarding the accuracy of oral history, Jean-Loup Gassend concludes in the book \"Autopsy of a Battle\", \"I found that each witness account can be broken down into two parts: 1) descriptions of events that the witness participated in directly, and 2) descriptions of events that the witness did not actually participate in, but that he heard about from other sources. The distinction between these two parts of a witness account is of the highest importance. I noted that concerning events that the witnesses participated in, the information provided was surprisingly reliable, as was confirmed by comparison with other sources. The imprecision or mistakes usually concerned numbers, ranks, and dates, the first two tending to become inflated with time. Concerning events that the witness had not participated in personally, the information was only as reliable as whatever the source of information had been (various rumors); that is to say, it was often very unreliable and I usually discarded such information.\"\nIn 2006, American historian Caroline Elkins published \"Imperial Reckoning: The Untold Story of Britain's Gulag in Kenya\", detailing the Mau Mau Uprising against British rule and its suppression by the colonial government. The work received both praise and criticism over its usage of oral testimony from Kenyans. Three years later in 2009, a group of Kenyans who had been interned in concentration camps during the rebellion by the colonial authorities filed a lawsuit against the British government. The case, known as \"Mutua and Five Others versus the Foreign and Commonwealth Office\", was heard at the High Court of Justice in London with the Honourable Justice McCombe presiding. Oral testimony detailing abuses by colonial officials, recorded by Elkins in \"Imperial Reckoning\", was cited as evidence by the prosecution during the case, British lawyer Martyn Day and the Kenya Human Rights Commission. During the trial, over the course of discovery the FCO discovered some 300 boxes of previously undisclosed files that validated Elkins' claims in \"Imperial Reckoning\" and provided new evidence supporting the claimants' case. McCombe eventually ruled in the Kenyan claimants' favor, stressing the \"substantial documentation supporting accusations of systematic abuses\".\nPros and cons.\nWhen using oral history as a source material, several caveats exist. The person being interviewed may not accurately recall factual information such as names or dates, and they may exaggerate. To avoid this, interviewers can do thorough research prior to the interview and formulate questions for the purpose of clarification. There also exists a pre-conceived notion that oral history is less reliable than written records. Written source materials are different in the execution of information, and that they may have additional sources. Oral sources identify intangibles such as atmosphere, insights into character, and clarifications to points made briefly in print. Oral history can also indicate lifestyle, dialect and terminology, and customs that may no longer be prominent. Oral history can be used academically to trigger independent contextualisation and independent research regarding views expressed by interviewees. Successful oral history enhances its written counterpart.\nOther concerns that scholars point to include the fact that the data collected in the form of oral histories is difficult to quantify, can reflect the researchers\u2019 biases towards their object of study, and are open to many interpretations.\nIn addition, older male speakers from rural communities who have spent their whole life there and who usually did not continue education past age 14 are proportionally overrepresented in some oral history material.\nTranscription.\nTranscribing the data obtained is obviously beneficial and the intentions for future use of transcripts largely determine the way in which the interview will be transcribed. As oral history projects as a rule do not involve the employment of a professional transcriber, \"aberrant\" characteristics such as dialectal features and superfluous repetitions may be neutralized and eliminated so as to make transcripts more accessible to average readers who are not accustomed to such \"aberrations\"; that is to say, transcripts may be not completely reflective of the original, actual utterances of the interviewees.\nControversies.\nIn Guatemalan literature, \"I, Rigoberta Mench\u00fa\" (1983), brings oral history into the written form through the https:// genre. \"I, Rigoberta Mench\u00fa\" is compiled by Venezuelan anthropologist Burgos-Debray, based on a series of interviews she conducted with Mench\u00fa. The Mench\u00fa-controversy arose when historian David Stoll took issue with Mench\u00fa's claim that \"this is a story of all poor Guatemalans\". In \"Rigoberta Mench\u00fa and the Story of All Poor Guatemalans\" (1999), Stoll argues that the details in Mench\u00fa's \"testimonio\" are inconsistent with his own fieldwork and interviews he conducted with other Mayas. According to Guatemalan novelist and critic Arturo Arias, this controversy highlights a tension in oral history. On one hand, it presents an opportunity to convert the subaltern subject into a \"speaking subject\". On the other hand, it challenges the historical profession in certifying the \"factuality of her mediated discourse\" as \"subaltern subjects are forced to [translate across epistemological and linguistic frameworks and] use the discourse of the colonizer to express their subjectivity\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "22689", "revid": "49007270", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22689", "title": "Oncogene", "text": "Gene that has the potential to cause cancer\nAn oncogene is a gene that has the potential to cause cancer. In tumor cells, these genes are often mutated, or expressed at high levels.\nMost normal cells undergo a preprogrammed rapid cell death (apoptosis) if critical functions are altered and then malfunction. Activated oncogenes can cause those cells designated for apoptosis to survive and proliferate instead. Most oncogenes began as proto-oncogenes: normal genes involved in cell growth and proliferation or inhibition of apoptosis. If, through mutation, normal genes promoting cellular growth are up-regulated (gain-of-function mutation), they predispose the cell to cancer and are termed \"oncogenes\". Usually, multiple oncogenes, along with mutated apoptotic or tumor suppressor genes, act in concert to cause cancer. Since the 1970s, dozens of oncogenes have been identified in human cancer. Many cancer drugs target the proteins encoded by oncogenes. Oncogenes are a physically and functionally diverse set of genes, and as a result, their protein products have pleiotropic effects on a variety of intricate regulatory cascades within the cell.\nGenes known as proto-oncogenes are those that normally encourage cell growth and division in order to generate new cells or sustain the viability of pre-existing cells. When overexpressed, proto-oncogenes can be inadvertently activated (turned on), which changes them to oncogenes.\nThere are numerous ways to activate (turn on) oncogenes in cells:\nGene changes or mutations: A person's genetic \"coding\" may differ in a way that causes an oncogene to always be activated. These types of gene changes can develop spontaneously throughout the course of a person's life or they might be inherited from a parent when a transcription error occurs during cell division.\nCells can frequently switch genes on or off via epigenetic mechanisms rather than actual genetic alterations. Alternately, different chemical compounds that can be linked to genetic material (DNA or RNA) may have an impact on which genes are active. An oncogene may sporadically become activated due to these epigenetic modifications. \nChromosomal rearrangement: Every living creature has chromosomes, which are substantial strands of DNA that contain the genes for a cell. A chromosome's DNA sequence may alter each time a cell divides. This could cause a gene to be located near to a proto-oncogene that acts as an \"on\" switch, keeping it active even when it shouldn't. The cell can develop irregularly with the aid of this new oncogene.\nGene duplication: If one cell has more copies of a gene than another, that cell may produce too much of a certain protein.\nThe first human oncogene (HRAS), a crucial finding in the field of cancer research, was discovered more than 40 years ago, and since then, the number of novel pathogenic oncogenes has increased steadily. The discovery of specific small-molecule inhibitors that specifically target the different oncogenic proteins and a comprehensive mechanistic analysis of the ways in which oncogenes dysregulate physiological signaling to cause different cancer types and developmental syndromes are potential future advances in the field of cancer research. Investigating the quickly expanding field of oncogene molecular research, the goal of this special issue was to generate practical translational indicators that could be able to meet clinical needs.\nGenes that are considered crucial for cancer can be divided into two categories based on whether the harmful mutations in them result in function loss or gain. Gain-of-function mutations of proto-oncogenes drive cells to proliferate when they shouldn't, while loss-of-function mutations of tumor suppressor genes free cells from inhibitions that typically serve to control their numbers. The ability of the mutant genes, known as oncogenes, to steer a specific line of test cells toward malignant proliferation can occasionally be used to identify these later mutations, which have a dominating effect.\nMany of them were initially found to induce cancer in animals when they are introduced through viral vector infection, which carries genetic information from a prior host cell. Another method for identifying oncogenes is to look for genes that are activated by mutations in human cancer cells or by chromosomal translocations that may indicate the presence of a gene that is crucial for cancer.\nCancer patients are generally categorized according to clinical parameters in order to tailor their cancer therapy. For example, the separation of patients with acute leukemia into those with lymphocytic leukemia and those with myelocytic leukemia is important, because the optimal treatment for each form is different. Even in a particular disease, the identification of patients with good and poor prognostic potential is helpful, since more aggressive therapy may be needed to achieve a cure in the poor prognostic group. Oncogenes are prognostic markers in certain human cancers. N-myc amplification is an independent determinant in predicting a poor outcome in childhood neuroblastoma. Those children with amplification of N-myc, regardless of stage, will have shortened survival. Thus, therapeutic efforts are concentrated on intensifying treatment in this poor prognostic group.\nHistory.\nThe theory of oncogenes was foreshadowed by the German biologist Theodor Boveri in his 1914 book \"Zur Frage der Entstehung Maligner Tumoren\" (Concerning the Origin of Malignant Tumors) in which he predicted the existence of oncogenes \"(Teilungsfoerdernde Chromosomen)\" that become amplified \"(im permanenten \u00dcbergewicht)\" during tumor development.\nLater on, the term \"oncogene\" was rediscovered in 1969 by National Cancer Institute scientists George Todaro and Robert Huebner.\nThe first confirmed oncogene was discovered in 1970 and was termed SRC (pronounced \"sarc\" as it is short for sarcoma). SRC was first discovered as an oncogene in a chicken retrovirus. Experiments performed by Dr. G. Steve Martin of the University of California, Berkeley demonstrated that SRC was indeed the gene of the virus that acted as an oncogene upon infection. The first nucleotide sequence of v-Src was sequenced in 1980 by A.P. Czernilofsky et al.\nIn 1976, Drs. Dominique St\u00e9helin, J. Michael Bishop and Harold E. Varmus of the University of California, San Francisco demonstrated that oncogenes were activated proto-oncogenes as is found in many organisms, including humans. Bishop and Varmus were awarded the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine in 1989 for their discovery of the cellular origin of retroviral oncogenes.\nDr. Robert Weinberg is credited with discovering the first identified human oncogene in a human bladder cancer cell line. The molecular nature of the mutation leading to oncogenesis was subsequently isolated and characterized by the Spanish biochemist Mariano Barbacid and published in \"Nature\" in 1982. Dr. Barbacid spent the following months extending his research, eventually discovering that the oncogene was a mutated allele of HRAS and characterizing its activation mechanism.\nThe resultant protein encoded by an oncogene is termed oncoprotein. Oncogenes play an important role in the regulation or synthesis of proteins linked to tumorigenic cell growth. Some oncoproteins are accepted and used as tumor markers.\nProto-oncogene.\nA proto-oncogene is a normal gene that could become an oncogene due to mutations or increased expression. Proto-oncogenes code for proteins that help to regulate the cell growth and differentiation. Proto-oncogenes are often involved in signal transduction and execution of mitogenic signals, usually through their protein products. Upon acquiring an activating mutation, a proto-oncogene becomes a tumor-inducing agent, an oncogene. Examples of proto-oncogenes include RAS, WNT, MYC, ERK, and TRK. The MYC gene is implicated in Burkitt's lymphoma, which starts when a chromosomal translocation moves an enhancer sequence within the vicinity of the MYC gene. The MYC gene codes for widely used transcription factors. When the enhancer sequence is wrongly placed, these transcription factors are produced at much higher rates. Another example of an oncogene is the Bcr-Abl gene found on the Philadelphia chromosome, a piece of genetic material seen in Chronic Myelogenous Leukemia caused by the translocation of pieces from chromosomes 9 and 22. Bcr-Abl codes for a tyrosine kinase, which is constitutively active, leading to uncontrolled cell proliferation. (More information about the Philadelphia Chromosome below)\nActivation.\nThe proto-oncogene can become an oncogene by a relatively small modification of its original function. There are three basic methods of activation:\nThe expression of oncogenes can be regulated by microRNAs (miRNAs), small RNAs 21-25 nucleotides in length that control gene expression by downregulating them. Mutations in such microRNAs (known as oncomirs) can lead to activation of oncogenes. Antisense messenger RNAs could theoretically be used to block the effects of oncogenes.\nClassification.\nThere are several systems for classifying oncogenes, but there is not yet a widely accepted standard. They are sometimes grouped both spatially (moving from outside the cell inwards) and chronologically (parallelling the \"normal\" process of signal transduction). There are several categories that are commonly used:\nAdditional oncogenetic regulator properties include:\n*Growth factors are usually secreted by either specialized or non-specialized cells to induce cell proliferation in themselves, nearby cells, or distant cells. An oncogene may cause a cell to secrete growth factors even though it does not normally do so. It will thereby induce its own uncontrolled proliferation (\"autocrine loop\"), and proliferation of neighboring cells, possibly leading to tumor formation. It may also cause production of growth hormones in other parts of the body.\n*Receptor tyrosine kinases add phosphate groups to other proteins in order to turn them on or off. Receptor kinases add phosphate groups to receptor proteins at the surface of the cell (which receives protein signals from outside the cell and transmits them to the inside of the cell). Tyrosine kinases add phosphate groups to the amino acid tyrosine in the target protein. They can cause cancer by turning the receptor permanently on (constitutively), even without signals from outside the cell.\n*Ras is a small GTPase that hydrolyses GTP into GDP and phosphate. Ras is activated by growth factor signaling (i.e., EGF, TGFbeta) and acting as a binary switch (on/off) in growth signaling pathways. Downstream effectors of Ras include three mitogen-activated protein kinases Raf a MAP Kinase Kinase Kinase (MAPKKK), MEK a MAP Kinase Kinase (MAPKK), and ERK a MAP Kinase(MAPK), which in turn regulate genes that mediate cell proliferation.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "22691", "revid": "46036750", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22691", "title": "Orthogonal frequency-division multiplexing", "text": "Method of encoding digital data on multiple carrier frequencies\nIn telecommunications, orthogonal frequency-division multiplexing (OFDM) is a type of digital transmission used in digital modulation for encoding digital (binary) data on multiple carrier frequencies. OFDM has developed into a popular scheme for wideband digital communication, used in applications such as digital television and audio broadcasting, DSL internet access, wireless networks, power line networks, and 4G/5G mobile communications.\nOFDM is a frequency-division multiplexing (FDM) scheme that was introduced by Robert W. Chang of Bell Labs in 1966. In OFDM, the incoming bitstream representing the data to be sent is divided into multiple streams. Multiple closely spaced orthogonal subcarrier signals with overlapping spectra are transmitted, with each carrier modulated with bits from the incoming stream so multiple bits are being transmitted in parallel. Demodulation is based on fast Fourier transform algorithms. OFDM was improved by Weinstein and Ebert in 1971 with the introduction of a guard interval, providing better orthogonality in transmission channels affected by multipath propagation. Each subcarrier (signal) is modulated with a conventional modulation scheme (such as quadrature amplitude modulation or phase-shift keying) at a low symbol rate. This maintains total data rates similar to conventional single-carrier modulation schemes in the same bandwidth.\nThe main advantage of OFDM over single-carrier schemes is its ability to cope with severe channel conditions (for example, attenuation of high frequencies in a long copper wire, narrowband interference and frequency-selective fading due to multipath) without the need for complex equalization filters. Channel equalization is simplified because OFDM may be viewed as using many slowly modulated narrowband signals rather than one rapidly modulated wideband signal. The low symbol rate makes the use of a guard interval between symbols affordable, making it possible to eliminate intersymbol interference (ISI) and use echoes and time-spreading (in analog television visible as ghosting and blurring, respectively) to achieve a diversity gain, i.e. a signal-to-noise ratio improvement. This mechanism also facilitates the design of single frequency networks (SFNs) where several adjacent transmitters send the same signal simultaneously at the same frequency, as the signals from multiple distant transmitters may be re-combined constructively, sparing interference of a traditional single-carrier system.\nIn coded orthogonal frequency-division multiplexing (COFDM), forward error correction (convolutional coding) and time/frequency interleaving are applied to the signal being transmitted. This is done to overcome errors in mobile communication channels affected by multipath propagation and Doppler effects. COFDM was introduced by Alard in 1986 for Digital Audio Broadcasting for Eureka Project 147. In practice, OFDM has become used in combination with such coding and interleaving, so that the terms COFDM and OFDM co-apply to common applications.\nExample of applications.\nThe following list is a summary of existing OFDM-based standards and products. For further details, see the Usage section at the end of the article.\nWireless.\nThe OFDM-based multiple access technology OFDMA is also used in several 4G and pre-4G cellular networks, mobile broadband standards, the next generation WLAN and the wired portion of Hybrid fiber-coaxial networks:\nKey features.\nThe advantages and disadvantages listed below are further discussed in the Characteristics and principles of operation section below.\nCharacteristics and principles of operation.\nOrthogonality.\nConceptually, OFDM is a specialized frequency-division multiplexing (FDM) method, with the additional constraint that all subcarrier signals within a communication channel are orthogonal to one another.\nIn OFDM, the subcarrier frequencies are chosen so that the subcarriers are orthogonal to each other, meaning that crosstalk between the sub-channels is eliminated and inter-carrier guard bands are not required. This greatly simplifies the design of both the transmitter and the receiver; unlike conventional FDM, a separate filter for each sub-channel is not required.\nThe orthogonality requires that the subcarrier spacing is formula_1 Hertz, where \"T\"U seconds is the useful symbol duration (the receiver-side window size), and \"k\" is a positive integer, typically equal to 1. This stipulates that each carrier frequency undergoes \"k\" more complete cycles per symbol period than the previous carrier. Therefore, with \"N\" subcarriers, the total passband bandwidth will be \"B\" \u2248 \"N\"\u00b7\u0394\"f\" (Hz).\nThe orthogonality also allows high spectral efficiency, with a total symbol rate near the Nyquist rate for the equivalent baseband signal (i.e., near half the Nyquist rate for the double-side band physical passband signal). Almost the whole available frequency band can be used. OFDM generally has a nearly 'white' spectrum, giving it benign electromagnetic interference properties with respect to other co-channel users.\nA simple example: A useful symbol duration \"T\"U = 1\u00a0ms would require a subcarrier spacing of formula_2 (or an integer multiple of that) for orthogonality. \"N\" = 1,000 subcarriers would result in a total passband bandwidth of \"N\"\u0394f = 1\u00a0MHz. For this symbol time, the required bandwidth in theory according to Nyquist is formula_3 (half of the achieved bandwidth required by our scheme), where \"R\" is the bit rate and where \"N\" = 1,000 samples per symbol by FFT. If a guard interval is applied (see below), Nyquist bandwidth requirement would be even lower. The FFT would result in \"N\" = 1,000 samples per symbol. If no guard interval was applied, this would result in a base band complex valued signal with a sample rate of 1\u00a0MHz, which would require a baseband bandwidth of 0.5\u00a0MHz according to Nyquist. However, the passband RF signal is produced by multiplying the baseband signal with a carrier waveform (i.e., double-sideband quadrature amplitude-modulation) resulting in a passband bandwidth of 1\u00a0MHz. A single-side band (SSB) or vestigial sideband (VSB) modulation scheme would achieve almost half that bandwidth for the same symbol rate (i.e., twice as high spectral efficiency for the same symbol alphabet length). It is however more sensitive to multipath interference.\nOFDM requires very accurate frequency synchronization between the receiver and the transmitter; with frequency deviation the subcarriers will no longer be orthogonal, causing \"inter-carrier interference\" (ICI) (i.e., cross-talk between the subcarriers). Frequency offsets are typically caused by mismatched transmitter and receiver oscillators, or by Doppler shift due to movement. While Doppler shift alone may be compensated for by the receiver, the situation is worsened when combined with multipath, as reflections will appear at various frequency offsets, which is much harder to correct. This effect typically worsens as speed increases, and is an important factor limiting the use of OFDM in high-speed vehicles. In order to mitigate ICI in such scenarios, one can shape each subcarrier in order to minimize the interference resulting in a non-orthogonal subcarriers overlapping. For example, a low-complexity scheme referred to as WCP-OFDM (\"Weighted Cyclic Prefix Orthogonal Frequency-Division Multiplexing\") consists of using short filters at the transmitter output in order to perform a potentially non-rectangular pulse shaping and a near perfect reconstruction using a single-tap per subcarrier equalization. Other ICI suppression techniques usually drastically increase the receiver complexity.\nImplementation using the FFT algorithm.\nThe orthogonality allows for efficient modulator and demodulator implementation using the FFT algorithm on the receiver side, and inverse FFT on the sender side. Although the principles and some of the benefits have been known since the 1960s, OFDM is popular for wideband communications today by way of low-cost digital signal processing components that can efficiently calculate the FFT.\nThe time to compute the inverse-FFT or FFT has to take less than the time for each symbol, which for example for DVB-T (FFT 8k) means the computation has to be done in 896 \u00b5s or less.\nFor an -point FFT this may be approximated to:\nformula_4\nThe computational demand approximately scales linearly with FFT size so a double size FFT needs double the amount of time and vice versa. As a comparison an Intel Pentium III CPU at 1.266\u00a0GHz is able to calculate a 8192 point FFT in 576 \u00b5s using FFTW. Intel Pentium M at 1.6\u00a0GHz does it in 387 \u00b5s. Intel Core Duo at 3.0\u00a0GHz does it in 96.8 \u00b5s.\nGuard interval for elimination of intersymbol interference.\nOne key principle of OFDM is that since low symbol rate modulation schemes (i.e., where the symbols are relatively long compared to the channel time characteristics) suffer less from intersymbol interference caused by multipath propagation, it is advantageous to transmit a number of low-rate streams in parallel instead of a single high-rate stream. Since the duration of each symbol is long, it is feasible to insert a guard interval between the OFDM symbols, thus eliminating the intersymbol interference.\nThe guard interval also eliminates the need for a pulse-shaping filter, and it reduces the sensitivity to time synchronization problems.\nA simple example: If one sends a million symbols per second using conventional single-carrier modulation over a wireless channel, then the duration of each symbol would be one microsecond or less. This imposes severe constraints on synchronization and necessitates the removal of multipath interference. If the same million symbols per second are spread among one thousand sub-channels, the duration of each symbol can be longer by a factor of a thousand (i.e., one millisecond) for orthogonality with approximately the same bandwidth. Assume that a guard interval of 1/8 of the symbol length is inserted between each symbol. Intersymbol interference can be avoided if the multipath time-spreading (the time between the reception of the first and the last echo) is shorter than the guard interval (i.e., 125 microseconds). This corresponds to a maximum difference of 37.5 kilometers between the lengths of the paths.\nThe cyclic prefix, which is transmitted during the guard interval, consists of the end of the OFDM symbol copied into the guard interval, and the guard interval is transmitted followed by the OFDM symbol. The reason that the guard interval consists of a copy of the end of the OFDM symbol is so that the receiver will integrate over an integer number of sinusoid cycles for each of the multipaths when it performs OFDM demodulation with the FFT.\nIn some standards such as Ultrawideband, in the interest of transmitted power, cyclic prefix is skipped and nothing is sent during the guard interval. The receiver will then have to mimic the cyclic prefix functionality by copying the end part of the OFDM symbol and adding it to the beginning portion.\nSimplified equalization.\nThe effects of frequency-selective channel conditions, for example fading caused by multipath propagation, can be considered as constant (flat) over an OFDM sub-channel if the sub-channel is sufficiently narrow-banded (i.e., if the number of sub-channels is sufficiently large). This makes frequency domain equalization possible at the receiver, which is far simpler than the time-domain equalization used in conventional single-carrier modulation. In OFDM, the equalizer only has to multiply each detected subcarrier (each Fourier coefficient) in each OFDM symbol by a constant complex number, or a rarely changed value. On a fundamental level, simpler digital equalizers are better because they require fewer operations, which translates to fewer round-off errors in the equalizer. Those round-off errors can be viewed as numerical noise and are inevitable.\nOur example: The OFDM equalization in the above numerical example would require one complex valued multiplication per subcarrier and symbol (i.e., formula_5 complex multiplications per OFDM symbol; i.e., one million multiplications per second, at the receiver). The FFT algorithm requires formula_6 [this is imprecise: over half of these complex multiplications are trivial, i.e. = to 1 and are not implemented in software or HW]. complex-valued multiplications per OFDM symbol (i.e., 10 million multiplications per second), at both the receiver and transmitter side. This should be compared with the corresponding one million symbols/second single-carrier modulation case mentioned in the example, where the equalization of 125 microseconds time-spreading using a FIR filter would require, in a naive implementation, 125 multiplications per symbol (i.e., 125 million multiplications per second). FFT techniques can be used to reduce the number of multiplications for an FIR filter-based time-domain equalizer to a number comparable with OFDM, at the cost of delay between reception and decoding which also becomes comparable with OFDM.\nIf differential modulation such as DPSK or DQPSK is applied to each subcarrier, equalization can be completely omitted, since these non-coherent schemes are insensitive to slowly changing amplitude and phase distortion.\nIn a sense, improvements in FIR equalization using FFTs or partial FFTs leads mathematically closer to OFDM, but the OFDM technique is easier to understand and implement, and the sub-channels can be independently adapted in other ways than varying equalization coefficients, such as switching between different QAM constellation patterns and error-correction schemes to match individual sub-channel noise and interference characteristics.\nSome of the subcarriers in some of the OFDM symbols may carry pilot signals for measurement of the channel conditions (i.e., the equalizer gain and phase shift for each subcarrier). Pilot signals and training symbols (preambles) may also be used for time synchronization (to avoid intersymbol interference, ISI) and frequency synchronization (to avoid inter-carrier interference, ICI, caused by Doppler shift).\nOFDM was initially used for wired and stationary wireless communications. However, with an increasing number of applications operating in highly mobile environments, the effect of dispersive fading caused by a combination of multi-path propagation and doppler shift is more significant. Over the last decade, research has been done on how to equalize OFDM transmission over doubly selective channels.\nChannel coding and interleaving.\nOFDM is invariably used in conjunction with channel coding (forward error correction), and almost always uses frequency and/or time interleaving.\nFrequency (subcarrier) interleaving increases resistance to frequency-selective channel conditions such as fading. For example, when a part of the channel bandwidth fades, frequency interleaving ensures that the bit errors that would result from those subcarriers in the faded part of the bandwidth are spread out in the bit-stream rather than being concentrated. Similarly, time interleaving ensures that bits that are originally close together in the bit-stream are transmitted far apart in time, thus mitigating against severe fading as would happen when travelling at high speed.\nHowever, time interleaving is of little benefit in slowly fading channels, such as for stationary reception, and frequency interleaving offers little to no benefit for narrowband channels that suffer from flat-fading (where the whole channel bandwidth fades at the same time).\nThe reason why interleaving is used on OFDM is to attempt to spread the errors out in the bit-stream that is presented to the error correction decoder, because when such decoders are presented with a high concentration of errors the decoder is unable to correct all the bit errors, and a burst of uncorrected errors occurs. A similar design of audio data encoding makes compact disc (CD) playback robust.\nA classical type of error correction coding used with OFDM-based systems is convolutional coding, often concatenated with Reed-Solomon coding. Usually, additional interleaving (on top of the time and frequency interleaving mentioned above) in between the two layers of coding is implemented. The choice for Reed-Solomon coding as the outer error correction code is based on the observation that the Viterbi decoder used for inner convolutional decoding produces short error bursts when there is a high concentration of errors, and Reed-Solomon codes are inherently well suited to correcting bursts of errors.\nNewer systems, however, usually now adopt near-optimal types of error correction codes that use the turbo decoding principle, where the decoder iterates towards the desired solution. Examples of such error correction coding types include turbo codes and LDPC codes, which perform close to the Shannon limit for the Additive White Gaussian Noise (AWGN) channel. Some systems that have implemented these codes have concatenated them with either Reed-Solomon (for example on the MediaFLO system) or BCH codes (on the DVB-S2 system) to improve upon an error floor inherent to these codes at high signal-to-noise ratios.\nAdaptive transmission.\nThe resilience to severe channel conditions can be further enhanced if information about the channel is sent over a return-channel. Based on this feedback information, adaptive modulation, channel coding and power allocation may be applied across all subcarriers, or individually to each subcarrier. In the latter case, if a particular range of frequencies suffers from interference or attenuation, the carriers within that range can be disabled or made to run slower by applying more robust modulation or error coding to those subcarriers.\nThe term &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Visible anchor/styles.css\" /&gt;discrete multitone modulation (DMT) denotes OFDM-based communication systems that adapt the transmission to the channel conditions individually for each subcarrier, by means of so-called \"bit-loading\". Examples are ADSL and VDSL.\nThe upstream and downstream speeds can be varied by allocating either more or fewer carriers for each purpose. Some forms of rate-adaptive DSL use this feature in real time, so that the bitrate is adapted to the co-channel interference and bandwidth is allocated to whichever subscriber needs it most.\nOFDM extended with multiple access.\nOFDM in its primary form is considered as a digital modulation technique, and not a multi-user channel access method, since it is used for transferring one bit stream over one communication channel using one sequence of OFDM symbols. However, OFDM can be combined with multiple access using time, frequency or coding separation of the users.\nIn orthogonal frequency-division multiple access (OFDMA), frequency-division multiple access is achieved by assigning different OFDM sub-channels to different users. OFDMA supports differentiated quality of service by assigning different number of subcarriers to different users in a similar fashion as in CDMA, and thus complex packet scheduling or medium access control schemes can be avoided. OFDMA is used in:\nOFDMA is also a candidate access method for the IEEE 802.22 \"Wireless Regional Area Networks\" (WRAN). The project aims at designing the first cognitive radio-based standard operating in the VHF-low UHF spectrum (TV spectrum).\nIn multi-carrier code-division multiple access (MC-CDMA), also known as OFDM-CDMA, OFDM is combined with CDMA spread spectrum communication for coding separation of the users. Co-channel interference can be mitigated, meaning that manual fixed channel allocation (FCA) frequency planning is simplified, or complex dynamic channel allocation (DCA) schemes are avoided.\nSpace diversity.\nIn OFDM-based wide-area broadcasting, receivers can benefit from receiving signals from several spatially dispersed transmitters simultaneously, since transmitters will only destructively interfere with each other on a limited number of subcarriers, whereas in general they will actually reinforce coverage over a wide area. This is very beneficial in many countries, as it permits the operation of national single-frequency networks (SFN), where many transmitters send the same signal simultaneously over the same channel frequency. SFNs use the available spectrum more effectively than conventional multi-frequency broadcast networks (MFN), where program content is replicated on different carrier frequencies. SFNs also result in a diversity gain in receivers situated midway between the transmitters. The coverage area is increased and the outage probability decreased in comparison to an MFN, due to increased received signal strength averaged over all subcarriers.\nAlthough the guard interval only contains redundant data, which means that it reduces the capacity, some OFDM-based systems, such as some of the broadcasting systems, deliberately use a long guard interval in order to allow the transmitters to be spaced farther apart in an SFN, and longer guard intervals allow larger SFN cell-sizes. A rule of thumb for the maximum distance between transmitters in an SFN is equal to the distance a signal travels during the guard interval \u2014 for instance, a guard interval of 200 microseconds would allow transmitters to be spaced 60\u00a0km apart.\nA \"single frequency network\" is a form of transmitter macrodiversity. The concept can be further used in \"dynamic single-frequency networks\" (DSFN), where the SFN grouping is changed from timeslot to timeslot.\nOFDM may be combined with other forms of space diversity, for example antenna arrays and MIMO channels. This is done in the IEEE 802.11 Wireless LAN standards.\nLinear transmitter power amplifier.\nAn OFDM signal exhibits a high peak-to-average power ratio (PAPR) because the independent phases of the subcarriers mean that they will often combine constructively. Handling this high PAPR requires:\nAny non-linearity in the signal chain will cause intermodulation distortion that\nThe linearity requirement is demanding, especially for transmitter RF output circuitry where amplifiers are often designed to be non-linear in order to minimise power consumption. In practical OFDM systems a small amount of peak clipping is allowed to limit the PAPR in a judicious trade-off against the above consequences. However, the transmitter output filter which is required to reduce out-of-band spurs to legal levels has the effect of restoring peak levels that were clipped, so clipping is not an effective way to reduce PAPR.\nAlthough the spectral efficiency of OFDM is attractive for both terrestrial and space communications, the high PAPR requirements have so far limited OFDM applications to terrestrial systems.\nThe crest factor CF (in dB) for an OFDM system with \"n\" uncorrelated subcarriers is\nformula_7\nwhere CFc is the crest factor (in dB) for each subcarrier.\n(CFc is 3.01\u00a0dB for the sine waves used for BPSK and QPSK modulation).\nFor example, the DVB-T signal in 2K mode is composed of 1705 subcarriers that are each QPSK-modulated, giving a crest factor of 35.32\u00a0dB.\nMany PAPR (or crest factor) reduction techniques have been developed, for instance, based on iterative clipping.\nOver the years, numerous model-driven approaches have been proposed to reduce the PAPR in communication systems. In recent years, there has been a growing interest in exploring data-driven models for PAPR reduction as part of ongoing research in end-to-end communication networks. These data-driven models offer innovative solutions and new avenues of exploration to address the challenges posed by high PAPR effectively. By leveraging data-driven techniques, researchers aim to enhance the performance and efficiency of communication networks by optimizing power utilization.\nThe dynamic range required for an FM receiver is 120 dB while DAB only require about 90 dB. As a comparison, each extra bit per sample increases the dynamic range by 6 dB.\nEfficiency comparison between single carrier and multicarrier.\nThe performance of any communication system can be measured in terms of its power efficiency and bandwidth efficiency. The power efficiency describes the ability of communication system to preserve bit error rate (BER) of the transmitted signal at low power levels. Bandwidth efficiency reflects how efficiently the allocated bandwidth is used and is defined as the throughput data rate per hertz in a given bandwidth. If the large number of subcarriers are used, the bandwidth efficiency of multicarrier system such as OFDM with using optical fiber channel is defined as\n formula_8\nwhere formula_9 is the symbol rate in giga-symbols per second (Gsps), formula_10 is the bandwidth of OFDM signal, and the factor of 2 is due to the two polarization states in the fiber.\nThere is saving of bandwidth by using multicarrier modulation with orthogonal frequency-division multiplexing. So the bandwidth for multicarrier system is less in comparison with single carrier system and hence bandwidth efficiency of multicarrier system is larger than single carrier system.\nThere is only 1dB increase in receiver power, but we get 76.7% improvement in bandwidth efficiency with using multicarrier transmission technique.\nIdealized system model.\nThis section describes a simple idealized OFDM system model suitable for a time-invariant AWGN channel.\nTransmitter.\nAn OFDM carrier signal is the sum of a number of orthogonal subcarriers, with baseband data on each subcarrier being independently modulated commonly using some type of quadrature amplitude modulation (QAM) or phase-shift keying (PSK). This composite baseband signal is typically used to modulate a main RF carrier.\nformula_11 is a serial stream of binary digits. By inverse multiplexing, these are first demultiplexed into formula_12 parallel streams, and each one mapped to a (possibly complex) symbol stream using some modulation constellation (QAM, PSK, etc.). Note that the constellations may be different, so some streams may carry a higher bit-rate than others.\nAn inverse FFT is computed on each set of symbols, giving a set of complex time-domain samples. These samples are then quadrature-mixed to passband in the standard way. The real and imaginary components are first converted to the analogue domain using digital-to-analogue converters (DACs); the analogue signals are then used to modulate cosine and sine waves at the carrier frequency, formula_13, respectively. These signals are then summed to give the transmission signal, formula_14.\nReceiver.\nThe receiver picks up the signal formula_15, which is then quadrature-mixed down to baseband using cosine and sine waves at the carrier frequency. This also creates signals centered on formula_16, so low-pass filters are used to reject these. The baseband signals are then sampled and digitised using analog-to-digital converters (ADCs), and a forward FFT is used to convert back to the frequency domain.\nThis returns formula_12 parallel streams, each of which is converted to a binary stream using an appropriate symbol detector. These streams are then re-combined into a serial stream, formula_18, which is an estimate of the original binary stream at the transmitter.\nMathematical description.\nIf formula_12 subcarriers are used, and each subcarrier is modulated using formula_20 alternative symbols, the OFDM symbol alphabet consists of formula_21 combined symbols.\nThe low-pass equivalent OFDM filter is expressed as:\nformula_22\nwhere formula_23 are the data symbols, formula_12 is the number of subcarriers, and formula_25 is the OFDM symbol time. The subcarrier spacing of formula_26 makes them orthogonal over each symbol period; this property is expressed as:\nformula_27\nwhere formula_28 denotes the complex conjugate operator and formula_29 is the Kronecker delta.\nTo avoid intersymbol interference in multipath fading channels, a guard interval of length formula_30 is inserted prior to the OFDM block. During this interval, a \"cyclic prefix\" is transmitted such that the signal in the interval formula_31 equals the signal in the interval formula_32. The OFDM signal with cyclic prefix is thus:\nformula_33\nThe low-pass signal filter above can be either real or complex-valued. Real-valued low-pass equivalent signals are typically transmitted at baseband\u2014wireline applications such as DSL use this approach. For wireless applications, the low-pass signal is typically complex-valued; in which case, the transmitted signal is up-converted to a carrier frequency formula_13. In general, the transmitted signal can be represented as:\nformula_35\nUsage.\nOFDM is used in:\nOFDM system comparison table.\nKey features of some common OFDM-based systems are presented in the following table.\nADSL.\nOFDM is used in ADSL connections that follow the ANSI T1.413 and G.dmt (ITU G.992.1) standards, where it is called \"discrete multitone modulation\" (DMT). DSL achieves high-speed data connections on existing copper wires. OFDM is also used in the successor standards ADSL2, ADSL2+, VDSL, VDSL2, and G.fast. ADSL2 uses variable subcarrier modulation, ranging from BPSK to 32768QAM (in ADSL terminology this is referred to as bit-loading, or bit per tone, 1 to 15 bits per subcarrier).\nLong copper wires suffer from attenuation at high frequencies. The fact that OFDM can cope with this frequency selective attenuation and with narrow-band interference are the main reasons it is frequently used in applications such as ADSL modems.\nPowerline Technology.\nOFDM is used by many powerline devices to extend digital connections through power wiring. Adaptive modulation is particularly important with such a noisy channel as electrical wiring. Some medium speed smart metering modems, \"Prime\" and \"G3\" use OFDM at modest frequencies (30\u2013100\u00a0kHz) with modest numbers of channels (several hundred) in order to overcome the intersymbol interference in the power line environment.\nThe IEEE 1901 standards include two incompatible physical layers that both use OFDM. The ITU-T G.hn standard, which provides high-speed local area networking over existing home wiring (power lines, phone lines and coaxial cables) is based on a PHY layer that specifies OFDM with adaptive modulation and a Low-Density Parity-Check (LDPC) FEC code.\nWireless local area networks (LAN) and metropolitan area networks (MAN).\nOFDM is extensively used in wireless LAN and MAN applications, including IEEE 802.11a/g/n and WiMAX.\nIEEE 802.11a/g/n, operating in the 2.4 and 5\u00a0GHz bands, specifies per-stream airside data rates ranging from 6 to 54\u00a0Mbit/s. If both devices can use \"HT mode\" (added with 802.11n), the top 20\u00a0MHz per-stream rate is increased to 72.2\u00a0Mbit/s, with the option of data rates between 13.5 and 150\u00a0Mbit/s using a 40\u00a0MHz channel. Four different modulation schemes are used: BPSK, QPSK, 16-QAM, and 64-QAM, along with a set of error correcting rates (1/2\u20135/6). The multitude of choices allows the system to adapt the optimum data rate for the current signal conditions.\nWireless personal area networks (PAN).\nOFDM is also now being used in the http:// for high-speed wireless personal area networks in the 3.1\u201310.6\u00a0GHz ultrawideband spectrum (see MultiBand-OFDM).\nTerrestrial digital radio and television broadcasting.\nMuch of Europe and Asia has adopted OFDM for terrestrial broadcasting of digital television (DVB-T, DVB-H and T-DMB) and radio (EUREKA 147 DAB, Digital Radio Mondiale, HD Radio and T-DMB).\nDVB-T.\nBy Directive of the European Commission, all television services transmitted to viewers in the European Community must use a transmission system that has been standardized by a recognized European standardization body, and such a standard has been developed and codified by the DVB Project, \"Digital Video Broadcasting (DVB); Framing structure, channel coding and modulation for digital terrestrial television\". Customarily referred to as DVB-T, the standard calls for the exclusive use of COFDM for modulation. DVB-T is now widely used in Europe and elsewhere for terrestrial digital TV.\nSDARS.\nThe ground segments of the Digital Audio Radio Service (SDARS) systems used by XM Satellite Radio and Sirius Satellite Radio are transmitted using Coded OFDM (COFDM). The word \"coded\" comes from the use of forward error correction (FEC).\nCOFDM vs VSB.\nThe question of the relative technical merits of COFDM versus 8VSB for terrestrial digital television has been a subject of some controversy, especially between European and North American technologists and regulators. The United States has rejected several proposals to adopt the COFDM-based DVB-T system for its digital television services, and for many years has opted to use 8VSB (vestigial sideband modulation) exclusively for terrestrial digital television. However, in November 2017, the FCC approved a voluntary transition to ATSC 3.0, a new broadcast standard which is based on COFDM. Unlike the first digital television transition in America, TV stations will not be assigned separate frequencies to transmit ATSC 3.0 and are not required to switch to ATSC 3.0 by any deadline. Televisions sold in the U.S. are also not required to include ATSC 3.0 tuning capabilities. Full-powered television stations are permitted to make the switch to ATSC 3.0, as long as they continue to make their main channel available through a simulcast agreement with another in-market station (with a similar coverage area) through at least November 2022.\nOne of the major benefits provided by COFDM is in rendering radio broadcasts relatively immune to multipath distortion and signal fading due to atmospheric conditions or passing aircraft. Proponents of COFDM argue it resists multipath far better than 8VSB. Early 8VSB DTV (digital television) receivers often had difficulty receiving a signal. Also, COFDM allows single-frequency networks, which is not possible with 8VSB.\nHowever, newer 8VSB receivers are far better at dealing with multipath, hence the difference in performance may diminish with advances in equalizer design.\nDigital radio.\nCOFDM is also used for other radio standards, for Digital Audio Broadcasting (DAB), the standard for digital audio broadcasting at VHF frequencies, for Digital Radio Mondiale (DRM), the standard for digital broadcasting at shortwave and medium wave frequencies (below 30\u00a0MHz) and for DRM+ a more recently introduced standard for digital audio broadcasting at VHF frequencies. (30 to 174\u00a0MHz)\nThe United States again uses an alternate standard, a proprietary system developed by iBiquity dubbed \"HD Radio\". However, it uses COFDM as the underlying broadcast technology to add digital audio to AM (medium wave) and FM broadcasts.\nBoth Digital Radio Mondiale and HD Radio are classified as in-band on-channel systems, unlike Eureka 147 (DAB: Digital Audio Broadcasting) which uses separate VHF or UHF frequency bands instead.\nBST-OFDM used in ISDB.\nThe \"band-segmented transmission orthogonal frequency-division multiplexing\" (\"BST-OFDM\") system proposed for Japan (in the ISDB-T, ISDB-TSB, and ISDB-C broadcasting systems) improves upon COFDM by exploiting the fact that some OFDM carriers may be modulated differently from others within the same multiplex. Some forms of COFDM already offer this kind of hierarchical modulation, though BST-OFDM is intended to make it more flexible. The 6\u00a0MHz television channel may therefore be \"segmented\", with different segments being modulated differently and used for different services.\nIt is possible, for example, to send an audio service on a segment that includes a segment composed of a number of carriers, a data service on another segment and a television service on yet another segment\u2014all within the same 6\u00a0MHz television channel. Furthermore, these may be modulated with different parameters so that, for example, the audio and data services could be optimized for mobile reception, while the television service is optimized for stationary reception in a high-multipath environment.\nUltra-wideband.\nUltra-wideband (UWB) wireless personal area network technology may also use OFDM, such as in Multiband OFDM (MB-OFDM). This UWB specification is advocated by the WiMedia Alliance (formerly by both the Multiband OFDM Alliance [MBOA] and the WiMedia Alliance, but the two have now merged), and is one of the competing UWB radio interfaces.\nFlash-OFDM.\n\"Fast low-latency access with seamless handoff orthogonal frequency-division multiplexing\" (Flash-OFDM), also referred to as F-OFDM, was based on OFDM and also specified higher protocol layers. It was developed by Flarion, and purchased by Qualcomm in January 2006. Flash-OFDM was marketed as a packet-switched cellular bearer, to compete with GSM and 3G networks. As an example, 450\u00a0MHz frequency bands previously used by NMT-450 and C-Net C450 (both 1G analogue networks, now mostly decommissioned) in Europe are being licensed to Flash-OFDM operators.\nIn Finland, the license holder Digita began deployment of a nationwide \"@450\" wireless network in parts of the country since April 2007. It was purchased by Datame in 2011. In February 2012 Datame announced they would upgrade the 450\u00a0MHz network to competing CDMA2000 technology.\nSlovak Telekom in Slovakia offers Flash-OFDM connections with a maximum downstream speed of 5.3\u00a0Mbit/s, and a maximum upstream speed of 1.8\u00a0Mbit/s, with a coverage of over 70 percent of Slovak population. The Flash-OFDM network was switched off in the majority of Slovakia on 30 September 2015.\nT-Mobile Germany used Flash-OFDM to backhaul Wi-Fi HotSpots on the Deutsche Bahn's ICE high speed trains between 2005 and 2015, until switching over to UMTS and LTE.\nAmerican wireless carrier Nextel Communications field tested wireless broadband network technologies including Flash-OFDM in 2005. Sprint purchased the carrier in 2006 and decided to deploy the mobile version of WiMAX, which is based on Scalable Orthogonal Frequency-Division Multiple Access (SOFDMA) technology.\nCitizens Telephone Cooperative launched a mobile broadband service based on Flash-OFDM technology to subscribers in parts of Virginia in March 2006. The maximum speed available was 1.5\u00a0Mbit/s. The service was discontinued on April 30, 2009.\nVector OFDM (VOFDM).\nVOFDM was proposed by Xiang-Gen Xia in 2000 (\"Proceedings of ICC 2000\", New Orleans, and \"IEEE Trans. on Communications\", Aug. 2001) for single transmit antenna systems. VOFDM replaces each scalar value in the conventional OFDM by a vector value and is a bridge between OFDM and the single carrier frequency domain equalizer (SC-FDE). When the vector size is formula_36, it is OFDM and when the vector size is at least the channel length and the FFT size is formula_36, it is SC-FDE.\nIn VOFDM, assume formula_38 is the vector size, and each scalar-valued signal formula_39 in OFDM is replaced by a vector-valued signal formula_40of vector size formula_38, formula_42. One takes the formula_43-point IFFT of formula_44, component-wisely and gets another vector sequence of the same vector size formula_38, formula_46. Then, one adds a vector CP of length formula_47 to this vector sequence as\n formula_48.\nThis vector sequence is converted to a scalar sequence by sequentializing all the vectors of size formula_38, which is transmitted at a transmit antenna sequentially.\nAt the receiver, the received scalar sequence is first converted to the vector sequence of vector size formula_38. When the CP length satisfies formula_51, then, after the vector CP is removed from the vector sequence and the formula_43-point FFT is implemented component-wisely to the vector sequence of length formula_43, one obtains\n formula_54\nwhere formula_55 are additive white noise and formula_56 and formula_57 is the following formula_58 polyphase matrix of the ISI channel formula_59:\n formula_60,\nwhere formula_61 is the formula_62th polyphase component of the channel formula_63. From (1), one can see that the original ISI channel is converted to formula_43 many vector subchannels of vector size formula_38. There is no ISI across these vector subchannels but there is ISI inside each vector subchannel. In each vector subchannel, at most formula_38 many symbols are interfered each other. Clearly, when the vector size formula_67, the above VOFDM returns to OFDM and when formula_68 and formula_69, it becomes the SC-FDE. The vector size formula_38 is a parameter that one can choose freely and properly in practice and controls the ISI level. There may be a trade-off between vector size formula_38, demodulation complexity at the receiver, and FFT size, for a given channel bandwidth. Equation (1) is mathematically new for an ISI channel, when the vector size formula_72. \nNote that the length of the CP part in the sequential form does not have to be an integer multiple of the vector size, formula_73. One can truncate the above vectorized CP to a sequential CP of length not less than the ISI channel length, which will not affect the above demodulation.\nAlso note that there exist many other different generalizations/forms of OFDM, to see their essential differences, it is critical to see their corresponding received signal equations to demodulate. The above VOFDM is the earliest and the only one that achieves the received signal equation (1) and/or its equivalent form, although it may have different implementations at transmitter vs. different IFFT algorithms. \nIt has been shown (Yabo Li et al., \"IEEE Trans. on Signal Processing\", Oct. 2012) that applying the MMSE linear receiver to each vector subchannel (1), it achieves multipath diversity and/or signal space diversity. This is because the vectorized channel matrices in (1) are pseudo-circulant and can be diagonalized by the formula_20-point DFT/IDFT matrix with some diagonal phase shift matrices. Then, the right hand side DFT/IDFT matrix and the formula_75th diagonal phase shift matrix in the diagonalization can be thought of the precoding to the input information symbol vector formula_76 in the formula_75th sub vector channel, and all the vectorized subchannels become diagonal channels of formula_20 discrete frequency components from the formula_79-point DFT of the original ISI channel. It may collect the multipath diversity and/or signal space diversity similar to the precoding to collect the signal space diversity for single antenna systems to combat wireless fading or the diagonal space-time block coding to collect the spatial diversity for multiple antenna systems. The details are referred to the IEEE TCOM and IEEE TSP papers mentioned above.\nWavelet-OFDM.\nOFDM has become an interesting technique for power line communications (PLC). In this area of research, a wavelet transform is introduced to replace the DFT as the method of creating orthogonal frequencies. This is due to the advantages wavelets offer, which are particularly useful on noisy power lines.\nInstead of using an IDFT to create the sender signal, the wavelet OFDM uses a synthesis bank consisting of a formula_12-band transmultiplexer followed by the transform function\nformula_81\nOn the receiver side, an analysis bank is used to demodulate the signal again. This bank contains an inverse transform\nformula_82\nfollowed by another formula_12-band transmultiplexer. The relationship between both transform functions is\nformula_84\nAn example of W-OFDM uses the Perfect Reconstruction Cosine Modulated Filter Bank (PR-CMFB) and Extended Lapped Transform (ELT) is used for the wavelet TF. Thus, formula_85 and formula_86 are given as\nformula_87\nThese two functions are their respective inverses, and can be used to modulate and demodulate a given input sequence. Just as in the case of DFT, the wavelet transform creates orthogonal waves with formula_88, formula_89, ..., formula_90. The orthogonality ensures that they do not interfere with each other and can be sent simultaneously. At the receiver, formula_91, formula_92, ..., formula_93 are used to reconstruct the data sequence once more.\nAdvantages over standard OFDM.\nW-OFDM is an evolution of the standard OFDM, with certain advantages.\nMainly, the sidelobe levels of W-OFDM are lower. This results in less ICI, as well as greater robustness to narrowband interference. These two properties are especially useful in PLC, where most of the lines aren't shielded against EM-noise, which creates noisy channels and noise spikes.\nA comparison between the two modulation techniques also reveals that the complexity of both algorithms remains approximately the same.\nOther orthogonal transforms.\nThe vast majority of implementations of OFDM use the fast Fourier transform (FFT).\nHowever, there exist other orthogonal transforms that can be used.\nFor example, OFDM systems based on\nthe discrete Hartley transform (DHT) \nand the wavelet transform\nhave been investigated.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "22692", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22692", "title": "OFDM", "text": ""}
{"id": "22693", "revid": "41840956", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22693", "title": "Operator overloading", "text": "Feature of some programming languages\nIn computer programming, operator overloading, sometimes termed \"operator ad hoc polymorphism\", is a specific case of polymorphism, where different operators have different implementations depending on their arguments. Operator overloading is generally defined by a programming language, a programmer, or both.\nRationale.\nOperator overloading is syntactic sugar, and is used because it allows programming using notation nearer to the target domain and allows user-defined types a similar level of syntactic support as types built into a language. It is common, for example, in scientific computing, where it allows computing representations of mathematical objects to be manipulated with the same syntax as on paper.\nOperator overloading does not change the expressive power of a language (with functions), as it can be emulated using function calls. For example, consider variables , and of some user-defined type, such as matrices:\nIn a language that supports operator overloading, and with the usual assumption that the operator has higher precedence than the operator, this is a concise way of writing:\nHowever, the former syntax reflects common mathematical usage.\nExamples.\nIn this case, the addition operator is overloaded to allow addition on a user-defined type in C++:\nTime operator+(const Time&amp; lhs, const Time&amp; rhs) {\n Time temp = lhs;\n temp.seconds += rhs.seconds;\n temp.minutes += temp.seconds / 60;\n temp.seconds %= 60;\n temp.minutes += rhs.minutes;\n temp.hours += temp.minutes / 60;\n temp.minutes %= 60;\n temp.hours += rhs.hours;\n return temp;\nAddition is a binary operation, which means it has two operands. In C++, the arguments being passed are the operands, and the object is the returned value.\nThe operation could also be defined as a class method, replacing by the hidden argument; However, this forces the left operand to be of type :\n// The \"const\" right before the opening curly brace means that `this` is not modified.\nTime Time::operator+(const Time&amp; rhs) const {\n Time temp = *this; // `this` should not be modified, so make a copy.\n temp.seconds += rhs.seconds;\n temp.minutes += temp.seconds / 60;\n temp.seconds %= 60;\n temp.minutes += rhs.minutes;\n temp.hours += temp.minutes / 60;\n temp.minutes %= 60;\n temp.hours += rhs.hours;\n return temp;\nNote that a unary operator defined as a class method would receive no apparent argument (it only works from ):\nbool Time::operator!() const {\n return hours == 0 &amp;&amp; minutes == 0 &amp;&amp; seconds == 0;\nThe less-than (&lt;) operator is often overloaded to sort a structure or class:\nclass IntegerPair {\nprivate:\n int x;\n int y;\npublic:\n explicit IntegerPair(int x = 0, int y = 0):\n bool operator&lt;(const IntegerPair&amp; p) const {\n if (x == p.x) {\n return y &lt; p.y;\n return x &lt; p.x;\n};\nLike with the previous examples, in the last example operator overloading is done within the class. In C++, after overloading the less-than operator (codice_1), standard sorting functions can be used to sort some classes.\nStarting in C++20 with the introduction of the three-way comparison operator (codice_2), all the order operators can be defined by just defining that operator. The three-way comparison operator exists in many languages, including C++, Python, Rust, Swift, and PHP. Other languages, such as Java and C# instead use a method codice_3.\nimport std;\nusing std::strong_ordering;\nclass IntegerPair {\nprivate:\n int x;\n int y;\npublic:\n explicit IntegerPair(int x = 0, int y = 0):\n // can be auto-generated with = default;\n strong_ordering operator&lt;(const IntegerPair&amp; p) const {\n if (strong_ordering cmp = x &lt;=&gt; p.x; cmp != strong_ordering::equal) {\n return cmp;\n return y &lt;=&gt; p.y;\n};\nCriticisms.\nOperator overloading has often been criticized because it allows programmers to reassign the semantics of operators depending on the types of their operands. For example, the use of the operator in C++ a \u00ab b shifts the bits in the variable left by bits if and are of an integer type, but if is an output stream then the above code will attempt to write a to the stream. Because operator overloading allows the original programmer to change the usual semantics of an operator and to catch any subsequent programmers by surprise, it is considered good practice to use operator overloading with care (the creators of Java decided not to use this feature, although not necessarily for this reason).\nAnother, more subtle, issue with operators is that certain rules from mathematics can be wrongly expected or unintentionally assumed. For example, the commutativity of + (i.e. that ) does not always apply; an example of this occurs when the operands are strings, since + is commonly overloaded to perform a concatenation of strings (i.e. yields , while yields ). A typical counter to this argument comes directly from mathematics: While + is commutative on integers (and more generally any complex number), it is not commutative for other \"types\" of variables. In practice, + is not even always associative, for example with floating-point values due to rounding errors. Another example: In mathematics, multiplication is commutative for real and complex numbers but not commutative in matrix multiplication.\nCatalog.\nA classification of some common programming languages is made according to whether their operators are overloadable by the programmer and whether the operators are limited to a predefined set.\nTimeline of operator overloading.\n1960s.\nThe ALGOL 68 specification allowed operator overloading.\nExtract from the ALGOL 68 language specification (page 177) where the overloaded operators \u00ac, =, \u2260, and abs are defined:\n 10.2.2. Operations on Boolean Operands\n a) op \u2228 = (bool a, b) bool:( a | true | b );\n b) op \u2227 = (bool a, b) bool: ( a | b | false );\n c) op \u00ac = (bool a) bool: ( a | false | true );\n d) op = = (bool a, b) bool:( a\u2227b ) \u2228 ( \u00acb\u2227\u00aca );\n e) op \u2260 = (bool a, b) bool: \u00ac(a=b);\n f) op abs = (bool a)int: ( a | 1 | 0 );\nNote that no special declaration is needed to \"overload\" an operator, and the programmer is free to create new operators. For dyadic operators their priority compared to other operators can be set:\n prio max = 9;\n op max = (int a, b) int: ( a&gt;b | a | b );\n op ++ = ( ref int a ) int: ( a +:= 1 );\n1980s.\nAda supports overloading of operators from its inception, with the publication of the Ada 83 language standard. However, the language designers chose to preclude the definition of new operators. Only extant operators in the language may be overloaded, by defining new functions with identifiers such as \"+\", \"*\", \"&amp;\" etc. Subsequent revisions of the language (in 1995 and 2005) maintain the restriction to overloading of extant operators.\nIn C++, operator overloading is more refined than in ALGOL 68.\n1990s.\nJava language designers at Sun Microsystems chose to omit overloading. When asked about operator overloading, Brian Goetz of Oracle responded \"Value types first, then we can talk about it.\", suggesting that it could potentially be added after Project Valhalla.\nPython allows operator overloading through the implementation of methods with special names. For example, the addition (+) operator can be overloaded by implementing the method .\nRuby allows operator overloading as syntactic sugar for simple method calls.\nLua allows operator overloading as syntactic sugar for method calls with the added feature that if the first operand doesn't define that operator, the method for the second operand will be used.\n2000s.\nMicrosoft added operator overloading to C# in 2001 and to Visual Basic .NET in 2003. C# operator overloading is very similar in syntax to C++ operator overloading:\npublic class Fraction\n private int numerator;\n private int denominator;\n public static Fraction operator +(Fraction lhs, Fraction rhs)\n =&gt; new Fraction(lhs.numerator * rhs.denominator + rhs.numerator * lhs.denominator, lhs.denominator * rhs.denominator);\nScala treats all operators as methods and thus allows operator overloading by proxy.\n2010s.\nIn Raku, the definition of all operators is delegated to lexical functions, and so, using function definitions, operators can be overloaded or new operators added. For example, the function defined in the Rakudo source for incrementing a Date object with \"codice_4\" is:\nmulti infix:&lt;+&gt;(Date:D $d, Int:D $x) {\n Date.new-from-daycount($d.daycount + $x)\nSince \"multi\" was used, the function gets added to the list of multidispatch candidates, and \"codice_4\" is only overloaded for the case where the type constraints in the function signature are met.\nWhile the capacity for overloading includes codice_4, codice_7, codice_8, the postfix and term codice_9, and so on, it also allows for overloading various brace operators: codice_10, codice_11, codice_12, and codice_13.\nKotlin has supported operator overloading since its creation by overwriting specially named functions (like codice_14, codice_15, codice_16, etc.)\ndata class Point(val x: Int, val y: Int) {\n operator fun plus(other: Point): Point {\n return Point(this.x + other.x, this.y + other.y)\nBecause both Kotlin and Java compile to .class, when converted back to Java this will just be represented as:\npublic class Point {\n // fields and constructor...\n public Point plus(Point other) {\n return new Point(this.x + other.x, this.y + other.y);\nOperator overloading in Rust is accomplished by implementing the traits in codice_17.\nuse std::ops::Add;\nstruct Point {\n x: i32,\n y: i32\nimpl Point {\n pub fn new(x: i32, y: i32) -&gt; Self {\nimpl Add for Point {\n type Output = Point;\n fn add(self, other: Point) -&gt; Point {\n Point {\n x: self.x + other.y,\n y: self.y + other.y\nfn main() {\n let p1: Point = Point::new(1, 2);\n let p2: Point = Point::new(3, 4);\n let sum: Point = p1 + p2;\n println!(\"Sum of p1 and p2: {:?}\", sum);\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "22698", "revid": "19089174", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22698", "title": "Origin of life", "text": ""}
{"id": "22700", "revid": "609725", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22700", "title": "Omphalos hypothesis", "text": "Creationist hypothesis\nThe Omphalos hypothesis is one attempt to reconcile the scientific evidence that the Earth is billions of years old with a literal interpretation of the Genesis creation narrative, which implies that the Earth is only a few thousand years old. It is based on the religious belief that the universe was created by a divine being, within the past six to ten thousand years (in keeping with flood geology), and that the presence of objective, verifiable evidence that the universe is older than approximately ten millennia is due to the creator introducing false evidence that makes the universe appear significantly older.\nThe idea was named after the title of a book, \"Omphalos\" (1857), in which Philip Henry Gosse argued that for the world to be \"functional\", God must have created the Earth with mountains and canyons, trees with growth rings, Adam and Eve with fully grown hair, fingernails, and navels (\u1f40\u03bc\u03c6\u03b1\u03bb\u03cc\u03c2 \"omphalos\" is Greek for \"navel\"), and all living creatures with fully formed evolutionary features, etc., and that, therefore, \"no\" empirical evidence about the age of the Earth or universe can be taken as reliable.\nVarious supporters of Young Earth creationism have given different explanations for their belief that the universe is filled with false evidence of the universe's age, including a belief that some things needed to be created at a certain age for the ecosystems to function, or their belief that the creator was deliberately planting deceptive evidence.\nGosse's thesis was widely rejected at the time, but saw some revival in the 20th century by some Young Earth creationists, who extended the argument to include visible light that appears to originate from far-off stars and galaxies (addressing the \"starlight problem\").\nDevelopment of the idea.\nPre-scientific sources.\nStories of the beginning of human life based on the creation story in Genesis have been published for centuries. The 4th-century theologian Ephrem the Syrian described a world in which divine creation instantly produced fully grown organisms:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Although the grasses were only a moment old at their creation, they appeared as if they were months old. Likewise, the trees, although only a day old when they sprouted forth, were nevertheless like ... years old as they were fully grown and fruits were already budding on their branches.\n19th-century thinkers.\nBy the 19th century, scientific evidence of the Earth's age had been collected, and it disagreed with a literal reading of the biblical accounts. This evidence was rejected by some writers at the time, such as Fran\u00e7ois-Ren\u00e9 de Chateaubriand. Chateaubriand wrote in his 1802 book, \"G\u00e9nie du christianisme\" (Part I Book IV Chapter V), that \"God might have created, and doubtless did create, the world with all the marks of antiquity and completeness which it now exhibits.\" In modern times, Rabbi Dovid Gottlieb supported a similar position, saying that the objective scientific evidence for an old universe is strong, but wrong, and that the traditional Jewish calendar is correct.\nIn the middle of the 19th century, the disagreement between scientific evidence about the age of the Earth and the Western religious traditions was a significant debate among intellectuals. Gosse published \"Omphalos\" in 1857 to explain his answer to this question. He concluded that the religious tradition was correct. Gosse began with the earlier idea that the Earth contained mature organisms at the instant they were created, and that these organisms had false signs of their development, such as hair on mammals, which grows over time. He extended this idea of creating a single mature organism to creating mature systems, and concluded that fossils were an artifact of the creation process and merely part of what was necessary to make creation work. Therefore, he reasoned, fossils and other signs of the Earth's age could not be used to prove its age.\nOther contemporary proposals for reconciling the stories of creation in Genesis with the scientific evidence included the \"interval theory\" or gap theory of creation, in which a large interval of time passed in between the initial creation of the universe and the beginning of the Six Days of Creation. This idea was put forward by Archbishop John Bird Sumner of Canterbury in \"Treatise on the Records of Creation\". Another popular idea, promoted by the English theologian John Pye Smith, was that the Garden of Eden described the events of only one small location. A third proposal, by French naturalist Georges-Louis Leclerc, Comte de Buffon, held that the six \"days\" of the creation story were arbitrary and large ages rather than 24-hour periods.\nTheologians rejected Gosse's proposal on the grounds that it seemed to make the divine creator tell lies\u2014either lying in the scriptures, or lying in nature. Scientists rejected it on the grounds that it disagreed with uniformitarianism, an explanation of geology that was widely supported at the time, and the impossibility of testing or falsifying the idea.\nModern creationists.\nSome modern creationists still argue against scientific evidence in the same way. For instance, John D. Morris, president of the Institute for Creation Research wrote in 1990 about the \"appearance of age\", saying that: \"...what [God] created was functionally complete right from the start\u2014able to fulfill the purpose for which it was created\".\nHe does not extend this idea to the geological record, preferring to believe that it was all created in the Flood, but others such as Gerald E. Aardsma go further, with his idea of \"virtual history\". This appears to suggest that events after the creation have changed the \"virtual history\" we now see, including the fossils:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;This raises one more major point of difference, the handling of the Fall. Briefly, Creation with Appearance of Age runs into a theological snag with things like fossils of fish with other smaller fish in their stomachs: \"Do you mean that God chose to paint, of all things, a facade of SUFFERING and DEATH onto the creation when He gave it this arbitrary appearance of age at the time of creation?\" The virtual history paradigm recognizes simply that all creation type miracles entail a virtual history, so the Fall, with its creation type miracles (by which the nature of the creation was changed\u2014\"subjected to futility\") carried with it its own (fallen) virtual history, which is the virtual history we now see. We do not see the original utopian pre-Fall creation with its (presumably utopian) virtual history.\nCriticisms.\nBeginning of false creation.\nAlthough Gosse's original Omphalos hypothesis specifies a popular creation story, others have proposed that the idea does not preclude creation as recently as five minutes ago, including memories of times before this created \"in situ\". This idea is sometimes called Last Thursdayism by its opponents, as in \"the world might as well have been created last Thursday.\"\nScientifically, the concept is both unverifiable and unfalsifiable through any conceivable scientific study\u2014in other words, it is impossible to conclude the truth of the hypothesis, since it requires the empirical data itself to have been arbitrarily created to look the way it does at every observable level of detail.\nDeceptive creator.\nFrom a religious viewpoint, it can be interpreted as God having created a \"fake\" universe, such as illusions of light emitted from supernovae that never really happened, or volcanic mountains that were never really volcanoes in the first place and that never actually experienced erosion.\nIn a rebuttal of the claim that God might have implanted a false history of the age of the universe to test our faith in the truth of the Torah, Rabbi Natan Slifkin, an author whose works have been banned by several Haredi rabbis for going against the tenets of the Talmud, writes:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;God essentially created two conflicting accounts of Creation: one in nature, and one in the Torah. How can it be determined which is the real story, and which is the fake designed to mislead us? One could equally propose that it is nature that presents the real story, and that the Torah was devised by God to test us with a fake history!\nOne has to be able to rely on God's truthfulness if religion is to function. Or, to put it another way\u2014if God went to enormous lengths to convince us that the world is billions of years old, who are we to disagree?\nSimilar formulations.\nFive-minute hypothesis.\nThe five-minute hypothesis is a skeptical hypothesis put forth by the philosopher Bertrand Russell, that proposes that the universe sprang into existence five minutes ago from nothing, with human memory and all other signs of history included. It is a commonly used example of how one may maintain extreme philosophical skepticism with regard to memory and trust in evidentially derived historical chronology.\nBorges's \"Tl\u00f6n, Uqbar, Orbis Tertius\".\nJorge Luis Borges, in his 1940 work, \"Tl\u00f6n, Uqbar, Orbis Tertius\", describes a fictional world in which some essentially follow as a religious belief a philosophy much like Russell's discussion on the logical extreme of Gosse's theory:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;One of the schools of Tl\u00f6n goes so far as to negate time: it reasons that the present is indefinite, that the future has no reality other than as a present hope, the past none other than present memory.\nBorges had earlier written a short essay, \"The Creation and P. H. Gosse\" that explored the rejection of Gosse's \"Omphalos\". Borges argued that its unpopularity stemmed from Gosse's explicit (if inadvertent) outlining of what Borges characterized as absurdities in the Genesis story.\nLast Thursdayism.\nThe satirical \"Last Thursday\" version likely originated in the 1990s. In the early 21st century, a \"church\" of \"Last Thursdayism\" was established as a parody of religion and tenets of faith. The church sparked lively debates online.\nLast Thursdayism presents the Omphalos hypothesis as a parody religion. The \"Church of Last Thursdayism\" website attempted to equate belief in Last Thursdayism with an actual religion, listing \"tenets of faith\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The universe was created on Thursday and will expire on Thursday.\nThe universe was created by you as a test for yourself.\nYou will receive reward or punishment based on your actions in this test.\nLeft-handedness is a sinful temptation.\nEveryone except you was placed here and pre-programmed to act as part of your test environment.\nEveryone except you knows this.\nThe purpose of this one-week test is to discover your moral boundaries and character.\u2014\u200a\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "22702", "revid": "26347579", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22702", "title": "Origen", "text": "Christian scholar, ascetic, and theologian (c. 185 \u2013 c. 253)\nOrigen of Alexandria (c.\u2009185\u00a0\u2013 c.\u2009253), also known as Origen Adamantius, was an early Christian scholar, ascetic, and theologian who was born and spent the first half of his career in Alexandria. He was a prolific writer who wrote roughly 2,000 treatises in multiple branches of theology, including textual criticism, biblical exegesis and hermeneutics, homiletics, and spirituality. He was one of the most influential and controversial figures in early Christian theology, apologetics, and asceticism. He has been described by John Anthony McGuckin as \"the greatest genius the early church ever produced\".\nOrigen founded the Christian School of Caesarea, where he taught logic, cosmology, natural history, and theology, and became regarded by the churches of Palestine and Arabia as the ultimate authority on all matters of theology. He was tortured for his faith during the Decian persecution in 250 and died three to four years later from his injuries.\nOrigen produced a massive quantity of writings because of the patronage of his close friend Ambrose of Alexandria, who provided him with a team of secretaries to copy his works, making him one of the most prolific writers in late antiquity. His treatise \"On the First Principles\" systematically laid out the principles of Christian theology and became the foundation for later theological writings. He also authored , the most influential work of early Christian apologetics. Origen produced the , the first critical edition of the Hebrew Bible, which contained the original Hebrew text, four different Greek translations, and a Greek transliteration of the Hebrew, all written in columns, side by side. He wrote hundreds of sermons covering almost the entire Bible, interpreting many passages as allegorical. Origen was the first to propose the ransom theory of atonement in its fully developed form, and he also significantly contributed to the development of the concept of the Trinity. Origen hoped that all people might eventually attain salvation but was always careful to maintain that this was only speculation. He defended free will and advocated Christian pacifism.\nOrigen is considered by some Christian groups to be a Church Father. He is widely regarded as one of the most influential Christian theologians. His teachings were especially influential in the east, with Athanasius of Alexandria and the three Cappadocian Fathers being among his most devoted followers. Argument over the orthodoxy of Origen's teachings spawned the First Origenist Crisis in the late fourth century, in which he was attacked by Epiphanius of Salamis and Jerome but defended by Tyrannius Rufinus and John of Jerusalem. In 543, Emperor Justinian I condemned him as a heretic and ordered all his writings to be burned. The Second Council of Constantinople in 553 may have anathematized Origen, or it may have only condemned certain heretical teachings which claimed to be derived from Origen. The Church rejected his teachings on the pre-existence of souls.\nLife.\nAlmost all information about Origen's life comes from a lengthy biography of him in the \"Ecclesiastical History\" written by the Christian historian Eusebius (c.\u2009260\u00a0\u2013 c.\u2009340). Eusebius portrays Origen as the perfect Christian scholar and a literal saint. Eusebius, however, wrote this account almost fifty years after Origen's death and had access to few reliable sources on Origen's life, especially his early years. Anxious for more material, Eusebius recorded events based only on unreliable hearsay evidence, and frequently made speculative inferences. Nonetheless, scholars can reconstruct a general impression of Origen's historical life by sorting out the parts of Eusebius's account that are accurate from those that are inaccurate.\nEarly years.\nOrigen was born in either 185 or 186\u00a0AD in Alexandria. Porphyry called him \"a Greek, and educated in Greek literature\". According to Eusebius, Origen's father was Leonides of Alexandria, a respected professor of literature and a devout Christian who practised his religion openly (and later a martyr and saint). Joseph Wilson Trigg deems the details of this report unreliable, but admits that Origen's father was certainly at least \"a prosperous and thoroughly Hellenized bourgeois\". According to John Anthony McGuckin, Origen's mother, whose name is unknown, may have been a member of the lower class who did not have the right of citizenship. \nIt is likely that, due to his mother's status, Origen was not a Roman citizen. Origen's father taught him about literature and philosophy as well as the Bible and Christian doctrine. Eusebius states that Origen's father made him memorize passages of scripture daily. Trigg accepts this tradition as possibly genuine, given Origen's ability as an adult to recite extended passages of scripture. Eusebius also reports that Origen became so learned about the scriptures at an early age that his father was unable to answer his questions about them.\nIn 202, when Origen was \"not yet seventeen\", Emperor Septimius Severus ordered Roman citizens who openly practised Christianity to be executed. Origen's father Leonides was arrested and thrown in prison. Eusebius reports that Origen wanted to turn himself in to the authorities so that they would execute him as well, but his mother hid all his clothes and he was unable to go to the authorities since he refused to leave the house naked. According to McGuckin, even if Origen had turned himself in, it is unlikely that he would have been punished, since the emperor was only intent on executing Roman citizens. Origen's father was beheaded, and the state confiscated the family's entire property, leaving them impoverished. Origen was the eldest of nine children, and as his father's heir, it became his responsibility to provide for the whole family.\nWhen he was eighteen, Origen was appointed as a catechist at the Catechetical School of Alexandria. Many scholars have assumed that Origen became the head of the school, but according to McGuckin, this is highly improbable. It is more likely that he was given a paid teaching position, perhaps as a \"relief effort\" for his impoverished family. While employed at the school, he adopted the ascetic lifestyle of the Greek Sophists. He spent the whole day teaching and would stay up late at night writing treatises and commentaries. He went barefoot and only owned one cloak. He did not drink alcohol and ate a simple diet and he often fasted for long periods. Although Eusebius goes to great lengths to portray Origen as one of the Christian monastics of his era, this portrayal is now generally recognized as anachronistic.\nAccording to Eusebius, as a young man, Origen was taken in by a wealthy Gnostic woman, who was also the patron of a very influential Gnostic theologian from Antioch, who frequently lectured in her home. Eusebius goes to great lengths to insist that, although Origen studied while in her home, he never once \"prayed in common\" with her or the Gnostic theologian. Later, Origen succeeded in converting a wealthy man named Ambrose from Valentinian Gnosticism to orthodox Christianity. Ambrose was so impressed by the young scholar that he gave Origen a house, a secretary, seven stenographers, a crew of copyists and calligraphers, and paid for all of his writings to be published.\nWhen he was in his early twenties, Origen sold the small library of Greek literary works that he had inherited from his father for a sum which netted him a daily income of four obols. He used this money to continue his study of the Bible and of philosophy. Origen studied at numerous schools throughout Alexandria, including the Platonic Academy of Alexandria, where he was a student of Ammonius Saccas. Eusebius claims that Origen studied under Clement of Alexandria, but according to McGuckin, this is almost certainly a retrospective assumption based on the similarity of their teachings. Origen rarely mentions Clement in his writings, and when he does, it is usually to correct him.\nAlleged self-castration.\nEusebius claims that, as a young man, following a literal reading of , in which Jesus is presented as saying \"there are eunuchs who have made themselves eunuch for the sake of the kingdom of heaven\", Origen either castrated himself or had someone else castrate him in order to ensure his reputation as a respectable tutor. Eusebius further alleges that Origen privately told Demetrius, the bishop of Alexandria, about the castration and that Demetrius initially praised him for his devotion to God on account of it. \nOrigen, however, never mentions anything about having castrated himself in any of his surviving writings. In his explanation of this verse in his \"Commentary on the Gospel of Matthew\", written near the end of life, he strongly condemns any literal interpretation of Matthew 19:12, asserting that only an idiot would interpret the passage as advocating literal castration.\nSince the beginning of the twentieth century, some scholars have questioned the historicity of Origen's self-castration, with many seeing it as a wholesale fabrication. Trigg states that Eusebius's account of Origen's self-castration is certainly true, because Eusebius, who was an ardent admirer of Origen, yet clearly describes the castration as an act of pure folly, would have had no motive to pass on a piece of information that might tarnish Origen's reputation unless it was \"notorious and beyond question\". Trigg sees Origen's condemnation of the literal interpretation of Matthew 19:12 as him \"tacitly repudiating the literalistic reading he had acted on in his youth\".\nIn sharp contrast, McGuckin dismisses Eusebius's story of Origen's self-castration as \"hardly credible\", seeing it as a deliberate attempt by Eusebius to distract from more serious questions regarding the orthodoxy of Origen's teachings. McGuckin also states: \"We have no indication that the motive of castration for respectability was ever regarded as standard by a teacher of mixed-gender classes.\" He adds that Origen's female students would have been accompanied by attendants at all times, meaning that Origen would have had no good reason to think that anyone would suspect him of impropriety. \nHenry Chadwick argues that, while Eusebius's story may be true, it seems unlikely, given that Origen's exposition of Matthew 19:12 \"strongly deplored any literal interpretation of the words\". Instead, Chadwick suggests, \"Perhaps Eusebius was uncritically reporting malicious gossip retailed by Origen's enemies, of whom there were many.\" McGuckin similarly notes that Origen \"himself derides the literalist interpretation of the eunuch, saying it was something only an idiot would consider. His tone suggests quite clearly that he regards the idea as offensive, and Origen's text ought always to be preferred as a historical source over and above Eusebius.\" However, many noted historians, such as Peter Brown and William Placher, continue to find no reason to conclude that the story is false. Placher theorizes that, if it is true, it may have followed an episode in which Origen received some raised eyebrows while privately tutoring a woman.\nTravels and early writings.\nIn his early twenties Origen became less interested in work as a grammarian and more interested in operating as a rhetor-philosopher. He gave his job as a catechist to his younger colleague Heraclas. Meanwhile, Origen began to style himself as a \"master of philosophy\". Origen's new position as a self-styled Christian philosopher brought him into conflict with Demetrius, the bishop of Alexandria. Demetrius, a charismatic leader who ruled the Christian congregation of Alexandria with an iron fist, became the most direct promoter of the elevation in status of the bishop of Alexandria; before Demetrius, the bishop of Alexandria had merely been a priest who was elected to represent his fellows, but after Demetrius, the bishop was seen as clearly a rank higher than his fellow priests. By styling himself as an independent philosopher, Origen was reviving a role that had been prominent in earlier Christianity but which challenged the authority of the now-powerful bishop.\nMeanwhile, Origen began composing his massive theological treatise \"On the First Principles\", a landmark book which systematically laid out the foundations of Christian theology for centuries to come. Origen also began travelling abroad to visit schools across the Mediterranean. In 212 he travelled to Rome \u2013 a major center of philosophy at the time. In Rome, Origen attended lectures by Hippolytus of Rome and was influenced by his theology. In 213 or 214, the governor of the Province of Arabia sent a message to the prefect of Egypt requesting him to send Origen to meet with him so that he could interview him and learn more about Christianity from its leading intellectual. Origen, escorted by official bodyguards, spent a short time in Arabia with the governor before returning to Alexandria.\nIn the autumn of 215, the Roman Emperor Caracalla visited Alexandria. During the visit, the students at the schools there protested and made fun of him for having murdered his brother Geta (died 211). Caracalla, incensed, ordered his troops to ravage the city, execute the governor, and kill all the protesters. He also commanded them to expel all the teachers and intellectuals from the city. Origen fled Alexandria and traveled to the city of Caesarea Maritima in the Roman province of Palestine, where the bishops Theoctistus of Caesarea and Alexander of Jerusalem became his devoted admirers and asked him to deliver discourses on the scriptures in their respective churches. This effectively allowed Origen to deliver sermons even though he was not formally ordained. While this was an unexpected phenomenon, especially given Origen's international fame as a teacher and philosopher, it infuriated Demetrius, who saw it as a direct undermining of his authority. Demetrius sent deacons from Alexandria to demand that the Palestinian hierarchs immediately return \"his\" catechist to Alexandria. He also issued a decree chastising the Palestinians for allowing a person who was not ordained to preach. The Palestinian bishops, in turn, issued their condemnation, accusing Demetrius of being jealous of Origen's fame and prestige.\nOrigen obeyed Demetrius's order and returned to Alexandria, bringing with him an antique scroll he had purchased at Jericho containing the full text of the Hebrew Bible. The manuscript, which had purportedly been found \"in a jar\", became the source text for one of the two Hebrew columns in Origen's . Origen studied the Old Testament in great depth; Eusebius even claims that Origen learned Hebrew. Most modern scholars regard this claim as implausible, but they disagree over how much Origen knew about the language. H. Lietzmann concludes that Origen probably only knew the Hebrew alphabet and not much else, whereas R. P. C. Hanson and G. Bardy argue that Origen had a superficial understanding of the language but not enough to have composed the entire . A note in Origen's \"On the First Principles\" mentions an unknown \"Hebrew master\", but this was probably a consultant, not a teacher.\nOrigen also studied the entire New Testament, but especially the epistles of the apostle Paul and the Gospel of John, the writings which Origen regarded as the most important and authoritative. At Ambrose's request, Origen composed the first five books of his exhaustive \"Commentary on the Gospel of John\", He also wrote the first eight books of his \"Commentary on Genesis\", his \"Commentary on Psalms 1\u201325\", and his \"Commentary on Lamentations\". In addition to these commentaries, Origen also wrote two books on the resurrection of Jesus and ten books of ('Miscellanies'). It is likely that these works contained much theological speculation, which brought Origen into even greater conflict with Demetrius.\nConflict with Demetrius and removal to Caesarea.\nOrigen repeatedly asked Demetrius to ordain him as a priest, but Demetrius continually refused. In around 231, Demetrius sent Origen on a mission to Athens. Along the way, Origen stopped in Caesarea, where he was warmly greeted by the bishops Theoctistus of Caesarea and Alexander of Jerusalem, who had become his close friends during his previous stay. While he was visiting Caesarea, Origen asked Theoctistus to ordain him as a priest. Theoctistus gladly complied. Upon learning of Origen's ordination, Demetrius was outraged and issued a condemnation declaring that Origen's ordination by a foreign bishop was an act of insubordination.\nEusebius reports that as a result of Demetrius's condemnations, Origen decided not to return to Alexandria and instead to take up permanent residence in Caesarea. John Anthony McGuckin, however, argues that Origen had probably already been planning to stay in Caesarea. The Palestinian bishops declared Origen the chief theologian of Caesarea. Firmilian, the bishop of Caesarea Mazaca in Cappadocia, was such a devoted disciple of Origen that he begged him to come to Cappadocia and teach there.\nDemetrius raised a storm of protests against the bishops of Palestine and the church synod in Rome. According to Eusebius, Demetrius published the allegation that Origen had secretly castrated himself, a capital offense under Roman law at the time and one which would have made Origen's ordination invalid, since eunuchs were forbidden from becoming priests. Demetrius also alleged that Origen had taught an extreme form of , which held that all beings, including even Satan himself, would eventually attain salvation. This allegation probably arose from a misunderstanding of Origen's argument during a debate with the Valentinian Gnostic teacher Candidus. Candidus had argued in favor of predestination by declaring that the Devil was beyond salvation. Origen had responded by arguing that, if the Devil is destined for eternal damnation, it was on account of his actions, which were the result of his own free will. Therefore, Origen had declared that Satan was only morally reprobate, not absolutely reprobate.\nDemetrius died in 232, less than a year after Origen's departure from Alexandria. The accusations against Origen faded with the death of Demetrius, but they did not disappear entirely and they continued to haunt him for the rest of his career. Origen defended himself in his \"Letter to Friends in Alexandria\", in which he vehemently denied that he had ever taught that the Devil would attain salvation and insisted that the very notion of the Devil attaining salvation was simply ludicrous.\nWork and teaching in Caesarea.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Rquote/styles.css\"/&gt;{ class=\"rquote pullquote floatright\" role=\"presentation\" style=\"display:table; border-collapse:collapse; border-style:none; float:right; margin:0.5em 0.75em; width:33%; \"\nDuring his early years in Caesarea, Origen's primary task was the establishment of a Christian School; Caesarea had long been seen as a center of learning for Jews and Hellenistic philosophers, but until Origen's arrival, it had lacked a Christian center of higher education. According to Eusebius, the school Origen founded was primarily targeted towards young pagans who had expressed interest in Christianity but were not yet ready to ask for baptism. The school therefore sought to explain Christian teachings through Middle Platonism. Origen started his curriculum by teaching his students classical Socratic reasoning. After they had mastered this, he taught them cosmology and natural history. Finally, once they had mastered all of these subjects, he taught them theology, which was the highest of all philosophies, the accumulation of everything they had previously learned.\nWith the establishment of the Caesarean school, Origen's reputation as a scholar and theologian reached its zenith and he became known throughout the Mediterranean world as a brilliant intellectual. The hierarchs of the Palestinian and Arabian church synods regarded Origen as the ultimate expert on all matters dealing with theology. While teaching in Caesarea, Origen resumed work on his \"Commentary on John\", composing at least books six through ten. In the first of these books, Origen compares himself to \"an Israelite who has escaped the perverse persecution of the Egyptians\". Origen also wrote the treatise \"On Prayer\" at the request of his friend Ambrose and Tatiana (referred to as the \"sister\" of Ambrose), in which he analyzes the different types of prayers described in the Bible and offers a detailed exegesis on the Lord's Prayer.\nPagans also took a fascination with Origen. The Neoplatonist philosopher Porphyry heard of Origen's fame and traveled to Caesarea to listen to his lectures. Porphyry recounts that Origen had extensively studied the teachings of Pythagoras, Plato, and Aristotle, but also those of important Middle Platonists, Neopythagoreans, and Stoics, including Numenius of Apamea, Chronius, Apollophanes, Longinus, Moderatus of Gades, Nicomachus, Chaeremon, and Cornutus. Nonetheless, Porphyry accused Origen of having betrayed true philosophy by subjugating its insights to the exegesis of the Christian scriptures. Eusebius reports that Origen was summoned from Caesarea to Antioch at the behest of Julia Avita Mamaea, the mother of Roman Emperor Severus Alexander, \"to discuss Christian philosophy and doctrine with her\".\nIn 235, approximately three years after Origen began teaching in Caesarea, Alexander Severus, who had been tolerant towards Christians, was murdered and Emperor Maximinus Thrax instigated a purge of all those who had supported his predecessor. His pogroms targeted Christian leaders and, in Rome, Pope Pontianus and Hippolytus of Rome were both sent into exile. Origen knew that he was in danger and went into hiding in the home of a faithful Christian woman named Juliana the Virgin, who had been a student of the Ebionite leader Symmachus. Origen's close friend and longtime patron Ambrose was arrested in Nicomedia, and Protoctetes, the leading priest in Caesarea, was also arrested. In their honor, Origen composed his treatise \"Exhortation to Martyrdom\", which is now regarded as one of the greatest classics of Christian resistance literature. After coming out of hiding following Maximinus's death, Origen founded a school of which Gregory Thaumaturgus, later bishop of Pontus, was one of the pupils. He preached regularly on Wednesdays and Fridays, and later daily.\nLater life.\nSometime between 238 and 244, Origen visited Athens, where he completed his \"Commentary on the Book of Ezekiel\" and began writing his \"Commentary on the Song of Songs\". After visiting Athens, he visited Ambrose in Nicomedia. According to Porphyry, Origen also travelled to Rome or Antioch, where he met Plotinus, the founder of Neoplatonism. The Christians of the eastern Mediterranean continued to revere Origen as the most orthodox of all theologians, and when the Palestinian hierarchs learned that Beryllus, the bishop of Bostra and one of the most energetic Christian leaders of the time, had been preaching adoptionism (the belief that Jesus was born human and only became divine after his baptism), they sent Origen to convert him to orthodoxy. Origen engaged Beryllus in a public disputation, which went so successfully that Beryllus promised only to teach Origen's theology from then on. On another occasion, a Christian leader in Arabia named Heracleides began teaching that the soul was mortal and that it perished with the body. Origen refuted these teachings, arguing that the soul is immortal and can never die.\nIn c.\u2009249, the Plague of Cyprian broke out. In 250, Emperor Decius, believing that the plague was caused by Christians' failure to recognise him as divine, issued a decree for Christians to be persecuted. This time Origen did not escape. Eusebius recounts how Origen suffered \"bodily tortures and torments under the iron collar and in the dungeon; and how for many days with his feet stretched four spaces in the stocks\". The governor of Caesarea gave very specific orders that Origen was not to be killed until he had publicly renounced his faith in Christ. Origen endured two years of imprisonment and torture, but obstinately refused to renounce his faith. In June 251, Decius was killed fighting the Goths in the Battle of Abritus, and Origen was released from prison. Nonetheless, Origen's health was broken by the physical tortures enacted on him, and he died less than a year later at the age of sixty-nine. A later legend, recounted by Jerome and numerous itineraries, places his death and burial at Tyre, but little value can be attached to this.\nWorks.\nExegetical writings.\nOrigen was an extremely prolific writer. According to Epiphanius, he wrote a grand total of roughly 6,000 works over the course of his lifetime. Most scholars agree that this estimate is probably somewhat exaggerated. According to Jerome, Eusebius listed the titles of just under 2,000 treatises written by Origen in his lost \"Life of Pamphilus\". Jerome compiled an abbreviated list of Origen's major treatises, itemizing 800 different titles.\nBy far the most important work of Origen on textual criticism was the ('Sixfold'), a massive comparative study of various translations of the Old Testament in six columns: Hebrew, Hebrew in Greek characters, the Septuagint, and the Greek translations of Theodotion (a Jewish scholar from c. 180 AD), Aquila of Sinope (another Jewish scholar from c. 117\u2013138), and Symmachus (an Ebionite scholar from c. 193\u2013211). Origen was the first Christian scholar to introduce critical markers to a Biblical text. He marked the Septuagint column of the \"Hexapla\" using signs adapted from those used by the textual critics of the Great Library of Alexandria: a passage found in the Septuagint that was not found in the Hebrew text would be marked with an obelus (\u00f7) and a passage that was found in other Greek translations, but not in the Septuagint, would be marked with an asterisk (*).\nThe was the cornerstone of the Great Library of Caesarea, which Origen founded. It was still the centerpiece of the library's collection by the time of Jerome, who records having used it in his letters on multiple occasions. When Emperor Constantine the Great ordered fifty complete copies of the Bible to be transcribed and disseminated across the empire, Eusebius used the as the master copy for the Old Testament. Although the original has been lost, the text of it has survived in numerous fragments and a more-or-less complete Syriac translation of the Greek column, made by the seventh-century bishop Paul of Tella, has also survived. For some sections of the , Origen included additional columns containing other Greek translations; for the Book of Psalms, he included no less than eight Greek translations, making this section known as ('Ninefold'). Origen also produced the ('Fourfold'), a smaller, abridged version of the containing only the four Greek translations and not the original Hebrew text.\nAccording to Jerome's \"Epistle\" 33, Origen wrote extensive on the books of Exodus, Leviticus, Isaiah, Psalms 1\u201315, Ecclesiastes, and the Gospel of John. None of these have survived intact, but parts of them were incorporated into the , a collection of excerpts from major works of Biblical commentary written by the Church Fathers. Other fragments of the are preserved in Origen's and in Pamphilus of Caesarea's apology for Origen. The were of a similar character, and the margin of , 184, contains citations from this work on Romans 9:23; I Corinthians 6:14, 7:31, 34, 9:20\u201321, 10:9, besides a few other fragments. Origen composed homilies covering almost the entire Bible. There are 205, and possibly 279, homilies of Origen that are extant either in Greek or in Latin translations.\nThe homilies preserved are on Genesis (16), Exodus (13), Leviticus (16), Numbers (28), Joshua (26), Judges (9), I Sam. (2), Psalms 36\u201338 (9), Canticles (2), Isaiah (9), Jeremiah (7 Greek, 2 Latin, 12 Greek and Latin), Ezekiel (14), and Luke (39). The homilies were preached in the church at Caesarea, with the exception of the two on 1 Samuel which were delivered in Jerusalem. Nautin has argued that they were all preached in a three-year liturgical cycle some time between 238 and 244, preceding the \"Commentary on the Song of Songs\", where Origen refers to homilies on Judges, Exodus, Numbers, and a work on Leviticus. On June 11, 2012, the Bavarian State Library announced that the Italian philologist Marina Molin Pradel had discovered twenty-nine previously unknown homilies by Origen in a twelfth-century Byzantine manuscript from their collection. Prof. Lorenzo Perrone of Bologna University and other experts confirmed the authenticity of the homilies. The texts of these manuscripts can be found online.\nOrigen is the main source of information on the use of the texts that were later officially canonized as the New Testament. The information used to create the late-fourth-century Easter Letter, which declared accepted Christian writings, was probably based on the lists given in Eusebius's \"Ecclesiastical History\" HE 3:25 and 6:25, which were both primarily based on information provided by Origen. Origen accepted the authenticity of the epistles of 1 John, 1 Peter, and Jude without question and accepted the Epistle of James as authentic with only slight hesitation. He also refers to 2 John, 3 John, and 2 Peter but notes that all three were suspected to be forgeries. Origen may have also considered other writings to be \"inspired\" that were rejected by later authors, including the Epistle of Barnabas, Shepherd of Hermas, and 1 Clement. \"Origen is not the originator of the idea of biblical canon, but he certainly gives the philosophical and literary\u2013interpretative underpinnings for the whole notion.\"\nExtant commentaries.\nOrigen's commentaries written on specific books of scripture are much more focused on systematic exegesis than his homilies. In these writings, Origen applies the precise critical methodology that had been developed by the scholars of the Mouseion in Alexandria to the Christian scriptures. The commentaries also display Origen's impressive encyclopedic knowledge of various subjects and his ability to cross-reference specific words, listing every place in which a word appears in the scriptures along with all the word's known meanings, a feat made all the more impressive by the fact that he did this in a time when Bible concordances had not yet been compiled. Origen's massive \"Commentary on the Gospel of John\", which spanned more than thirty-two volumes once it was completed, was written with the specific intention not only to expound the correct interpretation of the scriptures, but also to refute the interpretations of the Valentinian Gnostic teacher Heracleon, who had used the Gospel of John to support his argument that there were really two gods, not one. Of the original thirty-two books in the \"Commentary on John\", only nine have been preserved: Books I, II, VI, X, XIII, XX, XXVIII, XXXII, and a fragment of XIX.\nOf the original twenty-five books in Origen's \"Commentary on the Gospel of Matthew\", only eight have survived in the original Greek (Books 10\u201317), covering Matthew 13.36\u201322.33. An anonymous Latin translation beginning at the point corresponding to Book 12, Chapter 9 of the Greek text and covering Matthew 16.13\u201327.66 has also survived. The translation contains parts that are not found in the original Greek and is missing parts that are found in it. Origen's \"Commentary on the Gospel of Matthew\" was universally regarded as a classic, even after his condemnation, and it ultimately became the work which established the Gospel of Matthew as the primary gospel. Origen's \"Commentary on the Epistle to the Romans\" was originally fifteen books long, but only tiny fragments of it have survived in the original Greek. An abbreviated Latin translation in ten books was produced by the monk Tyrannius Rufinus at the end of the fourth century. The historian Socrates Scholasticus records that Origen had included an extensive discussion of the application of the title to the Virgin Mary in his commentary, but this discussion is not found in Rufinus's translation, probably because Rufinus did not approve of Origen's position on the matter, whatever that might have been.\nOrigen also composed a \"Commentary on the Song of Songs\", in which he took explicit care to explain why the Song of Songs was relevant to a Christian audience. The \"Commentary on the Song of Songs\" was Origen's most celebrated commentary and Jerome famously writes in his preface to his translation of two of Origen's homilies over the Song of Songs that: \"In his other works, Origen habitually excels others. In this commentary, he excelled himself.\" Origen expanded on the exegesis of the Jewish Rabbi Akiva, interpreting the Song of Songs as a mystical allegory in which the bridegroom represents the Logos and the bride represents the soul of the believer. This was the first Christian commentary to expound such an interpretation and it became extremely influential on later interpretations of the Song of Songs. Despite this, the commentary now only survives in part through a Latin translation of it made by Tyrannius Rufinus in 410. Fragments of some other commentaries survive. Citations in Origen's include fragments of the third book of the commentary on Genesis. There is also Ps. i, iv.1, the small commentary on Canticles, and the second book of the large commentary on the same, the twentieth book of the commentary on Ezekiel, and the commentary on Hosea. Of the non-extant commentaries, there is limited evidence of their arrangement.\n\"On the First Principles\".\nOrigen's \"On the First Principles\" was the first ever systematic exposition of Christian theology. He composed it as a young man between 220 and 230 while he was still living in Alexandria. Fragments from Books 3.1 and 4.1\u20133 of Origen's Greek original are preserved in Origen's . A few smaller quotations of the original Greek are preserved in Justinian's \"Letter to Mennas\". The vast majority of the text has only survived in a heavily abridged Latin translation produced by Tyrannius Rufinus in 397. \"On the First Principles\" begins with an essay explaining the nature of theology. Book One describes the heavenly world and includes descriptions of the oneness of God, the relationship between the three persons of the Trinity, the nature of the divine spirit, reason, and angels. Book Two describes the world of man, including the incarnation of the Logos, the soul, free will, and eschatology. Book Three deals with cosmology, sin, and redemption. Book Four deals with teleology and the interpretation of the scriptures.\n\"Against Celsus\".\n\"Against Celsus\" ( ; Latin: ), preserved entirely in Greek, was Origen's last treatise, written about 248. It is an apologetic work defending orthodox Christianity against the attacks of the pagan philosopher Celsus, who was seen in the ancient world as early Christianity's foremost opponent. In 178, Celsus had written a polemic entitled \"On the True Word\", in which he had made numerous arguments against Christianity. The church had responded by ignoring Celsus's attacks, but Origen's patron Ambrose brought the matter to his attention. Origen initially wanted to ignore Celsus and let his attacks fade, but one of Celsus's major claims, which held that no self-respecting philosopher of the Platonic tradition would ever be so stupid as to become a Christian, provoked him to write a rebuttal.\nIn the book, Origen systematically refutes each of Celsus's arguments point by point and argues for a rational basis of Christian faith. Origen draws heavily on the teachings of Plato and argues that Christianity and Greek philosophy are not incompatible, and that philosophy contains much that is true and admirable, but that the Bible contains far greater wisdom than anything Greek philosophers could ever grasp. Origen responds to Celsus's accusation that Jesus had performed his miracles using magic rather than divine powers by asserting that, unlike magicians, Jesus had not performed his miracles for show, but rather to reform his audiences. \"Against Celsus\" became the most influential of all early Christian apologetics works; before it was written, Christianity was seen by many as merely a folk religion for the illiterate and uneducated, but Origen raised it to a level of academic respectability. Eusebius admired \"Against Celsus\" so much that, in his \"Against Hierocles\" 1, he declared that \"Against Celsus\" provided an adequate rebuttal to all criticisms the church would ever face.\nOther writings.\nBetween 232 and 235, while in Caesarea in Palestine, Origen wrote \"On Prayer\", of which the full text has been preserved in the original Greek. After an introduction on the object, necessity, and advantage of prayer, he ends with an exegesis of the Lord's Prayer, concluding with remarks on the position, place, and attitude to be assumed during prayer, as well as on the classes of prayer. \"On Martyrdom\", or the \"Exhortation to Martyrdom\", also preserved entire in Greek, was written some time after the beginning of the persecution of Maximinus in the first half of 235. In it, Origen warns against any trifling with idolatry and emphasises the duty of suffering martyrdom manfully, while in the second part he explains the meaning of martyrdom.\nThe papyri discovered at Tura in 1941 contained the Greek texts of two previously unknown works of Origen. Neither work can be dated precisely, though both were probably written after the persecution of Maximinus in 235. One is \"On the Pascha\". The other is \"Dialogue with Heracleides\", a record written by one of Origen's stenographers of a debate between Origen and the Arabian bishop Heracleides, a quasi-Monarchianist who taught that the Father and the Son were the same. In the dialogue, Origen uses Socratic questioning to persuade Heracleides to believe in the \"Logos theology\", in which the Son or Logos is a separate entity from God the Father. The debate between Origen and Heracleides, and Origen's responses in particular, has been noted for its unusually cordial and respectful nature in comparison to the much fiercer polemics of Tertullian or the fourth-century debates between Trinitarians and Arians.\nLost works include two books on the Resurrection, written before \"On First Principles\", and also two dialogues on the same theme dedicated to Ambrose. Eusebius had a collection of more than one hundred letters of Origen, and the list of Jerome speaks of several books of his epistles. Except for a few fragments, only three letters have been preserved. The first, partly preserved in the Latin translation of Rufinus, is addressed to friends in Alexandria. The second is a short letter to Gregory Thaumaturgus, preserved in the . The third is an epistle to Sextus Julius Africanus, extant in Greek, replying to a letter from Africanus (also extant), and defending the authenticity of the Greek additions to the book of Daniel.\nMany works have been falsely ascribed to Origen. Forgeries of the writings of Origen made in his lifetime are discussed by Rufinus in . The , the attributed to Hippolytus of Rome, and the \"Commentary on Job\" by Julian the Arian have also been ascribed to him.\nViews.\nChristology.\nOrigen writes that Jesus was \"the firstborn of all creation [who] assumed a body and a human soul\". He firmly believed that Jesus had a human soul and abhorred docetism (the teaching which held that Jesus had come to Earth in spirit form rather than a physical human body). Origen envisioned Jesus' human nature as the one soul that stayed closest to God and remained perfectly faithful to Him, even when all other souls fell away. At Jesus's incarnation, his soul became fused with the Logos and they \"intermingled\" to become one. Thus, according to Origen, Christ was both human and divine, but like all human souls, Christ's human nature was existent from the beginning.\nOrigen was the first to propose the ransom theory of atonement in its fully developed form, although Irenaeus had previously proposed a prototypical form of it. According to this theory, Christ's death on the cross was a ransom to Satan in exchange for humanity's liberation. This theory holds that Satan was tricked by God because Christ was not only free of sin, but also the incarnate Deity, whom Satan lacked the ability to enslave. The theory was later expanded by theologians such as Gregory of Nyssa and Rufinus of Aquileia. In the eleventh century, Anselm of Canterbury criticized the ransom theory, along with the associated Christus Victor theory, resulting in the theory's decline in western Europe. The theory has nonetheless retained some of its popularity in the Eastern Orthodox Church.\nCosmology and eschatology.\nOne of Origen's main teachings was the doctrine of the preexistence of souls, which held that before God created the material world he created a vast number of incorporeal \"spiritual intelligences\" ( ). All of these souls were at first devoted to the contemplation and love of their Creator, but as the fervor of the divine fire cooled, almost all of these intelligences eventually grew bored of contemplating God, and their love for him \"cooled off\" ( ). When God created the world, the souls which had previously existed without bodies became incarnate. Those whose love for God diminished the most became demons. Those whose love diminished moderately became human souls, eventually to be incarnated in fleshly bodies. Those whose love diminished the least became angels.\nOne soul, however, who remained perfectly devoted to God became, through love, one with the Word (Logos) of God. The Logos eventually took flesh and was born of the Virgin Mary, becoming the God-man Jesus Christ. In recent years it has been questioned whether Origen believed this, being in reality a belief of his disciples and a misrepresentation by Justinian, Epiphanius and others.\nOrigen believed that, eventually, the whole world would be converted to Christianity, \"since the world is continually gaining possession of more souls\". He believed that the Kingdom of Heaven was not yet come, but that it was the duty of every Christian to make the eschatological reality of the kingdom present in their lives. Origen is often believed to be a Universalist, who suggested that all people might eventually attain salvation, but only after being purged of their sins through \"divine fire\". This, of course, in line of Origen's allegorical interpretation, was not \"literal\" fire, but rather the inner anguish of knowing one's own sins.\nOrigen was careful to maintain that universal salvation was merely a possibility and not a definitive doctrine, though he seemed strongly convinced that at least all human souls will be reunited to God in a final apokatastasis \u2013 the re-establishment of an original unity in creation \u2013 \"because the end is always like the beginning\" and because he believed all divine punishment to be medicinal. It is certain that Origen rejected the Stoic doctrine of eternal return, although he did posit the existence of a series of non-identical worlds. Jerome quotes Origen as having allegedly written that \"after aeons and the one restoration of all things, the state of Gabriel will be the same as that of the Devil, Paul's as that of Caiaphas, that of virgins as that of prostitutes\". However, Origen expressly states in his \"Letter to Friends in Alexandria\" that Satan and \"those who are cast out of the kingdom of God\" would not be included in the final salvation. Moreover, Origen often described a quite traditional fiery punishment in his homilies, considering the doctrine vital for the Christians who are not yet spiritually mature. On the other hand, he thought it sometimes necessary to admit the medicinal character of divine punishment to refute the notion of a cruel God.\nThe \"Letter to Friends\" may not reflect his actual eschatological views, as in some of his works he suggests that eternal punishment is not true but should nonetheless be taught as true to the majority of people in order to discourage sinning. For instance, in of \"Against Celsus\", he states, \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;It is in the precincts of Jerusalem that punishment will be inflicted upon those who undergo the process of purification [...] But the remarks which might be made on this topic are neither to be made to all, nor to be uttered on the present occasion; for it is not unattended with danger to commit to writing the explanation of such subjects, seeing the multitude need no further instruction than that which relates to the punishment of sinners; while to ascend beyond this is not expedient, for the sake of those who are with difficulty restrained, even by fear of eternal punishment, from plunging into any degree of wickedness, and into the flood of evils which result from sin.\nA number of critics in the patristic era accused Origen of teaching that even the resurrection bodies would eventually vanish so that the souls could be united with the incorporeal God. In Rufinus's favourable translation of \"On the First Principles\", however, Origen repeatedly asserts that some kind of body is indispensable for created beings, although when contemplating the final end of all things, he offers three hypotheses \u2013 incorporeal existence, ethereal corporeality, or corporeality coming to rest in a stable part of the universe \u2013 leaving the reader to judge whichever is best. Nevertheless, based on other passages from his works, he probably preferred the third one. He seems to have believed that even the not yet resurrected souls of the departed possess bodies, albeit luminous ones, which explains ghost sightings. In discussing the resurrection bodies, he stressed Paul's teaching about the spiritual body. Origen emphasized its vast superiority and difference from the current body to the point of arguing that it will lack teeth and other no longer needed parts. However, he insisted that our individual bodies will be recognizable thanks to a unique form (\u03b5\u1f36\u03b4\u03bf\u03c2), preserved by each of our immortal souls, that shapes and integrates each body.\nOrigen explicitly rejected \"the false doctrine of the transmigration of souls into bodies\". But this may refer only to a specific kind of transmigration according to theologian Geddes MacGregor, who has argued that Origen must have believed in the Platonic teaching of ('transmigration of souls'; i.e. reincarnation) because it makes sense within his eschatology and is never explicitly denied in the Bible. Roger E. Olson, however, dismisses the view that Origen believed in reincarnation as a New Age misunderstanding of Origen's teachings.\nEthics.\nOrigen was an ardent believer in free will, and he adamantly rejected the Valentinian idea of election. Instead, Origen believed that even disembodied souls have the power to make their own decisions. Furthermore, in his interpretation of the story of Jacob and Esau, Origen argues that the superficial unfairness of a person's condition at birth\u2014with some humans being poor, others rich, some being sick, and others healthy\u2014is a by-product of what the person's soul had done in the pre-existent state. Origen defends free will in his interpretations of instances of divine foreknowledge in the scriptures, arguing that Jesus's knowledge of Judas's future betrayal in the gospels and God's knowledge of Israel's future disobedience in the Deuteronomistic history only show that God knew these events would happen in advance. Origen therefore concludes that the individuals involved in these incidents still made their decisions out of their own free will. Like Plato, Plotinus and Gregory of Nyssa, Origen understands that only the agent who chooses the Good is free; choosing evil is never free but slavery.\nOrigen was an ardent pacifist, and in his \"Against Celsus\", he argued that Christianity's inherent pacifism was one of the most outwardly noticeable aspects of the religion. While Origen did admit that some Christians served in the Roman army, he pointed out that most did not and insisted that engaging in earthly wars was against the way of Christ. Origen accepted that it was sometimes necessary for a non-Christian state to wage wars but insisted that it was impossible for a Christian to fight in such a war without compromising his or her faith, since Christ had absolutely forbidden violence of any kind. Origen explained the violence found in certain passages of the Old Testament as allegorical and pointed out Old Testament passages which he interpreted as supporting nonviolence, such as Psalm 7 and Lamentations 3. Origen maintained that, if everyone were peaceful like Christians, there would be no war.\nHermeneutics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Rquote/styles.css\"/&gt;{ class=\"rquote pullquote floatright\" role=\"presentation\" style=\"display:table; border-collapse:collapse; border-style:none; float:right; margin:0.5em 0.75em; width:33%; \"\nOrigen bases his theology on the Christian scriptures and does not appeal to Platonic teachings without having first supported his argument with a scriptural basis. He saw the scriptures as divinely inspired and was cautious never to contradict his own interpretation of what was written in them. Nonetheless, Origen did have a penchant for speculating beyond what was explicitly stated in the Bible, and this habit frequently placed him in the hazy realm between strict orthodoxy and heresy.\nAccording to Origen, there are two kinds of Biblical literature which are found in both the Old and New Testaments: ('history' or 'narrative') and ('legislation' or 'ethical prescription'). Origen expressly states that the Old and New Testaments should be read together and according to the same rules. Origen further taught that there were three different ways in which passages of scripture could be interpreted. The \"flesh\" was the literal, historical interpretation of the passage; the \"soul\" was the moral message behind the passage; and the \"spirit\" was the eternal, incorporeal reality that the passage conveyed. In Origen's exegesis, the Book of Proverbs, Ecclesiastes, and the Song of Songs represent perfect examples of the bodily, soulful, and spiritual components of scripture respectively.\nOrigen saw the \"spiritual\" interpretation as the deepest and most important meaning of the text and taught that some passages held no literal meaning at all and that their meanings were purely allegorical. Nonetheless, he stressed that \"the passages which are historically true are far more numerous than those which are composed with purely spiritual meanings\" and often used examples from corporeal realities. Origen noticed that the accounts of Jesus's life in the four canonical gospels contain irreconcilable contradictions, but he argued that these contradictions did not undermine the spiritual meanings of the passages in question. Origen's idea of a twofold creation was based on an allegorical interpretation of the creation story found in the first two chapters of the Book of Genesis.\nTheology.\nOrigen's conception of God the Father is apophatic\u2014a perfect unity, invisible and incorporeal, transcending all things material, and therefore inconceivable and incomprehensible. He is likewise unchangeable and transcends space and time. But his power is limited by his goodness, justice, and wisdom; and, though entirely free from necessity, his goodness and omnipotence constrained him to reveal himself. This revelation, the external self-emanation of God, is expressed by Origen in various ways, the Logos being only one of many. The revelation was the first creation of God (cf. Proverbs 8:22), in order to afford creative mediation between God and the world, such mediation being necessary, because God, as changeless unity, could not be the source of a multitudinous creation.\nThe Logos is the rational creative principle that permeates the universe. The Logos acts on all human beings through their capacity for logic and rational thought, guiding them to the truth of God's revelation. As they progress in their rational thinking, all humans become more like Christ. Nonetheless, they retain their individuality and do not become subsumed into Christ. Creation came into existence only through the Logos, and God's nearest approach to the world is the command to create. While the Logos is substantially a unity, he comprehends a multiplicity of concepts, so that Origen terms him, in Platonic fashion, \"essence of essences\" and \"idea of ideas\".\nThe focused understanding of the Logos, along with the paradigms of participation carried from Greek philosophy, allowed Origen to have a major role in the development of the concept of human deification or . Origen believed that Christ's humanity was deified and this deification spread to all the believers. By participating in the very Logos himself, we become participants in divinity. Origen, however, concluded that only those who are created in God's image and live a life of virtue can be deified; virtue for Origen is linked to the person of Jesus Christ. Thus, he excluded all inanimate objects or animals (previously seen as divine in some pagan polytheistic systems), and also excluded the pagan heroes from this perceived deification.\nOrigen significantly contributed to the development of the idea of the Trinity. He declared the Holy Spirit to be a part of the Godhead and interpreted the Parable of the Lost Coin to mean that the Holy Spirit dwells within each and every person and that the inspiration of the Holy Spirit was necessary for any kind of speech dealing with God. Origen taught that the activity of all three parts of the Trinity was necessary for a person to attain salvation.\nIn one fragment preserved by Rufinus in his Latin translation of Pamphilus's \"Defense of Origen\", Origen seems to apply the phrase ( 'of the same substance') to the relationship between the Father and the Son. But Williams states that it is impossible to verify whether the quote that uses the word really comes from Pamphilus at all, let alone Origen.\nIn other passages, Origen rejected the belief that the Son and the Father were one as heretical. According to Rowan Williams, because the words and were used synonymously in Origen's time, Origen almost certainly would have rejected , as a description for the relationship between the Father and the Son, as heretical.\nNonetheless, Origen was a subordinationist, meaning he believed that the Father was superior to the Son and the Son was superior to the Holy Spirit, a model based on Platonic proportions. Jerome records that Origen had written that God the Father is invisible to all beings, including even the Son and the Holy Spirit, and that the Son is invisible to the Holy Spirit as well. At one point Origen suggests that the Son was created by the Father and that the Holy Spirit was created by the Son, but, at another point, he writes that: \"Up to the present I have been able to find no passage in the Scriptures that the Holy Spirit is a created being.\" At the time when Origen was alive, orthodox views on the Trinity had not yet been formulated and subordinationism was not yet considered heretical. In fact, virtually all orthodox theologians prior to the Arian controversy in the latter half of the fourth century were subordinationists to some extent. Origen's subordinationism may have developed out of his efforts to defend the unity of God against the Gnostics.\nTransmission of knowledge.\nOrigen cites Hermippus of Smyrna to argue that Pythagoras owed a debt to Judaism.\nInfluence on the later church.\nBefore the Crises.\nOrigen is often seen as the first major Christian theologian. Though his orthodoxy had been questioned in Alexandria while he was alive, after Origen's death Pope Dionysius of Alexandria became one of the foremost proponents of Origen's theology. Every Christian theologian who came after him was influenced by his theology, whether directly or indirectly. Origen's contributions to theology were so vast and complex, however, that his followers frequently emphasized drastically different parts of his teachings to the expense of other parts. Dionysius emphasized Origen's subordinationist views, which led Dionysius to deny the unity of the Trinity, causing controversy throughout North Africa. At the same time, Origen's other disciple Theognostus of Alexandria taught that the Father and the Son were \"of one substance\".\nFor centuries after his death, Origen was regarded as the bastion of orthodoxy, and his philosophy practically defined Eastern Christianity. Origen was revered as one of the greatest of all Christian teachers; he was especially beloved by monks, who saw themselves as continuing in Origen's ascetic legacy. As time progressed, however, Origen became criticized under the standard of orthodoxy in later eras, rather than the standards of his own lifetime. In the early fourth century, the Christian writer Methodius of Olympus criticized some of Origen's more speculative arguments but otherwise agreed with Origen on all other points of theology. Peter of Antioch and Eustathius of Antioch criticized Origen as heretical.\nBoth orthodox and heterodox theologians claimed to be following in the tradition Origen had established. Athanasius of Alexandria, the most prominent supporter of the Holy Trinity at the First Council of Nicaea, was deeply influenced by Origen, and so were Basil of Caesarea, Gregory of Nyssa, and Gregory of Nazianzus (the \"Cappadocian Fathers\"). At the same time, Origen deeply influenced Arius of Alexandria and later followers of Arianism. Although the extent of the relationship between the two is debated, in antiquity, many orthodox Christians believed that Origen was the true and ultimate source of the Arian heresy.\nFirst Origenist Crisis.\nThe First Origenist Crisis began in the late fourth century, coinciding with the beginning of monasticism in Palestine. The first stirring of the controversy came from the Cyprian bishop Epiphanius of Salamis, who was determined to root out all heresies and refute them. Epiphanius attacked Origen in his anti-heretical treatises (375) and (376), compiling a list of teachings Origen had espoused that Epiphanius regarded as heretical. Epiphanius's treatises portray Origen as an originally orthodox Christian who had been corrupted and turned into a heretic by the evils of \"Greek education\". Epiphanius particularly objected to Origen's subordinationism, his \"excessive\" use of allegorical hermeneutic, and his habit of proposing ideas about the Bible \"speculatively, as exercises\" rather than \"dogmatically\".\nEpiphanius asked John, the bishop of Jerusalem, to condemn Origen as a heretic. John refused on the grounds that a person could not be retroactively condemned as a heretic after that person had already died. In 393, a monk named Atarbius advanced a petition to have Origen and his writings censured. Tyrannius Rufinus, a priest at the monastery on the Mount of Olives who had been ordained by John of Jerusalem and was a longtime admirer of Origen, rejected the petition outright. Rufinus's close friend and associate Jerome, who had also studied Origen, however, came to agree with the petition. Around the same time, John Cassian, an Eastern monk, introduced Origen's teachings to the West.\nIn 394, Epiphanius wrote to John of Jerusalem, again asking for Origen to be condemned, insisting that Origen's writings denigrated human sexual reproduction and accusing him of having been an Encratite. John once again denied this request. By 395, Jerome had allied himself with the anti-Origenists and begged John of Jerusalem to condemn Origen, a plea which John once again refused. Epiphanius launched a campaign against John, openly preaching that John was an Origenist deviant. He successfully persuaded Jerome to break communion with John and ordained Jerome's brother Paulinianus as a priest in defiance of John's authority.\nIn 397, Rufinus published a Latin translation of Origen's \"On First Principles\". Rufinus was convinced that Origen's original treatise had been interpolated by heretics and that these interpolations were the source of the heterodox teachings found in it. He therefore heavily modified Origen's text, omitting and altering any parts which disagreed with contemporary Christian orthodoxy. In the introduction to this translation, Rufinus mentioned that Jerome had studied under Origen's disciple Didymus the Blind, implying that Jerome was a follower of Origen. Jerome was so incensed by this that he resolved to produce his own Latin translation of \"On the First Principles\", in which he promised to translate every word exactly as it was written and lay bare Origen's heresies to the whole world. Jerome's translation has been lost in its entirety.\nIn 399, the Origenist crisis reached Egypt. Pope Theophilus I of Alexandria was sympathetic to the supporters of Origen and the church historian, Sozomen, records that he had openly preached the Origenist teaching that God was incorporeal. In his \"Festal Letter\" of 399, he denounced those who believed that God had a literal, human-like body, calling them illiterate \"simple ones\". A large mob of Alexandrian monks who regarded God as anthropomorphic rioted in the streets. According to the church historian Socrates Scholasticus, in order to prevent a riot, Theophilus made a sudden about-face and began denouncing Origen. In 400, Theophilus summoned a council in Alexandria, which condemned Origen and all his followers as heretics for having taught that God was incorporeal, which they decreed contradicted the only true and orthodox position, which was that God had a literal, physical body resembling that of a human.\nTheophilus labeled Origen as the \"hydra of all heresies\" and persuaded Pope Anastasius I to sign the letter of the council, which primarily denounced the teachings of the Nitrian monks associated with Evagrius Ponticus. In 402, Theophilus expelled Origenist monks from Egyptian monasteries and banished the four monks known as the \"Tall Brothers\", who were leaders of the Nitrian community. John Chrysostom, the patriarch of Constantinople, granted the Tall Brothers asylum, a fact which Theophilus used to orchestrate John's condemnation and removal from his position at the Synod of the Oak in July 403. Once John Chrysostom had been deposed, Theophilus restored normal relations with the Origenist monks in Egypt and the first Origenist crisis came to an end.\nSecond Origenist Crisis.\nThe Second Origenist Crisis occurred in the sixth century, during the height of Byzantine monasticism. Although the Second Origenist Crisis is not nearly as well documented as the first, it seems to have primarily concerned the teachings of Origen's later followers, rather than what Origen had written. Origen's disciple Evagrius Ponticus had advocated contemplative, noetic prayer, but other monastic communities prioritized asceticism in prayer, emphasizing fasting, labors, and vigils. \nSome Origenist monks in Palestine, referred to by their enemies as \"\" (meaning 'those who would assume equality with Christ'), emphasized Origen's teaching of the pre-existence of souls and held that all souls were originally equal to Christ's and would become equal again at the end of time. Another faction of Origenists in the same region instead insisted that Christ was the \"leader of many brethren\", as the first-created being. This faction was more moderate, and they were referred to by their opponents as \"\" ('[those] first created'). Both factions accused the other of heresy, and other Christians accused both of them of heresy.\nThe Protoktistoi appealed to the Emperor Justinian I to condemn the Isochristoi of heresy through Pelagius, the papal . In 543, Pelagius presented Justinian with documents, including a letter denouncing Origen written by Patriarch Mennas of Constantinople, along with excerpts from Origen's \"On First Principles\" and several anathemata against Origen. A domestic synod convened to address the issue concluded that the Isochristoi's teachings were heretical and, seeing Origen as the ultimate culprit behind the heresy, denounced Origen as a heretic as well. Emperor Justinian ordered for all of Origen's writings to be burned. In the west, the , which was written sometime between 519 and 553, listed Origen as an author whose writings were to be categorically banned.\nIn 553, during the early days of the Second Council of Constantinople (the Fifth Ecumenical Council), when Pope Vigilius was still refusing to take part in it despite Justinian holding him hostage, the bishops at the council ratified an open letter which condemned Origen as the leader of the Isochristoi. The letter was not part of the official acts of the council, and it more or less repeated the edict issued by the Synod of Constantinople in 543. It cites objectionable writings attributed to Origen, but all the writings referred to in it were actually written by Evagrius Ponticus. After the council officially opened, but while Pope Vigillius was still refusing to take part, Justinian presented the bishops with the problem of a text known as \"The Three Chapters\", which attacked the Antiochene Christology.\nThe bishops drew up a list of anathemata against the heretical teachings contained within \"The Three Chapters\" and those associated with them. In the official text of the eleventh anathema, Origen is condemned as a Christological heretic, but Origen's name does not appear at all in the , the first draft of the anathemata issued by the imperial chancery, nor does it appear in the version of the conciliar proceedings that was eventually signed by Pope Vigillius, a long time afterwards. Norman P. Tanner's edition of the \"Decrees of the Ecumenical Councils\" (Georgetown University Press, 1990) says: \"Our edition does not include the text of the anathemas against Origen since recent studies have shown that these anathemas cannot be attributed to this council.\" These discrepancies may indicate that Origen's name was retrospectively inserted into the text after the council. \nSome authorities believe these anathemata belong to an earlier local synod. Even if Origen's name did appear in the original text of the anathema, the teachings attributed to Origen that are condemned in the anathema were actually the ideas of later Origenists, which had very little grounding in anything Origen had actually written. Popes Vigilius, Pelagius I, Pelagius II, and Gregory the Great were only aware that the Fifth Council specifically dealt with \"The Three Chapters\" and make no mention of Origenism or universalism, nor spoke as if they knew of its condemnation\u2014even though Gregory the Great was opposed to universalism.\nAfter the Anathemas.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Rquote/styles.css\"/&gt;{ class=\"rquote pullquote floatright\" role=\"presentation\" style=\"display:table; border-collapse:collapse; border-style:none; float:right; margin:0.5em 0.75em; width:33%; \"\nAs a direct result of the numerous condemnations of his work, only a tiny fraction of Origen's voluminous writings have survived. Nonetheless, these writings still amount to a massive number of Greek and Latin texts, very few of which have yet been translated into English. Many more writings have survived in fragments through quotations from later Church Fathers. Even in the late 14th century, Francesc Eiximenis in his Llibre de les dones, produced otherwise unknown quotations from Origen, which may be evidence of other works surviving into the Late Medieval period. \nIt is likely that the writings containing Origen's most unusual and speculative ideas have been lost to time, making it nearly impossible to determine whether Origen actually held the heretical views which the anathemas against him ascribed to him. Nonetheless, in spite of the decrees against Origen, the church remained enamored of him and he remained a central figure of Christian theology throughout the first millennium. He continued to be revered as the founder of Biblical exegesis, and anyone in the first millennium who took the interpretation of the scriptures seriously would have had knowledge of Origen's teachings.\nJerome's Latin translations of Origen's homilies were widely read in western Europe throughout the Middle Ages, and Origen's teachings greatly influenced those of the Byzantine monk Maximus the Confessor and the Irish theologian John Scotus Eriugena. Since the Renaissance, the debate over Origen's orthodoxy has continued to rage. Basilios Bessarion, a Greek refugee who fled to Italy after the Fall of Constantinople in 1453, produced a Latin translation of Origen's \"Against Celsus\", which was printed in 1481. Major controversy erupted in 1487, after the Italian humanist scholar Giovanni Pico della Mirandola issued a thesis arguing that \"it is more reasonable to believe that Origen was saved than he was damned\". A papal commission condemned Pico's position on account of the anathemas against Origen, but not until after the debate had received considerable attention.\nThe most prominent advocate of Origen during the Renaissance was the Dutch humanist scholar Desiderius Erasmus, who regarded Origen as the greatest of all Christian authors and wrote in a letter to John Eck that he learned more about Christian philosophy from a single page of Origen than from ten pages of Augustine. Erasmus especially admired Origen for his lack of rhetorical flourishes, which were so common in the writings of other Patristic authors. Erasmus borrowed heavily from Origen's defense of free will in \"On First Principles\" in his 1524 treatise \"On Free Will\", now considered his most important theological work. \nIn 1527, Erasmus translated and published the portion of Origen's \"Commentary on the Gospel of Matthew\" that survived only in Greek and in 1536, he published the most complete edition of Origen's writings that had ever been published at that time. While Origen's emphasis on the human effort in attaining salvation appealed to the Renaissance humanists, it made him far less appealing to the proponents of the Reformation. \nMartin Luther deplored Origen's understanding of salvation as irredeemably defective and declared \"in all of Origen there is not one word about Christ\". Consequently, he ordered for Origen's writings to be banned. Nonetheless, the earlier Czech reformer Jan Hus had taken inspiration from Origen for his view that the church is a spiritual reality rather than an official hierarchy, and Luther's contemporary, the Swiss reformer Huldrych Zwingli, took inspiration from Origen for his interpretation of the Eucharist as symbolic.\nIn the seventeenth century, the English Cambridge Platonist Henry More was a devoted Origenist, and although he did reject the notion of universal salvation, he accepted most of Origen's other teachings. Pope Benedict XVI expressed admiration for Origen, describing him in a sermon as part of a series on the Church Fathers as \"a figure crucial to the whole development of Christian thought\", \"a true 'maestro'\", and \"not only a brilliant theologian but also an exemplary witness of the doctrine he passed on\". He concludes the sermon by inviting his audience to \"welcome into your hearts the teaching of this great master of the faith\". Modern Protestant evangelicals admire Origen for his passionate devotion to the scriptures but are frequently baffled or even appalled by his allegorical interpretation of them, which many believe ignores the literal, historical truth behind them.\nOrigen is often noted for being one of the few Church Fathers who is not generally regarded as a saint. Nevertheless, there are notable individuals who referred to Origen as St. Origen. This includes Anglicans such as Edward Welchman, John Howson and Sir Winston Churchill; Calvinists such as Pierre Bayle, Georges-Louis Liomin and Heinrich Bullinger; American scholar and Orthodox Christian David Bentley Hart; Oriental Orthodox such as Pope Shenouda III of Alexandria, Fr. Tadros Yakoup Malaty and the Coptic Orthodox Diocese of the Southern United States. The Evangelical Church in Germany celebrates April 27 as Origen's feast day.\nTranslations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nTranslations available online\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "22703", "revid": "50528310", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22703", "title": "Oliver Hazard Perry-class frigate", "text": "Class of guided-missile frigates\nThe \"Oliver Hazard Perry\" class is a class of guided-missile frigates named after U.S. Commodore Oliver Hazard Perry, a commander noted for his role in the Battle of Lake Erie. Also known as the \"Perry\" or FFG-7 (commonly \"fig seven\") class, the warships were designed in the United States in the mid-1970s as general-purpose escort vessels inexpensive enough to be bought in large numbers to replace World War II-era destroyers and complement 1960s-era s.\nIn Admiral Elmo Zumwalt's \"high low fleet plan\", the FFG-7s were the low-capability ships, with the s serving as the high-capability ships. Intended to protect amphibious landing forces, supply and replenishment groups, and merchant convoys from aircraft and submarines, they were also later part of battleship-centered surface action groups and aircraft carrier battle groups/strike groups. 55 ships were built in the United States: 51 for the United States Navy and four for the Royal Australian Navy (RAN). Eight were built in Taiwan, six in Spain, and two in Australia for their navies. Former U.S. Navy warships of this class have been sold or donated to the navies of Bahrain, Egypt, Poland, Pakistan, Taiwan, and Turkey.\nThe first of the 51 U.S. Navy-built \"Oliver Hazard Perry\" frigates entered into service in 1977, and the last remaining in active service, , was decommissioned on 29 September 2015. The retired vessels were mostly mothballed with some transferred to other navies for continued service and some used as weapons targets and sunk. Some of the U.S. Navy's frigates, such as USS \"Duncan\" (14.6 years in service), had fairly short careers, while a few lasted as long as 30+ years in active U.S. service, with some lasting even longer after being sold or donated to other navies. In 2020, the Navy announced the new as their latest class of frigates.\nDesign and construction.\nThe ships were designed by the Bath Iron Works shipyard in Maine in partnership with naval architects Gibbs &amp; Cox. The design process was notable as the initial design was accomplished with the help of computers in 18 hours by Raye Montague, a civilian U.S. Navy naval engineer, making it the first ship designed by computer.\nThe \"Oliver Hazard Perry\"-class ships were produced in long \"short-hull\" (Flight I) and long \"long-hull\" (Flight III) variants. The long-hull ships (FFG 8, 28, 29, 32, 33, and 36\u201361) carry the larger SH-60 Seahawk LAMPS III helicopters, while the short-hulled warships carry the smaller and less-capable SH-2 Seasprite LAMPS I. Aside from the lengths of their hulls, the principal difference between the versions is the location of the aft capstan: on long-hull ships, it sits a step below the level of the flight deck to provide clearance for the tail rotor of the longer Seahawk helicopters.\nThe long-hull ships carry the RAST (Recovery Assist Securing and Traversing) system (also known as a Beartrap (hauldown device)) for the Seahawk. It is a hook, cable, and winch system that can reel in a Seahawk from a hovering flight, expanding the ship's pitch-and-roll range in which flight operations are permitted. The FFG 8, 29, 32, and 33 were built as \"short-hull\" warships but were later modified into \"long-hull\" warships.\n\"Oliver Hazard Perry\"-class frigates were the second class of surface ships (after the s) in the U.S. Navy to be built with gas turbine propulsion. The gas turbine propulsion plant was more automated than other Navy propulsion plants at the time, and it could be centrally monitored and controlled from a remote engineering control center away from the engines. The gas turbine propulsion plants also allowed the ship's speed to be controlled directly from the bridge via a throttle control, a first for the U.S. Navy.\nAmerican shipyards constructed \"Oliver Hazard Perry\"-class ships for the U.S. Navy and the Royal Australian Navy (RAN). Early American-built Australian ships were originally built as the \"short-hull\" version, but they were modified during the 1980s to the \"long-hull\" design. Shipyards in Australia, Spain, and Taiwan produced several warships of the \"long-hull\" design for their navies.\nAlthough the per-ship costs rose greatly over the period of production, all 51 ships planned for the U.S. Navy were built.\nDuring the design phase of the \"Oliver Hazard Perry\" class, the head of the Royal Corps of Naval Constructors, R.J. Daniels, was invited by an old friend, U.S. Chief of the Bureau of Ships, Admiral Robert C. Gooding, to advise upon the use of variable-pitch propellers in the class. During this conversation, Daniels warned Gooding against the use of aluminium in the superstructure of the FFG-7 class as he believed it would lead to structural weaknesses. A number of ships subsequently developed structural cracks, including a fissure in USS \"Duncan\", before the problems were remedied.\nThe \"Oliver Hazard Perry\"-class frigates were designed primarily as anti-aircraft and anti-submarine warfare guided-missile warships intended to provide open-ocean escort of amphibious warfare ships and merchant ship convoys in moderate threat environments in a potential war with the Soviet Union and the Warsaw Pact countries. They could also provide air defense against 1970s- and 1980s-era aircraft and anti-ship missiles. These warships are equipped to escort and protect aircraft carrier battle groups, amphibious landing groups, underway replenishment groups, and merchant ship convoys. They can conduct independent operations to perform tasks such as surveillance of illegal drug smugglers, maritime interception operations, and exercises with other nations.\nThe addition of the Naval Tactical Data System, LAMPS helicopters, and the Tactical Towed Array System (TACTAS) gave these warships a combat capability far beyond the original expectations. They are well suited for operations in littoral regions and most war-at-sea scenarios.\nNotable combat actions.\n\"Oliver Hazard Perry\"-class frigates made worldwide news during the 1980s. Despite being small, these frigates were shown to be very durable. During the Iran\u2013Iraq War, on 17 May 1987, was attacked by an Iraqi warplane and struck by two Exocet anti-ship missiles. Thirty-seven U.S. Navy sailors died in the deadly prelude to the American Operation Earnest Will, the reflagging and escorting of oil tankers through the Persian Gulf and the Straits of Hormuz.\nLess than a year later, on 14 April 1988, was nearly sunk by an Iranian mine. There were no deaths, but ten sailors were evacuated from the warship for medical treatment. The crew of \"Samuel B. Roberts\" battled fire and flooding for two days, ultimately managing to save the ship. The U.S. Navy retaliated four days later with Operation Praying Mantis, a one-day attack on Iranian oil platforms being used as bases for raids on merchant shipping. Those had included bases for the minelaying operations that damaged \"Samuel B. Roberts\". \"Stark\" and \"Roberts\" were each repaired in American shipyards and returned to full service. \"Stark\" was decommissioned in 1999 and scrapped in 2006. \"Roberts\" was decommissioned at Mayport on 22 May 2015.\nOn 18 April 1988, was accompanying the cruiser and frigate when they came under attack from the Iranian gunboat , which fired a U.S.-made Harpoon anti-ship missile at the ships. With \"Simpson\" having the only clear shot, the frigate fired an SM-1 standard missile, which struck \"Joshan\". \"Simpson\" fired three more SM-1s, and with later naval fire from \"Wainwright\", sank the Iranian vessel.\nModifications.\nUnited States.\nThe United States Navy and Royal Australian Navy modified their remaining \"Perry\"s to reduce their operating costs, replacing Detroit Diesel 16V149TI electrical generators with Caterpillar 3512B diesel engines.\nUpgrades to the \"Perry\" class were problematic due to \"little reserved space for growth (39 tons in the original design), and the inflexible, proprietary electronics of the time\", such that the \"US Navy gave up on the idea of upgrades to face new communications realities and advanced missile threats\". The U.S. Navy decommissioned 25 \"FFG-7 Short\" ships via \"bargain basement sales to allies or outright retirement, after an average of only 18 years of service\".\nFrom 2004 to 2005, the U.S. Navy removed the frigates' Mk 13 single-arm missile launchers because the primary missile, the Standard SM-1MR, had become outmoded. It would supposedly have been too costly to refit the Standard SM-1MR missiles, which had little ability to bring down sea-skimming missiles. Another reason was to allow more SM-1MRs to go to American allies that operated \"Perry\"s, such as Poland, Spain, Australia, Turkey, and Taiwan. As a result, the \"zone-defense\" anti-aircraft warfare (AAW) capability of the U.S. Navy's \"Perry\"s had vanished, and all that remained was a \"point-defense\" type of anti-air warfare armament, so they relied upon cover from AEGIS destroyers and cruisers.\nThe removal of the Mk 13 launchers also stripped the frigates of their Harpoon anti-ship missiles. However, their Seahawk helicopters could still carry the much shorter-range Penguin and Hellfire anti-ship missiles. The last nine ships of the class had new remotely operated 25\u00a0mm Mk 38 Mod 2 Machine Gun Systems (MGSs) installed on platforms over the old Mk 13 launcher magazine.\nUp to 2002, the U.S. Navy updated the remaining active \"Oliver Hazard Perry\"-class warships' Phalanx CIWS to the \"Block 1B\" capability, which allowed the Mk 15 20\u00a0mm Phalanx gun to shoot at fast-moving surface craft and helicopters. They were also to have been fitted with the Mk 53 Decoy Launching System \"Nulka\" in place of the SRBOC (Super Rapid Blooming Offboard Chaff) and flares, which would have better protected the ship against anti-ship missiles. It was planned to outfit the remaining ships with a 21-cell RIM-116 Rolling Airframe Missile launcher at the location of the former Mk 13, but this did not occur.\nOn 11 May 2009, the first International Frigate Working Group met at Mayport Naval Station to discuss maintenance, obsolescence, and logistics issues regarding \"Oliver Hazard Perry\"-class ships of the U.S. and foreign navies.\nOn 16 June 2009, Vice Admiral Barry McCullough turned down the suggestion of then-U.S. Senator Mel Martinez (R-FL) to keep the \"Perry\"s in service, citing their worn-out and maxed-out condition. However, U.S. Representative Ander Crenshaw (R-FL) and former U.S. Representative Gene Taylor (D-MS) took up the cause to retain the vessels.\nThe \"Oliver Hazard Perry\"-class frigates were to have been eventually replaced by Littoral Combat Ships by 2019. However, the worn-out frigates were being retired faster than the LCSs were being built, which may lead to a gap in United States Southern Command mission coverage. According to Navy deactivation plans, all \"Oliver Hazard Perry\"-class frigates would be retired by October 2015. \"Simpson\" was the last to be retired (on 29 September 2015), leaving the Navy devoid of frigates for the first time since 1943. The ships will either be made available for sale to foreign navies or dismantled.\n\"Perry\"-class frigate retirement was accelerated by budget pressures, leading to the remaining 11 ships being replaced by only eight LCS hulls. With the timeline LCS mission packages will come online unknown, there is uncertainty if they will be able to perform the frigates' counter-narcotics and anti-submarine roles when they are gone. The Navy is looking into Military Sealift Command to see if the Joint High Speed Vessel, Mobile Landing Platform, and other auxiliary ships could handle low-end missions that the frigates performed.\nThe U.S. Coast Guard harvested weapons systems components from decommissioned Navy \"Perry\"-class frigates to save money. Harvesting components from four decommissioned frigates resulted in more than $24\u00a0million in cost savings, which increases with parts from more decommissioned frigates. Equipment including Mk 75 76\u00a0mm/62 caliber gun mounts, gun control panels, barrels, launchers, junction boxes, and other components was returned to service aboard s to extend their service lives into the 2030s.\nIn June 2017, Chief of Naval Operations Admiral John Richardson revealed the Navy was \"taking a hard look\" at reactivating 7-8 out of 12 mothballed \"Perry\"-class frigates to increase fleet numbers. While the move was under consideration, there would be difficulties in returning them to service given the age of the ships and their equipment, likely requiring a significant modernization effort. Although bringing the frigates out of retirement would have provided a short-term solution to fleet size, their limited combat capability would restrict them to acting as a theater security cooperation, maritime security asset. Their likely role would have been serving as basic surface platforms that stay close to U.S. shores, performing missions such as assisting drug interdiction efforts or patrolling the Arctic so an extensive upgrade to the ships' combat systems would not need to be undertaken. An October 2017 memo recommended against reactivating the frigates, claiming it would cost too much money, taking funding away from other Navy priorities for ships with little effectiveness.\nAustralia.\nAustralia spent A$1.46bn to upgrade the Royal Australian Navy's (RAN) guided-missile frigates, including equipping them to fire the SM-2 version of the Standard missile, adding an eight-cell Mark 41 Vertical Launching System (VLS) for Evolved Sea Sparrow Missiles (ESSMs), and installing better air-search radars and long-range sonar. The RAN had opted to retain their \"Adelaide\" frigates rather than purchase the U.S. Navy's destroyers; the \"Kidd\"s were more capable but more expensive and manpower intensive. However, the upgrade project ran over budget and fell behind schedule.\nThe first of the upgraded frigates, , returned to the RAN fleet in 2005. Four frigates were eventually upgraded at the Garden Island shipyard in Sydney, Australia, with the modernizations lasting between 18 months and two years. The cost of the upgrades was partly offset, in the short run, by the decommissioning and disposal of the two older frigates. was decommissioned on 12 November 2005 at naval base in Western Australia, and was decommissioned at that same naval base on 20 January 2008. HMAS \"Sydney\" was decommissioned at the Garden Island naval base in 2016. HMAS Darwin was also decommissioned at Garden Island in 2018.\nThe \"Adelaide\"-class frigates were replaced by three spanish designed \"Hobart\"-class air warfare destroyers equipped with the AEGIS combat system. HMAS \"Melbourne\" and \"Newcastle\" were transferred in May 2020 to the Chilean Navy and serve as \"Capitan Prat\" and \"Almirante Latorre\".\nTurkey.\nThe G-class frigates of the Turkish Navy have undergone a major modernisation program, which included the retrofitting of a Turkish digital combat management system named GENESIS (\"Gemi Entegre Sava\u015f \u0130dare Sistemi\"). The system was designed &amp; implemented jointly by the Turkish Navy &amp; HAVELSAN, a Turkish electronic hardware systems &amp; software company. The GENESIS upgraded ships were delivered between 2007 &amp; 2011.\nThe GENESIS advanced combat management system has the capacity of tracking more than 1,000 tactical targets, thanks to its digital sensor data fusion, automatic threat evaluation, weapon engagement opportunities, and Link-16/22 system integration.\nThe modernisation program also included the addition of an 8-cell Mk.41 VLS for RIM-162 ESSM, together with the upgrade of the Mk-92 fire control system by Lockheed Martin; the retrofitting of the SMART-S Mk2 3D air search radar, which replaced the AN/SPS-49; and the addition of a new, long range sonar.\nThe Mk.41 vertical launching system (VLS) has been fitted in front of the Mk.13 launcher. TCG \"Gediz\" was the first ship in the class to receive the Mk.41 VLS installation.\nThe G-class frigates of the Turkish Navy were also modified with the ASIST landing platform system at the Istanbul Naval Shipyard, so that they can accommodate the S-70B Seahawk helicopter.\nRelated legislation.\nThe Naval Vessel Transfer Act of 2013 authorized the transfer of and to Mexico, and the sale of , , , and to the Taipei Economic and Cultural Representative Office in the United States (which is the Taiwan agency designated under the Taiwan Relations Act) for about $10\u00a0million each.\nConsidered for reactivation.\nOn 13 June 2017, Chief of Naval Operations Admiral John M. Richardson said the Navy was looking into the possibility of recommissioning several \"Oliver Hazard Perry\"-class frigates from its inactive fleet to support President Donald Trump's proposed 355-ship navy plan. On 11 December 2017, the Navy decided against reactivating the class, saying it would cost too much.\nAs of 14 October 2025, the decommissioned but extant \"Oliver Hazard Perry\"-class frigates, kept at the Naval Inactive Ship Maintenance Facility in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, were:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "22705", "revid": "19992876", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22705", "title": "Ottawa Senators", "text": "National Hockey League team in Ontario, Canada\nThe Ottawa Senators (), officially the Ottawa Senators Hockey Club and colloquially known as the Sens, are a professional ice hockey team based in Ottawa. The Senators compete in the National Hockey League (NHL) as a member of the Atlantic Division in the Eastern Conference. The team plays its home games at the 18,652-seat Canadian Tire Centre, which opened in 1996.\nFounded and established by Ottawa real estate developer Bruce Firestone, the team is the second NHL franchise to use the Ottawa Senators name. The original Ottawa Senators, founded in 1883, won the Stanley Cup 11 times, playing in the NHL from 1917 until 1934. On December 6, 1990, after a two-year public campaign by Firestone, the NHL awarded a new franchise, which began play in the 1992\u201393 season. The Senators have made 17 playoff appearances, won four division titles, and won the 2003 Presidents' Trophy. They made an appearance in the 2007 Stanley Cup Final but lost to the Anaheim Ducks in five games.\nHistory.\nOttawa had been home to the original Senators, a founding NHL franchise and 11-time Stanley Cup champions. The original Senators' eventual financial losses forced the franchise to move to St. Louis in 1934 operating as the Eagles while a Senators senior amateur team took over the Senators' place in Ottawa. The NHL team was unsuccessful in St. Louis and planned to return to Ottawa, but the NHL decided instead to suspend the franchise and transfer the players.\nFifty-four years later, after the NHL announced plans to expand, Ottawa real estate developer Bruce Firestone decided along with colleagues Cyril Leeder and Randy Sexton that Ottawa was now able to support an NHL franchise, and the group proceeded to put a bid together. This effort was supported by key individuals including Jeff Kyle and Mark Bonneau who later became executives with the Senators. Firestone's firm, Terrace Investments, did not have the liquid assets to finance the expansion fee and the team, but the group conceived a strategy to leverage land development. In 1989, after finding a suitable site on farmland just west of Ottawa in Kanata on which to construct a new arena, Terrace announced its intention to win a franchise and launched a successful \"Bring Back the Senators\" campaign to both woo the public and persuade the NHL that the city could support an NHL franchise. Public support was high, and the group would secure over 11,000 season ticket pledges. On December 12, 1990, the NHL approved a new franchise for Firestone's group to start play in the 1992\u201393 season.\nEarly years (1992\u20131996).\nThe new team hired former NHL player Mel Bridgman, who had no previous NHL management experience, as its first general manager in 1992. Ottawa signed former Boston Bruins head coach Rick Bowness. The new Senators were placed in the Adams Division of the Wales Conference and played their first game on October 8, 1992, in the Ottawa Civic Centre against the Montreal Canadiens with much pre-game spectacle. The Senators defeated the Canadiens 5\u20133 in one of the few highlights that season. Following the initial excitement of the opening night victory, the club floundered badly. Eventually, it tied the San Jose Sharks for the worst record in the league, winning only 10 games with 70 losses and four ties for 24 points, three points better than the NHL record for futility. The Senators had aimed low and considered the 1992\u201393 season a small success, as Firestone had set a goal for the season of not setting a new NHL record for fewest points in a season. The long-term plan was to finish low in the standings for its first few years to secure high draft picks and eventually contend for the Stanley Cup.\nTerrace needed a partner to make the final franchise payment to the NHL. Firestone sold 50% of Terrace to Rod Bryden, a technology executive and entrepreneur. A limited partnership was set up to own the hockey team and a new company, Palladium Corp., which was charged with building the new arena. The partnership included local high-tech executives and singer Paul Anka, who was born in Ottawa. Bryden would become the sole owner of Terrace and majority owner of the Senators in August 1993, buying out Firestone.\nBridgman was fired after one season and team president Randy Sexton took over the general manager duties. The strategy of aiming low and securing a high draft position did not change. The Senators finished last overall for the next three seasons. For the 1993\u201394 season, the team now played in the Eastern Conference's Northeast Division. Although 1993 first overall draft choice Alexandre Daigle wound up being one of the greatest draft busts in NHL history, they chose Radek Bonk in 1994, Bryan Berard (traded for Wade Redden) in 1995, Chris Phillips in 1996 and Marian Hossa in 1997, all of whom would become solid NHL players and formed a strong core of players in years to come. Alexei Yashin, the team's first-ever draft selection from 1992, emerged as one of the NHL's brightest young stars. The team traded many of their better veteran players of the era, including 1992\u201393 leading scorer Norm Maciver and fan favourites Mike Peluso and Bob Kudelski in an effort to stockpile prospects and draft picks.\nAs the 1995\u201396 season began, Yashin refused to honour his contract and did not play. In December, after three straight last-place finishes and a team which was ridiculed throughout the league, fans began to grow restless waiting for the team's long-term plan to yield results, and arena attendance began to decline. Bowness was fired in late 1995 and was replaced by the Prince Edward Island Senators' head coach Dave Allison. Allison would fare no better than his predecessor, and the team would stumble to a 2\u201322\u20133 record under him. Sexton himself was fired and replaced by Pierre Gauthier, the former assistant general manager of the Mighty Ducks of Anaheim team. Before the end of January 1996, Gauthier had resolved the team's most pressing issues by settling Yashin's contract dispute, and hiring the highly regarded Jacques Martin as head coach. While Ottawa finished last-overall once again, the season ended with renewed optimism, due in part to the upgraded management and coaching, and also to the emergence of an unheralded rookie from Sweden named Daniel Alfredsson, who would win the Calder Memorial Trophy as NHL Rookie of the Year in 1996.\nJacques Martin era (1996\u20132004).\nMartin would impose a \"strong defence first\" philosophy that led to the team qualifying for the playoffs every season that he coached, but he was criticized for the team's lack of success in the playoffs, notably losing four straight series against their provincial rival, the Toronto Maple Leafs.\nIn 1996\u201397, his first season, the club qualified for the playoffs in the last game of the season and nearly defeated the Buffalo Sabres in the first round. In 1997\u201398, the club finished with their first winning record and upset the heavily favoured New Jersey Devils to win their first playoff series. However, they were ousted in the second round by the Washington Capitals. In 1998\u201399, the Senators jumped from fourteenth overall in the previous season to third, with 103 points\u2014the first 100-point season in club history, only to be swept in the first round by the Sabres. In 1999\u20132000, despite Yashin's holdout, Martin guided the team to the playoffs, only to lose to the Maple Leafs in the first Battle of Ontario series. Yashin returned for 2000\u201301 and the team improved to win their division and place second in the Eastern Conference. Yashin played poorly in another first-round playoff loss and on the day of the 2001 NHL entry draft, he was traded to the New York Islanders in exchange for Zdeno Chara, Bill Muckalt and the second overall selection in the draft, which Ottawa used to select centre Jason Spezza.\nThe 2001\u201302 Senators regular season points total dropped, but in the playoffs, they upset the Philadelphia Flyers for the franchise's second playoff series win. The Sens would go on to push their second-round series to seven games, but they were ultimately once again defeated by the Maple Leafs. Despite speculation that Martin would be fired, it was general manager Marshall Johnston who left, retiring from the team. He was replaced by John Muckler, the Senators' first with previous management experience.\nAlthough the Senators were bankrupt, they continued to play in the 2002\u201303 season after getting emergency financing. Despite the off-ice problems, Ottawa had an outstanding season, placing first overall in the NHL to win the Presidents' Trophy. In the playoffs, they came within one game of making it into the 2003 Stanley Cup Final, losing to the eventual Stanley Cup champion New Jersey Devils. In 2003\u201304, Martin would guide the team to another good regular season but again would lose in the first round of the playoffs to the Maple Leafs, leading to Martin's dismissal as management felt that a new coach was required for playoff success.\nBankruptcy and sale to Eugene Melnyk.\nIn 2000, owner Bryden publicly appealed for tax relief from the Government of Canada for all Canadian NHL teams, coping with a significant drop in the Canadian dollar. His appeal was first met with a plan for tax relief, but the tax relief program was cancelled. Bryden then announced the sale of the club outright to a limited partnership in 2002 for CA$\u00a0million, which would include creditors and Bryden himself. After its principal creditor Ogden Entertainment failed, the Senators entered bankruptcy protection in January 2003, owing CA$\u00a0million for the club and CA$\u00a0million for the arena. The deal fell through in 2003 when American investor Nelson Peltz declined to get involved.\nIn August 2003, pharmaceutical billionaire Eugene Melnyk purchased the club for a reported CA$\u00a0million. Melnyk, principal shareholder of Biovail Pharmaceuticals, chose to finance half of the purchase price for the club and arena with debt. Share values of Biovail were depressed, and he did not want to sell them at the lower price.\nBryan Murray era (2004\u20132016).\nAfter the playoff loss, owner Melnyk promised that changes were coming, and they came quickly. In June 2004, Anaheim Ducks general manager Bryan Murray of nearby Shawville became the head coach. That summer, the team also made substantial personnel changes, trading long-time players Patrick Lalime and Radek Bonk, and signing free agent goaltender Dominik Hasek. The team would not be able to show its new line-up for a year, as the 2004\u201305 NHL lock-out intervened and most players played in Europe or in the minors. In a final change, just before the 2005\u201306 season, the team traded long-time player Marian Hossa for Dany Heatley.\nThe media predicted the Senators to be Stanley Cup contenders in 2005\u201306, as they had a strong core of players returning. They played an up-tempo style that fit the new rule changes, and Hasek was expected to provide top-notch goaltending. The team rushed out of the gate, winning 19 of the first 22 games, in the end winning 52 games and 113 points, placing first in the conference, and second overall. The newly formed 'CASH' line of Alfredsson, Spezza, and Heatley established itself as one of the league's top offensive lines. Hasek played well until he was injured during the 2006 Winter Olympics, forcing the team to enter the playoffs with rookie netminder Ray Emery as their starter. Without Hasek, the club bowed out in a second-round loss to the Buffalo Sabres.\nIn 2006\u201307, the Senators reached the Stanley Cup Final after qualifying for the playoffs in nine consecutive seasons. The Senators had a high turn-over of personnel and the disappointment of 2006 to overcome and started the season poorly. Trade rumours swirled around Alfredsson for most of the last months of 2006. The team lifted itself out of last place in the division to nearly catch the Buffalo Sabres by season's end, placing fourth in the Eastern Conference. The team finished with 105 points, their fourth consecutive 100-point season and sixth in the last eight. In the playoffs, Ottawa continued its good play. Led by the 'CASH' line, goaltender Emery, and the strong defence of Phillips and Anton Volchenkov, the club defeated the Pittsburgh Penguins, the second-ranked New Jersey Devils and the top-ranked Sabres to advance to the Stanley Cup Final.\nThe 2006\u201307 Senators thus became the first Ottawa team to be in a Stanley Cup Final since 1927, and the city was swept up in the excitement. Businesses along all of the main streets posted large hand-drawn \"Go Sens Go\" signs, residents put up large displays in front of their homes or decorated their cars. A large Ottawa Senators flag was draped on the City Hall, along with a large video screen showing the games. A six-storey likeness of Alfredsson was hung on the Corel building. Rallies were held outside of City Hall, car rallies of decorated cars paraded through town and a section of downtown, dubbed the \"Sens Mile\", was closed off to traffic during and after games for fans to congregate.\nIn the Stanley Cup Final, the Senators faced the Anaheim Ducks, considered a favourite since the start of the season, a team the Senators had last played in 2006, and a team known for its strong defence. The Ducks won the first two games in Anaheim 3\u20132 and 1\u20130. Returning home, the Senators won game three 5\u20133 but lost game four 3\u20132. The Ducks won game five 6\u20132 in Anaheim to clinch the series and their first Stanley Cup championship. The Ducks had played outstanding defence, shutting down the 'CASH' line, forcing Murray to split up the line. The Ducks scored timely goals and Ducks' goaltender Jean-Sebastien Giguere out-played Emery.\nIn the off-season after the Stanley Cup Final, Murray's contract was expiring. At the same time, general manager Muckler had one season remaining and was expected to retire. Murray, who had previously been a general manager for other NHL clubs, was expected to take over the general manager position, although no public timetable was given. Owner Melnyk decided to offer Muckler another position in the organization and give the general manager position to Murray. Muckler declined the offer and was relieved from his position. Melnyk publicly justified the move, saying that he expected to lose Murray if his contract ran out. Murray then elevated John Paddock, the assistant coach, to head coach of the Senators. Under Paddock, the team came out to a record start to the 2007\u201308 season. However, team play declined to a .500 level, and the team was falling out of the playoffs. Paddock was fired by Murray, who took over coaching on an interim basis. The club managed to qualify for the playoffs by a tie-breaker but was swept in the first round of the playoffs by the Pittsburgh Penguins. In June, the club bought out goaltender Emery, who had become notorious for off-ice events in Ottawa and lateness to several team practices.\nFor 2008\u201309, Murray hired Craig Hartsburg to coach the Senators. Under Hartsburg's style, the Senators struggled and played under .500. Uneven goaltending with Martin Gerber and Alex Auld meant the team played cautiously to protect the goaltender. Murray's patience ran out in February 2009, with the team well out of playoff contention, and Hartsburg was fired, although he had two years left on his contract, and the team also had Paddock under contract. Cory Clouston was elevated from the Binghamton coaching position. The team played above .500 under Clouston and rookie goaltender Brian Elliott, who had been promoted from Binghamton. Gerber was waived from the team at the trading deadline, and the team traded for goaltender Pascal Leclaire, although he would not play due to injury. The team failed to make the playoffs for the first time in 12 seasons. Auld would be traded in the off-season to make room. Clouston's coaching had caused a rift with Heatley (although unspecified \"personal issues\" were also noted by Heatley), and after Clouston was given a contract to continue coaching, Heatley made a trade demand and was traded to the San Jose Sharks just before the start of the 2009\u201310 season.\nIn 2009\u201310, the Senators were a .500 team until going on a team-record 11-game winning streak in January. The streak propelled the team to the top of the Northeast Division standings and a top-three placing for the playoffs. The team could not hold off the Sabres for the division lead but qualified for the playoffs in the fifth position. For the third season in four, the Senators played off against the Pittsburgh Penguins in the first round. A highlight for the Senators was winning a triple-overtime fifth game in Pittsburgh, but the team could not win a playoff game on home ice, losing the series in six games.\nThe Senators had a much poorer than expected 2010\u201311 campaign, resulting in constant rumours of a shakeup right through until December. The rumours were heightened in January after the team went on a lengthy losing streak. January was a dismal month for the Senators, winning only one game. Media speculated on the imminent firing of Clouston, Murray or both. Owner Melynk cleared the air in an article in the January 22, 2011 edition of the \"Ottawa Sun.\" Melnyk stated that he would not fire either Clouston or Murray but that he had given up on this season and was in the process of developing a plan for the future. On January 24, \"The Globe and Mail\" reported that the plan included hiring a new general manager before the June entry draft and that Murray would be retained as an advisor to the team. A decision on whether to retain Clouston would be made by the new general manager. The article by Roy MacGregor, a long-time reporter of the Ottawa Senators, stated that former assistant coach Pierre McGuire had already been interviewed. Murray, in a press conference that day, stated that he wished to stay on as the team's general manager. He also stated that Melnyk was allowing him to continue as the general manager without restraint. Murray said that the players were now to be judged by their play until the February 28 trade deadline. Murray would attempt to move \"a couple, at least,\" of the players for draft picks or prospects at that time if the Senators remained out of playoff contention.\nTrue to his word, Murray made a flurry of trades. He started his overhaul with the trading of Mike Fisher to the Nashville Predators. Fisher already had a home in Nashville with his wife Carrie Underwood. The trading of Fisher, a fan favourite in Ottawa, led to a small anti-Underwood backlash with the banning of her songs from the playlists of some local radio stations. Murray next traded veterans Chris Kelly, and Jarkko Ruutu. A swap of goaltenders was made with the Colorado Avalanche which brought Craig Anderson to Ottawa in exchange for Elliott, both goaltenders having sub-par years. Next, under-achieving forward Alex Kovalev was traded to the Pittsburgh Penguins. On trade deadline day, Ottawa picked up goaltender Curtis McElhinney on waivers. The team traded Chris Campoli with a seventh-round pick to the Chicago Blackhawks for a second-round pick and Ryan Potulny. Goaltender Anderson played very well down the stretch for Ottawa, and the team quickly signed the soon-to-be unrestricted free agent to a four-year contract. After media speculation on the future of Murray within the organization, Murray was re-signed as general manager on April 8 to a three-year extension. On April 9, head coach Clouston and assistants Greg Carvel and Brad Lauer were dismissed from their positions. Murray said that the decision was made based on the fact that the team entered the season believing it was a contender, but finished with a 32\u201340\u201310 record. Former Detroit Red Wings' assistant coach Paul MacLean was hired as Clouston's replacement on June 14, 2011.\nAs the 2011\u201312 season began, many hockey writers and commentators were convinced that the Senators would finish at or near the bottom of the NHL standings. While rebuilding, the Ottawa line-up contained many rookies and inexperienced players. The team struggled out of the gate, losing five of their first six games before a reversal of fortunes saw them win six games in a row. In December 2011, the team acquired forward Kyle Turris from the Phoenix Coyotes in exchange for highly regarded prospect David Rundblad and a draft pick. The team improved its play afterwards and moved into a playoff position before the All-Star Game. For the first time in Senators' history, the All-Star Game was held in Ottawa and considered a great success. Five Senators were voted in or named to the event, including Daniel Alfredsson, who was named the captain of one team. The team continued its playoff push after the break. After starting goaltender Anderson injured his hand in a kitchen accident at home, the Senators called up Robin Lehner from Binghamton and acquired highly regarded goaltender Ben Bishop from the St. Louis Blues. While Anderson recovered, the team continued its solid play and finished as the eighth seed in the Eastern Conference, drawing a first-round playoff matchup against the Conference champion New York Rangers. Ultimately, Ottawa lost the series in seven games.\nThe next season, Ottawa would be challenged to repeat the success they had in 2011\u201312 due to long-term injuries to key players such as Erik Karlsson, Jason Spezza, Milan Michalek and Craig Anderson. Despite these injuries, the Senators would finish seventh in the Eastern Conference and head coach Paul MacLean would go on to win the Jack Adams Award as the NHL's coach of the year. In a rivalry series, Ottawa defeated the second-seeded Montreal Canadiens in the first round of the playoffs in five games, blowing out Montreal 6\u20131 in games three and five. This was the first Montreal-Ottawa playoff series since Ottawa joined the league and the first between the cities' teams since the original Senators played the Canadiens in 1927. The Senators could not repeat the upset, losing to the top-seeded Pittsburgh Penguins in five games in the second round.\nJuly 5, 2013, would be a day of mixed emotions for the city and fans, as long-time captain Alfredsson signed a one-year contract with the Detroit Red Wings, leaving Ottawa after 17 seasons with the Senators and 14 as captain after a contract dispute. The signing shocked numerous fans across the city and many within the Senators organization. The day finished optimistically, however, as Murray acquired star forward Bobby Ryan from the Anaheim Ducks, hoping Ryan could replace Alfredsson on the top line with Spezza. Murray would also sign free-agent forward Clarke MacArthur to a two-year contract that same day and bring back former defenceman Joe Corvo to a one-year contract three days later on July 8, 2013.\nFor the 2013\u201314 season, the league realigned and Ottawa was assigned to the new Atlantic Division along with the rest of the old Northeast Division and the Detroit Red Wings, formerly of the Western Conference. The re-alignment brought increased competition to qualify for the playoffs, as there were now 16 teams in the Eastern Conference fighting for eight playoff spots. The season began with a changing of leadership, as on September 14, 2013, the Ottawa Senators named Spezza their eighth captain in franchise history. While new addition Clarke MacArthur had a career year, Ryan and Spezza struggled to find chemistry, and Ryan was moved to a line with MacArthur and Kyle Turris. Corvo lost his place in the line-up and was waived. The team outside of a playoff position, Murray bolstered the club with a trade for flashy right-winger Ales Hemsky from the Edmonton Oilers. The club, however, was eliminated from playoff contention in the last week of the season, finishing five points short. Further disappointment ensued as the team lost Hemsky to free agency and Spezza requested a trade out of Ottawa, ending the era of the stars of the 2007 Stanley Cup Final team. Spezza agreed to be traded to the Dallas Stars and was sent with Ludwig Karlsson for Alex Chiasson, Nick Paul, Alex Guptill and a 2015 second-round pick.\nAt the beginning of the 2014\u201315 season, Karlsson was named the franchise's ninth captain and the club signed Ryan to a seven-year extension. Unhappy with an 11\u201311\u20135 record after 27 games, the Senators fired head coach MacLean and replaced him with assistant coach Dave Cameron. The change turned the season around for the Senators, who won 32 of their last 55 games. After both Senators' goalies Anderson and Lehner were injured, the team turned to Binghamton goaltender Andrew Hammond. Hammond, aka 'The Hamburglar,' would compile a record of 20\u20131\u20132, a goals-against average of 1.79, and a save percentage of .941 to get the team back into playoff position. The Senators became the first team in modern NHL history to overcome a 14-point deficit at any juncture of the season to qualify for the playoffs. However, the Senators lost to the Canadiens in six games in the first round of the playoffs.\nDuring the 2014\u201315 season, it was announced that Murray had cancer. Taking regular treatment, Murray chose to stay on as general manager through the 2015\u201316 season. Despite posting the best record of any Canadian team in the league, the Senators failed to make the playoffs in what was considered a disappointing season (all seven Canadian teams missed the playoffs). Murray made one 'blockbuster' nine-player trade that brought Toronto Maple Leafs' captain Dion Phaneuf to the Senators before the trade deadline. The Senators were outside of a playoff position at the time of the deal, and played well until the end of the season, but fell just short, placing fifth in the division.\nPierre Dorion era (2016\u20132023).\nOn April 10, 2016, the day after the final game of the 2015\u201316 season, Murray announced his resignation as general manager and that he would continue in an advisory role with the club. Assistant general manager Pierre Dorion was promoted to the general manager position. On April 12, the Senators fired head coach Cameron. On May 8, 2016, the Senators hired former Tampa Bay Lightning head coach Guy Boucher as their new head coach. On the following day, Marc Crawford was announced as associate coach. On June 13, 2016, the Senators hired Daniel Alfredsson as the senior advisor of hockey operations. In June 2016, the Senators hired Rob Cookson as an assistant coach, who had worked with both Boucher and Crawford in Switzerland, and Pierre Groulx as a goaltending coach.\nThe Senators finished second in the Atlantic Division during the 2016\u201317 season. They faced the Boston Bruins in the first round of the playoffs, winning that series in six games. In the second round, they defeated the New York Rangers in six games. During the second game of that series, Jean-Gabriel Pageau scored four goals, including the game-winning goal in double overtime. The Senators would come within one win of the Stanley Cup Final having lost in double overtime of the seventh game of their conference finals series against the Pittsburgh Penguins, who went on to win their second consecutive Stanley Cup.\nFollowing their appearance in the conference finals the previous season, the Senators lost defenceman Marc Methot to the 2017 NHL expansion draft. On November 5, 2017, the Senators conducted a blockbuster trade with the Colorado Avalanche, bringing in star forward Matt Duchene from the Avalanche in exchange for Kyle Turris, Shane Bowers, Andrew Hammond, a conditional first-round pick in 2018 or 2019 and a third-round pick in 2019. Following the trade, however, the Senators' season began to fall apart with a disastrous November road trip. A season highlight was hosting the NHL 100 Classic game outdoors at the TD Place Stadium football field versus the Montreal Canadiens. The game marked the centennial of the first Montreal-Ottawa game in the NHL. The Senators won the game 3\u20130, but the festival atmosphere was somewhat marred by owner Melnyk's controversial comments to the press about attendance levels and selling or moving the team. Out of the playoff picture, the Senators chose to trade away veteran players. Forward Derick Brassard and defenceman Phaneuf were dealt at the trade deadline to the Pittsburgh Penguins and Los Angeles Kings, respectively. The Senators finished the year second-to-last in the league with a 28\u201343\u201311 record and 67 points, their fourth-worst season since entering the league.\nDuring the 2018 off-season, the Senators began what would end up being a complete rebuild. They traded forward Mike Hoffman to the San Jose Sharks, who later that day flipped him to the Florida Panthers. The Senators ended up with the fourth-overall pick in the 2018 draft due to their poor record. Under the Matt Duchene trade conditions, they either had to give up the pick to the Avalanche or wait a year and surrender their 2019 first-round pick instead. The Senators elected to keep the pick and selected forward Brady Tkachuk fourth overall. Just before the regular season started, the Senators traded their captain, Erik Karlsson, to the San Jose Sharks for a large package of players and draft picks.\nAfter a miserable start to the 2018\u201319 season, the Senators were unable to re-sign forwards Duchene, Mark Stone, and Ryan Dzingel before the trade deadline. In an attempt to create optimism, owner Melnyk famously stated: \"The Senators will be all-in again for a five-year run of unparalleled success\u2013where the team will plan to spend close to the NHL's salary cap every year from 2021 to 2025. The Senators' current rebuild is a blueprint on how to bring the Stanley Cup home to its rightful place in Ottawa.\" All three players were subsequently traded before the 2019 trade deadline. Duchene and Dzingel were traded to the Columbus Blue Jackets in exchange for draft picks, prospects and Anthony Duclair. In contrast, fan favourite Stone was traded to the Vegas Golden Knights in exchange for prospect Erik Brannstrom, forward Oscar Lindberg and a second-round pick. Just days after trading away the team's three leading scorers, it was announced that the plans for a new downtown arena on the open land at LeBreton Flats had fallen through. The \"Ottawa Citizen\" called it \"one of the gloomiest weeks in the history of the Ottawa Senators.\" On March 1, 2019, with the team in 31st place, head coach Boucher was fired with associate coach Marc Crawford taking over as head coach for the remainder of the season. The 2018\u201319 season saw the team finish last in the NHL without their own first-round draft pick. This marked the first time since 1995\u201396 that the Senators missed back-to-back playoff appearances.\nPrior to the 2019\u201320 season, D. J. Smith was hired as the new head coach while the organization shifted its focus to developing its young players. The season was ultimately cut short due to the COVID-19 pandemic, and the Senators finished second last in the NHL with 62 points in 71 games. In contrast, Ottawa's farm team, the Belleville Senators, put together a very impressive, albeit shortened season led by Ottawa's top prospects, which included Josh Norris, Drake Batherson, Alex Formenton and Erik Brannstrom among others. Meanwhile, the San Jose Sharks suffered an unexpected collapse that year which significantly benefited the Senators who had acquired their first-round draft pick in the Karlsson trade. Ottawa found themselves with the third and fifth picks in the 2020 NHL draft and used them to select highly touted prospects Tim Stutzle and Jake Sanderson.\nThe Senators would miss the playoffs again for the 2020\u201321 season, a season overshadowed by the COVID-19 pandemic. The young team played an all-Canadian shortened season, during which they had a poor record to start the season but finished the season with a strong stretch of play, inspiring some optimism for the future. The Senators again traded away veterans at the trade deadline for draft picks.\nBefore the 2021\u201322 season, general manager Dorion's contract was extended until 2025. He proceeded to declare: \"The rebuild is done. Now we're stepping into another zone.\" His claims, however, did not materialize as the Senators got off to a slow start and were quickly out of the playoff picture. On October 17, 2021, Tkachuk signed a seven-year deal after a dramatic contract holdout. Just under three weeks later, he was named the tenth captain in franchise history at just 22 years of age. Tkachuk was, at the time, the franchise's youngest-ever captain.\nAhead of the 2022\u201323 season, the team was aggressive in their efforts to exit their rebuild, drastically retooling the team through the acquisitions of forwards Alex DeBrincat and Claude Giroux and goaltender Cam Talbot. In addition, the team signed forwards Norris and Stutzle to eight-year contract extensions. At the end of the season, the Senators missed the playoffs by six points.\nBefore the 2023\u201324 season, DeBrincat notified the Senators he would not re-sign long-term with the club and was traded to Detroit. Talbot was not re-signed. Instead, the Senators signed free agents \u2013 goaltender Joonas Korpisalo and forward Vladimir Tarasenko. At the start of the 2023\u201324 season, the NHL levied the forfeiture of a first-round pick due to negligence on the part of the Senators involving the trade of Evgeni Dadonov. Dorion resigned as general manager upon being asked to step down. After an 11\u201315\u20130 start to the season, the Senators fired coach Smith on December 18, 2023 and former head coach Martin, who had been serving as a senior advisor stepped in as interim coach until the end of the season.\nDeath of owner Eugene Melnyk and sale.\nOwner Eugene Melnyk died in March 2022 due to an unspecified illness. In statements in recent years, Melnyk had said that he planned to leave the team to his two daughters Olivia and Anna when he had been asked if he intended to sell the team. However, there had been speculation about ownership changes. The team added an 'EM' patch on the jersey for the rest of the season. In November 2022, the team engaged a New York City investment banker to facilitate a sale of the team. The Senators confirmed the planned sale in a press release on November 5, with a condition of sale being that the team remain in Ottawa. On June 13, 2023, the Senators announced that a purchase agreement had been signed with a group of investors headed by Michael Andlauer, a Toronto businessman and part-owner of the Montreal Canadiens. Andlauer became majority owner along with his partners, Eugene Melnyk's daughters, and a group of Canadian businessmen on September 21, 2023.\nAndlauer era and 2024\u201325 playoff berth.\nAfter Andlauer took over the franchise, he set about making changes. Cyril Leeder, who had previously served as the team's chief executive officer (CEO) from 2009 to 2017 was brought back as the CEO in September 2023. On September 29, former player Steve Staios was named president of hockey operations. After Dorion's failure to disclose contract information led to the NHL penalizing the team a first-round draft pick, he resigned. Dorion was replaced as general manager on an interim basis by Staios. Staios was later named permanent general manager and another former NHL player, Dave Poulin, was named senior vice president of hockey operations to assist Staios in December.\nDuring the off-season after the 2023\u201324 season, the Senators announced the hiring of former Canucks and Devils head coach Travis Green. Green's first season behind the Senators' bench got off to a shaky start, and by the middle of the 2024\u201325 season the team was 28th in the league. The team improved its position as the season progressed and clinched its first playoff berth to end an eight-year drought. Green became the first head coach to lead the Senators to the postseason since the 2016\u201317 season. In the playoffs, the Senators faced off against the Toronto Maple Leafs in the first postseason installment of the Battle of Ontario since the 2004 playoffs. The Maple Leafs began the series with a 3\u20130 series lead, but the Senators would win the next two games before being eliminated in six games.\nOn August 27, 2025, it was announced that the Allen Americans of the ECHL will once again be an official minor-league affiliate of the team, as well as the Belleville Senators of the AHL starting with the 2025\u201326 season.\nRivalries.\nToronto Maple Leafs.\nThe Battle of Ontario is a rivalry with the Toronto Maple Leafs. It is the current version of an old rivalry between Ottawa, Canada's capital, and Toronto, Canada's largest city and business capital. The teams compete in the same division and meet frequently during regular season games. In the early 2000s, the teams met four consecutive times in the playoffs with Toronto winning all four series.\nAs of the end of the 2024\u201325 season, Ottawa leads the regular season series 76\u201355\u20133\u201313, while Toronto leads 20\u201310 in the playoff record.\nMontreal Canadiens.\nThere is a long-standing Ottawa-Montreal rivalry (dating back to the 1800s) in multiple sports including ice hockey. Today, both teams compete in the Atlantic Division. There is only a two-hour drive from Montreal to Ottawa via Quebec Autoroute 40 and Ontario Highway 417, plus railway and air connections. When the teams play in Ottawa, \"the games matter\" according to sports writer Wayne Scanlan of the \"Ottawa Citizen\", and many Canadiens fans turn out in Montreal jerseys. The current rivalry began when the Ottawa Senators' first NHL game was held in Ottawa on October 8, 1992, where the expansion Senators beat the Canadiens 5\u20133. That victory was one of the only Senators' highlights of their inaugural season; they won only nine more games the rest of the season to finish with 10 wins and 24 points, while the Canadiens won their 24th Stanley Cup that season. Another regular season highlight of the rivalry was the NHL 100 Classic played at TD Place Stadium outdoors in Ottawa in December 2017, celebrating the centennial of the first NHL game between the original Senators and the Canadiens.\nThe rivalry existed prior to the teams meeting in the playoffs, especially as the teams both became competitive in the early 2000s and Ottawa's captain Alfredsson was among those who hoped for a playoff series between the two. The hoped-for playoff series finally came in 2013. In that series, there were a large number of controversial events. In game one, Ottawa's Eric Gryba laid out Montreal's Lars Eller in an open ice hit. After the game, the Senators' head coach MacLean blamed Raphael Diaz for a suicide pass. Later, Canadiens' coach Michel Therrien responded and said that what MacLean said was a \"lack of respect.\" Ottawa won that game 4\u20132. Brandon Prust later insulted MacLean after the game, saying that he doesn't care what that \"bug-eyed, fat walrus has to say.\" In game three, there was a full line brawl between Ottawa and Montreal. And later in that game, MacLean called a timeout with 17 seconds left in the third period with a 6\u20131 lead. Therrien called Maclean classless while Maclean responded by saying that he was protecting his players from Montreal's dirty play in that game. The Senators eventually won the series 4\u20131.\nTwo years later, the rivalry was renewed in another playoff series. In game one, Montreal's P. K. Subban slashed Ottawa's Stone \u2013 breaking his wrist \u2013 and Subban was later ejected. Senators' coach Cameron called the slash vicious and said that Subban deserved a suspension. Ottawa's MacArthur called it a 'lumberjack slash', and Stone said that he was being targeted all game. Meanwhile, Therrien said that Subban did not deserve to be ejected and should have only gotten a minor penalty. The Canadiens won that game 4\u20133. The Canadiens won the next two games in overtime. Riding a 3\u20130 lead in the series, the Canadiens saw Ottawa win the next two games, before closing the series in game six with a 2\u20130 victory in Ottawa.\nAs of the end of the 2024\u201325 season, Montreal leads the current Ottawa Senators in the regular season series 82\u201373\u20135\u201311, while Ottawa leads 6\u20135 in the playoff record.\nHome rinks.\nOttawa Civic Centre.\nThe Senators' first home arena was the Ottawa Civic Centre (now TD Place Arena), located on Bank Street in Ottawa, where they played from the 1992\u201393 season to January of the 1995\u201396 season. The arena, used by the junior Ottawa 67's, was renovated for the Senators, including adding press boxes and luxury boxes. They played their first home game on October 8, 1992, against the Montreal Canadiens with much pre-game spectacle. The Senators would defeat the Canadiens 5\u20133. Their last game in the arena was on December 31, 1995, versus the Tampa Bay Lightning.\nCanadian Tire Centre.\nAs part of its bid to land an NHL franchise for Ottawa, Terrace Corporation unveiled the original proposal for the arena development at a press conference in September 1989. The proposal included a hotel and 20,500-seat arena, named The Palladium, on , surrounded by a mini-city, named \"West Terrace.\" The site itself, of farmland, on the western border of Kanata, had been acquired in May 1987 from farmer Cyril Bennett for CA$\u00a0million, and flipped to Terrace for CA$\u00a0million in 1989. Rezoning approval was granted by the Ontario Municipal Board on August 28, 1991, with conditions. The conditions imposed by the board included scaling down the arena to 18,500 seats, a moratorium on development outside the initial arena site, and that the cost of the highway interchange with Highway 417 be paid by Terrace. A two-year period was spent seeking financing for the site and interchange by Terrace Corporation. The corporation received a CA$\u00a0million grant from the Government of Canada but needed to borrow to pay for the rest of the costs of construction. A ground-breaking ceremony was held in June 1992, but construction did not start until July 7, 1994. Actual construction took 18 months, finishing in January 1996.\nThe Palladium opened on January 15, 1996, with a concert by Canadian rocker Bryan Adams. The Senators played their first game in their new arena two days later, falling 3\u20130 to the Montreal Canadiens. On February 17, 1996, the name 'Palladium' was changed to 'Corel Centre' when Corel Corporation, an Ottawa software company, signed a twenty-year deal for the naming rights.\nWhen mortgage holder Covanta Energy (the former Ogden Entertainment) went into receivership in 2001, Terrace was expected to pay off its debt to Covanta in full. The ownership could not refinance the arena, eventually leading Terrace itself to declare bankruptcy in 2002. On August 26, 2003, billionaire businessman Eugene Melnyk finalized the purchase of the Senators and the arena. The arena and club became solely owned by Melnyk through a new company, Capital Sports &amp; Entertainment.\nIn 2004, the ownership applied to expand its seating, and the City of Ottawa amended its by-laws for the venue, increasing its seating capacity in 2005 to 19,153 and total attendance capacity to 20,500, including standing room.\nOn January 19, 2006, the arena became known as 'Scotiabank Place' after Melnyk reached a new 15-year naming agreement with Canadian bank Scotiabank on January 11, 2006, ending the 20-year contract with Corel. Scotiabank had been an advertising partner with the club for several years and a financial partner with owner Melnyk, and signed a CA$ million over 15-years deal; a slight increase over Corel's contract. While Corel was no longer the arena name sponsor, it continued as an advertising sponsor.\nIn 2011, in time for the Senators hosting the NHL All-Star Game, the team installed a new video scoreboard, known as the 'Bell HD' screen, made by Panasonic. The new scoreboard increased the video display from to and added LED rings.\nOn June 18, 2013, the Senators and Scotiabank ended the seven-year naming rights deal. The Ottawa Senators announced a marketing agreement with the Canadian Tire retail store chain, and as a result, the arena was renamed Canadian Tire Centre on July 1, 2013.\nDowntown arena proposal.\nIn 2015, the National Capital Commission (NCC) put out a request for proposals to redevelop the LeBreton Flats area in downtown Ottawa, a longtime vacant former industrial area. In 2016, the NCC settled on the proposal presented by Senators owner Eugene Melnyk and the RendezVous LeBreton Group partnership with Trinity Developments. The proposal included housing units, park space, a recreation facility, a library and a new arena for the Ottawa Senators.\nThe plan to build a new arena downtown came apart in late 2018 after it was revealed that the Senators were suing Trinity for CA$\u00a0million in damages. Trinity was developing a site adjacent to the LeBreton Flats site, and the Senators felt this was inappropriate competition. Trinity responded with a CA$\u00a0billion lawsuit, accusing the Senators of being unwilling to contribute any money to the project. The NCC announced the cancellation of the partnership's bid to develop the site but gave the sides an extension when the two parties agreed to mediation. On February 27, 2019, it was announced that mediation between the parties had failed to come to an agreement and that the NCC would explore other options for the site's redevelopment.\nThe NCC resumed the process to redevelop the overall site, reserving the site of the arena and asking for preliminary bids on the arena site separately. After a February 2022 deadline to submit bids, the NCC announced that it had received several bids for the site. Local media speculated that the Senators were actively pursuing a bid, authorized by Melnyk shortly before his death. On June 23, 2022, the NCC announced that the Senators proposal had been chosen for the site, with a lease agreement expected to be put in place by autumn of 2023. In related business, the outstanding lawsuits around the previous LeBreton bid were settled out of court in December 2022.\nIn 2024, the Senators stated that it would be \"several years\" before construction would start. The Senators under Andlauer reviewed other possibilities before concluding that they would like to instead purchase the site, and possibly expand the site they could develop as an entertainment destination. In September 2024, the Senators and the NCC agreed to expand the site to from 6 acres, but the purchase has not been concluded. A land sale agreement, for LeBreton Flats, was signed in August 2025 with the NCC.\nPractice facility.\nThe Senators practice facility is known as the Bell Sensplex, a CA$\u00a0million joint venture with the City of Ottawa. Located southeast of the Canadian Tire Centre, the facility has three NHL-sized rinks, an Olympics-size rink and a fieldhouse that opened in 2004. It is used for Senators' practices, minor hockey and it is also the home of the annual minor hockey league Bell Capital Cup tournament.\nTeam identity.\nThe Senators organization is located in a bilingual marketplace and operates in both English and French. The City of Ottawa provides services in English and French and the Ottawa\u2013Gatineau census metropolitan area contains a mix of anglophones and francophones. Longstanding Senators policy calls for providing services and marketing in both English and French to its bilingual fanbase. A bilingual version of the Canadian national anthem is sung before home games, and all announcements are in both languages. It has been estimated that 40 percent of season ticket holders are francophone. Senators games are broadcast on both the English-language TSN and the French-language RDS networks, in a long-standing agreement with Bell Media.\nLogo and jersey design.\nThe team colours are black, red and white with gold trim. Except for the gold, the colours match the colours of the original Senators. The team's home jersey is black with red trim, while the away jersey is white with black and red trim. The club's logo is the head of a Roman general, a member of the Senate of the Roman Republic in a gold semi-circle. The original logo, unveiled on May 23, 1991, described the general as a \"centurion figure, strong and prominent\" according to its designer, Tony Milchard.\nFrom 1992 to 1995, the Senators' primary road jerseys were black with red stripes. The numbers were red for the first season but switched to white afterward. White stripes were added to the uniform in 1995. The white uniforms, worn on home games until 2003 and on road games until 2007, featured black sleeves, tail stripes with red accents, and black lettering. In 1997, the Senators unveiled a red third jersey. It featured the first iteration of the \"forward-facing\" centurion logo, designed by Kevin Caradonna, head of the team's graphic design department, who also designed the mascot \"Spartacat.\" The jersey became the team's primary dark jersey starting in 1999. From 2000 to 2007, the Senators also wore a black alternate jersey with gold, red and white accents.\nA new jersey design was unveiled on August 22, 2007, in conjunction with the league-wide adoption of the \"Rbk EDGE\" jerseys by Reebok for the 2007\u201308 season. The jersey incorporates the original Senators' 'O' logo as a shoulder patch. At the same time, the team updated its logos and switched its usage. The primary logo, which, according to team owner Eugene Melnyk, \"represents strength and determination\" is an update of the old secondary logo.\nBefore the 2008\u201309 season, the Senators unveiled a new black third jersey featuring the shortened \"SENS\" moniker in front. The centurion logo adorns the shoulders, and the striping was inspired by the team's original black jerseys.\nIn 2011, the Senators introduced a throwback-inspired third jersey design. Predominantly black, the jersey incorporated horizontal striping intended to be reminiscent of the original Senators' 'barber-pole' designs. Shield-type patches were added to the shoulders. The design of the shield-type patches was meant to be similar to the shield patches that the original Senators added to their jerseys after each Stanley Cup championship win. The patches spell the team name, one in English and one in French. The design was a collaborative effort between the Senators and a fan in Gatineau, Quebec, who had been circulating a version of it on the internet since 2009. The black third jerseys served as the basis of the Senators' 2014 Heritage Classic jerseys, which used cream as the base colour.\nIn 2017, the Senators' jerseys received a slight makeover when Adidas replaced Reebok as the NHL's uniform provider. The number font was changed to match those of their recent third jerseys, which were retired after the 2016\u201317 season. Before the 2018\u201319 season, the Senators brought back the red jerseys worn during the NHL 100 Classic as a third jersey. The design featured a silver \"O\" in front with black trim amid horizontal black, silver and white stripes.\nIn 2020, the Senators reintroduced its 1997\u20132007 logo with the jersey set used from 1992 to 1995. The updated logo uses a gold outline as opposed to red. The new uniforms, while largely resembling the originals from the 1990s, retained the lettering font used since the Adidas takeover. In contrast, the white uniforms retained only the black and red stripes along the upper arm sleeves. Both the home and away uniforms include a red band across the very bottom of the jerseys. In addition, the Senators unveiled a \"Reverse Retro\" alternate uniform; the design was of the original 1992\u201393 uniform but with red as the base colour. In the 2022\u201323 season, the Senators wore \"Reverse Retro\" uniforms based on the alternates they wore from 1997 to 2007, but with the current 2-D logo in front, black as the base colour and less white elements.\nPrior to the 2025\u201326 season, the Senators unveiled a red alternate uniform, again using the primary logo as the crest along with gold and black stripes along the waist, shoulders and sleeves.\nArena entertainment.\nAt many home games, the fans are entertained both outside and inside the Canadian Tire Centre with myriad entertainers \u2013 live music, DJs, giveaways and promotions. The live music includes the traditional Scottish music of the 'Sons of Scotland Pipe Band' of Ottawa, along with highland dancers. Before and during games, entertainment is hosted by Spartacat, the official mascot of the Senators, an anthropomorphic lion. He made his debut on the Senators' opening night: October 8, 1992. During intermissions, the entertainment varies with on-ice contests, youth games, t-shirt giveaways, live bands and DJs. At each game, a selected fan rides one of the on-ice resurfacers (\"Zambonis\"). The team's public address announcer is Jonathan Trottier and their in-game DJ is Alexis Marchand. When the Senators score a goal, the team's goal horn is a Nathan Airchime M3H from a retired VIA Rail train which was initially used in the Ottawa Civic Centre, and the team's goal song is \"Song 2\" by Blur. At each game, the Senators spotlight a Canadian veteran soldier.\nLike other NHL arenas in Canada, \"O Canada\" is sung before the opening faceoff, along with \"The Star-Spangled Banner\" if an American team is visiting. \"O Canada\" is sung in both English and French with the first half of the first stanza and chorus sung in English and the second half of the first stanza sung in French. From 1994 until 2016, the national anthems were sung by former Ontario Provincial Police Constable Lyndon Slewidge. Currently, the team has no regular singer. During \"O Canada\", a large Canadian flag is unfurled and passed from fan to fan in the lower bowl section.\nThe Senators have their own theme song titled \"Trumpeters Cry,\" which is played as the team comes on the ice and is also used in Sens TV web videos. The song was written by Ottawa singer-songwriter Andres del Castillo, who was formerly of the band Eight Seconds.\nAttendance, revenue and ownership.\nOn April 18, 2008, the club announced its final attendance figures for 2007\u201308. The club had 40 sell-outs out of 41 home dates, a total attendance of 812,665 during the regular season, placing the club third in attendance in the NHL. The number of sell-outs and the total attendance were both club records. The previous attendance records were set during the 2005\u201306 with a season total of 798,453 and 33 sell-outs. In the 2006\u201307 regular season, total attendance was 794,271, with 31 sell-outs out of 41 home dates or an average attendance of 19,372. In the 2007 playoffs, the Senators played nine games with nine sell-outs and an attendance of 181,272 for an average of 20,141, the highest in team history. Until recent seasons, the club was regularly represented in the top half in attendance in the NHL. In 2018\u201319, the Senators average attendance was 14,553, 27th in the league. Attendance dropped further in the 2019\u201320 season, dropping to an average of 12,618, the lowest in the league.\nIn 2022, \"Forbes\" magazine valued the Senators at US$\u00a0million. \"Forbes\" estimated the debt/value ratio at 25% and that the team earned US$ million in 2020\u201321 on revenue of US$\u00a0million. The team is now owned by Michael Andlauer who is the majority owner along with his partners, Eugene Melnyk's daughters, and a group of Canadian businessmen. It was previously owned by Eugene Melynk who bought the team and arena out of bankruptcy in 2003 for US$\u00a0million. Before Melnyk's ownership, the Senators were owned by founder Terrace Investments, majority owned by Rod Bryden, until it declared bankruptcy in 2002. Terrace Investments initially won the bid for an NHL franchise in 1990.\nSens Army.\nThe fans of the Senators are known as the \"Sens Army\". Like most hockey fanatics, they are known to dress up for games, some in Roman legionary clothing. For the 2006\u201307 playoff run, more fans than ever before would wear red. Fan activities included 'Red Rallies' of decorated cars, fan rallies at Ottawa City Hall Plaza and the 'Sens Mile' along Elgin Street, where fans would congregate.\nSens Mile.\nMuch like the Red Mile in Calgary during the Flames' 2004 Stanley Cup run and the Copper Kilometre in Edmonton during the Oilers' 2006 Stanley Cup run, Senators' fans took to the streets to celebrate their team's success during the 2007 playoffs. The idea to have a 'Sens Mile' on downtown Elgin Street, a street with numerous restaurants and pubs, began as a grassroots campaign on Facebook before game four of the Ottawa\u2013Buffalo conference finals series. After the game five win, Ottawa residents closed the street to traffic for a spontaneous celebration. The City of Ottawa then closed Elgin Street for each game of the Stanley Cup Final.\nSeason-by-season record.\n\"This is a partial list of the last five seasons completed by the Senators. For the full season-by-season history, see List of Ottawa Senators seasons\"\n\"Note: GP = Games Played, W = Wins, L = Losses, T = Ties, OTL = Overtime Losses, Pts = Points, GF = Goals for, GA = Goals against, PIM = Penalties in minutes\"\nPlayers and personnel.\nCurrent roster.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Navbar-header/styles.css\"/&gt;\nTeam captains.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nHead coaches.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nGeneral managers.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nSource: \"Ottawa Senators 2009\u201310 Media Guide\", p.\u00a0206.\nHonoured members.\nRetired numbers.\nThe Senators have retired the numbers of four players. The NHL retired Wayne Gretzky's No. 99 for all its member teams at the 2000 NHL All-Star Game.\nAwards and trophies.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Column/styles.css\"/&gt;\nPrince of Wales Trophy\nPresidents' Trophy\nCalder Memorial Trophy\nNHL Plus-Minus Award\nJack Adams Award\nJames Norris Memorial Trophy\nKing Clancy Memorial Trophy\n&lt;templatestyles src = \"Column/styles.css\" /&gt;\nMark Messier Leadership Award\nBill Masterton Memorial Trophy\nNHL All-Rookie Team\n&lt;templatestyles src = \"Column/styles.css\" /&gt;\nNHL first All-Star team\nNHL second All-Star team\nTeam records.\nTeam scoring leaders.\nThese are the top 10 regular season point-scorers in franchise history. Figures are updated after each NHL regular season is completed.\n\"Note: Pos = Position; GP = Games played; G = Goals; A = Assists; Pts = Points; P/G = Points per game average\"\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nSource: Ottawa Senators Media Guide\nTeam records.\nSource: Ottawa Senators.\nBroadcasting.\nOttawa Senators games are broadcast locally in both the English and French languages. As of the 2014\u201315 season, regional television rights to the Senators' regular season games not broadcast nationally by Sportsnet, TVA Sports, or \"Hockey Night in Canada\" are owned by Bell Media under a 12-year contract, with games airing in English on TSN5, and in French on RDS. Regional broadcasts are available within the team's designated region (shared with the Montreal Canadiens), which includes the Ottawa River valley, Eastern Ontario (portions are shared with the Toronto Maple Leafs), along with Quebec, the Maritime provinces and Newfoundland and Labrador.\nOn radio, all home and away games are broadcast on a five-station network stretching across Eastern Ontario, including one American station, WQTK in Ogdensburg, New York. The flagship radio station is CFGO in Ottawa. Radio broadcasts on CFGO began in 1997\u201398; the contract has since been extended through the 2025\u20132026 as part of Bell Media's rights deal with the team. The Senators are broadcast on radio in French through Intersport Production and CJFO-FM in Ottawa. Nicolas St. Pierre provides play-by-play, with Alain Sanscartier as colour commentator.\nSportsnet East held English regional rights to the Sens before the 2014\u201315 season. In April 2014, Dean Brown, who had called play-by-play for Senators games since the team's inception, stated that it was \"extremely unlikely\" that he would move to TSN and continue his role. He noted that the network already had four commentators among its personalities \u2013 including Gord Miller, Chris Cuthbert, Rod Black, and Paul Romanuk (who was, however, picked up by Rogers for its national NHL coverage in June 2014), who were likely candidates to serve as the new voices of the Senators. Brown ultimately moved to the Senators' radio broadcasts alongside Gord Wilson. Both Miller and Cuthbert, along with Ray Ferraro and Jamie McLennan, became the Senators' TV voices on TSN from 2014 to 2020. After Cuthbert joined Sportsnet in 2020, former Canucks radio voice Jon Abbott took over as the secondary play-by-play commentator in games where Miller is assigned to call the Maple Leafs. Mike Johnson, who concurrently works colour commentary for the Canadiens and Maple Leafs on TSN, replaced Ferraro as an alternate to McLennan. After Abbott left to join the Calgary Flames in 2024, broadcaster Matt Cullen and Kenzie Lalonde split time as the backup to Miller.\nDuring the 2006\u201307 and 2007\u201308 seasons, several games were only available in video on pay-per-view or at local movie theatres in the Ottawa area. The \"Sens TV\" service was suspended indefinitely as of September 24, 2008. In 2010, Sportsnet launched a secondary channel for selected Senators games as part of its Sportsnet One service. Selected Senators games were broadcast in French by RDS and TVA Sports. On the RDS network, Felix Seguin and former Senators goaltender Patrick Lalime were the announcers from the 2011\u201312 season to the 2013\u201314 season, and Michel Y. Lacroix and Norman Flynn starting in the 2014\u201315 season. The TVA Sports broadcast team consisted of Michel Langevin, Yvon Pedneault and Enrico Ciccone.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "22706", "revid": "34920183", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22706", "title": "Orchestra", "text": "Large instrumental ensemble\nAn orchestra (; ) is a large instrumental ensemble typical of classical music, which combines instruments from different families. There are typically four main sections of instruments:\nOther instruments such as the piano, harpsichord, pipe organ, and celesta may sometimes appear in a fifth keyboard section or may stand alone as soloist instruments, as may the concert harp and, for performances of some modern compositions, electronic instruments, and guitars.\nA full-size Western orchestra may sometimes be called a &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Visible anchor/styles.css\" /&gt;symphony orchestra or philharmonic orchestra (from Greek \"phil-\", \"loving\", and \"harmony\"). The number of musicians employed in a given performance may vary from seventy to over one hundred, depending on the work being played and the venue size. A \"&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Visible anchor/styles.css\" /&gt;chamber orchestra\" (sometimes a \"concert orchestra\") is a smaller ensemble of not more than around fifty musicians. Orchestras that specialize in the Baroque music of, for example, Johann Sebastian Bach and George Frideric Handel, or Classical repertoire, such as that of Haydn and Mozart, tend to be smaller than orchestras performing a Romantic music repertoire such as the symphonies of Ludwig van Beethoven and Johannes Brahms. The typical orchestra grew in size throughout the 18th and 19th centuries, reaching a peak with the large orchestras of as many as 120 players called for in the works of Richard Wagner and later Gustav Mahler.\nOrchestras are usually led by a conductor who directs the performance with movements of the hands and arms, often made easier for the musicians to see by using a short wooden rod known as a conductor's baton. The conductor unifies the orchestra, sets the tempo, and shapes the sound of the ensemble. The conductor also prepares the orchestra by leading rehearsals before the public concert, in which the conductor provides instructions to the musicians on their interpretation of the music being performed.\nThe leader of the first violin section \u2013 commonly called the concertmaster \u2013 also plays an important role in leading the musicians. In the Baroque music era (1600\u20131750), orchestras were often led by the concertmaster, or by a chord-playing musician performing the basso continuo parts on a harpsichord or pipe organ, a tradition that some 20th-century and 21st-century early music ensembles continue.\nOrchestras play a wide range of repertoire, including symphonies, opera and ballet overtures, concertos for solo instruments, and pit ensembles for operas, ballets, and some types of musical theatre (e.g., Gilbert and Sullivan operettas).\nAmateur orchestras include youth orchestras made up of students from an elementary school, a high school, or a university, and community orchestras; typically they are made up of amateur musicians from a particular city or region.\nThe term \"orchestra\" derives from the Greek \u1f40\u03c1\u03c7\u03ae\u03c3\u03c4\u03c1\u03b1 (\"orchestra\"), the name for the area in front of a stage in ancient Greek theatre reserved for the Greek chorus.\nHistory.\nBaroque and classical eras.\nIn the Baroque era, the size and composition of an orchestra were not standardised. There were large differences in size, instrumentation and playing styles\u2014and therefore in orchestral soundscapes and palettes \u2014 between the various European regions. The \"Baroque orchestra\" ranged from smaller orchestras (or ensembles) with one player per part, to larger-scale orchestras with many players per part. Examples of the smaller variety were Bach's orchestras, for example in Koethen, where he had access to an ensemble of up to 18 players. Examples of large-scale Baroque orchestras would include Corelli's orchestra in Rome which ranged between 35 and 80 players for day-to-day performances, being enlarged to 150 players for special occasions.\nIn the classical era, the orchestra became more standardized with a small to medium-sized string section and a core wind section consisting of pairs of oboes, flutes, bassoons and horns, sometimes supplemented by percussion and pairs of clarinets and trumpets.\nBeethoven's influence.\nThe so-called \"standard complement\" of doubled winds and brass in the orchestra pioneered in the late 18th century and consolidated during the first half of the 19th century is generally attributed to the forces called for by Beethoven after Haydn and Mozart. Beethoven's instrumentation almost always included paired flutes, oboes, clarinets, bassoons, horns and trumpets. The exceptions are his Symphony No. 4, Violin Concerto, and Piano Concerto No. 4, which each specify a single flute. Beethoven carefully calculated the expansion of this particular timbral \"palette\" in Symphonies 3, 5, 6, and 9 for an innovative effect. The third horn in the \"Eroica\" Symphony arrives to provide not only some harmonic flexibility but also the effect of \"choral\" brass in the Trio movement. Piccolo, contrabassoon, and trombones add to the triumphal finale of his Symphony No. 5. A piccolo and a pair of trombones help deliver the effect of storm and sunshine in the Sixth, also known as the \"Pastoral Symphony\". The Ninth asks for a second pair of horns, for reasons similar to the \"Eroica\" (four horns has since become standard); Beethoven's use of piccolo, contrabassoon, trombones, and untuned percussion\u2014plus chorus and vocal soloists\u2014in his finale, are his earliest suggestion that the timbral boundaries of the symphony might be expanded. For several decades after his death, symphonic instrumentation was faithful to Beethoven's well-established model, with few exceptions.\nInstrumental technology.\nThe invention of the piston and rotary valve by Heinrich St\u00f6lzel and Friedrich Bl\u00fchmel, both Silesians, in 1815, was the first in a series of innovations which impacted the orchestra, including the development of modern keywork for the flute by Theobald Boehm and the innovations of Adolphe Sax in the woodwinds, notably the invention of the saxophone. These advances would lead Hector Berlioz to write a landmark book on instrumentation, which was the first systematic treatise on using instrumental sound as an expressive element of music.\nWagner's influence.\nThe next major expansion of symphonic practice came from Richard Wagner's Bayreuth orchestra, founded to accompany his musical dramas. Wagner's works for the stage were scored with unprecedented scope and complexity: indeed, his score to \"Das Rheingold\" calls for six harps. Thus, Wagner envisioned an ever-more-demanding role for the conductor of the theatre orchestra, as he elaborated in his influential work \"On Conducting\". This brought about a revolution in orchestral composition and set the style for orchestral performance for the next eighty years. Wagner's theories re-examined the importance of tempo, dynamics, bowing of string instruments and the role of principals in the orchestra.\n20th-century orchestra.\nAt the beginning of the 20th century, symphony orchestras were larger, better funded, and better trained than previously; consequently, composers could compose larger and more ambitious works. The works of Gustav Mahler were particularly innovative; in his later symphonies, such as the mammoth Symphony No. 8, Mahler pushes the furthest boundaries of orchestral size, employing large forces. By the late Romantic era, orchestras could support the most enormous forms of symphonic expression, with huge string and brass sections and an expanded range of percussion instruments. With the recording era beginning, the standards of performance were pushed to a new level, because a recorded symphony could be listened to closely and even minor errors in intonation or ensemble, which might not be noticeable in a live performance, could be heard by critics. As recording technologies improved over the 20th and 21st centuries, eventually small errors in a recording could be \"fixed\" by audio editing or overdubbing. Some older conductors and composers could remember a time when simply \"getting through\" the music as well as possible was the standard. Combined with the wider audience made possible by recording, this led to a renewed focus on particular star conductors and on a high standard of orchestral execution.\nInstrumentation.\nThe typical symphony orchestra consists of four groups of related musical instruments called the woodwinds, brass, percussion, and strings. Other instruments such as the piano, accordion, and celesta may sometimes be grouped into a fifth section such as a keyboard section or may stand alone, as may the concert harp and electric and electronic instruments. The orchestra, depending on the size, contains almost all of the standard instruments in each group.\nIn the history of the orchestra, its instrumentation has been expanded over time, often agreed to have been standardized by the classical period and Ludwig van Beethoven's influence on the classical model. In the 20th and 21st\u00a0century, new repertory demands expanded the instrumentation of the orchestra, resulting in a flexible use of the classical-model instruments and newly developed electric and electronic instruments in various combinations. In the mid 20th century, several attempts were made in Germany and the United States to confine the instrumentation of the symphonic orchestra exclusively to groups of one instrument. In this configuration, the symphonic orchestra consisted entirely of free-reed chromatic accordions which were modified to recreate the full range of orchestral sounds and timbres during the performance of orthodox Western classical music.\nThe terms \"symphony orchestra\" and \"philharmonic orchestra\" may be used to distinguish different ensembles from the same locality, such as the London Symphony Orchestra and the London Philharmonic Orchestra. A symphony or philharmonic orchestra will usually have over eighty musicians on its roster, in some cases over a hundred, but the actual number of musicians employed in a particular performance may vary according to the work being played and the size of the venue.\nA \"chamber orchestra\" is usually a smaller ensemble; a major chamber orchestra might employ as many as fifty musicians, but some are much smaller. \"Concert orchestra\" is an alternative term, as in the BBC Concert Orchestra and the RT\u00c9 Concert Orchestra.\nExpanded instrumentation.\nApart from the core orchestral complement, various other instruments are called for occasionally. These include the flugelhorn and cornet. Saxophones and classical guitars, for example, appear in some 19th- through 21st-century scores. While appearing only as featured solo instruments in some works, for example Maurice Ravel's orchestration of Modest Mussorgsky's \"Pictures at an Exhibition\" and Sergei Rachmaninoff's \"Symphonic Dances\", the saxophone is included in other works, such as Ravel's \"Bol\u00e9ro\", Sergei Prokofiev's Romeo and Juliet Suites\u00a01 and 2, Vaughan Williams' Symphonies No.\u00a06 and No.\u00a09, and William Walton's \"Belshazzar's Feast\", and many other works as a member of the orchestral ensemble. The euphonium is featured in a few late Romantic and 20th\u00a0century works, usually playing parts marked \"tenor tuba\", including Gustav Holst's \"The Planets\", and Richard Strauss's \"Ein Heldenleben\". The Wagner tuba, a modified member of the horn family, appears in Richard Wagner's cycle \"Der Ring des Nibelungen\" and several other works by Strauss, Igor Stravinsky (as featured in The Rite of Spring), B\u00e9la Bart\u00f3k, and others; it also has a notably prominent role in Anton Bruckner's Symphony No.\u00a07 in E\u00a0Major. Cornets appear in Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky's ballet \"Swan Lake\", Claude Debussy's \"La\u00a0Mer\", and several orchestral works by Hector Berlioz. Unless these instruments are played by members \"doubling\" on another instrument (for example, a trombone player changing to euphonium or a bassoon player switching to contrabassoon for a certain passage), orchestras typically hire freelance musicians to augment their regular ensemble.\nThe 20th\u00a0century orchestra was far more flexible than its predecessors. In Beethoven's and Felix Mendelssohn's time, the orchestra was composed of a fairly standard core of instruments, which was very rarely modified by composers. As time progressed, and as the Romantic period saw changes in accepted modification with composers such as Berlioz and Mahler; some composers used multiple harps and sound effect such as the wind machine. During the 20th\u00a0century, the modern orchestra was generally standardized with the modern instrumentation listed below. Nevertheless, by the mid- to late 20th\u00a0century, with the development of contemporary classical music, instrumentation could practically be hand-picked by the composer (e.g., to add electric instruments such as electric guitar, electronic instruments such as synthesizers, \nondes martenot, or trautonium, as well as other non-Western instruments, or other instruments not traditionally used in orchestras including the: bandoneon, free bass accordion, harmonica, jews harp, mandola and water percussion.\nWith this history in mind, the orchestra can be analysed in five eras: the Baroque era, the Classical era, early/mid-Romantic music era, late-Romantic era and combined Modern/Postmodern eras. The first is a Baroque orchestra (i.e., J.S. Bach, Handel, Vivaldi), which generally had a smaller number of performers, and in which one or more chord-playing instruments, the basso continuo group (e.g., harpsichord or pipe organ and assorted bass instruments to perform the bassline), played an important role; the second is a typical classical period orchestra (e.g., early Beethoven along with Mozart and Haydn), which used a smaller group of performers than a Romantic music orchestra and a fairly standardized instrumentation; the third is typical of an early/mid-Romantic era (e.g., Schubert, Berlioz, Schumann, Brahms); the fourth is a late-Romantic/early 20th-century orchestra (e.g., Wagner, Mahler, Stravinsky), to the common complement of a 2010-era modern orchestra (e.g., Adams, Barber, Aaron Copland, Glass, Penderecki).\nLate Baroque orchestra.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nClassical orchestra.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nEarly Romantic orchestra.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nLate Romantic orchestra.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nModern/Postmodern orchestra.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nOrganization.\nAmong the instrument groups and within each group of instruments, there is a generally accepted hierarchy. Every instrumental group (or section) has a principal who is generally responsible for leading the group and playing orchestral solos. The violins are divided into two groups, first violin and second violin, with the second violins playing in lower registers than the first violins, playing an accompaniment part, or harmonizing the melody played by the first violins. The principal first violin is called the concertmaster (or orchestra \"leader\" in the U.K.) and is not only considered the leader of the string section, but the second-in-command of the entire orchestra, behind only the conductor. The concertmaster leads the pre-concert tuning and handles musical aspects of orchestra management, such as determining the bowings for the violins or the entire string section. The concertmaster usually sits to the conductor's left, closest to the audience. There is also a principal second violin, a principal viola, a principal cello, and a principal bass.\nThe principal trombone is considered the leader of the low brass section, while the principal trumpet is generally considered the leader of the entire brass section. While the oboe often provides the tuning note for the orchestra (due to a 300-year-old convention), there is generally no designated principal of the woodwind section (though in woodwind ensembles, the flute is often the presumptive leader). Instead, each principal confers with the others as equals in the case of musical differences of opinion. Most sections also have an assistant principal (or co-principal or associate principal), or in the case of the first violins, an assistant concertmaster, who often plays a tutti part in addition to replacing the principal in their absence.\nA section string player plays in unison with the rest of the section, except in the case of divided (\"divisi\") parts, where upper and lower parts in the music are often assigned to \"outside\" (nearer the audience) and \"inside\" seated players. Where a solo part is called for in a string section, the section leader invariably plays that part. The section leader (or principal) of a string section is also responsible for determining the bowings, often based on the bowings set out by the concertmaster. In some cases, the principal of a string section may use a slightly different bowing than the concertmaster, to accommodate the requirements of playing their instrument (e.g., the double-bass section). Principals of a string section will also lead entrances for their section, typically by lifting the bow before the entrance, to ensure the section plays together. Tutti wind and brass players generally play a unique but non-solo part. Section percussionists play parts assigned to them by the principal percussionist.\nIn modern times, the musicians are usually directed by a conductor, although early orchestras did not have one, giving this role to the concertmaster or the harpsichordist playing the continuo. Some modern orchestras also do without conductors, particularly smaller orchestras and those specializing in historically accurate (so-called \"period\") performances of baroque and earlier music.\nThe most frequently performed repertoire for a symphony orchestra is Western classical music or opera. However, orchestras are used sometimes in popular music (e.g., to accompany a rock or pop band in a concert), extensively in film music, and increasingly often in video game music. Orchestras are also used in the symphonic metal genre. The term \"orchestra\" can also be applied to a jazz ensemble, for example in the performance of big-band music.\nSelection and appointment of members.\nIn the 2000s, all tenured members of a professional orchestra normally audition for positions in the ensemble. Performers typically play one or more solo pieces of the auditionee's choice, such as a movement of a concerto, a solo Bach movement, and a variety of excerpts from the orchestral literature that are advertised in the audition poster (so the auditionees can prepare). The excerpts are typically the most technically challenging parts and solos from the orchestral literature. Orchestral auditions are typically held in front of a panel that includes the conductor, the concertmaster, the principal player of the section for which the auditionee is applying, and possibly other principal players.\nThe most promising candidates from the first round of auditions are invited to return for a second or third round of auditions, which allows the conductor and the panel to compare the best candidates. Performers may be asked to sight read orchestral music. The final stage of the audition process in some orchestras is a \"test week\", in which the performer plays with the orchestra for a week or two, which allows the conductor and principal players to see if the individual can function well in an actual rehearsal and performance setting.\nThere are a range of different employment arrangements. The most sought-after positions are permanent, tenured positions in the orchestra. Orchestras also hire musicians on contracts, ranging in length from a single concert to a full season or more. Contract performers may be hired for individual concerts when the orchestra is doing an exceptionally large late-Romantic era orchestral work, or to substitute for a permanent member who is sick. A professional musician who is hired to perform for a single concert is sometimes called a \"sub\". Some contract musicians may be hired to replace permanent members for the period that the permanent member is on parental leave or disability leave.\nHistory of gender in ensembles.\nHistorically, major professional orchestras have been mostly or entirely composed of men. The first women members hired in professional orchestras have been harpists. The Vienna Philharmonic, for example, did not accept women to permanent membership until 1997, far later than comparable orchestras (the other orchestras ranked among the world's top five by \"Gramophone\" in 2008). The last major orchestra to appoint a woman to a permanent position was the Berlin Philharmonic. In February 1996, the Vienna Philharmonic's principal flute, Dieter Flury, told \"Westdeutscher Rundfunk\" that accepting women would be \"gambling with the emotional unity () that this organism currently has\". In April 1996, the orchestra's press secretary wrote that \"compensating for the expected leaves of absence\" of maternity leave would be a problem.\nIn 1997, the Vienna Philharmonic was \"facing protests during a [US] tour\" by the National Organization for Women and the International Alliance for Women in Music. Finally, \"after being held up to increasing ridicule even in socially conservative Austria, members of the orchestra gathered [on 28\u00a0February 1997] in an extraordinary meeting on the eve of their departure and agreed to admit a woman, Anna Lelkes, as harpist.\" As of 2013, the orchestra has six female members; one of them, violinist Albena Danailova, became one of the orchestra's concertmasters in 2008, the first woman to hold that position in that orchestra. In 2012, women made up 6% of the orchestra's membership. VPO president Clemens Hellsberg said the VPO now uses completely screened blind auditions.\nIn 2013, an article in \"Mother Jones\" stated that while \"[m]any prestigious orchestras have significant female membership \u2014 women outnumber men in the New York Philharmonic's violin section \u2014 and several renowned ensembles, including the National Symphony Orchestra, the Detroit Symphony, and the Minnesota Symphony, are led by women violinists\", the double bass, brass, and percussion sections of major orchestras \"...\u00a0are still predominantly male.\" A 2014 BBC article stated that the \"...\u00a0introduction of 'blind' auditions, where a prospective instrumentalist performs behind a screen so that the judging panel can exercise no gender or racial prejudice, has seen the gender balance of traditionally male-dominated symphony orchestras gradually shift.\"\nAmateur ensembles.\nThere are also a variety of amateur orchestras:\nRepertoire and performances.\nOrchestras play a wide range of repertoire ranging from 17th-century dance suites, 18th\u00a0century divertimentos to 20th-century film scores and 21st-century symphonies. Orchestras have become synonymous with the symphony, an extended musical composition in Western classical music that typically contains multiple movements which provide contrasting keys and tempos. Symphonies are notated in a musical score, which contains all the instrument parts. The conductor uses the score to study the symphony before rehearsals and decide on their interpretation (e.g., tempos, articulation, phrasing, etc.), and to follow the music during rehearsals and concerts, while leading the ensemble. Orchestral musicians play from parts containing just the notated music for their instrument. A small number of symphonies also contain vocal parts (e.g., Beethoven's Ninth Symphony).\nOrchestras also perform overtures, a term originally applied to the instrumental introduction to an opera. During the early Romantic era, composers such as Beethoven and Mendelssohn began to use the term to refer to independent, self-existing instrumental, programmatic works that presaged genres such as the symphonic poem, a form devised by Franz Liszt in several works that began as dramatic overtures. These were \"at first undoubtedly intended to be played at the head of a programme\". In the 1850s the concert overture began to be supplanted by the symphonic poem.\nOrchestras also play with instrumental soloists in concertos. During concertos, the orchestra plays an accompaniment role to the soloist (e.g., a solo violinist or pianist) and, at times, introduces musical themes or interludes while the soloist is not playing. Orchestras also play during operas, ballets, some musical theatre works and some choral works (both sacred works such as Masses and secular works). In operas and ballets, the orchestra accompanies the singers and dancers, respectively, and plays overtures and interludes where the melodies played by the orchestra take centre stage.\nPerformances.\nIn the Baroque era, orchestras performed in a range of venues, including at the fine houses of aristocrats, in opera halls and in churches. Some wealthy aristocrats had an orchestra in residence at their estate, to entertain them and their guests with performances. During the Classical era, as composers increasingly sought out financial support from the general public, orchestra concerts were increasingly held in public concert halls, where music lovers could buy tickets to hear the orchestra. Aristocratic patronage of orchestras continued during the Classical era, but this went on alongside public concerts. In the 20th and 21st\u00a0century, orchestras found a new patron: governments. Many orchestras in North America and Europe receive part of their funding from national, regional level governments (e.g., state governments in the U.S.) or city governments. These government subsidies make up part of orchestra revenue, along with ticket sales, charitable donations (if the orchestra is registered as a charity) and other fundraising activities. With the invention of successive technologies, including sound recording, radio broadcasting, television broadcasting and Internet-based streaming and downloading of concert videos, orchestras have been able to find new revenue sources.\nIssues in performance.\nFaking.\nOne of the \"great unmentionable [topics] of orchestral playing\" is \"faking\", the process by which an orchestral musician gives the false \"...\u00a0impression of playing every note as written\", typically for a very challenging passage that is very high or very fast, while not actually playing the notes that are in the printed music part. An article in \"The Strad\" states that all orchestral musicians, even those in the top orchestras, occasionally fake certain passages. One reason that musicians fake is because there are not enough rehearsals. Another factor is the extreme challenges in 20th\u00a0century and 21st\u00a0century contemporary pieces; some professionals said \"faking\" was \"necessary in anything from ten to almost ninety per cent of some modern works\". Professional players who were interviewed were of a consensus that faking may be acceptable when a part is not written well for the instrument, but faking \"just because you haven't practised\" the music is not acceptable.\nCounter-revolution.\nWith the advent of the early music movement, smaller orchestras where players worked on execution of works in styles derived from the study of older treatises on playing became common. These include the Orchestra of the Age of Enlightenment, the London Classical Players under the direction of Sir Roger Norrington and the Academy of Ancient Music under Christopher Hogwood, among others.\nRecent trends in the United States.\nIn the United States, the late 20th\u00a0century saw a crisis of funding and support for orchestras. The size and cost of a symphony orchestra, compared to the size of the base of supporters, became an issue that struck at the core of the institution. Few orchestras could fill auditoriums, and the time-honored season-subscription system became increasingly anachronistic, as more and more listeners would buy tickets on an \"ad-hoc\" basis for individual events. Orchestral endowments and \u2014 more centrally to the daily operation of American orchestras \u2014 orchestral donors have seen investment portfolios shrink, or produce lower yields, reducing the ability of donors to contribute; further, there has been a trend toward donors finding other social causes more compelling. While government funding is less central to American than European orchestras, cuts in such funding are still significant for American ensembles. Finally, the drastic drop in revenues from recording, related to changes in the recording industry itself, began a period of change that has yet to reach its conclusion.\nU.S. orchestras that have gone into Chapter 11\u00a0bankruptcy include the Philadelphia Orchestra (April\u00a02011), and the Louisville Orchestra (December\u00a02010); orchestras that have gone into Chapter 7\u00a0bankruptcy and have ceased operations include the Northwest Chamber Orchestra in 2006, the Honolulu Orchestra in March\u00a02011, the New Mexico Symphony Orchestra in April 2011, and the Syracuse Symphony in June\u00a02011. The Festival of Orchestras in Orlando, Florida, ceased operations at the end of March\u00a02011.\nOne source of financial difficulties that received notice and criticism was high salaries for music directors of US orchestras, which led several high-profile conductors to take pay cuts in recent years. Music administrators such as Michael Tilson Thomas and Esa-Pekka Salonen argued that new music, new means of presenting it, and a renewed relationship with the community could revitalize the symphony orchestra. The American critic Greg Sandow has argued in detail that orchestras must revise their approach to music, performance, the concert experience, marketing, public relations, community involvement, and presentation to bring them in line with the expectations of 21st\u00a0century audiences immersed in popular culture.\nIt is not uncommon for contemporary composers to use unconventional instruments, including various synthesizers, to achieve desired effects. Many, however, find more conventional orchestral configuration to provide better possibilities for color and depth. Composers like John Adams often employ Romantic-size orchestras, as in Adams' opera \"Nixon in China\"; Philip Glass and others may be more free, yet still identify size-boundaries. Glass in particular has recently turned to conventional orchestras in works like the \"Concerto for Cello and Orchestra\" and the Violin Concerto No.\u00a02.\nAlong with a decrease in funding, some U.S. orchestras have reduced their overall personnel, as well as the number of players appearing in performances. The reduced numbers in performance are usually confined to the string section, since the numbers here have traditionally been flexible (as multiple players typically play from the same part).\nRole of conductor.\nConducting is the art of directing a musical performance, such as an orchestral or choral concert. The primary duties of the conductor are to set the tempo, ensure correct entries by various members of the ensemble, and \"shape\" the phrasing where appropriate. To convey their ideas and interpretation, a conductor communicates with their musicians primarily through hand gestures, typically (though not invariably) with the aid of a baton, and may use other gestures or signals, such as eye contact with relevant performers. A conductor's directions will almost invariably be supplemented or reinforced by verbal instructions or suggestions to their musicians in rehearsal prior to a performance.\nThe conductor typically stands on a raised podium with a large music stand for the full score, which contains the musical notation for all the instruments and voices. Since the mid-18th century, most conductors have not played an instrument when conducting, although in earlier periods of classical music history, leading an ensemble while playing an instrument was common. In Baroque music from the 1600s to the 1750s, the group would typically be led by the harpsichordist or first violinist (see concertmaster), an approach that in modern times has been revived by several music directors for music from this period. Conducting while playing a piano or synthesizer may also be done with musical theatre pit orchestras. Communication is typically non-verbal during a performance (this is strictly the case in art music, but in jazz big bands or large pop ensembles, there may be occasional spoken instructions, such as a \"count in\"). However, in rehearsals, frequent interruptions allow the conductor to give verbal directions as to how the music should be played or sung.\nConductors act as guides to the orchestras or choirs they conduct. They choose the works to be performed and study their scores, to which they may make certain adjustments (e.g., regarding tempo, articulation, phrasing, repetitions of sections, and so on), work out their interpretation, and relay their vision to the performers. They may also attend to organizational matters, such as scheduling rehearsals, planning a concert season, hearing auditions and selecting members, and promoting their ensemble in the media. Orchestras, choirs, concert bands and other sizable musical ensembles such as big bands are usually led by conductors.\nConductorless orchestras.\nIn the Baroque music era (1600\u20131750), most orchestras were led by one of the musicians, typically the principal first violin, called the concertmaster. The concertmaster would lead the tempo of pieces by lifting his or her bow in a rhythmic manner. Leadership might also be provided by one of the chord-playing instrumentalists playing the basso continuo part which was the core of most Baroque instrumental ensemble pieces. Typically, this would be a harpsichord player, a pipe organist, or a lutist or theorbo player. A keyboard player could lead the ensemble with his or her head, or by taking one of the hands off the keyboard to lead a more difficult tempo change. A lutenist or theorbo player could lead by lifting the instrument neck up and down to indicate the tempo of a piece, or to lead a ritard during a cadence or ending. In some works which combined choirs and instrumental ensembles, two leaders were sometimes used: A concertmaster to lead the instrumentalists and a chord-playing performer to lead the singers. During the Classical music period (c.\u20091720\u20131800), the practice of using chordal instruments to play basso continuo was gradually phased out, and it disappeared completely by 1800. Instead, ensembles began to use conductors to lead the orchestra's tempos and playing style, while the concertmaster played an additional leadership role for the musicians, especially the string players, who imitate the bowstroke and playing style of the concertmaster, to the degree that is feasible for the different stringed instruments.\nIn 1922, the idea of a conductor-less orchestra was revived in post-revolutionary Soviet Union. The symphony orchestra Persimfans was formed without a conductor, because the founders believed that the ensemble should be modeled on the ideal Marxist state, in which all people are equal. As such, its members felt that there was no need to be led by the dictatorial baton of a conductor; instead they were led by a committee, which determined tempos and playing styles. Although it was a partial success within the Soviet Union, the principal difficulty with the concept was in changing tempo during performances, because even if the committee had issued a decree about where a tempo change should take place, there was no leader in the ensemble to guide this tempo change. The orchestra survived for ten years before Stalin's cultural politics disbanded it by taking away its funding.\nIn Western nations, some ensembles, such as the Orpheus Chamber Orchestra, based in New York City, have had more success with conductorless orchestras, although decisions are likely to be deferred to some sense of leadership within the ensemble (for example, the principal wind and string players, notably the concertmaster). Others have returned to the tradition of a principal player, usually a violinist, being the artistic director and running rehearsal and leading concerts. Examples include the Australian Chamber Orchestra, Amsterdam Sinfonietta &amp; Candida Thompson and the New Century Chamber Orchestra. As well, as part of the early music movement, some 20th and 21st\u00a0century orchestras have revived the Baroque practice of having no conductor on the podium for Baroque pieces, using the concertmaster or a chord-playing basso continuo performer (e.g., harpsichord or organ) to lead the group.\nMultiple conductors.\nOffstage instruments.\nSome orchestral works specify that an offstage trumpet should be used or that other instruments from the orchestra should be positioned off-stage or behind the stage, to create a haunted, mystical effect. To ensure that the offstage instrumentalist(s) play in time, sometimes a sub-conductor will be stationed offstage with a clear view of the principal conductor. Examples include the ending of \"Neptune\" from Gustav Holst's \"The Planets\". The principal conductor leads the large orchestra, and the sub-conductor relays the principal conductor's tempo and gestures to the offstage musician (or musicians). One of the challenges with using two conductors is that the second conductor may get out of synchronization with the main conductor, or may mis-convey (or misunderstand) the principal conductor's gestures, which can lead to the offstage instruments being out of time. In the late 20th\u00a0century and early 21st\u00a0century, some orchestras use a video camera pointed at the principal conductor and a closed-circuit TV set in front of the offstage performers, instead of using two conductors.\nContemporary music.\nThe techniques of polystylism and polytempo music have led a few 20th and 21st\u00a0century composers to write music where multiple orchestras or ensembles perform simultaneously. These trends have brought about the phenomenon of polyconductor music, wherein separate sub-conductors conduct each group of musicians. Usually, one principal conductor conducts the sub-conductors, thereby shaping the overall performance. In Percy Grainger's \"The Warriors\" which includes three conductors: the primary conductor of the orchestra, a secondary conductor directing an off-stage brass ensemble, and a tertiary conductor directing percussion and harp. One example in the late-century orchestral music is Karlheinz Stockhausen's \"Gruppen\", for three orchestras, which are placed around the audience. This way, the \"sound masses\" could be spatialized, as in an electroacoustic work. \"Gruppen\" was premiered in Cologne, in 1958, conducted by Stockhausen, Bruno Maderna and Pierre Boulez. It has been performed in 1996 by Simon Rattle, John Carewe and Daniel Harding.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "22707", "revid": "50661354", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22707", "title": "Oolong", "text": "Partially oxidized Chinese tea\nOolong (, ; ; , 'black dragon' tea) is a traditional semi-oxidized Chinese tea (\"Camellia sinensis\") produced through a process that includes withering the leaves under strong sun and allowing some oxidation to occur before curling and twisting. Most oolong teas, especially those of fine quality, involve unique tea plant cultivars that are exclusively used for particular varieties. The degree of oxidation, which is controlled by the length of time between picking and final drying, can range from 8% to 85% depending on the variety and production style. Oolong is especially popular in southeastern China and among ethnic Chinese in Southeast Asia, as is the Fujian preparation process known as the gongfu tea ceremony.\nDifferent styles of oolong tea can vary widely in flavor. They can be sweet and fruity with honey aromas, woody and thick with roasted aromas, or green and fresh with complex aromas, all depending on the horticulture and style of production. Several types of oolong tea, including those produced in the Wuyi Mountains, Nanping of northern Fujian, such as Da Hong Pao, are among the most famous Chinese teas. Different varieties of oolong are processed differently, but the leaves are usually formed into one of two distinct styles. Some are rolled into long curly leaves, while others are \"wrap-curled\" into small beads, each with a tail. The former style is the more traditional.\nThe Chinese term (oolong) was first used to describe a tea in the 1857 text \"Miscellaneous Notes on Fujian\" by Shi Hongbao. In Taiwan, oolong teas are also known as () or \"dark green teas\" since early 2000. The term \"blue tea\" () in French is used to refer to oolong tea. Oolong teas share some characteristics with both green and black teas \u2013 they have light flavour notes but are often more complex in taste than green teas, and not as strong as black teas.\nThe manufacturing of oolong tea involves repeating stages to achieve the desired amount of bruising and browning of leaves. Withering, rolling, shaping, and firing are similar to the process for black tea, but much more attention to timing and temperature is necessary.\nPossible origins.\nThere are three widely espoused explanations of the origin of the name of Oolong tea. According to the \"tribute tea\" theory, oolong tea came directly from Dragon-Phoenix Tea Cake tribute tea. The name oolong tea replaced the old title when loose tea came into fashion. Since it was dark, long, and curly, it was called \"Black Dragon\" tea, leading to the Oolong name.\nVarieties.\nFujian.\nTea production in Fujian is concentrated in two regions: the Wuyi Mountains and Anxi County, Quanzhou. Both are major historical centers of oolong tea production in China.\nWuyi Mountains.\nThe most famous and expensive oolong teas are made here, and the production is still usually accredited as being organic. Some of the better known cliff teas are:\nGuangdong.\nSingle Bush \"Dancong\" () (\"Phoenix oolong\")\nDancong tea refers to a family of strip-style oolong teas from Guangdong Province. They are noted for their ability to naturally imitate the flavors and fragrances of various flowers and fruits, such as orange blossom, orchid, grapefruit, almond, ginger flower, etc.\nThe term \"dancong\" originally meant phoenix teas all picked from one tree. In recent times, though, it has become a generic term for all Phoenix Mountain oolongs. True dancongs are still produced, but are not common outside China.\nTaiwan.\nTea cultivation in Taiwan began in the 18th century. Since then, many of the teas which are grown in Fujian province have also been grown in Taiwan. Since the 1970s, the tea industry in Taiwan has expanded at a rapid rate, in line with the rest of the economy. Due to high domestic demand and a strong tea culture, most Taiwanese tea is bought and consumed in Taiwan.\nAs the weather in Taiwan is highly variable, tea quality may differ from season to season. Although the island is not particularly large, it is geographically varied, with high, steep mountains rising abruptly from low-lying coastal plains. The different weather patterns, temperatures, altitudes, and soil ultimately result in differences in the appearance, aroma, and flavour of the tea grown in Taiwan. In some mountainous areas, teas have been cultivated at ever higher elevations to produce a unique, sweet taste that fetches a premium price.\nPreparation.\nRecommended brewing techniques for oolong tea vary widely. One common method is to use a small steeping vessel, such as a gaiwan or Yixing clay teapot, with a higher than usual leaf to water ratio. Such vessels are used in the gongfu method of tea preparation, which involves multiple short steepings.\nFor a single infusion, 1- to 5-minute steepings are recommended, depending on personal preference. The recommended water temperature ranges from .\nCharacteristics.\nCaffeine.\nOolong contains caffeine, although the caffeine content in tea will vary based on terroir, when the leaf is plucked, and the production processes.\nTeaghrelins.\nSome semi-oxidized oolong teas contain acylated flavonoid tetraglycosides, named teaghrelins due to their ability to bind to ghrelin receptors. Teaghrelins were isolated from Chin-shin oolong tea and Shy\u2010jih\u2010chuen oolong tea and recently from other oolong tea varieties.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "22709", "revid": "128551", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22709", "title": "Okapi", "text": "Species of mammal\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Taxobox/core/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe okapi (; Okapia johnstoni), also known as the forest giraffe, zebra giraffe and Congolese giraffe, is an artiodactyl mammal that is endemic to the northeast Democratic Republic of the Congo in central Africa. However, non-invasive genetic identification has suggested that a population has occurred south-west of the Congo River as well. It is the only species in the genus Okapia. Although the okapi has striped markings reminiscent of zebras, it is most closely related to the giraffe. The okapi and the giraffe are the only living members of the family Giraffidae.\nThe okapi stands about tall at the shoulder and has a typical body length around . Its weight ranges from . It has a long neck, and large, flexible ears. Its coat is a chocolate to reddish brown, much in contrast with the white horizontal stripes and rings on the legs, and white ankles. Male okapis have short, distinct horn-like protuberances on their heads called ossicones, less than in length. Females possess hair whorls, and ossicones are absent.\nOkapis are primarily diurnal, but may be active for a few hours in darkness. They are essentially solitary, coming together only to breed. Okapis are herbivores, feeding on tree leaves and buds, grasses, ferns, fruits, and fungi. Rut in males and estrus in females does not depend on the season. In captivity, estrus cycles recur every 15 days. The gestational period is around 440 to 450 days long, following which usually a single calf is born. The juveniles are kept in hiding, and nursing takes place infrequently. Juveniles start taking solid food from three months, and weaning takes place at six months.\nOkapis inhabit canopy forests at altitudes of . The International Union for the Conservation of Nature and Natural Resources classifies the okapi as endangered. Major threats include habitat loss due to logging and human settlement. Illegal mining and extensive hunting for bushmeat and skin have also led to a decline in populations. The Okapi Conservation Project was established in 1987 to protect okapi populations.\nEtymology and taxonomy.\nAlthough the okapi was unknown to the Western world until the 20th century, it may have been depicted since the early fifth century BCE on the fa\u00e7ade of the Apadana at Persepolis, a gift from the Ethiopian procession to the Achaemenid kingdom.\nFor years, Europeans in Africa had heard of an animal that they came to call the African unicorn. It was brought to prominent European attention by speculation on its existence found in press reports covering Henry Morton Stanley's journeys in 1887. In his travelogue of exploring the Congo, Stanley mentioned a kind of donkey that the natives called the \"atti\", which scholars later identified as the okapi.\nWhen the British special commissioner in Uganda, Sir Harry Johnston, discovered some Pygmy inhabitants of the Congo being abducted by a showman for exhibition, he rescued them and promised to return them to their homes. The Pygmies fed Johnston's curiosity about the animal mentioned in Stanley's book. Johnston was puzzled by the okapi tracks the natives showed him; while he had expected to be on the trail of some sort of forest-dwelling horse, the tracks were of a cloven-hoofed beast.\nThough Johnston did not see an okapi himself, he did manage to obtain pieces of striped skin and eventually a skull. From this skull, the okapi was correctly classified as a relative of the giraffe; in 1901, the species was formally recognized as \"Okapia johnstoni\".\n\"Okapia johnstoni\" was first described as \"Equus johnstoni\" by English zoologist Philip Lutley Sclater in 1901. The generic name \"Okapia\" derives either from the Mbuba name or the related Lese Karo name , while the specific name (\"johnstoni\") is in recognition of Johnston, who first acquired an okapi specimen for science from the Ituri Forest.\nIn 1901, Sclater presented a painting of the okapi before the Zoological Society of London that depicted its physical features with some clarity. Much confusion arose regarding the taxonomical status of this newly discovered animal. Sir Harry Johnston himself called it a \"Helladotherium\", or a relative of other extinct giraffids. Based on the description of the okapi by Pygmies, who referred to it as a \"horse\", Sclater named the species \"Equus johnstoni\". Subsequently, zoologist Ray Lankester declared that the okapi represented an unknown genus of the Giraffidae, which he placed in its own genus, \"Okapia\", and assigned the name \"Okapia johnstoni\" to the species.\nIn 1902, Swiss zoologist Charles Immanuel Forsyth Major suggested the inclusion of \"O. johnstoni\" in the extinct giraffid subfamily Palaeotraginae. However, the species was placed in its own subfamily Okapiinae, by Swedish palaeontologist Birger Bohlin in 1926, mainly due to the lack of a cingulum, a major feature of the palaeotragids. In 1986, \"Okapia\" was finally established as a sister genus of \"Giraffa\" on the basis of cladistic analysis. The two genera together with \"Palaeotragus\" constitute the tribe Giraffini.\nEvolution.\nThe earliest members of the Giraffidae first appeared in the early Miocene in Africa, having diverged from the superficially deer-like climacoceratids. Giraffids spread into Europe and Asia by the middle Miocene in a first radiation. Another radiation began in the Pliocene, but was terminated by a decline in diversity in the Pleistocene. Several important primitive giraffids existed more or less contemporaneously in the Miocene (23\u201310 million years ago), including \"Canthumeryx\", \"Giraffokeryx\", \"Palaeotragus\", and \"Samotherium\". According to palaeontologist and author Kathleen Hunt, \"Samotherium\" split into \"Okapia\" (18 million years ago) and \"Giraffa\" (12 million years ago). However, J. D. Skinner argued that \"Canthumeryx\" gave rise to the okapi and giraffe through the latter three genera and that the okapi is the extant form of \"Palaeotragus\". The okapi is sometimes referred to as a living fossil, as it has existed as a species over a long geological time period, and morphologically resembles more primitive forms (e.g. \"Samotherium\").\nIn 2016, a genetic study found that the common ancestor of giraffe and okapi lived about 11.5\u00a0million years ago.\nDescription.\nThe okapi is a medium-sized giraffid, standing tall at the shoulder. Its average body length is about and its weight ranges from . It has a long neck, and large and flexible ears. In sharp contrast to the white horizontal stripes on the legs and white ankles, the okapi's coat is a chocolate to reddish brown. The distinctive stripes resemble those of a zebra. These features serve as an effective camouflage amidst dense vegetation. The face, throat, and chest are greyish white. Interdigital glands are present on all four feet, and are slightly larger on the front feet. Male okapis have short, hair-covered horn-like structures called ossicones, less than in length, which are similar in form and function to the ossicones of a giraffe. The okapi exhibits sexual dimorphism, with females taller on average, slightly redder, and lacking prominent ossicones, instead possessing hair whorls.\nThe okapi shows several adaptations to its tropical habitat. The large number of rod cells in the retina facilitate night vision, and an efficient olfactory system is present. The large auditory bullae of the temporal bone allow a strong sense of hearing. The dental formula of the okapi is 0.0.3.33.1.3.3. Teeth are low-crowned and finely cusped, and efficiently cut tender foliage. The large cecum and colon help in microbial digestion, and a quick rate of food passage allows for lower cell wall digestion than in other ruminants.\nThe okapi is easily distinguished from its nearest extant relative, the giraffe. It is much smaller than the giraffe and shares more external similarities with bovids and cervids. Ossicones are present only in the male okapi, while both sexes of giraffe possess this feature. The okapi has large palatine sinuses (hollow cavities in the palate), unique among the giraffids. Morphological features shared between the giraffe and the okapi include a similar gait \u2013 both use a pacing gait, stepping simultaneously with the front and the hind leg on the same side of the body, unlike other ungulates that walk by moving alternate legs on either side of the body \u2013 and a long, black tongue (longer in the okapi) useful for plucking buds and leaves, as well as for grooming.\nEcology and behaviour.\nOkapis are primarily diurnal, but may be active for a few hours in darkness. They are essentially solitary, coming together only to breed. They have overlapping home ranges and typically occur at densities around 0.6 animals per square kilometre. Male home ranges average , while female home ranges average . Males migrate continuously, while females are sedentary. Males often mark territories and bushes with their urine, while females use common defecation sites. Grooming is a common practice, focused at the earlobes and the neck. Okapis often rub their necks against trees, leaving a brown exudate.\nThe male is protective of his territory, but allows females to pass through the domain to forage. Males visit female home ranges at breeding time. Although generally tranquil, the okapi can kick and butt with its head to show aggression. As the vocal cords are poorly developed, vocal communication is mainly restricted to three sounds \u2014 \"chuff\" (contact calls used by both sexes), \"moan\" (by females during courtship) and \"bleat\" (by infants under stress). Individuals may engage in Flehmen response, a visual expression in which the animal curls back its upper lips, displays the teeth, and inhales through the mouth for a few seconds. The leopard is the main natural predator of the okapi.\nDiet.\nOkapis are herbivores, feeding on tree leaves and buds, branches, grasses, ferns, fruits, and fungi. They are unique in the Ituri Forest as they are the only known mammal that feeds solely on understory vegetation, where they use their tongues to selectively browse for suitable plants. The tongue is also used to groom their ears and eyes. They prefer to feed in treefall gaps. The okapi has been known to feed on over 100 species of plants, some of which are known to be poisonous to humans and other animals. Fecal analysis shows that none of those 100 species dominates the diet of the okapi. Staple foods comprise shrubs and lianas. The main constituents of the diet are woody, dicotyledonous species; monocotyledonous plants are not eaten regularly. In the Ituri forest, the okapi feeds mainly upon the plant families Acanthaceae, Ebenaceae, Euphorbiaceae, Flacourtiaceae, Loganiaceae, Rubiaceae, and Violaceae.\nReproduction.\nFemale okapis become sexually mature at about one-and-a-half years old, while males reach maturity after two years. Rut in males and estrus in females does not depend on the season. In captivity, estrous cycles recur every 15\u00a0days. The male and the female begin courtship by circling, smelling, and licking each other. The male shows his interest by extending his neck, tossing his head, and protruding one leg forward. This is followed by mounting and copulation.\nThe gestational period is around 440 to 450\u00a0days long, following which usually a single calf is born, weighing . The udder of the pregnant female starts swelling 2\u00a0months before parturition, and vulval discharges may occur. Parturition takes 3\u20134\u00a0hours, and the female stands throughout this period, though she may rest during brief intervals. The mother consumes the afterbirth and extensively grooms the infant. Her milk is very rich in proteins and low in fat.\nAs in other ruminants, the infant can stand within 30\u00a0minutes of birth. Although generally similar to adults, newborn calves have long hairs around the eye (resembling false eyelashes), a long dorsal mane, and long white hairs in the stripes. These features gradually disappear and give way to the general appearance within a year. The juveniles are kept in hiding, and nursing takes place infrequently. Calves are known not to defecate for the first month or two of life, which is hypothesized to help avoid predator detection in their most vulnerable phase of life. The growth rate of calves is appreciably high in the first few months of life, after which it gradually declines. Juveniles start taking solid food from 3\u00a0months, and weaning takes place at 6\u00a0months. Ossicone development in males takes 1\u00a0year after birth. The okapi's typical lifespan is 20\u201330\u00a0years.\nDistribution and habitat.\nThe okapi is endemic to the Democratic Republic of the Congo, where it occurs north and east of the Congo River. It ranges from the Maiko National Park northward to the Ituri rainforest, then through the river basins of the Rubi, Lake Tele, and Ebola to the west and the Ubangi River further north. Smaller populations exist west and south of the Congo River. It is also common in the Wamba and Epulu areas. It is extinct in Uganda.\nThe okapi inhabits canopy forests at elevations of . It occasionally uses seasonally inundated areas, but does not occur in gallery forests, swamp forests, and habitats disturbed by human settlements. In the wet season, it visits rocky inselbergs that offer forage uncommon elsewhere. Results of research conducted in the late 1980s in a mixed \"Cynometra\" forest indicated that the okapi population density averaged 0.53 animals per square kilometre. In 2008, it was recorded in Virunga National Park. There is also evidence that okapis were also observed in the Semuliki Valley in Uganda by Europeans, but later became extinct in the late 1970s. The Semuliki Valley provides a similar habitat to the Congo Basin.\nStatus.\nThreats and conservation.\nThe IUCN classifies the okapi as endangered. It is fully protected under Congolese law. The Okapi Wildlife Reserve and Maiko National Park support significant populations of the okapi, though a steady decline in numbers has occurred due to several threats. Other areas of occurrence are the Rubi Tele Hunting Reserve, the Abumombanzi Reserve, the \nSankuru Nature Reserve, the Lomami National Park. Major threats include habitat loss due to logging and human settlement. Extensive hunting for bushmeat and skin and illegal mining have also led to population declines. A threat that has emerged quite recently is the presence of illegal armed groups around protected areas, inhibiting conservation and monitoring actions. A small population occurs north of the Virunga National Park, but lacks protection due to the presence of armed groups in the vicinity. In June 2012, a gang of poachers attacked the headquarters of the Okapi Wildlife Reserve, killing six guards and other staff as well as all 14 okapis at their breeding center.\nThe Okapi Conservation Project, established in 1987, works towards the conservation of the okapi, as well as the growth of the indigenous Mbuti people. In November 2011, the White Oak Conservation center and Jacksonville Zoo and Gardens hosted an international meeting of the Okapi Species Survival Plan and the Okapi European Endangered Species Programme at Jacksonville, which was attended by representatives from zoos from the US, Europe, and Japan. The aim was to discuss the management of captive okapis and arrange support for okapi conservation. Many zoos in North America and Europe currently have okapis in captivity.\nOkapis in zoos.\nAround 100 okapis are in accredited Association of Zoos and Aquariums (AZA) zoos. The okapi population is managed in America by the AZA's Species Survival Plan, a breeding program that works to ensure genetic diversity in the captive population of endangered animals, while the EEP (European studbook) and ISB (Global studbook) are managed by Antwerp Zoo in Belgium, which was the first zoo to have an Okapi on display (in 1919), as well as one of the most successful in breeding them.\nIn 1937, the Bronx Zoo became the first in North America to acquire an okapi. With one of the most successful breeding programs, 13 calves have been born there between 1991 and 2011. The San Diego Zoo has exhibited okapis since 1956, and their first okapi calf was born in 1962. Since then, there have been more than 60 okapis born at the zoo and the nearby San Diego Zoo Safari Park, the most recent being Mosi, a male calf born on 21\u00a0July 2017 at the zoo. The Brookfield Zoo in Chicago has also greatly contributed to the captive population of okapis in accredited zoos. The zoo has had 28 okapi births since 1959.\nOther North American zoos that exhibit and breed okapis include: Denver Zoo and Cheyenne Mountain Zoo (Colorado); Houston Zoo, Dallas Zoo, and San Antonio Zoo (Texas); Disney's Animal Kingdom, White Oak Conservation, Zoo Miami, and ZooTampa at Lowry Park (Florida); Los Angeles Zoo, Sacramento Zoo, and San Diego Zoo (California); Saint Louis Zoo (Missouri); Cincinnati Zoo and Botanical Garden and Columbus Zoo and Aquarium (Ohio); Memphis Zoo and Nashville Zoo (Tennessee); The Maryland Zoo in Baltimore (Maryland); Sedgwick County Zoo and Tanganyika Wildlife Park (Kansas); Roosevelt Park Zoo (North Dakota); Henry Doorly Zoo and Aquarium (Nebraska); Philadelphia Zoo (Pennsylvania); Potawatomi Zoo (Indiana); Oklahoma City Zoo and Botanical Garden (Oklahoma); Blank Park Zoo (Iowa); and Potter Park Zoo (Michigan).\nIn Europe, zoos that exhibit and breed okapis include: Chester Zoo, London Zoo, Marwell Zoo, The Wild Place, and Yorkshire Wildlife Park (United Kingdom); Dublin Zoo (Ireland); Berlin Zoo, Frankfurt Zoo, Wilhelma Zoo, Wuppertal Zoo, Cologne Zoo, and Leipzig Zoo (Germany); Zoo Basel (Switzerland); Copenhagen Zoo (Denmark); Rotterdam Zoo and Safaripark Beekse Bergen (Netherlands); Antwerp Zoo (Belgium); Dv\u016fr Kr\u00e1lov\u00e9 Zoo (Czech Republic); Wroc\u0142aw Zoo (Poland); Bioparc Zoo de Dou\u00e9 and ZooParc de Beauval (France); and Lisbon Zoo (Portugal).\nIn Asia, three Japanese zoos exhibit okapis: Ueno Zoo in Tokyo; Kanazawa Zoo and Zoorasia in Yokohama.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "22710", "revid": "28979433", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22710", "title": "Ovary", "text": "Female reproductive organ that produces egg cells\nThe ovary (from la \" \u014dv\u0101rium\"\u00a0'egg') is a gonad in the female reproductive system that produces ova; when released, an ovum travels through the fallopian tube/oviduct into the uterus. There is an ovary on the left and the right side of the body. The ovaries are endocrine glands, secreting various hormones that play a role in the menstrual cycle and fertility. The ovary progresses through many stages beginning in the prenatal period through menopause.\nStructure.\nEach ovary is whitish in color and located alongside the lateral wall of the uterus in a region called the ovarian fossa. The ovarian fossa is the region that is bounded by the external iliac artery and in front of the ureter and the internal iliac artery. This area is about 4\u00a0cm x 3\u00a0cm x 2\u00a0cm in size.\nThe ovaries are surrounded by a capsule, and have an outer cortex and an inner medulla. The capsule is of dense connective tissue and is known as the tunica albuginea.\nUsually, ovulation occurs in one of the two ovaries releasing an egg each menstrual cycle.\nThe side of the ovary closest to the fallopian tube is connected to it by infundibulopelvic ligament, and the other side points downwards attached to the uterus via the ovarian ligament.\nOther structures and tissues of the ovaries include the hilum.\nLigaments.\nThe ovaries lie within the peritoneal cavity, on either side of the uterus, to which they are attached via a fibrous cord called the ovarian ligament. The ovaries are uncovered in the peritoneal cavity but are tethered to the body wall via the suspensory ligament of the ovary, which is a posterior extension of the broad ligament of the uterus. The part of the broad ligament of the uterus that covers the ovary is known as the mesovarium.\nThe ovarian pedicle is made up part of the fallopian tube, mesovarium, ovarian ligament, and ovarian blood vessels.\nMicroanatomy.\nThe surface of the ovaries is covered with a membrane consisting of a lining of simple cuboidal-to-columnar shaped mesothelium, called the germinal epithelium.\nThe outer layer is the ovarian cortex, consisting of ovarian follicles and stroma in between them. Included in the follicles are the cumulus oophorus, membrana granulosa (and the granulosa cells inside it), corona radiata, zona pellucida, and primary oocyte. Theca of follicle, antrum and liquor folliculi are also contained in the follicle. Also in the cortex is the corpus luteum derived from the follicles. The innermost layer is the ovarian medulla. It can be hard to distinguish between the cortex and medulla, but follicles are usually not found in the medulla.\nFollicular cells are flat epithelial cells that originate from surface epithelium covering the ovary. They are surrounded by granulosa cells that have changed from flat to cuboidal and proliferated to produce a stratified epithelium.\nThe ovary also contains blood vessels and lymphatics.\nFunction.\nAt puberty, the ovary begins to secrete increasing levels of hormones. Secondary sex characteristics begin to develop in response to the hormones. The ovary changes structure and function beginning at puberty. Since the ovaries are able to regulate hormones, they also play an important role in pregnancy and fertility. When egg cells (oocytes) are released from the fallopian tube, a variety of feedback mechanisms stimulate the endocrine system, which cause hormone levels to change. These feedback mechanisms are controlled by the hypothalamus and pituitary glands. Messages or signals from the hypothalamus are sent to the pituitary gland. In turn, the pituitary gland releases hormones to the ovaries. From this signaling, the ovaries release their own hormones.\nGamete production.\nThe ovaries are the site of production and periodical release of egg cells, the female gametes. In the ovaries, the developing egg cells (or oocytes) mature in the fluid-filled follicles. Typically, only one oocyte develops at a time, but others can also mature simultaneously. Follicles are composed of different types and number of cells according to the stage of their maturation, and their size is indicative of the stage of oocyte development.\nWhen an oocyte completes its maturation in the ovary, a surge of luteinizing hormone is secreted by the pituitary gland, which stimulates the release of the oocyte through the rupture of the follicle, a process called ovulation. The follicle remains functional and reorganizes into a corpus luteum, which secretes progesterone in order to prepare the uterus for an eventual implantation of the embryo.\nHormone secretion.\nAt maturity, ovaries secrete estrogen, androgen, inhibin, and progestogen. In women before menopause, 50% of testosterone is produced by the ovaries and released directly into the blood stream. The other 50% of testosterone in the blood stream is made from conversion of the adrenal pre-androgens ( DHEA and androstenedione) to testosterone in other parts of the body. Estrogen is responsible for the appearance of secondary sex characteristics for females at puberty and for the maturation and maintenance of the reproductive organs in their mature functional state. Progesterone prepares the uterus for pregnancy, and the mammary glands for lactation. Progesterone functions with estrogen by promoting menstrual cycle changes in the endometrium.\nOvarian aging.\nAs women age, they experience a decline in reproductive performance leading to menopause. This decline is tied to a decline in the number of ovarian follicles. Although about 1 million oocytes are present at birth in the human ovary, only about 500 (about 0.05%) of these ovulate, and the rest do not ovulate. The decline in ovarian reserve appears to occur at a constantly increasing rate with age, and leads to nearly complete exhaustion of the reserve by about age 52. As ovarian reserve and fertility decline with age, there is also a parallel increase in pregnancy failure and meiotic errors resulting in chromosomally abnormal conceptions. The ovarian reserve and fertility perform optimally around 20\u201330 years of age. Around 45 years of age, the menstrual cycle begins to change and the follicle pool decreases significantly. The events that lead to ovarian aging remain unclear. The variability of aging could include environmental factors, lifestyle habits or genetic factors.\nWomen with an inherited mutation in the DNA repair gene BRCA1 undergo menopause prematurely, suggesting that naturally occurring DNA damages in oocytes are repaired less efficiently in these women, and this inefficiency leads to early reproductive failure. The BRCA1 protein plays a key role in a type of DNA repair termed homologous recombinational repair that is the only known cellular process that can accurately repair DNA double-strand breaks. Titus et al. showed that DNA double-strand breaks accumulate with age in humans and mice in primordial follicles. Primordial follicles contain oocytes that are at an intermediate (prophase I) stage of meiosis. Meiosis is the general process in eukaryotic organisms by which germ cells are formed, and it is likely an adaptation for removing DNA damages, especially double-strand breaks, from germ line DNA (see Meiosis and Origin and function of meiosis). Homologous recombinational repair is especially promoted during meiosis. Titus et al. also found that expression of 4 key genes necessary for homologous recombinational repair of DNA double-strand breaks (BRCA1, MRE11, RAD51 and ATM) decline with age in the oocytes of humans and mice. They hypothesized that DNA double-strand break repair is vital for the maintenance of oocyte reserve and that a decline in efficiency of repair with age plays a key role in ovarian aging. A study identified 290 genetic determinants of ovarian ageing, also found that DNA damage response processes are implicated and suggests that possible effects of extending fertility in women would improve bone health, reduce risk of type 2 diabetes and increase the risk of hormone-sensitive cancers.\nA variety of testing methods can be used in order to determine fertility based on maternal age. Many of these tests measure levels of hormones FSH, and GnrH. Methods such as measuring AMH (anti-M\u00fcllerian hormone) levels, and AFC (antral follicule count) can predict ovarian aging. AMH levels serve as an indicator of ovarian aging since the quality of ovarian follicles can be determined.\nClinical significance.\nOvarian diseases can be classified as endocrine disorders or as a disorders of the reproductive system.\nIf the egg fails to release from the follicle in the ovary an ovarian cyst may form. Small ovarian cysts are common in healthy women. Some women have more follicles than usual (polycystic ovary syndrome), which inhibits the follicles to grow normally and this will cause cycle irregularities.\nSociety and culture.\nCryopreservation.\nCryopreservation of ovarian tissue, often called \"ovarian tissue cryopreservation\", is of interest to women who want to preserve their reproductive function beyond the natural limit, or whose reproductive potential is threatened by cancer therapy, for example in hematologic malignancies or breast cancer. The procedure is to take a part of the ovary and carry out slow freezing before storing it in liquid nitrogen whilst therapy is undertaken. Tissue can then be thawed and implanted near the fallopian, either orthotopic (on the natural location) or heterotopic (on the abdominal wall), where it starts to produce new eggs, allowing normal conception to take place. A study of 60 procedures concluded that ovarian tissue harvesting appears to be safe. The ovarian tissue may also be transplanted into mice that are immunocompromised (SCID mice) to avoid graft rejection, and tissue can be harvested later when mature follicles have developed.\nHistory.\nAristotle referred to ovarectomy in \"Historia Animalium\", in sows to stimulate growth and fatness, and in female war camels to sterilize them. However he believed that embryos are formed when the seed of a male (produced by the sperm ducts, rather than the testicles) plants into the soil of a female (probably referring to menstrual blood), and did not subscribe the gonads of significance in heredity. He also observed that spayed females cease to go into estrus.\nHerophilus was the first to describe the ovaries and the oviducts. He called the ovaries the \"female testes\", and gave the female equal credit with the male for producing the fetus. He thought the ovaries produced female seeds, and the testicles produced male seeds. The female seeds travel through the fallopian tubes and combine with the male seed in the uterus (not the fallopian tubes), thus producing an embryo. Soranus of Ephesus gave a detailed description of the ovaries.5 Galen in \"On Semen\" argued that both the testicles and the ovaries contribute to embryo, but the testicles contribute more since they are larger.\nVesalius, by dissecting women of reproductive age, discovered the follicles with fluid within \"white and like a milky serum\", as well as yellow stuff likely to be the corpus luteum. He also noted the ovaries are bumpy with ovulation stigmas. Fabricius observed that in the hen, yolk is formed in the ovary, while the white and the shell are formed during the transit through the oviduct. He also made the first illustration of the corpus luteum in \"De Formato Foetu\" (1604) and called it \"numerous conjoined little glands\". Carlo Ruini noted that the ovaries of fetal mare are up to 4 times as large as the mother's.\nNicolas Steno in 1667 hypothesized that the ovaries of mammals are analogous to the ovaries of birds, and thus they too contain eggs (rather than the \"female semen\"). In 1675 he described the ovaries of various animals, and hypothesized that she-mules are infertile because their ovaries do not produce eggs. De Graaf made a full-length study of the female reproductive system. He thought the whole follicle was an egg, and proved it by cooking and eating the liquid inside follicles and noting that it had the same color, taste, and consistency as cooked egg-white. He stated that the number of corpus luteum is the same as the number of fetuses, and it only occurs after coitus (he was observing rabbits, who have induced ovulation). He also thought the corpus luteum is the scar tissue left behind after the egg is shed from the ovary. He observed that the corpus luteum is yellow in cows, red in sheep red, and ashen in others. Drelincourt in 1685 suggested that the follicle is not the egg, and that the true egg is much smaller, and within the follicle. Malpighi speculated that the follicle never leaves the ovary, but remains within. The true egg is much smaller and within the follicle, and leaves the ovary. He also coined the word \"corpus luteum\" [Latin for \"yellow body\"] because he worked with the cow's ovaries, in which the corpus luteum is yellow. Boerhaave clearly stated the currently accepted theory that the ovum escapes from the ovary, leaving a scar tissue of corpus luteum, and pass down the fallopian tube, be fertilized by a sperm within the tube, then enters the uterus.\nThere was a controversy during the period about how reproduction works. Some like Harvey agreed with Aristotle that the ovaries are unimportant. Some like Wharton, Descartes, and Le Grand, agreed with Galen that the ovaries produced female semen that mixes with male semen to produce an embryo. The new \"ovism\" school like Steno and de Graaf thought the ovaries in mammals worked like the ovaries in birds: The entire follicle is an egg. The egg is fertilized in the ovary. Only fertilized eggs can leave the ovary. The new \"animalculism\" school believed only the sperm contained the generative principle.\nJohn Huner experimentally removed one ovary from a sow and compared her with a sow with two ovaries. He noted that the half-spayed sow became infertile after producing 76 piglets, but still continued to go into estrus. The other sow produced 162 piglets, thus he proposed that each ovary could produce a fixed number of offsprings. Percival Pott reported in 1775 that he removed two herniated ovaries from a woman, after which she became thinner, lost her large breasts, and ceased menstruation. This was the first accurate description of the effect of ovarectomy in humans. In 1827, von Baer first described and illustrated the mammalian egg within the follicle.\nAlbert Peuch in 1873 stated that spaying young sows prevented subsequent growth in uterus. Emil Knauer showed that transplanting ovaries into the abdominal cavity in spayed gods, rabbits, and guinea pigs prevented this uterine atrophy, similar to the testicle transplant experiment of Berthold in 1849. Prenant in 1898 concluded by histology that the corpus luteum was an endocrine gland. Vilhelm Magnus both showed independently in 1901 that spaying pregnant rabbits or removing their corpora lutea by thermocautery resulted in abortion or resorption of the embryos. Leo Loeb noted in 1906 that traumatizing the endometrium of a nonpregnant guinea pig or rabbit resulted in formation of placenta or deciduoma, but this did not happen if corpora lutea were removed. In 1915, Edmund Herrmann, an Austrian obstetrician, showed that a lipid extract of pig's corpora lutea produced a fully progestational endometrium when injected into immature rabbits. This line of work was continued by Corner and Allen, resulting in the discovery of progesterone. Leo Loeb also showed in 1911 that removing the corpora lutea hastened the next ovulation. (Makepeace \"et al\", 1937) showed specifically that injecting progesterone inhibited ovulation in rabbits. This eventually resulted in hormonal contraception.\nOther animals.\nBirds have only one functional ovary (the left), while the other remains vestigial. In mammals including humans, the female ovary is homologous to the male testicle, in that they are both gonads and endocrine glands. Ovaries of some kind are found in the female reproductive system of many invertebrates that employ sexual reproduction. However, they develop in a very different way in most invertebrates than they do in vertebrates, and are not truly homologous.\nMany of the features found in human ovaries are common to all vertebrates, including the presence of follicular cells, tunica albuginea, and so on. However, many species produce a far greater number of eggs during their lifetime than do humans, so that, in fish and amphibians, there may be hundreds, or even millions of fertile eggs present in the ovary at any given time. In these species, fresh eggs may be developing from the germinal epithelium throughout life. Corpora lutea are found only in mammals, and in some elasmobranch fish; in other species, the remnants of the follicle are quickly resorbed by the ovary. In birds, reptiles, and monotremes, the egg is relatively large, filling the follicle, and distorting the shape of the ovary at maturity.\nAmphibians and reptiles have no ovarian medulla; the central part of the ovary is a hollow, lymph-filled space.\nThe ovary of teleosts is also often hollow, but in this case, the eggs are shed into the cavity, which opens into the oviduct. Certain nematodes of the genus \"Philometra\" are parasitic in the ovary of marine fishes and can be spectacular, with females as long as , coiled in the ovary of a fish half this length. Although most female vertebrates have two ovaries, this is not the case in all species. In most birds and in platypuses, the right ovary never matures, so that only the left is functional. (Exceptions include the kiwi and some, but not all raptors, in which both ovaries persist.) In some elasmobranchs, only the right ovary develops fully. In the primitive jawless fish, and some teleosts, there is only one ovary, formed by the fusion of the paired organs in the embryo.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
