{"id": "23503", "revid": "17654814", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23503", "title": "Portland, Oregon", "text": "Most populous city in Oregon, U.S.\nPortland ( ) is the most populous city in the U.S. state of Oregon. Located in the Pacific Northwest at the confluence of the Willamette and Columbia rivers, it is the 28th-most populous city in the United States, sixth most populous on the West Coast, and third most populous in the Pacific Northwest (after Seattle and Vancouver, British Columbia) with a population of 652,503 at the 2020 census. The Portland metropolitan area, with over 2.54 million residents, is the 26th-largest metropolitan area in the nation. Almost half of Oregon's population resides within the Portland metro area. It is the county seat of Multnomah County, Oregon's most populous county.\nThe Portland area was shaped by massive ice-age floods. It was inhabited by the Chinookan peoples. European American settlers arrived in the 1840s. Portland was named after Portland, Maine, following a coin toss, which was itself named after England's Isle of Portland. In the 19th century, Portland became a major port and lumber center and gained a reputation for saloons and crime. The 20th century saw population growth, World War II shipbuilding, Japanese-American internment, organized crime, and a hippie/counterculture movement. Since the 1990s, it has experienced growth in the technology sector and rising housing costs. It saw major George Floyd protests in 2020\u20132021.\nPortland is located near volcanic features such as Mount Tabor and is also close to active faults. The city is divided into six addressing sectors and comprises diverse neighborhoods. Portland has a predominantly White population. The city\u2019s economy is driven by technology, athletic and outdoor brands, shipping, and craft industries. Social issues include homelessness and property crime, although recent trends indicate a low violent crime rate. The city prioritizes urban planning, sustainability, and diverse transportation options, while managing growth with an urban growth boundary. Portland also has numerous schools and universities, media outlets, healthcare facilities, and global sister-city connections.\nThe city operates with a mayor\u2013council government system, guided by a mayor and 12 city councilors, as well as Metro, the only directly elected metropolitan planning organization in the United States. Its climate is marked by warm, dry summers and cool, rainy winters. This climate is ideal for growing roses, and Portland has been called the \"City of Roses\" for more than a century. Portland is known for its vibrant music and performing arts scene, extensive parks including Forest Park, and professional sports teams such as the Trail Blazers, Timbers, and Thorns.\nHistory.\nBefore European settlement.\nDuring the prehistoric period, the land that would become Portland was flooded after the collapse of glacial dams from Lake Missoula, in what would later become Montana. These massive floods occurred during the last ice age and filled the Willamette Valley with of water.\nBefore American settlers began arriving in the 1800s, the land was inhabited for many centuries by two bands of indigenous Chinook people\u00a0\u2013 the Multnomah and the Clackamas. The Chinook people occupying the land were first documented in 1805 by Meriwether Lewis and William Clark. Before its European settlement, the Portland Basin of the lower Columbia River and Willamette River valleys had been one of the most densely populated regions on the Pacific Coast.\nEstablishment.\nLarge numbers of pioneer settlers began arriving in the Willamette Valley in the 1840s via the Oregon Trail with many arriving in nearby Oregon City. A new settlement then emerged ten miles from the mouth of the Willamette River, roughly halfway between Oregon City and Hudson's Bay Company's Fort Vancouver. This community was initially referred to as \"Stumptown\" and \"The Clearing\" because of the many trees cut down to allow for its growth. In 1843, William Overton saw potential in the new settlement but lacked the funds to file an official land claim. For 25 cents, Overton agreed to share half of the site with Asa Lovejoy of Boston.\nIn 1844, Overton sold his remaining half of the claim to Francis W. Pettygrove of Portland, Maine. Both Pettygrove and Lovejoy wished to rename \"The Clearing\" after their respective hometowns. This controversy was settled with a coin toss that Pettygrove won in a series of two out of three tosses, thereby providing Portland with its namesake. The coin used for this decision, now known as the Portland Penny, is on display in the headquarters of the Oregon Historical Society. At the time of its incorporation on February 8, 1851, Portland had over 800 inhabitants, a steam sawmill, a log cabin hotel, and a newspaper, the \"Weekly Oregonian\". A major fire swept through downtown in August 1873, destroying twenty blocks on the west side of the Willamette along Yamhill and Morrison Streets, and causing $1.3 million in damage, roughly equivalent to $ today. By 1879, the population had grown to 17,500 and by 1890 it had grown to 46,385. In 1888, the first steel bridge on the West Coast was opened in Portland, the predecessor of the 1912 namesake Steel Bridge that survives today. In 1889, Henry Pittock's wife, Georgiana, established the Portland Rose Society. The annual Portland Rose Festival\" is held here in June. The movement to make Portland a \"Rose City\" started as the city was preparing for the 1905 Lewis and Clark Centennial Exposition.\nPortland's access to the Pacific Ocean via the Willamette and Columbia rivers, as well as its easy access to the agricultural Tualatin Valley via the \"Great Plank Road\" (the route of current-day U.S. Route 26), provided the pioneer city with an advantage over other nearby ports, and it grew very quickly. Portland remained the major port in the Pacific Northwest for much of the 19th century, until the 1890s, when Seattle's deepwater harbor was connected to the rest of the mainland by rail, affording an inland route without the treacherous navigation of the Columbia River. The city had its own Japantown, for one, and the lumber industry also became a prominent economic presence, due to the area's large population of Douglas fir, western hemlock, red cedar, and big leaf maple trees.\nPortland developed a reputation early in its history as a hard-edged and gritty port town. Some historians have described the city's early establishment as being a \"scion of New England; an ends-of-the-earth home for the exiled spawn of the eastern established elite.\" In 1889, \"The Oregonian\" called Portland \"the most filthy city in the Northern States\", due to the unsanitary sewers and gutters, and, at the turn of the 20th century, it was considered one of the most dangerous port cities in the world. The city housed a large number of saloons, bordellos, gambling dens, and boarding houses which were populated with miners after the California gold rush, as well as the multitude of sailors passing through the port. By the early 20th century, the city had lost its reputation as a \"sober frontier city\" and garnered a reputation for being violent and dangerous.\n20th-century development.\nBetween 1900 and 1930, the city's population tripled from nearly 100,000 to 301,815.\nPortland enjoyed an economic and industrial surge during World War II. Ship builder Henry J. Kaiser had been awarded contracts to build Liberty ships and escort carriers, and chose sites in Portland and Vancouver, Washington, for shipyards. During this time, Portland's population rose by over 150,000, largely attributed to recruited laborers. The wartime shipbuilding boom in Portland also drew a large influx of African American migrants. This migration significantly expanded the city\u2019s Black population and laid the foundation for new community institutions, even as workers often faced discrimination in hiring and job assignments. The most decorated ship for a single action in US naval history, the USS Liberty, was constructed in Portland during the boom. Her keel was laid down on 23 February 1945, under a Maritime Commission contract at Oregon Shipbuilding Corporation.\nDuring World War II, Portland also housed an \"assembly center\" from which up to 3,676 people of Japanese descent were dispatched to internment camps in the heartland. It was the first American city to have residents report thus, and the Pacific International Livestock Exposition operated from May through September 10, 1942, processing people from the city, northern Oregon, and central Washington. General John DeWitt called the city the first \"Jap-free city on the West Coast\".\nAt the same time, Portland became a notorious hub for underground criminal activity and organized crime in the 1940s and 1950s. In 1957, \"Life\" magazine published an article detailing the city's history of government corruption and crime, specifically its gambling rackets and illegal nightclubs. The article, which focused on crime boss Jim Elkins, became the basis of a fictionalized film titled \"Portland Expos\u00e9\" (1957).\nDuring the 1960s, an influx of hippie subculture began to take root in the city in the wake of San Francisco's burgeoning countercultural scene. The city's Crystal Ballroom became a hub for the city's psychedelic culture, while food cooperatives and listener-funded media and radio stations were established. A large social activist presence evolved during this time as well, specifically concerning Native American rights, environmentalist causes, and gay rights. By the 1970s, Portland had well established itself as a progressive city, and experienced an economic boom for the majority of the decade; however, the slowing of the housing market in 1979 caused demand for the city and state timber industries to drop significantly.\nSince 1990.\nIn the 1990s, the technology industry began to emerge in Portland, specifically with the establishment of companies such as Intel, which brought more than US$10 billion in investments in 1995 alone. In the late 1990s, the Portland area was rated the fourth-least affordable place in the United States to purchase a new home. After 2000, Portland experienced significant growth, with a population rise of over 90,000 between 2000 and 2014. The city's increasing reputation for culture established it as a popular city for young people, and it was second only to Louisville, Kentucky, as one of the cities to attract and retain the highest number of college-educated people in the United States. Between 2001 and 2012, Portland's gross domestic product per person grew by fifty percent, more than any other city in the country.\nThe city acquired a diverse range of nicknames throughout its history, though it is most often called \"Rose City\" or \"The City of Roses\" (unofficial nickname since 1888, official since 2003). Another widely used nickname by local residents in everyday speech is \"PDX\", the airport code for Portland International Airport. Other nicknames include Bridgetown, Stumptown, Rip City, Soccer City, P-Town, Portlandia, and the more antiquated Little Beirut.\n2020 George Floyd protests.\nFrom May 28, 2020, until spring 2021, there were daily protests about the murder of George Floyd by police, and racial injustice. There were instances of looting, vandalism, and police actions causing injuries. One protestor was killed by an opposing one. Local businesses reported losses totaling millions of dollars as the result of vandalism and looting, according to Oregon Public Broadcasting. Some protests caused injury to protesters and police. In July, federal officers were deployed to safeguard federal property; their presence and tactics were criticized by Oregon officials, who demanded they leave, while lawsuits were filed against local and federal law enforcement alleging wrongful actions by them.\nOn May 25, 2021, a protest to commemorate the one-year anniversary of Floyd's murder caused property damage, and was followed by a number of arrests.\nGeography.\nGeology.\nPortland lies on top of a dormant volcanic field known as the Boring Lava Field, named after the nearby bedroom community of Boring. The Boring Lava Field has at least 32 cinder cones such as Mount Tabor, and its center lies in southeast Portland. Mount St. Helens, a highly active volcano northeast of the city in Washington state, is easily visible on clear days and is close enough to have dusted the city with volcanic ash after its eruption on May 18, 1980. The rocks of the Portland area range in age from late Eocene to more recent eras.\nMultiple shallow, active faults traverse the Portland metropolitan area. Among them are the Portland Hills Fault on the city's west side, and the East Bank Fault on the east side. According to a 2017 survey, several of these faults were characterized as \"probably more of a hazard\" than the Cascadia subduction zone due to their proximities to population centers, with the potential of producing magnitude 7 earthquakes. Notable earthquakes that have impacted the Portland area in recent history include the 6.8-magnitude Nisqually earthquake in 2001, and a 5.6-magnitude earthquake that struck on March 25, 1993.\nPer a 2014 report, over 7,000 locations within the Portland area are at high risk for landslides and soil liquefaction in the event of a major earthquake, including much of the city's west side (such as Washington Park) and sections of Clackamas County.\nTopography.\nPortland is east of the Pacific Ocean at the northern end of Oregon's most populated region, the Willamette Valley. Downtown Portland straddles the banks of the Willamette River, which flows north through the city center and separates the city's east and west neighborhoods. Less than from downtown, the Willamette River flows into the Columbia River, the fourth-largest river in the United States, which divides Oregon from Washington state. Portland is approximately upriver from the Pacific Ocean on the Columbia.\nThough much of downtown Portland is relatively flat, the foothills of the Tualatin Mountains, more commonly referred to locally as the \"West Hills\", pierce through the northwest and southwest reaches of the city. Council Crest Park at is often quoted as the highest point in Portland; however, the highest point in Portland is on a section of NW Skyline Blvd just north of Willamette Stone Heritage site. The highest point east of the river is Mt. Tabor, an extinct volcanic cinder cone, which rises to . Nearby Powell Butte and Rocky Butte rise to and , respectively. To the west of the Tualatin Mountains lies the Oregon Coast Range, and to the east lies the actively volcanic Cascade Range. On clear days, Mt. Hood and Mt. St. Helens dominate the horizon, while Mt. Adams and Mt. Rainier can also be seen in the distance.\nAccording to the United States Census Bureau, the city has an area of , of which is land and is water. Although almost all of Portland is within Multnomah County, small portions of the city are within Clackamas and Washington counties.\nClimate.\nPortland has a warm-summer Mediterranean climate (K\u00f6ppen \"Csb),\" falling just short of a hot-summer Mediterranean climate (K\u00f6ppen \"Csa)\" with cool and rainy winters, and warm and dry summers. This climate is characterized by having overcast, wet, and changing weather conditions in fall, winter, and spring, as Portland lies in the direct path of the stormy westerly flow, and warm, dry summers when the North Pacific High reaches its northernmost point in mid-summer. Portland's USDA Plant Hardiness Zone is 8b, with parts of the Downtown area falling into zone 9a.\nWinters are cool, cloudy, and rainy. The coldest month is December with an average daily high temperature of , although overnight lows usually remain above freezing by a few degrees. Evening temperatures fall to or below freezing 32 nights per year on average, but very rarely below . There are only 2.1 days per year where the daytime high temperature fails to rise above freezing; the mean for the lowest high is at the exact freezing point of . The lowest overnight temperature ever recorded was , on February 2, 1950, while the lowest daytime high temperature ever recorded was on January 15, 1888. The average window in which freezing temperatures may occur is between November 15 and March 19, allowing a growing season of 240 days.\nAnnual snowfall in Portland is , which usually falls between December and March. The city of Portland avoids snow more frequently than its suburbs, due in part to its low elevation and the urban heat island effect. Neighborhoods outside of the downtown core, especially in slightly higher elevations near the West Hills and Mount Tabor, can experience a dusting of snow while downtown receives no accumulation at all. The city has experienced a few major snow and ice storms in its past, with extreme totals having reached at the airport in 1949\u201350 and at downtown in 1892\u201393.\nSummers in Portland are warm, dry, and sunny, though the sunny warm weather is short-lived, from mid-June to early September. June, July, August and September account for a combined of total rainfall\u00a0\u2013 only 11% of the of annual precipitation. The warmest month is August, with an average high temperature of . Because of its inland location from the coast, as well as the protective nature of the Oregon Coast Range to its west, Portland summers are less susceptible to the moderating influence of the nearby Pacific Ocean. Consequently, Portland occasionally experiences heat waves, with temperatures rising above for a few days. However, on average, temperatures reach or exceed on only 61 days per year, of which 15 days will reach and only 1.3 days will reach . In 2018 more 90-degree days were recorded than ever before.\nOn June 28, 2021, Portland recorded its all-time record high temperature of and its warmest daily low temperature of during a major regional heat wave. The record had been broken for three consecutive days with daytime highs of on June 26 and on June 27; the previous record of was set on July 30, 1965 and matched on August 8 &amp; 10, 1981. A temperature of has been recorded in all five months from May through September. The warmest night of the year averages .\nSpring and fall can bring variable weather including high-pressure ridging that sends temperatures surging above and cold fronts that plunge daytime temperatures into the 40s \u00b0F (4\u20139\u00a0\u00b0C). However, lengthy stretches of overcast days beginning in mid-fall and continuing into mid-spring are most common. Rain often falls as a light drizzle for several consecutive days at a time, contributing to 157 days on average with measurable (\u2265) precipitation annually. Temperatures have reached as early as April 20 and as late as October 5, while has been reached as early as March 16 and as late as October 21. Thunderstorms are uncommon and tornadoes are very rare, although they do occur.\nCityscape.\nPortland's cityscape derives much of its character from the many bridges that span the Willamette River downtown, several of which are historic landmarks, and Portland has been nicknamed \"Bridgetown\" for many decades as a result. Three of downtown's most heavily used bridges are more than 100 years old and are designated historic landmarks: Hawthorne Bridge (1910), Steel Bridge (1912), and Broadway Bridge (1913). Portland's newest bridge in the downtown area, Tilikum Crossing, opened in 2015 and is the first new bridge to span the Willamette in Portland since the 1973 opening of the double-decker Fremont Bridge.\nOther bridges that span the Willamette River in the downtown area include the Burnside Bridge, the Ross Island Bridge (both built 1926), and the double-decker Marquam Bridge (built 1966). Other bridges outside the downtown area include the Sellwood Bridge (built 2016) to the south; and the St. Johns Bridge, a Gothic revival suspension bridge built in 1931, to the north. The Glenn L. Jackson Memorial Bridge and the Interstate Bridge provide access from Portland across the Columbia River into Washington state.\nAddressing sections.\nThe Willamette River, which flows north through downtown, serves as the natural boundary between East and West Portland. The denser and earlier-developed west side extends into the lap of the West Hills, while the flatter east side extends for roughly 180 blocks until it meets the suburb of Gresham. In 1891 the cities of Portland, Albina, and East Portland were consolidated, creating inconsistent patterns of street names and addresses. It was not unusual for a street name to be duplicated in disparate areas. The \"Great Renumbering\" on September 2, 1931, standardized street naming patterns and divided Portland into five \"general districts\", North, Northwest, Northeast, Southeast, and Southwest (which includes downtown Portland). House numbers were also changed from 20 per block to 100 per block and adopted a single street name on a grid. For example, the 200 block north of Burnside is either NW Davis Street or NE Davis Street throughout the entire city.\nWith the recent addition of South Portland, Portland now has six addressing sections. All addresses and streets within the city are prefixed by N, NW, NE, S, SW or SE with the exception of Burnside Street, which is prefixed with W or E. The Willamette River divides the city into east and west while Burnside, which traverses the entire city lengthwise, divides the north and south. Northeast, Southeast, Southwest, and Northwest Portland are respectively north or south of Burnside, and east or west of the Willamette. North Portland is a triangular peninsula bounded on the north by the Columbia River, on the east by N Williams Avenue, and on the west by the Willamette River as it bends to the northwest. South Portland was established on May 1, 2020, from a former part of Southwest Portland where the Willamette bends east of the nominal North-South meridian. House numbers numbers on east\u2013west streets in this area formerly had a leading zero, which was dropped as the street prefix (including north\u2013south streets) was changed from Southwest to South. For example, the current address of 246 S California St. was formerly 0246 SW California St. and the current address of 4310 S Macadam Ave. was formerly 4310 SW Macadam Ave.\nThe new South Portland addressing section was approved by the Portland City Council on June 6, 2018 and is bounded by SW Naito Parkway, SW View Point Terrace and the Tryon Creek State Natural Area to the west, SW Clay Street to the north, the Willamette River to the east, and city limits to the south. In 2018, the city's Bureau of Transportation finalized a plan to transition this part of Portland into South Portland, beginning on May 1, 2020, to reduce confusion by 9-1-1 dispatchers and delivery services. With the addition of South Portland, all six addressing sectors (N, NE, NW, S, SE and SW) are now officially known as sextants.\nNeighborhoods.\nThe five previous addressing sections of Portland, which were colloquially known as quadrants despite there being five, have developed distinctive identities, with mild cultural differences and friendly rivalries between their residents, especially between those who live east of the Willamette River versus west of the river.\nThe Pearl District in Northwest Portland, which was largely occupied by warehouses, light industry and railroad classification yards in the early to mid-20th century, now houses upscale art galleries, restaurants, and retail stores, and is one of the wealthiest neighborhoods in the city. Areas further west of the Pearl District include neighborhoods known as Uptown and Nob Hill, as well as the Alphabet District and NW 23rd Ave., a major shopping street lined with clothing boutiques and other upscale retail, mixed with cafes and restaurants.\nNortheast Portland is home to the Lloyd District, Alberta Arts District, and the Hollywood District. North Portland is largely residential and industrial. It contains Kelley Point Park, the northernmost point of the city. It also contains the St. Johns neighborhood, which is historically one of the most ethnically diverse and poorest neighborhoods in the city.\nOld Town Chinatown is next to the Pearl District in Northwest Portland. In 1890 it was the second largest Chinese community in the United States. In 2017, the crime rate was several times above the city average. This neighborhood has been called Portland's skid row.\nSouthwest Portland is largely residential. Downtown district, made up of commercial businesses, museums, skyscrapers, and public landmarks represents a small area within the southwest address section. Portland's South Waterfront area has been developing into a dense neighborhood of shops, condominiums, and apartments starting in the mid-2000s. Development in this area is ongoing. The area is served by the Portland Streetcar, the MAX Orange Line and four TriMet bus lines. This former industrial area sat as a brownfield prior to development in the mid-2000s.\nSoutheast Portland is largely residential, and consists of several neighborhoods, including Hawthorne District, Belmont, Brooklyn, and Mount Tabor. Reed College, a private liberal arts college that was founded in 1908, is located within the confines of Southeast Portland as is Mount Tabor, a volcanic landform.\nSouth Portland includes the Lair Hill, Johns Landing and South Waterfront districts and Lewis &amp; Clark College as well as the Riverdale area of unincorporated Multnomah County south of the Portland city limits.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\nEthnicity.\nThe 2020 census reported the city as 68.8% White (449,025 people), 8.1% Asian (52,854), 5.9% Black or African American (38,217), 1.1% Native American (7,335), 0.6% Pacific Islander (3,919), and 10.7% from two or more races (69,898). 11.1% were Hispanic or Latino, of any race (72,336). Whites not of Hispanic origin made up 66.4% of the total population.\nThe 2010 census reported the city as 76.1% White (444,254 people), 7.1% Asian (41,448), 6.3% Black or African American (36,778), 1.0% Native American (5,838), 0.5% Pacific Islander (2,919), 4.7% belonging to two or more racial groups (24,437) and 5.0% from other races (28,987). 9.4% were Hispanic or Latino, of any race (54,840). Whites not of Hispanic origin made up 72.2% of the total population.\nIn 1940, Portland's African-American population was approximately 2,000 and largely consisted of railroad employees and their families. During the war-time Liberty Ship construction boom, the need for workers drew many Black people to the city. The new influx of Black people settled in specific neighborhoods, such as the Albina district and Vanport. The May 1948 flood which destroyed Vanport eliminated the only integrated neighborhood, and an influx of blacks into the northeast quadrant of the city continued. Portland's longshoremen racial mix was described as being \"lily-white\" in the 1960s when the local International Longshore and Warehouse Union declined to represent grain handlers since some were black.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Pie chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\nOver two-thirds of Oregon's African-American residents live in Portland. As of the 2000 census, three of its high schools (Cleveland, Lincoln and Wilson) were over 70% White, reflecting the overall population, while Jefferson High School was 87% non-White. The remaining six schools have a higher number of non-Whites, including Blacks and Asians. Hispanic students average from 3.3% at Wells to 31% at Roosevelt.\nPortland residents identifying solely as Asian Americans account for 7.1% of the population; an additional 1.8% is partially of Asian heritage. Vietnamese Americans make up 2.2% of Portland's population, and make up the largest Asian ethnic group in the city, followed by Chinese (1.7%), Filipinos (0.6%), Japanese (0.5%), Koreans (0.4%), Laotians (0.4%), Hmong (0.2%), and Cambodians (0.1%). A small population of Iu Mien live in Portland. Portland has two Chinatowns, with New Chinatown in the 'Jade District' along SE 82nd Avenue with Chinese supermarkets, Hong Kong style noodle houses, dim sum, and Vietnamese ph\u1edf restaurants.\nWith about 12,000 Vietnamese residing in the city proper, Portland has one of the largest Vietnamese populations in America per capita. According to statistics, there are over 4,500 Pacific Islanders in Portland, making up 0.7% of the city's population. There is a Tongan community in Portland, who arrived in the area in the 1970s, and Tongans and Pacific Islanders as a whole are one of the fastest-growing ethnic groups in the Portland area.\nPortland's population has been and remains predominantly White. In 1940, Whites were over 98% of the city's population. In 2009, Portland had the fifth-highest percentage of White residents among the 40 largest U.S. metropolitan areas. A 2007 survey of the 40 largest cities in the U.S. concluded Portland's urban core has the highest percentage of White residents. Some scholars have noted the Pacific Northwest as a whole is \"one of the last Caucasian bastions of the United States\". While Portland's diversity was historically comparable to metro Seattle and Salt Lake City, those areas grew more diverse in the late 1990s and 2000s. Portland not only remains White, but migration to Portland is disproportionately White.\nThe Oregon Territory banned African American settlement in 1849. In the 19th century, certain laws allowed the immigration of Chinese laborers but prohibited them from owning property or bringing their families. The early 1920s saw the rapid growth of the Ku Klux Klan, which became very influential in Oregon politics, culminating in the election of Walter M. Pierce as governor.\nThe largest influxes of minority populations occurred during World War II, as the African American population grew by a factor of 10 for wartime work. After World War II, the Vanport flood in 1948 displaced many African Americans. As they resettled, redlining directed the displaced workers from the wartime settlement to neighboring Albina. There and elsewhere in Portland, they experienced police hostility, lack of employment, and mortgage discrimination, leading to half the black population leaving after the war.\nIn the 1980s and 1990s, radical skinhead groups flourished in Portland. In 1988, Mulugeta Seraw, an Ethiopian immigrant, was killed by three skinheads. The response to his murder involved a community-driven series of rallies, campaigns, nonprofits and events designed to address Portland's racial history, leading to a city considered significantly more tolerant than in 1988 at Seraw's death.\n76% of Latinos in Portland are of Mexican heritage. Italians and Russian Jews had a very visible presence in Portland. Portland also has a historic Roma population.\nHouseholds.\nAs of the 2010 census, there were 583,776 people living in the city, organized into 235,508 households. The population density was 4,375.2 people per square mile. There were 265,439 housing units at an average density of . Population growth in Portland increased 10.3% between 2000 and 2010. Population growth in the Portland metropolitan area has outpaced the national average during the last decade, and this is expected to continue over the next 50 years.\nOut of 223,737 households, 24.5% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 38.1% were married couples living together, 10.8% had a female householder with no husband present, and 47.1% were non-families. 34.6% of all households were made up of individuals, and 9% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.3 and the average family size was 3. The age distribution was 21.1% under the age of 18, 10.3% from 18 to 24, 34.7% from 25 to 44, 22.4% from 45 to 64, and 11.6% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 35 years. For every 100 females, there were 97.8 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 95.9 males.\nThe median income for a household in the city was $40,146, and the median income for a family was $50,271. Males had a reported median income of $35,279 versus $29,344 reported for females. The per capita income for the city was $22,643. 13.1% of the population and 8.5% of families were below the poverty line. Out of the total population, 15.7% of those under the age of 18 and 10.4% of those 65 and older were living below the poverty line. Figures delineating the income levels based on race are not available at this time. According to the Modern Language Association, in 2010 80.9% (539,885) percent of Multnomah County residents ages 5 and over spoke English as their primary language at home. 8.1% of the population spoke Spanish (54,036), with Vietnamese speakers making up 1.9%, and Russian 1.5%.\nSocial.\nThe Portland metropolitan area has historically had a significant LGBT population throughout the late 20th and early 21st century. In 2015, the city metro had the second highest percentage of LGBT residents in the United States with 5.4% of residents identifying as gay, lesbian, bisexual, or transgender, second only to San Francisco. In 2006, it was reported to have the seventh highest LGB population in the country, with 8.8% of residents identifying as gay, lesbian, or bisexual, and the metro ranking fourth in the nation at 6.1%. The city held its first pride festival in 1975 on the Portland State University campus.\nReligion.\nPortland has been cited as the least religious city in the United States with over 42% of residents identifying as religiously \"unaffiliated\", according to the nonpartisan and nonprofit Public Religion Research Institute's American Values Atlas.\nHomelessness.\nA 2019 survey by the city's budget office showed that homelessness is perceived as the top challenge facing Portland, and was cited as a reason people move and do not participate in park programs. Calls to 911 concerning \"unwanted persons\" have significantly increased between 2013 and 2018, and the police are increasingly dealing with homeless and mentally ill. Homelessness has taken a toll on the sense of safety among visitors, and residents and business owners are adversely impacted. Even though homeless services and shelter beds have increased, as of 2020 homelessness is considered an intractable problem in Portland. \nWhen encampments were being cleared in the Springwater Corridor in 2016, a community member from the nearby Lents neighborhood raised concerns that those campers were simply moving to their neighborhood. An aide, Lucas Hillier from then mayor Charlie Hales's office publicly mocked the citizen on a Facebook post that it's nothing compared to the Springwater Corridor camp referencing a KPTV story writing \"You think that one is bad, check out this douchebag.\" While the aide issued an apology, the citizen commented that the mayor's office was very disconnected from issuez faced by their constituents. As of 2020, Lucas Hillier manages the campsite cleanup program for the city.\nThe proposed budget for 2022\u201323 includes $5.8MM to buy land for affordable housing, and $36MM to equip and operate \"safe rest villages\". A 2022 initiative approved by the Portland city council makes homeless camping illegal, eventually requiring homeless individuals to move into mass shelters.\nPortland voters passed the Supportive Housing Services tax in 2020. In 2019, the reported number of homelessness was around 4,000 people. That number rose to over 10,000, though some of that increase was due to a change in counting methods in 2022.\nCrime.\nAccording to the Federal Bureau of Investigation's Uniform Crime Report in 2009, Portland ranked 53rd in violent crime out of the top 75 U.S. cities with a population greater than 250,000. The murder rate in Portland in 2013 averaged 2.3 murders per 100,000 people per year, which was lower than the national average. In 2011, 72% of arrested male subjects tested positive for illegal drugs and the city was dubbed the \"deadliest drug market in the Pacific Northwest\" due to drug related deaths.\nIn the Portland Metropolitan statistical area which includes Clackamas, Columbia, Multnomah, Washington, and Yamhill Counties, OR and Clark and Skamania Counties, WA for 2017, the murder rate was 2.6, violent crime was 283.2 per 100,000 people per year. In 2017, the population within the city of Portland was 649,408 and there were 24 murders and 3,349 violent crimes.\nIn the years following the Covid Pandemic, the city saw an increase in crime with car theft rates in Portland reaching the fifth highest of any US metropolitan area in 2023 with more than 11,000 vehicles stolen in 2022, up from 6,500 in 2019.\"\nSimilarly, an increase in violent crime peaked in 2022 with a record 101 homicides. In 2021, Portland recorded 90 homicides, compared with 20 in 2016, and 27 in 2017.\nAs of 2025[ [update]], violent crime in the city saw a marked decline, representing the highest drop of any city covered by the Major City Chiefs Mid Year Report at a 51% decrease from 2024. However, Portland has the second highest property crime per 100,000 population in the United States. The city saw just 17 homicides in the period from Jan 1, 2025 to June 30 as opposed to 35 during the same time frame in the previous year. Car theft also saw a significant decrease starting in 2024, with the city seeing the lowest number of cars stolen since recording began in 2015.\nEconomy.\nPortland's location is beneficial for several industries. Relatively low energy cost, accessible resources, north\u2013south and east\u2013west Interstates, international air terminals, large marine shipping facilities, and both west coast intercontinental railroads are all economic advantages.\nThe city's marine terminals alone handle over 13 million tons of cargo per year, and the port is home to one of the largest commercial dry docks in the country. The Port of Portland is the third-largest export tonnage port on the west coast of the U.S., and being about upriver, it is the largest fresh-water port.\nThe scrap steel industry's history in Portland predates World War II. Radius Recycling (formerly Schnitzer Steel), a major scrap recycler is headquartered in the KOIN Tower in Portland. Other heavy industry companies in Portland include ESCO Group, and Evraz Oregon Steel Mills.\nTechnology is a major component of the city's economy, with more than 1,200 technology companies existing within the metro. This high density of technology companies has led to the nickname Silicon Forest being used to describe the Portland area, a reference to the abundance of trees in the region and to the Silicon Valley region in Northern California. The area also hosts facilities for software companies and online startup companies, some supported by local seed funding organizations and business incubators. Computer components manufacturer Intel is the Portland area's largest employer, providing jobs for more than 15,000 people, with several campuses to the west of central Portland in the city of Hillsboro.\nThe Portland metro area has become a business cluster for athletic/outdoor gear and footwear manufacturer's headquarters. The area is home to the global, North American or U.S. headquarters of Nike (the only Fortune 500 company headquartered in Oregon), Adidas, Columbia Sportswear, LaCrosse Footwear, Dr. Martens, Li-Ning, Keen, Hi-Tec Sports, and Snow Peak. While headquartered elsewhere, Merrell, Amer Sports and Under Armour have design studios and local offices in the Portland area.\nOther notable Portland-based companies include industrial goods and metal fabrication company Precision Castparts, film animation studio Laika; commercial vehicle manufacturer Daimler Trucks North America; shipbuilding and ship repair company Vigor Marine Group; advertising firm Wieden+Kennedy; bankers Umpqua Holdings; child care and early childhood education provider KinderCare Learning Centers; and retailers Fred Meyer, New Seasons Market, Storables, and Powell's Books.\nBreweries are another major industry in Portland, which is home to 139 breweries/microbreweries, the 7th most in the nation, as of December 2018. Additionally, the city boasts a robust coffee culture that now rivals Seattle and hosts over 20 coffee roasters.\nTop Employers.\nAs of 2024[ [update]], Portland's top employers were:\nHousing.\nIn 2016, home prices in Portland grew faster than in any other city in the United States. Apartment rental costs in Portland reported in November 2019 was $1,337 for two bedroom and $1,133 for one bedroom.\nIn 2017, developers projected an additional 6,500 apartments to be built in the Portland Metro Area over the next year. However, as of December 2019, the number of homes available for rent or purchase in Portland continues to shrink. Over the past year, housing prices in Portland have risen 2.5%. Housing prices in Portland continue to rise, the median price rising from $391,400 in November 2018 to $415,000 in November 2019. There has been a rise of people from out of state moving to Portland, which impacts housing availability. Because of the demand for affordable housing and influx of new residents, more Portlanders in their 20s and 30s are still living in their parents' homes. There is a considerable amount of \"Airbnb type\" rentals in the city. An audit in 2018 located around 4,600 listings, of which 80% were illegally operated.\nTax Policy.\nPortland has no sales tax, and residents face some of the highest taxes in the United States. The state levies the sixth highest income tax on individuals, the top begins in at $125,000. Including local taxes, Portland Oregon has the 2nd highest top marginal rate in the United States at 14.7737%. The city rates ranks first for S-Corporations, Partnerships and LLCs and first for C-Corporations. In addition to state taxes, Portland has the nation's fifth-highest effective property tax rate on median-valued homes among major cities and the 13th highest rate for commercial property taxes. The city also imposes a 1% Clean Energy Surcharge on business with more than $1 billion in worldwide receipts and more than $500k in Portland revenue.\nIn 2020, Portland voters passed bills to impose a Supportive Housing Services tax and a Preschool for All Personal Income tax. The goal of the Supportive Housing Services tax was to raise $250 million annually to address homelessness across greater Portland by levying a 1% tax on income above $125,000 for individuals or $200,000 for couples filing jointly, and a 1% business income tax on net income for business with receipts above $5 million. The Preschool for All tax is 1.5% on $125k individual / $200k joint filers and an additional 1.5% on income over $250k individuals / $400k joint. Both rates are expected to increase by 0.8% in 2027.\nArts and culture.\nMusic, film, and performing arts.\nPortland is home to a range of classical performing arts institutions including the Portland Opera, Portland Baroque Orchestra, Oregon Symphony and Portland Youth Philharmonic; the last of these, established in 1924, was the first youth orchestra established in the United States. The city is also home to several theaters and performing arts institutions including the Oregon Ballet Theatre, Northwest Children's Theatre, Portland Center Stage, Artists Repertory Theatre, Curious Comedy Theatre and Miracle Theatre.\nIn 2013, \"The Guardian\" named the city's music scene as one of the \"most vibrant\" in the United States. Portland is home to famous bands such as the Kingsmen and Paul Revere &amp; the Raiders, both famous for their association with the song \"Louie Louie\" (1963). Other widely known musical groups include the Dandy Warhols, Quarterflash, Everclear, Pink Martini, Sleater-Kinney, Blitzen Trapper, the Decemberists, and Elliott Smith. More recently, Portugal. The Man, Modest Mouse, and the Shins have made their home in Portland. In the 1980s, the city was home to a burgeoning punk scene, which included bands such as the Wipers and Dead Moon. The city's now-demolished Satyricon nightclub was a punk venue where Nirvana frontman Kurt Cobain first encountered his future wife and Hole frontwoman Courtney Love in 1990. Love was then a resident of Portland and started several bands there with Kat Bjelland, later of Babes in Toyland. Multi-Grammy award-winning jazz artist Esperanza Spalding is from Portland and performed with the Chamber Music Society of Oregon at a young age.\nA wide range of films have been shot in Portland, from various independent features to major big-budget productions. Director Gus Van Sant has notably set and shot many of his films in the city. The city has also been featured in various television programs, notably the IFC sketch comedy series \"Portlandia\". The series, which ran for eight seasons from 2011 to 2018, was shot on location in Portland, and satirized the city as a hub of liberal politics, organic food, alternative lifestyles, and anti-establishment attitudes. MTV's long-time running reality show \"The Real World\" was also shot in Portland for the show's 29th season: \"\" premiered on MTV in 2013. Other television series shot in the city include \"Leverage\", \"The Librarians\", \"Under Suspicion\", \"Grimm\", and \"Nowhere Man\".\nAn unusual feature of Portland entertainment is the large number of movie theaters serving beer, often with second-run or revival films. Notable examples of these \"brew and view\" theaters include the Bagdad Theater and Pub, a former vaudeville theater built in 1927 by Universal Studios; Cinema 21; and the Laurelhurst Theater, in operation since 1923. Portland hosts the world's longest-running H. P. Lovecraft Film Festival at the Hollywood Theatre.\nMuseums and recreation.\nPortland is home to numerous museums and educational institutions, ranging from art museums to institutions devoted to science and wildlife. Among the science-oriented institutions are the Oregon Museum of Science and Industry (OMSI), which consists of five main halls and other ticketed attractions, such as the submarine, the ultra-large-screen Empirical Theater (which replaced an OMNIMAX theater in 2013), and the Kendall Planetarium. The World Forestry Center Discovery Museum, located in the city's Washington Park area, offers educational exhibits on forests and forest-related subjects. Also located in Washington Park are the Hoyt Arboretum, the International Rose Test Garden, the Japanese Garden, and the Oregon Zoo.\nThe Portland Art Museum owns the city's largest art collection and presents a variety of touring exhibitions each year and, with the recent addition of the Modern and Contemporary Art wing, it became one of the United States' 25 largest museums. The Oregon Historical Society Museum, founded in 1898, which has a variety of books, film, pictures, artifacts, and maps dating back throughout Oregon's history. It houses permanent and temporary exhibits about Oregon history, and hosts traveling exhibits about the history of the United States.\nOaks Amusement Park, in the Sellwood district of Southeast Portland, is the city's only amusement park and is also one of the country's longest-running amusement parks. It has operated since 1905 and was known as the \"Coney Island of the Northwest\" upon its opening.\nCuisine and breweries.\nFood carts are extremely popular within the city, with over 600 licensed carts. The city is home to Stumptown Coffee Roasters as well as dozens of other micro-roasteries and cafes.\nPortland has 58 active breweries within city limits, and 70+ within the surrounding metro area. and data compiled by the Brewers Association ranks Portland seventh in the United States as of 2018.\nPortland hosts a number of festivals throughout the year that celebrate beer and brewing, including the Oregon Brewers Festival, held in Tom McCall Waterfront Park. Held each summer during the last full weekend of July, it is the largest outdoor craft beer festival in North America, with over 70,000 attendees in 2008. Other major beer festivals throughout the calendar year include the Spring Beer and Wine Festival in April, the North American Organic Brewers Festival in June, the Portland International Beerfest in July, and the Holiday Ale Festival in December.\nSustainability.\nThe city became a pioneer of state-directed metropolitan planning, a program which was instituted statewide in 1969 to compact the urban growth boundaries of the city. Portland was the first city to enact a comprehensive plan to reduce carbon dioxide emissions.\nFree speech and public nudity.\nStrong free speech protections of the Oregon Constitution upheld by the Oregon Supreme Court in \"State v. Henry\", specifically found that full nudity and lap dances in strip clubs are protected speech. Portland has the highest number of strip clubs per-capita in a city in the United States, and Oregon ranks as the highest state for per-capita strip clubs.\nIn November 2008, a Multnomah County judge dismissed charges against a nude bicyclist arrested on June 26, 2008. The judge stated that the city's annual World Naked Bike Ride\u00a0\u2013 held each year in June since 2004\u00a0\u2013 has created a \"well-established tradition\" in Portland where cyclists may ride naked as a form of protest against cars and fossil fuel dependence. The defendant was not riding in the official World Naked Bike Ride at the time of his arrest as it had occurred 12 days earlier that year, on June 14.\nPublic art.\nThe city of Portland has over 400 pieces of permanently sited public art. One of the oldest pieces of public art in the city is Skidmore Fountain, which was completed in 1888. Most pieces are maintained by the Regional Arts &amp; Culture Council, an organization that is partially funded by the city government. Several outdoor statues, sculptures, and monuments were removed or vandalized following the 2020 George Floyd protests. A percent for art ordinance was passed by Portland's city council in 1980 to allocate funding for public artwork in the capital budgets of major city projects.\nSports.\nPortland is home to three major league sports franchises: the Portland Trail Blazers of the NBA, the Portland Timbers of Major League Soccer (MLS), and the Portland Thorns FC of the National Women's Soccer League. In 2015, the Timbers won the MLS Cup, which was the first male professional sports championship for a team from Portland since the Trail Blazers won the NBA championship in 1977.\nDespite being the 19th most populated metro area in the United States, Portland contains only one franchise from the four major sports leagues (NFL, NBA, NHL, MLB), making it the United States' second most populated metro area with that distinction, behind San Antonio, which also has only an NBA team (the Spurs). The city has been often rumored to receive an additional franchise, although efforts to acquire a team have failed due to stadium funding issues. An organization known as the Portland Diamond Project (PDP) has worked with MLB and local government, and there are plans to have an MLB stadium constructed at Zidell Yards in the South Waterfront neighborhood. The PDP has not yet received the funding for this project.\nOn September 18, 2024, it was announced that the city would receive a WNBA franchise named the Portland Fire, slated to start in 2026.\nPortland sports fans are characterized by their passionate support. The Trail Blazers sold out every home game between 1977 and 1995, a span of 814 consecutive games, the second-longest streak in American sports history. The Timbers joined MLS in 2011 and sold out 163 consecutive games through March 8, 2020, when they played their final home game prior to MLS suspending the season due to the COVID-19 pandemic. The Timbers season ticket waiting list has reached over 10,000, the longest waiting list in MLS. In 2015, they became the first team in the Northwest to win the MLS Cup. Player Diego Valeri marked a new record for fastest goal in MLS Cup history at 27 seconds into the game.\nThe annual Cambia Portland Classic women's golf tournament in September, now in its 50th year, is the longest-running non-major tournament on the LPGA Tour, plays in the southern suburb of West Linn.\nTwo rival universities exist within Portland city limits: the University of Portland Pilots and the Portland State University Vikings, both of whom field teams in popular spectator sports including soccer, baseball, and basketball. Portland State also has a football team. Additionally, the University of Oregon Ducks (in Eugene) and the Oregon State University Beavers (in Corvallis) both receive substantial attention and support from many Portland residents, despite their campuses being 110 and 84 miles from the city, respectively.\nRunning is a popular activity in Portland, and every year the city hosts the Portland Marathon as well as parts of the Hood to Coast Relay, the world's largest long-distance relay race (by number of participants). Portland served as the center to an elite running group, the Nike Oregon Project until its 2019 disbandment following coach Alberto Salazar's ban due to doping violations.\nHistoric Erv Lind Stadium is located in Normandale Park. It has been home to professional and college softball.\nPortland also hosts numerous cycling events and has become an elite bicycle racing destination. The Oregon Bicycle Racing Association supports hundreds of official bicycling events every year. Weekly events at Alpenrose Velodrome and Portland International Raceway allow for racing nearly every night of the week from March through September. Cyclocross races, such as the Cross Crusade, can attract over 1,000 riders and spectators.\nParks and recreation.\nParks and greenspace planning date back to John Charles Olmsted's 1903 \"Report to the Portland Park Board\". In 1995, voters in the Portland metropolitan region passed a regional bond measure to acquire valuable natural areas for fish, wildlife, and people. Ten years later, more than of ecologically valuable natural areas had been purchased and permanently protected from development.\nPortland is one of only four cities in the U.S. with extinct volcanoes within its boundaries (along with Pilot Butte in Bend, Oregon, Jackson Volcano in Jackson, Mississippi, and Diamond Head in Honolulu, Hawaii). Mount Tabor Park is known for its scenic views and historic reservoirs.\nForest Park is the largest wilderness park within city limits in the United States, covering more than . Portland is also home to Mill Ends Park, the world's smallest park (a two-foot-diameter circle, the park's area is only about 0.3 m2). Washington Park is just west of downtown and is home to the Oregon Zoo, Hoyt Arboretum, the Portland Japanese Garden, and the International Rose Test Garden. Portland is also home to Lan Su Chinese Garden (formerly the Portland Classical Chinese Garden), an authentic representation of a Suzhou-style walled garden. Portland's east side has several formal public gardens: the historic Peninsula Park Rose Garden, the rose gardens of Ladd's Addition, the Crystal Springs Rhododendron Garden, the Leach Botanical Garden, and The Grotto.\nPortland's downtown features two groups of contiguous city blocks dedicated for park space: the North and South Park Blocks. The Tom McCall Waterfront Park was built in 1974 along the length of the downtown waterfront after Harbor Drive was removed; it now hosts large events throughout the year. The nearby historically significant Burnside Skatepark and five indoor skateparks give Portland a reputation as possibly \"the most skateboard-friendly town in America.\"\nTryon Creek State Natural Area is one of three Oregon State Parks in Portland and the most popular; its creek has a run of steelhead. The other two State Parks are Willamette Stone State Heritage Site, in the West Hills, and the Government Island State Recreation Area in the Columbia River near Portland International Airport.\nIn February 2015, the City Council approved a total ban on smoking in all city parks and natural areas effective July 1, 2015. The ban includes cigarettes, vaping, as well as marijuana.\nGovernment.\nCity hall.\nSince January 1, 2025, the city of Portland is governed by a mayor\u2013council government system. Elected officials include the mayor, a 12-member city council, and a city auditor. The city council is responsible for legislative policy, while the mayor appoints a professional city manager who oversees the various bureaus and day-to-day operations of the city. The mayor is elected at-large, while the council is elected in four geographic districts using single transferable vote, with 3 winning candidates per district. Portland's current form of government was approved by voters in a 2022 ballot measure, with the first elections under the new system held in 2024.\nThe Portland Office of Community and Civic Life (formerly Office of Neighborhood Involvement) serves as a conduit between city government and Portland's 95 officially recognized neighborhoods. Each neighborhood is represented by a volunteer-based neighborhood association which serves as a liaison between residents of the neighborhood and the city government. The city provides funding to neighborhood associations through seven district coalitions, each of which is a geographical grouping of several neighborhood associations. Most (but not all) neighborhood associations belong to one of these district coalitions.\nPortland and its surrounding metropolitan area are served by Metro, the United States' only directly elected metropolitan planning organization. Metro's charter gives it responsibility for land use and transportation planning, solid waste management, and map development.\nThe Multnomah County government provides many services to the Portland area, as do Washington and Clackamas counties to the west and south.\nFire and emergency services are provided by Portland Fire &amp; Rescue.\nCourts and law enforcement.\nLaw enforcement is primarily provided by the Portland Police Bureau (PPB). The Multnomah County Sheriff's Office (MCSO) provides law enforcement on the city's transit system through their Transit Police division which is supplemented from officers from all local law enforcement agencies that fall within the transit authority's boundaries.\nState and national politics.\nPortland strongly favors the Democratic Party; registered Democrats (51.2%) outnumber Republicans (10.5%) nearly 5 to 1. All city offices are non-partisan. However, almost all of the city's elected officials are known to be Democrats. Fred L. Peterson in 1952 is the city's last elected Republican mayor, and no Republican has served as mayor even on an interim basis since Connie McCready held the post from 1979 to 1980.\nPortland is split among three of Oregon's U.S. congressional districts. Most of the city is in the 3rd District, represented by Maxine Dexter (D-Portland). Most of the city west of the Willamette River is part of the 1st District, represented by Suzanne Bonamici (D-Beaverton). A small portion of southeastern Portland is in the 5th District, currently represented by Democrat Janelle Bynum. Lori Chavez-DeRemer was the first Republican to represent a significant portion of the city in the U.S. House of Representatives since 1975, from 2023 to 2025. Both of Oregon's senators, Ron Wyden and Jeff Merkley, are progressive Democrats from Portland.\nIn the 2008 presidential election, Democratic candidate Barack Obama easily carried Portland, winning 245,464 votes from city residents to 50,614 for his Republican rival, John McCain. In the 2012 presidential election, Democratic candidate Barack Obama again easily carried Portland, winning 256,925 votes from Multnomah county residents to 70,958 for his Republican rival, Mitt Romney.\nSam Adams, the former mayor of Portland, became the city's first openly gay mayor in 2009. In 2004, 59.7 percent of Multnomah County voters cast ballots against Oregon Ballot Measure 36, which amended the Oregon Constitution to prohibit recognition of same-sex marriages. The measure passed with 56.6% of the statewide vote. Multnomah County is one of two counties where a majority voted against the initiative; the other is Benton County, which includes Corvallis, home of Oregon State University. On April 28, 2005, Portland became the only city in the nation to withdraw from a Joint Terrorism Task Force. As of February 19, 2015, the Portland city council approved permanently staffing the JTTF with two of its city's police officers.\nCity planning and development.\nThe city consulted with urban planners as far back as 1904, resulting in the development of Washington Park and the 40-Mile Loop greenway, which connects many of the city's parks. Portland is often cited as an example of a city with strong land use planning controls. This is largely the result of statewide land conservation policies adopted in 1973 under Governor Tom McCall, in particular the requirement for an urban growth boundary (UGB) for every city and metropolitan area. The opposite extreme, a city with few or no controls, is typically illustrated by Houston.\nOregon's 1973 \"urban growth boundary\" law limits the boundaries for large-scale development in each metropolitan area in Oregon. This limits access to utilities such as sewage, water and telecommunications, as well as coverage by fire, police and schools. Portland's urban growth boundary, adopted in 1979, separates urban areas (where high-density development is encouraged and focused) from traditional farm land (where restrictions on non-agricultural development are very strict). This was atypical in an era when automobile use led many areas to neglect their core cities in favor of development along interstate highways, in suburbs, and satellite cities.\nThe original state rules included a provision for expanding urban growth boundaries, but critics felt this was not being accomplished. In 1995, the State passed a law requiring cities to expand UGBs to provide enough undeveloped land for a 20-year supply of future housing at projected growth levels. In 2007, the legislature changed the law to require the maintenance of an estimated 50 years of growth within the boundary, as well as the protection of accompanying farm and rural lands. The growth boundary, along with efforts of the Portland Development Commission to create economic development zones, has led to the development of a large portion of downtown, a large number of mid- and high-rise developments, and an overall increase in housing and business density.\nProsper Portland (formerly the Portland Development Commission) is a semi-public agency that plays a major role in downtown development; city voters created it in 1958 to serve as the city's urban renewal agency. It provides housing and economic development programs within the city and works behind the scenes with major local developers to create large projects. In the early 1960s, the Portland Development Commission led the razing of a large Italian-Jewish neighborhood downtown, bounded roughly by I-405, the Willamette River, 4th Avenue and Market street. Mayor Neil Goldschmidt took office in 1972 as a proponent of bringing housing and the associated vitality back to the downtown area, which was seen as emptying out after 5 pm. The effort has had dramatic effects in the 30 years since, with many thousands of new housing units clustered in three areas: north of Portland State University (between I-405, SW Broadway, and SW Taylor St.); the RiverPlace development along the waterfront under the Marquam (I-5) bridge; and most notably in the Pearl District (between I-405, Burnside St., NW Northrup St., and NW 9th Ave.).\nHistorically, environmental consciousness has weighed significantly in the city's planning and development efforts. Portland was one of the first cities in the United States to promote and integrate alternative forms of transportation, such as the MAX Light Rail and extensive bike paths. The Urban Greenspaces Institute, housed in Portland State University Geography Department's Center for Mapping Research, promotes better integration of the built and natural environments. The institute works on urban park, trail, and natural areas planning issues, both at the local and regional levels. In October 2009, the Portland City Council unanimously adopted a climate action plan that will cut the city's greenhouse gas emissions to 80% below 1990 levels by 2050.\nAs of 2012, Portland was the largest city in the United States that did not add fluoride to its public water supply, and fluoridation has historically been a subject of controversy in the city. Portland voters have four times voted against fluoridation, in 1956, 1962, 1980 (repealing a 1978 vote in favor), and 2013. In 2012 the city council, responding to advocacy from public health organizations and others, voted unanimously to begin fluoridation by 2014. Fluoridation opponents forced a public vote on the issue, and on May 21, 2013, city voters again rejected fluoridation.\nEducation.\nPrimary and secondary education.\nNine public school districts and many private schools include sections of Portland. Portland Public Schools is the largest school district, operating 86 public schools. In addition to PPS, other school districts in Multnomah County that serve parts of the city include the Beaverton School District, Centennial School District, David Douglas School District, Parkrose School District, Reynolds School District, Riverdale School District, and Scappoose School District. Portions in Clackamas County are in the North Clackamas School District and Centennial School District. Portions in Washington County are in Portland Public Schools.\nDavid Douglas High School, in the Powellhurst neighborhood, has the largest enrollment of any public high school in the city. Other high schools include Benson, Cleveland, Franklin, Grant, Jefferson, Madison, Parkrose, Roosevelt, and Ida B Wells-Barnett (formerly Woodrow Wilson), and several suburban high schools which serve the city's outer areas. Established in 1869, Lincoln High School (formerly Portland High School) is the city's oldest public education institution, and is one of two of the oldest high schools west of the Mississippi River (after San Francisco's Lowell High School).\nFormer public schools in the city included Washington High School, which operated from 1906 until 1981, as well as Adams and Jackson, which also closed the same year.\nHigher education.\nPortland State University has the second-largest enrollment rate of any university in the state (after Oregon State University), with a student body of nearly 30,000. It has been named among the top fifteen percentile of American regional universities by The Princeton Review for undergraduate education, and has been internationally recognized for its degrees in Master of Business Administration and urban planning. The city is also home to the Oregon Health &amp; Science University, Portland Community College, and Carrington College.\nNotable private universities include the University of Portland, a Roman Catholic university affiliated with the Congregation of Holy Cross; Reed College, a liberal arts college, and Lewis &amp; Clark College.\nMedia.\n\"The Oregonian\" is the only daily general-interest newspaper serving Portland. It also circulates throughout the state and in Clark County, Washington.\nSmaller local newspapers, distributed free of charge in newspaper boxes and at venues around the city, include the \"Portland Tribune\" (general-interest paper published on Wednesdays), \"Willamette Week\" (general-interest alternative weekly published on Wednesdays), and \"The Portland Mercury\" (another alt-weekly, targeted at younger urban readers and published every other Thursday). The Portland area also has newspapers that are published for specific communities, including \"The Asian Reporter\" (a weekly covering Asian news, both international and local) and \"The Skanner\" (a weekly African-American newspaper covering both local and national news). The \"Portland Business Journal\" covers business-related news on a weekly basis, as does \"The Daily Journal of Commerce\", its main competitor. \"Portland Monthly\" is a monthly news and culture magazine. \"The Bee\", over 110 years old, is another neighborhood newspaper serving the inner southeast neighborhoods.\nInfrastructure.\nHealthcare.\nLegacy Health, a non-profit healthcare system in Portland, operates multiple facilities in the city and surrounding suburbs. These include Legacy Emanuel, founded in 1912, in Northeast Portland; and Legacy Good Samaritan, founded in 1875, and in Northwest Portland. Randall's Children's Hospital operates at the Legacy Emanuel Campus. Good Samaritan has centers for breast health, cancer, and stroke, and is home to the Legacy Devers Eye Institute, the Legacy Obesity and Diabetes Institute, the Legacy Diabetes and Endocrinology Center, the Legacy Rehabilitation Clinic of Oregon, and the Linfield-Good Samaritan School of Nursing.\nThe Catholic-affiliated Providence Health &amp; Services operates Providence Portland Medical Center in the North Tabor neighborhood of the city. Oregon Health &amp; Science University is a university hospital formed in 1974. The Veterans Affairs Medical Center operates next to the Oregon Health &amp; Science University main campus. Adventist Medical Center also serves the city. Shriners Hospital for Children is a small children's hospital established in 1923.\nTransportation.\nThe Portland metropolitan area has transportation services common to major U.S. cities, though Oregon's emphasis on proactive land-use planning and transit-oriented development within the urban growth boundary means commuters have multiple well-developed options.\nIn 2008, 12.6% of all commutes in Portland were on public transit. TriMet operates most of the region's buses and the MAX (short for Metropolitan Area Express) light rail system, which connects the city and suburbs. Opened in 1986, the MAX system has expanded to five lines, with the latest being the Orange Line to Milwaukie, which began operating in September 2015. WES Commuter Rail opened in February 2009 in Portland's western suburbs, linking Beaverton and Wilsonville.\nThe city-owned Portland Streetcar serves two routes in the Central City \u2013 downtown and adjacent districts. The first line, which opened in 2001 and was extended in 2005\u201307, operates from the South Waterfront District through Portland State University and north through the West End of downtown, to shopping areas and dense residential districts north and northwest of downtown. The second line that opened in 2012 added of tracks on the east side of the Willamette River and across the Broadway Bridge to a connection with the original line. The east-side line completed a loop to the tracks on the west side of the river upon completion of the new Tilikum Crossing in 2015, and, in anticipation of that, had been named the Central Loop line in 2012. However, it was renamed the Loop Service, with an A Loop (clockwise) and B Loop (counterclockwise), when it became a complete loop with the opening of the Tilikum Crossing bridge.\nFifth and Sixth avenues within downtown comprise the Portland Transit Mall, two streets devoted primarily to bus and light rail traffic with limited automobile access. Opened in 1977 for buses, the transit mall was renovated and rebuilt in 2007\u201309, with light rail added. Starting in 1975 and lasting nearly four decades, all transit service within downtown Portland was free, the area being known by TriMet as Fareless Square, but a need for minor budget cuts and funding needed for expansion prompted the agency to limit free rides to rail service only in 2010, and subsequently to discontinue the fare-free zone entirely in 2012.\nTriMet provides real-time tracking of buses and trains with its TransitTracker, and makes the data available to software developers so they can create customized tools of their own.\nI-5 connects Portland with the Willamette Valley, Southern Oregon, and California to the south and with Washington to the north. I-405 forms a loop with I-5 around the central downtown area of the city and I-205 is a loop freeway route on the east side which connects to the Portland International Airport. U.S. 26 supports commuting within the metro area and continues to the Pacific Ocean westward and Mount Hood and Central Oregon eastward. U.S. 30 has a main, bypass, and business route through the city extending to Astoria to the west; through Gresham, Oregon, and the eastern exurbs, and connects to I-84, traveling towards Boise, Idaho.\nPortland's main airport is Portland International Airport (PDX), about 20 minutes by car (40 minutes by MAX) northeast of downtown. Portland is also home to Oregon's only public use heliport, the Portland Downtown Heliport.\nAmtrak, the national passenger rail system, provides service to Portland at Union Station on three routes. Long-haul train routes include the \"Coast Starlight\" (with service from Los Angeles to Seattle) and the \"Empire Builder\" (with service to Chicago). The \"Amtrak Cascades\" state-supported trains operate between Vancouver, B.C., and Eugene, Oregon, and serve Portland several times daily. The city is also served by Greyhound Lines intercity bus service, which also operates BoltBus, an express bus service. The city's first airport was the Swan Island Municipal Airport, which was closed in the 1940s.\nPortland is the only city in the United States that owns operating mainline steam locomotives, donated to the city in 1958 by the railroads that ran them. Spokane, Portland &amp; Seattle 700 and the world-famous Southern Pacific 4449 can be seen several times a year pulling a special excursion train, either locally or on an extended trip. The \"Holiday Express\", pulled over the tracks of the Oregon Pacific Railroad on weekends in December, has become a Portland tradition over its several years running. These trains and others are operated by volunteers of the Oregon Rail Heritage Foundation, an amalgamation of rail preservation groups which collaborated on the finance and construction of the Oregon Rail Heritage Center, a permanent and publicly accessible home for the locomotives, which opened in 2012 adjacent to OMSI.\nIn Portland, cycling is a significant mode of transportation. As the city has been particularly supportive of urban bicycling it now ranks highly among the most bicycle-friendly cities in the world.\nBicycles accounted for 2.8% of commuting in 2021. Bicycle commuting declined by 46% between 2016 and 2022 according to Portland Bureau of Transportation report. For its achievements in promoting cycling as an everyday means of transportation, Portland has been recognized by the League of American Bicyclists and other cycling organizations for its network of on-street bicycling facilities and other bicycle-friendly services, being one of only three U.S. cities to have earned a Platinum-level rating. A new bicycle-sharing system, Biketown, launched on July 19, 2016, with 100 stations in the city's central and eastside neighborhoods.\nPortland abolished the requirement for parking minimum as well as Minneapolis and Austin.\nAs of 2015, Portland is owed $32.4 million in unpaid parking citations due to the city government's refusal to collect more aggressively.\nWater.\nThe city's main source of drinking water is several reservoirs in the Bull Run Watershed, which consists of roughly of forested land just west of Mount Hood. The city also operates 25 groundwater wells near the Columbia River in Northeast Portland, which supplements the cities water supply during the summer.\nSister cities.\nPortland's sister cities are:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nPortland's friendship city agreements are with:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23506", "revid": "1101673", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23506", "title": "Pan and scan", "text": "Method for adapting widescreen film to television\nPan and scan is a film editing technique used to modify widescreen images for display on a fullscreen screen. It involves cropping the sides of the original widescreen image and panning across it when the shot's focus changes. This cropping can result in the loss of key visual elements but may draw the viewers' attention towards a particular portion of the scene.\n\"Pan and scan\" was often used with VHS tapes before widescreen home media formats such as LaserDisc, DVD, and Blu-ray became common. The vertical equivalent, known as \"tilt and scan\" or \"reverse pan and scan,\" was used to adapt older films such as \"Cinderella\" (1950) for widescreen formats.\nThese techniques have been widely criticized since their inception, with critics often disapproving because it can remove substantial portions of the original image: up to 43% for films with a 2.35:1 aspect ratio, up to 48% for earlier 2.55:1 films, and up to 52% for 2.76:1 films. Creating new shots or cuts may alter cinematic effects, thereby impacting the pacing, atmosphere, and suspense originally intended by filmmakers. Pan and scan can sometimes alter the director's or cinematographer's original vision, as well as the intended field of view for specific scenes or an entire film, by depriving the audience of significant visual information.\nHistory.\nFor the first several decades of television broadcasting, sets displayed images with a 4:3 (1.33:1) aspect ratio, which was standard for most theatrical films before 1960. In the early to mid-1950s, filmmakers began using widescreen formats such as CinemaScope and Todd-AO to compete with television and attract audiences to theaters by providing wider visual perspectives and compositional possibilities.\nTo accommodate the wider aspect ratio of films, television broadcasters adopted the pan and scan technique, which maintained image quality and size but sacrificed the ability to view the entire image. A film subjected to pan and scan often loses around half its horizontal size due to cropping. Letterboxing was an alternative method of displaying widescreen films on a 4:3 screen, maintaining the original aspect ratio by adding black space above and below the image but reducing the image's size and quality.\nIn 1986, the Voyager Company made it company policy to release widescreen films on LaserDisc only in their original aspect ratio rather than in pan and scan formats, which were common for home media releases. Many other home video labels followed suit.\nIn the 1990s, widescreen televisions offered a wider 16:9 aspect ratio (1.78 times the height), allowing films with aspect ratios of 1.66:1 and 1.85:1 to fill most or all of the screen with minimal letterboxing or cropping. DVD packaging began to use the expression, \"16:9 \u2013 Enhanced for Widescreen TVs.\"\nFilms shot with aspect ratios of 2.20:1, 2.35:1, 2.39:1, 2.55:1, and especially 2.76:1 (\"Ben-Hur,\" for example), might still be problematic when displayed on televisions of any type. However, when the DVD is \"anamorphically enhanced for widescreen\", or the film is telecast on a high-definition channel and viewed on a widescreen TV, the black spaces are smaller, and the effect is much like watching a film on a theatrical widescreen.\nAs of 2018[ [update]], though aspect ratios of 16:9 (and occasionally 16:10, mostly for computers and tablets) remain standard, wider-screen consumer TVs in 21:9 have been marketed by several manufacturers.\nTechniques.\nDuring the pan and scan process, an editor selects the parts of the original filmed composition that appear to be the focus of the shot and ensures that these are copied (\"scanned\"). When the important action shifts to a new position in the frame, the operator moves the scanner to follow it, creating the effect of Panning. In a scene where the focus does not gradually shift from one horizontal position to another, such as actors at each extreme engaging in rapid conversation, the editor may choose to \"cut\" from one to the other, rather than rapidly panning back and forth.\nIf the actors are closer together on the screen, the editor may pan slightly, alternately cropping one or the other partially. This method preserves the maximum resolution of the image since it uses all the available vertical video scan lines, which is especially important for NTSC televisions, having fewer lines than other standards. It also gives a full-screen image on a traditional television set; hence pan-and-scan versions of films on VHS or DVD are often known as \"Fullscreen\".\nHowever, this method also has several drawbacks. Some visual information is unavoidably cropped out. It can also change a shot in which the camera was originally stationary to one in which it is frequently panning or change a single continuous shot into one with frequent cuts. In a shot that was originally panned to show something new, or in which something enters the shot from off-camera, it changes the timing of these appearances for the audience.\nFor example, in the film \"Oliver!\", made in Panavision, the criminal Bill Sikes commits a murder. The murder takes place mostly offscreen, behind a staircase wall, and Oliver is a witness. As Sikes steps back from behind the wall, the audience sees Oliver from the back watching him in terror. In the pan and scan version of the film, the audience sees Oliver's reaction as the murder is being committed, but not when Sikes steps backward from the wall having done it. Often in a pan and scan telecast, a character will seem to be speaking offscreen, because the pan and scan technique has cut their image out of the screen.\nShoot and protect.\nAs television screenings of feature films became more common and financially important, cinematographers began to work on compositions that would keep the vital information within the \"TV-safe area\" of the frame. For example, the BBC suggested programme makers who were recording in 16:9 frame their shots in a aspect ratio which was then broadcast on analogue services with small black bars at the top and bottom of the picture. Owners of widescreen TV sets receiving digital broadcasts would see the full 16:9 picture (this is known as Shoot and protect).\nReframing.\nOne modern alternative to pan and scan is to adjust the source material directly. This is very rare; the only known uses are in computer-generated features, such as those produced by Pixar, and video games such as \"BioShock\".\nThis approach to full-screen versions is sometimes called \"reframing\": some shots are pan and scan, while others (notably Warner Bros.' \"The Lego Movie\") are transferred open matte (a full widescreen image extended with the added image above and below).\nAnother method is to keep the camera angle as tight as a pan shot, but move the location of characters, objects, or the camera so that the subjects fit in the frame. The advent of DVDs and their use of anamorphic presentation, coupled with the increasing popularity of widescreen televisions and computer monitors, has rendered pan and scan less important. Fullscreen versions of films originally produced in widescreen are still available in the United States.\nOpen matte.\nFilmmakers may also create an original image that includes visual information that extends above and below the widescreen theatrical image; this is known as an open matte image. This may still be considered pan-and-scanned, but it gives the compositor the freedom to \"zoom out\" or \"un-crop\" the image to include not only the full width of the wide-format image but also additional visual content at the top and/or bottom of the screen, not included in the widescreen version.\nAs a general rule (before the adoption of DVD), special effects would be done within the theatrical aspect ratio, but not the full frame thereof. The expanded image area can sometimes include extraneous objects\u2014such as cables, microphone booms, jet vapor trails, or overhead telephone wires\u2014not intended to be included in the frame, depending upon the nature of the shot and how well the full frame was protected.\nA more unusual use of the technique is present in the 17 original \"Dragon Ball\" movies, released from 1986 to 1996. The films were displayed in 1.85:1 during their theatrical release, but this was cut down from 1.37:1 animation, a choice made so that the VHS releases would be nearly uncropped.\nAdjusting cinematography to account for aspect ratios.\nChanges in screen angle (panning) may be necessary to prevent closeups between two speakers where only one person is visible in the pan and scan version and both participants seem to speak alternately to persons off-camera; this comes at the cost of losing the smoothness of scenes. Conversely, the cropping of a film originally shown in the standard ratio to fit widescreen televisions may cut off foreground or background, such as a tap-dance scene in which much attention is directed appropriately at a dancer's feet. This situation commonly occurs when a widescreen TV is set to display full images without stretching (often called the zoom setting) for content with an aspect ratio of 1.78:1 or less. The solution is to pillar box the image by adding black bars on either side of the image, which maintains the full picture height. In Europe, where the PAL TV format offers more resolution, pan and scan broadcasts and movie DVDs originally shown in widescreen are relatively rare, unless it is programming broadcasts aimed at family viewing times like \"A Bug's Life\". However, on some channels in some countries (such as the United Kingdom), films with an aspect ratio of more than 1.85:1 are panned and scanned slightly to fit the broadcast 1.78:1 ratio.\nCriticism.\nSome film directors object to the use of pan and scan, arguing that it compromises their vision. Sydney Pollack decided to shoot his 1985 film \"Out of Africa\" in a matted 1.85:1 aspect ratio out of frustration with having his films shot in anamorphic 2.39:1 \"butchered\" for television and home video.\nIn 1991, Pollack sued a Danish public television channel for airing a pan and scan version of his 1975 film \"Three Days of the Condor\". The court ruled that the pan and scan version was a \"mutilation\" of the film and a violation of Pollack's \"droit moral\", but ruled in favour of the defendant.\nWoody Allen refused to release a pan and scan version of \"Manhattan\" (1979), and although Steven Spielberg eventually conceded to a pan and scan home video release of \"Raiders of the Lost Ark\" (1981), he successfully avoided them for \"The Color Purple\" (1985) and \"Always\" (1989).\nSimilarly, Phil Lord and Christopher Miller made two versions of \"The Lego Movie\" (2014), one in anamorphic 2.39:1 and another in 1.37:1 open matte spherical format for cinemas not using anamorphic lenses, and to avoid a panned and scanned version of the 2.39:1 version being used for TV broadcasts.\nSeveral prominent film critics, most notably Gene Siskel and Roger Ebert, have also criticized pan and scan and agreed with directors that movies should be presented as intended.\nAmateur online critics have derided it with terms like \"pan and scam\" and \"fool screen.\"\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23508", "revid": "199747", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23508", "title": "Plymouth", "text": "Plymouth ( ) is a port city and unitary authority in Devon, South West England. It is located on Devon's south coast between the rivers Plym and Tamar, about southwest of Exeter and southwest of London. It is the most populous city in Devon.\nPlymouth's history extends back to the Bronze Age, evolving from a trading post at Mount Batten into the thriving market town of Sutton, which was formally re-named as Plymouth in 1439 when it was made a borough. The settlement has played a significant role in English history, notably in 1588 when an English fleet based here defeated the Spanish Armada, and in 1620 as the departure point for the Pilgrim Fathers to the New World. During the English Civil War, the town was held by the Parliamentarians and was besieged between 1642 and 1646. In 1690 a dockyard was established on the River Tamar for the Royal Navy and Plymouth grew as a commercial shipping port throughout the Industrial Revolution.\nAfter absorbing nearby settlements in 1914, the borough was awarded city status in 1928. During World War II, Plymouth suffered extensive damage in the Plymouth Blitz, leading to post-war rebuilding that significantly shaped its modern appearance. A further expansion of its boundaries in 1967 contributed to its current status as the 30th-most populous built-up area in the UK and the second-largest city in the South West after Bristol, with a population in 2024 of 272,067.\nPlymouth's economy, historically rooted in shipbuilding and seafaring, has transitioned towards a service-based economy since the 1990s. It maintains strong maritime connections, hosting HMNB Devonport, the largest operational naval base in Western Europe, and offering ferry links to Brittany and Spain. The city is also home to the University of Plymouth, reflecting its educational and cultural significance. Today, the city is governed locally by Plymouth City Council and is represented nationally by three Members of Parliament.\nHistory.\nEarly history.\nUpper Palaeolithic deposits, including bones of \"Homo sapiens\" have been found in local caves, and artefacts dating from the Bronze Age to the Middle Iron Age have been found at Mount Batten, showing that it was one of few principal trading ports of pre-Roman Britannia dominating continental trade with Armorica. An unidentified settlement named \"TAMARI OSTIA\" (mouth/estuaries of the Tamar) is listed in Ptolemy's \"Geographia\" and is presumed to be located in the area of the modern city. An ancient promontory fort was located at Rame Head at the mouth of Plymouth Sound with ancient hillforts located at Lyneham Warren to the east, Boringdon Camp and Maristow Camp to the north.\nThe settlement of Plympton, further up the River Plym than the current Plymouth, was also an early trading port. (See Plympton for the derivation of the name \"Plym\".) As the river silted up in the early 11th century, mariners and merchants were forced to settle downriver, at the current day Barbican near the river mouth. At the time this village was called Sutton, meaning \"south town\" in Old English. The name \"Plym Mouth\", meaning \"mouth of the River Plym\" was first mentioned in a Pipe Roll of 1211. Plympton Priory owned land at Sutton and secured a charter from Henry III in 1254 granting the priory the right to hold a weekly market and annual fair at Sutton, making it a market town.\nEarly defence and Renaissance.\nDuring the Hundred Years' War a French attack in 1340 burned a manor house and took some prisoners, but failed to get into the town. In 1403 the town was burned by Breton raiders. On 12 November 1439 the market town of Sutton was incorporated as a borough and formally renamed Plymouth, with a subsequent charter the following year formalising its boundaries. It was the first time a borough charter had been issued by parliament rather than directly from the monarch.\nIn the late fifteenth century, Plymouth Castle, a \"castle quadrate\", was constructed close to the area now known as The Barbican; it included four round towers, one at each corner, as featured on the city coat of arms.\nThe castle served to protect Sutton Pool, which is where the fleet was based in Plymouth prior to the establishment of Plymouth Dockyard. In 1512, an Act of Parliament was passed to further fortify Plymouth. The work included defensive walls at the entrance to Sutton Pool (across which a chain was extended in times of danger). Defences on St Nicholas Island also date from this time, and a string of six artillery blockhouses were built, including one on Fishers Nose at the south-eastern corner of the Hoe. This location was further strengthened by the building of a fort (later known as Drake's Fort) in 1596; it was the site of the Citadel, established in the 1660s (see below).\nDuring the 16th century, locally produced wool was the major export commodity. Plymouth was the home port for successful maritime traders, among them Sir John Hawkins, who led England's first foray into the Atlantic slave trade, as well as Sir Francis Drake, Mayor of Plymouth in 1581\u20132. Crews for the first English failed settlement attempt at Roanoke Colony in North America departed in 1587 under Sir Walter Raleigh's and Drake's leadership; returning bearing maize, tobacco and potatoes.\nIn 1588, according to legend, Drake insisted on completing his game of bowls on the Hoe before engaging the Spanish Armada. In 1620 the Pilgrims set sail for the New World from Plymouth, establishing Plymouth Colony \u2013 the second English colony in what is now the United States. In 1625, the Mayor estimated that African slavers captured that summer about 1,000 villagers from the town's area, to be sold in Africa.\nDuring the English Civil War Plymouth sided with the Parliamentarians and was besieged for almost four years by the Royalists. The last major attack by the Royalists was by Sir Richard Grenville leading thousands of soldiers towards Plymouth, but they were defeated by the Plymothians at Freedom Fields Park. The civil war ended as a Parliamentary win, but monarchy was restored by King Charles II in 1660, who imprisoned many of the Parliamentary heroes on Drake's Island. Construction of the Royal Citadel began in 1665, after the Restoration; it was armed with cannon facing both out to sea and into the town, rumoured to be a reminder to residents not to oppose the Crown. Mount Batten tower also dates from around this time.\nPlymouth Dock, naval power and Foulston.\nThroughout the 17th century, Plymouth had gradually lost its pre-eminence as a trading port. By the mid-17th century, commodities manufactured elsewhere in England cost too much to transport to Plymouth, and the city had no means of processing sugar or tobacco imports, major products from the colonies. Local sailors turning to piracy such as Henry Every became infamous, celebrated in the London play The Successful Pyrate. It played a part in the Atlantic slave trade during the early 18th century, although it was relatively small.\nIn the nearby parish of Stoke Damerel the first dockyard, HMNB Devonport, opened in 1690 on the eastern bank of the River Tamar. Further docks were built here in 1727, 1762 and 1793. The settlement that developed here was called \"Dock\" or \"Plymouth Dock\" at the time, and a new town, separate from Plymouth, grew up. In 1712 there were 318 men employed and by 1733 the population had grown to 3,000 people.\nBefore the latter half of the 18th century, grain, timber and then coal were Plymouth's main imports. During this time the real source of wealth was from the neighbouring town of Plymouth Dock (renamed in 1824 to Devonport) and the major employer in the entire region was the dockyard. The \"Three Towns\" conurbation of Plymouth, Stonehouse and Devonport enjoyed some prosperity during the late 18th and early 19th century and were enriched by a series of neo-classical urban developments designed by London architect John Foulston. Foulston was important for both Devonport and Plymouth and was responsible for several grand public buildings, many now destroyed, including the Athenaeum, the Theatre Royal and Royal Hotel, and much of Union Street.\nLocal chemist William Cookworthy established his short-lived Plymouth Porcelain venture in 1768 to exploit the deposits of china clay that he had discovered in Cornwall. He was acquainted with engineer John Smeaton, the builder of the third Eddystone Lighthouse.\nThe Breakwater in Plymouth Sound was designed by John Rennie to protect the fleet moving in and out of Devonport; work started in 1812. Numerous technical difficulties and repeated storm damage meant that it was not completed until 1841, twenty years after Rennie's death. In the 1860s, a ring of Palmerston forts was constructed around the outskirts of Devonport, to protect the dockyard from attack from any direction.\nSome of the most significant imports to Plymouth from the Americas and Europe during the latter half of the 19th century included maize, wheat, barley, sugar cane, guano, sodium nitrate and phosphate. Aside from the dockyard in the town of Devonport, industries in Plymouth such as the gasworks, the railways and tramways, and a number of small chemical works had begun to develop in the 19th century, continuing into the 20th century.\n\"Plan for Plymouth\" 1943.\nDuring the First World War, Plymouth was the port of entry for many troops from around the Empire. It was developed as a facility for the manufacture of munitions. Although major units of the Royal Navy moved to the safety of Scapa Flow, Devonport was an important base for escort vessels and repairs. Flying boats operated from Mount Batten.\nDuring the Second World War, Devonport was the headquarters of Western Approaches Command until 1941, and Sunderland flying boats were operated by the Royal Australian Air Force. It was an important embarkation point for US troops for D-Day. The city was heavily bombed by the Luftwaffe, in a series of 59 raids known as the Plymouth Blitz. Although the dockyards were the principal targets, much of the city centre and over 3,700 houses were completely destroyed and more than 1,000 civilians lost their lives. This was largely due to Plymouth's status as a major port. Charles Church was hit by incendiary bombs and partially destroyed in 1941 during the Blitz, but has not been demolished. It has been designated as an official permanent monument to the bombing of Plymouth during World War II.\nThe redevelopment of the city was planned by Sir Patrick Abercrombie in his 1943 \"Plan for Plymouth\" whilst simultaneously working on the reconstruction plan for London. This initially included plans to expand the city into south east Cornwall, but these were abandoned after opposition from Cornwall County Council. Between 1951 and 1957 over 1000 homes were completed every year, mostly using innovative prefabricated systems of just three main types.\nThe \"Plan for Plymouth\" was, on the one hand, a template for the rapid reassembly of a destroyed city centre, but Abercrombie also took the opportunity to lay out a whole hierarchy of settlements across the city of communities, neighbourhoods and districts. Central to this was a revision of transport infrastructure that prioritised the position of the railway as a gateway to the city centre and provided in the long-term for a dual carriageway road by-pass that only finally came into being in the 1980s (forty years after being planned). The plan is the subject of Jill Craigie's documentary \"The Way We Live\" (1946).\nBy 1964 over 20,000 new homes had been built, transforming the dense overcrowded and unsanitary slums of the pre-war city into a low density, dispersed suburbia. Most of the city centre shops had been destroyed and those that remained were cleared to enable a zoned reconstruction according to his plan. In 1962 the modernist high rise of the Civic Centre was constructed, an architecturally significant example of mid-twentieth century civic slab-and-tower set piece. The Plymouth City Council allowed it to fall into disrepair but it was grade II listed in 2007 by English Heritage to prevent its demolition.\nPost-war, Devonport Dockyard was kept busy refitting aircraft carriers such as the and, later, nuclear submarines. New light industrial factories were constructed in the newly zoned industrial sector, attracting rapid growth of the urban population. The army had substantially left the city by 1971, after barracks were pulled down in the 1960s, but the city remains home to 29 Commando Regiment Royal Artillery and also 42 Commando of the Royal Marines.\nGovernance.\nAs a unitary authority there is only one tier of local government covering Plymouth. Plymouth City Council meets at the Council House on Armada Way in the city centre. There are no civil parishes in the city, which is an unparished area. The city forms part of the ceremonial county of Devon for the purposes of lieutenancy, but has been administratively independent from Devon County Council since it became a unitary authority in 1998.\nAdministrative history.\nThe first record of the existence of a settlement at Plymouth was in the Domesday Book in 1086 as \"Sudtone\" (Sutton), Saxon for south farm, located at the present-day Barbican. From Saxon times, it was in the hundred of Roborough. Sutton became a market town in 1254 and a borough in 1439, when it was formally renamed Plymouth.\nPlymouth was reformed to become a municipal borough in 1836, governed by a corporate body officially called the \"mayor, aldermen and burgesses of the borough of Plymouth\", but generally known as the corporation or town council. When elected county councils were established in 1889, both Plymouth and neighbouring Devonport were considered large enough to provide their own county-level services and so they were made county boroughs, independent from Devon County Council. In 1914 the county boroughs of Plymouth and Devonport and the adjoining urban district of East Stonehouse were merged to form a single county borough of Plymouth. Collectively they were referred to as \"The Three Towns\".\nPlymouth was granted city status on 18 October 1928. Between 1439 and 1935, Plymouth had a mayor. In 1935 the city was given the right to appoint a Lord Mayor. The city's boundaries further expanded in 1967 to include the town of Plympton and the parish of Plymstock.\nThe 1971 Local Government White Paper proposed abolishing county boroughs, which would have left Plymouth, a town of 250,000 people, being administered from a council based at the smaller Exeter, on the other side of the county. This led to Plymouth lobbying for the creation of a Tamarside county, to include Plymouth, Torpoint, Saltash, and the rural hinterland. The campaign was not successful, and Plymouth ceased to be a county borough on 1 April 1974 with responsibility for education, social services, highways and libraries transferred to Devon County Council. All powers returned when the city became a unitary authority on 1 April 1998 under recommendations of the Banham Commission.\nConstituencies.\nIn the Parliament of the United Kingdom, Plymouth is represented by the three constituencies of Plymouth Moor View, Plymouth Sutton and Devonport and South West Devon. Prior to Brexit in 2020 it was represented within the European Parliament as South West England.\nIn 1919, Nancy Astor was elected the first-ever female member of parliament to take office in the British Houses of Parliament for the constituency of Plymouth Sutton. She was elected to the seat vacated by her husband Waldorf Astor on his elevation to the peerage. Lady Astor was a vibrantly active campaigner for her resident constituents.\nIn 1945, Plymouth-born Michael Foot was elected Labour MP for the constituency of Plymouth Devonport which had been heavily damaged in the Plymouth Blitz. He represented the seat until 1955. After serving as Secretary of State for Education and being responsible for the Health and Safety at Work etc. Act 1974, he went on to become the leader of the Labour Party (1980\u20131983).\nCity Council.\nThe City of Plymouth is divided into 20 wards, 17 of which elect three councillors and the other three electing two councillors, making up a total council of 57. Elections are held three years out of every four, with a third of the council being elected each time for a four year term. The total for Plymouth's Parliamentary constituencies was 190,006 in April 2019. Since May 2023 Plymouth has had a Labour majority Council. Plymouth City Council is formally twinned with: Brest, France (1963), Gdynia, Poland (1976), Novorossiysk, Russia (1990 ) San Sebasti\u00e1n, Spain (1990) and Plymouth, United States (2001).\nPlymouth was granted the dignity of Lord Mayor by King George V in 1935. The position is elected each year by a group of six councillors. It is traditional that the position of the Lord Mayor alternates between the Conservative Party and the Labour Party annually and that the Lord Mayor chooses the Deputy Lord Mayor.\nThe Lord Mayor's official residence is 3 Elliot Terrace, located on the Hoe. Once a home of Waldorf and Nancy Astor, it was given by Lady Astor to the City of Plymouth as an official residence for future Lord Mayors and is also used today for civic hospitality, as lodgings for visiting dignitaries and High Court judges and it is also available to hire for private events. The Civic Centre municipal office building in Armada Way became a listed building in June 2007 because of its quality and period features, but has become the centre of a controversy as the council planned for its demolition estimating that it could cost \u00a340m to refurbish it, resulting in possible job losses.\nGeography.\nPlymouth lies between the River Plym to the east and the River Tamar to the west; both rivers flow into the natural harbour of Plymouth Sound. Since 1967, the unitary authority of Plymouth has included the, once independent, towns of Plympton and Plymstock which lie along the east of the River Plym. The River Tamar forms the county boundary between Devon and Cornwall and its estuary forms the Hamoaze on which is sited Devonport Dockyard.\nThe River Plym, which flows off Dartmoor to the north-east, forms a smaller estuary to the east of the city called Cattewater. Plymouth Sound is protected from the sea by the Plymouth Breakwater, in use since 1814. In the Sound is Drake's Island which is seen from Plymouth Hoe, a flat public area on top of limestone cliffs. The Unitary Authority of Plymouth is . The topography rises from sea level to a height, at Roborough, of about above Ordnance Datum (AOD).\nGeologically, Plymouth has a mixture of limestone, Devonian slate, granite and Middle Devonian limestone. Plymouth Sound, Shores and Cliffs is a Site of Special Scientific Interest, because of its geology. The bulk of the city is built upon Upper Devonian slates and shales and the headlands at the entrance to Plymouth Sound are formed of Lower Devonian slates, which can withstand the power of the sea.\nA band of Middle Devonian limestone runs west to east from Cremyll to Plymstock including the Hoe. Local limestone may be seen in numerous buildings, walls and pavements throughout Plymouth. To the north and northeast of the city is the granite mass of Dartmoor; the granite was mined and exported via Plymouth. Rocks brought down the Tamar from Dartmoor include ores containing tin, copper, tungsten, lead and other minerals. There is evidence that the middle Devonian limestone belt at the south edge of Plymouth and in Plymstock was quarried at West Hoe, Cattedown and Radford.\nUrban form.\nOn 27 April 1944 Sir Patrick Abercrombie's \"Plan for Plymouth\" to rebuild the bomb-damaged city was published; it called for demolition of the few remaining pre-War buildings in the city centre to make way for their replacement with wide, parallel, modern boulevards aligned east\u2013west linked by a north\u2013south avenue (Armada Way) linking the railway station with the vista of Plymouth Hoe.\nA peripheral road system connecting the historic Barbican on the east and Union Street to the west determines the principal form of the city centre, even following pedestrianisation of the shopping centre in the late 1980s, and continues to inform the present 'Vision for Plymouth' developed by a team led by Barcelona-based architect David MacKay in 2003 which calls for revivification of the city centre with mixed-use and residential.\nIn suburban areas, post-War prefabs had already begun to appear by 1946, and over 1,000 permanent council houses were built each year from 1951 to 1957 according to the Modernist zoned low-density garden city model advocated by Abercrombie. By 1964 over 20,000 new homes had been built, more than 13,500 of them permanent council homes and 853 built by the Admiralty.\nPlymouth is home to 28 parks with an average size of . Its largest park is Central Park, with other sizeable green spaces including Victoria Park, Freedom Fields Park, Alexandra Park, Devonport Park and the Hoe. Central Park is the home of Plymouth Argyle Football Club and a number of other leisure facilities.\nThe Plymouth Plan 2019\u20132034 was published May 2019 and sets the direction for future development with a new spatial strategy which reinforces links with the wider region in west Devon and east Cornwall in its Joint Local Plan and identifies three development areas within the city: the City centre and waterfront; a 'northern corridor' including Derriford and the vacant airfield site at Roborough; and an 'eastern corridor' including major new settlements at Sherford and Langage. Plymouth is categorized as a Small-Port City using the Southampton System for port-city classification.\nClimate.\nPlymouth has a moderated temperate oceanic climate (K\u00f6ppen \"Cfb\") which is wetter and milder than the rest of England. This means a wide range of exotic plants, palm trees, and yuccas can be cultivated. The annual mean high temperature is approximately . Due to the moderating effect of the sea and the south-westerly location, the climate is among the mildest of British cities, and one of the warmest UK cities in winter. The coldest month of February is similarly moderate, having mild mean minimum temperatures between . Snow usually falls in small amounts but a noteworthy recent exception was the period of the European winter storms of 2009\u201310 which, in early January 2010, covered Plymouth in at least of snow; more on higher ground. Another notable event was the of snowfall between 17 and 19 December 2010 \u2013 though only would lie at any one time due to melting. Over the 1961\u20131990 period, annual snowfall accumulation averaged less than per year.\nSouth West England has a favoured location when the Azores High pressure area extends north-eastwards towards the UK, particularly in summer. Coastal areas have average annual sunshine totals over 1,600 hours.\nOwing to its geographic location, rainfall tends to be associated with Atlantic depressions or with convection and is more frequent and heavier than in London and southeast England. The Atlantic depressions are more vigorous in autumn and winter and most of the rain which falls in those seasons in the south-west is from this source. Average annual rainfall is around . November to March have the highest mean wind speeds, with June to August having the lightest winds. The predominant wind direction is from the south-west.\nTypically, the warmest day of the year (1971\u20132000) will achieve a temperature of , although in July 2022 the temperature reached , the site record. On average, 4.25 days of the year will report a maximum temperature of or above. During the winter half of the year, the coldest night will typically fall to although in January 1979 the temperature fell to . Typically, 18.6 nights of the year will register an air frost.\nEducation.\nThere are three universities based in Plymouth, the University of Plymouth, Plymouth Marjon University and the Arts University Plymouth.\nThe University of Plymouth enrolls 23,155 total students as of 2018/2019 (largest in the UK out of 169). It also employs 2,900 staff with an annual income of around \u00a3160\u00a0million. It was founded in 1992 from Polytechnic South West (formerly Plymouth Polytechnic) following the Further and Higher Education Act 1992. It has a wide range of courses including those in marine focused business, marine engineering, marine biology and Earth, ocean and environmental sciences, surf science, shipping and logistics. The university formed a joint venture with the fellow Devonian University of Exeter in 2000, establishing the Peninsula College of Medicine and Dentistry. The college is ranked 8th out of 30 universities in the UK in 2011 for medicine. Its dental school was established in 2006, which also provides free dental care in an attempt to improve access to dental care in the South West.\nThe University of St Mark &amp; St John (known as \"Marjon\" or \"Marjons\") specialises in teacher training, and offers training across the country and abroad.\nArts University Plymouth offers a selection of courses including media. It was originally founded as the Plymouth Drawing School in 1856, and in December 2008, Plymouth College of Art and Design was renamed to Plymouth College of Art. In May 2022, the College was awarded University status, and became Arts University Plymouth.\nThe city is also home to two large colleges. The City College Plymouth provides courses from the most basic to Foundation degrees for approximately 26,000 students.\nPlymouth also has 71 state primary phase schools, 13 state secondary schools, eight special schools and three selective state grammar schools, Devonport High School for Girls, Devonport High School for Boys and Plymouth High School for Girls. There is also a private all-through school Plymouth College.\nThe city was also home to the Royal Naval Engineering College; opened in 1880 in Keyham, it trained engineering students for five years before they completed the remaining two years of the course at Greenwich. The college closed in 1910, but in 1940 a new college opened at Manadon. This was renamed \"Dockyard Technical College\" in 1959 before finally closing in 1994; training was transferred to the University of Southampton.\nPlymouth is home to the Marine Biological Association of the United Kingdom (MBA; founded 1884) which conducts research in all areas of the marine sciences. The Plymouth Marine Laboratory (PML; founded 1988) was formed in part from components of the MBA. Together with the National Marine Aquarium, the Sir Alister Hardy Foundation for Ocean Sciences, Plymouth University's Marine Institute and the Diving Diseases Research Centre, these marine-related organisations form the Plymouth Marine Sciences Partnership. The Plymouth Marine Laboratory, which focuses on global issues of climate change and sustainability. It monitors the effects of ocean acidity on corals and shellfish and reports the results to the UK government. It also cultivates algae that could be used to make biofuels or in the treatment of wastewater by using technology such as photo-bioreactors. It works alongside the Boots Group to investigate the use of algae in skincare protects, taking advantage of the chemicals they contain that adapt to protect themselves from the sun.\nA scheme was in operation over summer 2018 to provide meals during the summer holidays for children with parents on a low income, who could not afford to provide their children with healthy meals.\nUPSU also known as the University of Plymouth Student Union is based underground near the library. Every student at the University of Plymouth is a member of UPSU. The Union employs students across the University, from bar staff to events technicians. Every year the students at the University have an opportunity to vote which sabbatical officers represent them. In 2019 over 4000 students voted in the UPSU elections.\nDemography.\nFrom the 2011 Census, the Office for National Statistics published that Plymouth's unitary authority area population was 256,384; 15,664 more people than that of the last census from 2001, which indicated that Plymouth had a population of 240,720. The Plymouth urban area had a population of 260,203 in 2011 (the urban sprawl which extends outside the authority's boundaries). The city's average household size was 2.3 persons. At the time of the 2021 UK census, the ethnic composition of Plymouth's population was 94.1% White (of 89.5% was White British), with the largest minority ethnic group being Chinese at 0.5%. The white Irish ethnic group saw the largest decline in its share of the population since the 2001 Census to 2011 (\u221224%), while the \"Other Asian\" and Black African had the largest increases (360% and 351% respectively). This excludes the two new ethnic groups added to the 2011 census of Gypsy or Irish Traveller and Arab. The population rose rapidly during the second half of the 19th century, but declined by over 1.6% from 1931 to 1951.\nPlymouth's gross value added (a measure of the size of its economy) was \u00a35,169\u00a0million in 2013 making up 25% of Devon's GVA. Its GVA per person was \u00a319,943 and compared to the national average of \u00a323,755, was \u00a33,812 lower. Plymouth's unemployment rate was 7.0% in 2014 which was 2.0 points higher than the South West average and 0.8 points higher than the average for Great Britain (England, Wales and Scotland).\nA 2014 profile by the National Health Service showed Plymouth had higher than average levels of poverty and deprivation (26.2% of the population among the poorest 20.4% nationally). Life expectancy in Plymouth is 78.8 years for men and 82.5 for women\nEconomy.\nBecause of its coastal location, the economy of Plymouth has traditionally been , in particular the defence sector with over 12,000 people employed and approximately 7,500 in the armed forces. The Plymouth Gin Distillery has been producing Plymouth Gin since 1793, which was exported around the world by the Royal Navy. During the 1930s, it was the most widely distributed gin and had a controlled term of origin until 2015. Since the 1980s, employment in the defence sector has decreased substantially and the public sector is now prominent particularly in administration, health, education, medicine and engineering.\nDevonport Dockyard is the UK's only naval base that refits nuclear submarines and the Navy estimates that the Dockyard generates about 10% of Plymouth's income. Plymouth has the largest cluster of marine and maritime businesses in the south west with 270 firms operating within the sector. Other substantial employers include the university with almost 3,000 staff, the national retail chain The Range at their Estover headquarters, as well as the Plymouth Science Park employing 500 people in 50 companies.\nPlymouth has a post-war shopping area in the city centre with substantial pedestrianisation. At the west end of the zone inside a grade II listed building is the Pannier Market that was completed in 1959 \u2013 \"pannier\" meaning \"basket\" from French, so it translates as \"basket market\". In terms of retail floorspace, Plymouth is ranked in the top five in the South West, and 29th nationally. Plymouth was one of the first ten British cities to trial the new Business improvement district initiative. The Tinside Pool is situated at the foot of the Hoe and became a grade II listed building in 1998 before being restored to its 1930s look for \u00a33.4\u00a0million.\nPlymouth 2020.\nSince 2003, Plymouth Council has been undertaking a project of urban redevelopment called the \"Vision for Plymouth\" launched by the architect David Mackay and backed by both Plymouth City Council and the Plymouth Chamber of Commerce (PCC). With the aim of growing the population to 300,000 by building 33,000 new dwellings, its projects range from shopping centres, new public realm, a cruise terminal, rebalancing the underutilised city centre retail district and opening waterfront development linked by a new urban boulevard.\nIn 2004 the old Drake Circus shopping centre and Charles Cross car park were demolished and replaced by the latest Drake Circus Shopping Centre, which opened in October 2006. It received negative feedback before opening when David Mackay said it was already \"ten years out of date\". It was awarded the first ever Carbuncle Cup, awarded for Britain's ugliest building, in 2006. In contrast, the Theatre Royal's production and education centre, TR2, which was built on wasteland at Cattedown, was a runner-up for the RIBA Stirling Prize for Architecture in 2003.\nProposals included the demolition of the Plymouth Pavilions entertainment arena to create a canal \"boulevard\" linking Millbay to the city centre delivered in 2020. Millbay is being regenerated with mixed residential, retail and office space alongside the ferry port.\nPlymouth's Civic Centre was vacated by Plymouth City Council, and their operations were dispersed across the city centre\u2014the vacant and dilapidated modernist building was proposed for demolition by the Council but was ultimately saved by a listing in 2007 for its national architectural merit and was gifted to the developers Urban Splash, who intend to refurbish the structure for a mixed-use regeneration including variable let accommodation. The removal and relocation of Bretonside bus station\u2014a site originally earmarked for the Council\u2014was ultimately released for a mixed-use commercial leisure redevelopment including cinema and restaurants named 'Barcode' owned by British Land which also owns the adjacent Drake's Circus.\nJacka Bakery in the Barbican district is reputedly the oldest bakery in the UK, and has operated since the 1600s.\nTransport.\nRailway.\nPlymouth railway station is served by two train operating companies:\nSmaller stations in the suburban area west of the city centre are served by trains on the Tamar Valley Line to Gunnislake and local services on the Cornish Main Line, which crosses the Tamar on the Royal Albert Bridge. This was designed by Brunel and opened in 1859. The parallel road bridge was completed in 1961.\nHistory.\nThe station opened on its present site in 1877 and was previously named \"Plymouth North Road\", when there were other main line stations in the city at Millbay and Friary; these have since closed.\nFuture.\nThere have been proposals to reopen the Exeter to Plymouth railway of the LSWR which would connect Cornwall and Plymouth to Exeter using the former Southern Railway main line from Plymouth to Exeter via Okehampton, because the main line through South Devon is vulnerable to damage from rough seas at Dawlish, where some of the cliffs are also fragile. There are related proposals to reopen part of the old main line from Bere Alston on the Plymouth-Gunnislake line as far as Tavistock to serve a new housing development but, although the idea has been discussed since 2008, progress has been slow.\nRoads.\nThe A38 dual-carriageway runs from east to west across the north of the city; within the city, it is known as 'The Parkway' and represents the boundary between the older parts of the city and more recently developed suburban areas. Heading east, it connects Plymouth to the M5 motorway, about away near Exeter; heading west, it connects Devon with Cornwall via the Tamar Bridge.\nBuses.\nBus services are provided mainly by Plymouth Citybus and Stagecoach South West, but a few routes are served by smaller local operators. Long distance inter-city bus services terminate at Plymouth coach station.\nThere are three Park and Ride services at Milehouse, Coypool (Plympton) and George Junction (Plymouth City Airport), which are operated by Stagecoach South West except Milehouse park and ride. This is served by Plymouth Citybus\nFerries.\nA regular international ferry service provided by Brittany Ferries operates from Millbay taking cars and foot passengers directly to France (Roscoff) and Spain (Santander) primarily on the two ferries, \"MV Armorique\" and \"MV Pont-Aven\". The Cremyll Ferry is a passenger ferry between Stonehouse and the Cornish hamlet of Cremyll, which is believed to have operated continuously since 1204. There is also a pedestrian ferry from the Mayflower Steps to Mount Batten, and an alternative to using the Tamar Bridge via the Torpoint Ferry (vehicle and pedestrian) across the River Tamar.\nAir.\nThe city's airport was Plymouth City Airport about north of the city centre.\nThe airport was home to the local airline Air Southwest,\nwhich operated flights across the United Kingdom and Ireland. In June 2003, a report by the South West RDA was published looking at the future of aviation in the south-west and the possible closure of airports. It concluded that the best option for the south-west was to close Plymouth City Airport and expand Exeter International Airport and Newquay Cornwall Airport, although it did conclude that this was not the best option for Plymouth. In April 2011, it was announced that the airport would close, which it did on 23 December. A local company, FlyPlymouth, put forward plans in 2015 to reopen the airport by 2018, providing daily services to various destinations including London, but as of now, these projects have stalled.\nCycle routes.\nPlymouth is at the southern end of the long Devon Coast to Coast Cycle Route (National Cycle Route 27). The route runs mostly traffic-free on off-road sections between Ilfracombe and Plymouth. The route uses former railway lines, though there are some stretches on public roads.\nReligion.\nPlymouth has about 150 churches city-wide. The Plymouth Cathedral is Roman Catholic, and is located in Stonehouse. It was opened in 1858, and consecrated in 1880. The city's oldest church is Plymouth Minster, also known as St Andrew's Church, (Anglican) located at the top of Royal Parade\u2014it is the largest parish church in Devon and has been a site of gathering since AD\u00a0800. The city also includes five Baptist churches, over twenty Methodist chapels, and thirteen Roman Catholic churches. In 1831 the first Brethren assembly in England, a movement of conservative non-denominational Evangelical Christians, was established in the city, so that Brethren are often called Plymouth Brethren, although the movement did not begin locally.\nPlymouth has the first known reference to Jews in the South West from Sir Francis Drake's voyages in 1577 to 1580, as his log mentioned \"Moses the Jew\" \u2013 a man from Plymouth. The Plymouth Synagogue is a Listed Grade II* building, built in 1762 and is the oldest Ashkenazi Synagogue in the English speaking world. There are also places of worship for Islam, Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed, Buddhism, Unitarianism, Chinese beliefs and Humanism.\n58.1% of the population described themselves in the 2011 census return as being at least nominally Christian and 0.8% as Muslim with all other religions represented by less than 0.5% each. The portion of people without a religion is 32.9%; above the national average of 24.7%. 7.1% did not state their religious belief. Since the 2001 Census, the number of Christians and Jews has decreased (\u221216% and \u22127% respectively), while all other religions have increased and non-religious people have almost doubled in number.\nCulture.\nBuilt in 1815, Union Street was at the heart of Plymouth's historical culture. It became known as \"the servicemen's playground\", as it was where sailors from the Royal Navy would seek entertainment of all kinds. During the 1930s, there were 30 pubs and it attracted such performers as Charlie Chaplin to the New Palace Theatre. It was described in 2008 as the late-night hub of Plymouth's entertainment strip.\nOutdoor events and festivals are held including the annual British Firework Championships in August, which attracts tens of thousands of people across the waterfront. In August 2006 the world record for the most simultaneous fireworks was surpassed, by Roy Lowry of the University of Plymouth, over Plymouth Sound. From 2014 MTV Crashes Plymouth has taken place every July on Plymouth Hoe, hosting big-name acts such as The 1975, Little Mix, Tinie Tempah and Busted. Between 1992 and 2012 the Music of the Night celebration was performed in the Royal Citadel by the 29 Commando Regiment and local performers to raise money for local and military charities. A number of other smaller cultural events taken place annually, including Plymouth Art Weekender, Plymouth Fringe Festival and Illuminate Festival.\nThe city's main theatre is Theatre Royal Plymouth, presenting large-scale West End shows and smaller works as well as an extensive education and outreach programme. The main building is located in the city centre and contains three performance spaces \u2013 The Lyric (1,315 capacity), Drum Theatre (200 capacity), and The Lab (60 capacity) \u2013 and they also run their own specialised production and creative learning centre called TR2, based in Cattedown. Plymouth Pavilions has multiple uses for the city staging music concerts, basketball matches and stand-up comedy. There are also three cinemas: Reel Cinema at Derrys Cross, Plymouth Arts Centre at Looe Street and a Vue cinema at the Barbican Leisure Park. Barbican Theatre, Plymouth delivers a theatre and dance programme of performances and workshops focused on young people and emerging artists contains a main auditorium (110 \u2013 140 capacity) and rehearsal studio; they also host the B-Bar (80 capacity), which offers a programme of music, comedy and spoken word performance. The Plymouth Athenaeum, which includes a local interest library, is a society dedicated to the promotion of learning in the fields of science, technology, literature and art. In 2017 its auditorium (340 capacity) returned to use as a theatre, having been out of service since 2009. The Plymouth City Museum and Art Gallery, now renamed as The Box, is operated by Plymouth City Council allowing free admission \u2013 it has six galleries.\nPlymouth is the regional television centre of BBC South West. A team of journalists are headquartered at Plymouth for the ITV West Country regional station, after a merger with ITV West forced ITV Westcountry to close on 16 February 2009. The main local newspapers serving Plymouth are \"The Herald,\" \"Western Morning News\" and the Plymouth Chronicle with Greatest Hits Radio Plymouth, BBC Radio Devon, and Heart West being the local radio stations with the most listeners.\nSport.\nPlymouth is home to Plymouth Argyle F.C., who, as of the 2025-26 season, play in the third tier of English football, Sky Bet League One. The team's home ground is called Home Park and is located next to Central Park. It links itself with the group of English non-conformists that left Plymouth for the New World in 1620: its nickname is \"The Pilgrims\". The city also has three Non-League football clubs; Plymouth Parkway who play at Bolitho Park, Elburton Villa who play at Haye Road and Plymstock United who play at Dean Cross. Plymouth Parkway were promoted to the Western League from the South West Peninsula League in 2018, and after two Covid-19 interrupted years to the Southern Football League in 2021, whilst Elburton Villa and Plymstock United continue to compete in the South West Peninsula League.\nOther sports clubs competing in national competition include Plymouth Albion, Plymouth City Patriots, Plymouth Raiders and Plymouth Gladiators.\nPlymouth Albion Rugby Football Club is a rugby union club that was founded in 1875 and are currently competing in the third tier of Professional English Rugby the National League 1. They play at the Brickfields.\nIn basketball, the city is represented by two teams; Plymouth City Patriots, of the top-tier British Basketball League, and Plymouth Raiders of the National Basketball League.\nPlymouth Gladiators are a speedway team, currently competing in the British National League, with home meetings taking place at the Plymouth Coliseum. Plymouth cricket club was formed in 1843, the current 1st XI play in the Devon Premier League. Plymouth is also home to Plymouth Marjons Hockey Club, with their 1st XI playing in the National League last season. Plymouth Mariners Baseball club play in the South West Baseball League, they play their home games at Wilson Field in Central Park. Plymouth was home to an American football club, the Plymouth Admirals until 2010.\nPlymouth is an important centre for watersports, especially scuba diving and sailing. The Port of Plymouth Regatta is one of the oldest regattas in the world, and has been held regularly since 1823. In September 2011, Plymouth hosted the America's Cup World Series for nine days.\nPublic services.\nSince 1973 Plymouth has been supplied water by South West Water. Prior to the 1973 take over it was supplied by Plymouth County Borough Corporation. Before the 19th century two leats were built to provide drinking water for the town. They carried water from Dartmoor to Plymouth. A watercourse, known as Plymouth or Drake's Leat, was opened on 24 April 1591 to tap the River Meavy. The Devonport Leat was constructed to carry fresh drinking water to the expanding town of Devonport and its ever-growing dockyard. It was fed by three Dartmoor rivers: The West Dart, Cowsic and Blackabrook. It seems to have been carrying water since 1797, but it was officially completed in 1801. It was originally designed to carry water to Devonport town but has since been shortened and now carries water to Burrator Reservoir, which feeds most of the water supply of Plymouth. Burrator Reservoir is located about north of the city and was constructed in 1898 and expanded in 1928.\nPlymouth City Council is responsible for waste management throughout the city and South West Water is responsible for sewerage. Plymouth's electricity is supplied from the National Grid and distributed to Plymouth via Western Power Distribution. On the outskirts of Plympton a combined cycle gas-powered station, the Langage Power Station, which started to produce electricity for Plymouth at the end of 2009.\nHer Majesty's Courts and Tribunals Service provide a magistrates' court and a Combined Crown and County Court Centre in the city. The Plymouth Borough Police, formed in 1836, eventually became part of Devon and Cornwall Constabulary. There are police stations at Charles Cross and Crownhill (the Divisional HQ) and smaller stations at Plympton and Plymstock. The city has one of the Devon and Cornwall Area Crown Prosecution Service Divisional offices. Plymouth has five fire stations located in Camel's Head, Crownhill, Greenbank, Plympton and Plymstock which is part of Devon and Somerset Fire and Rescue Service. The Royal National Lifeboat Institution have an Atlantic 85 class lifeboat and Severn class lifeboat stationed at Millbay Docks.\nPlymouth is served by Plymouth Hospitals NHS Trust and the city's NHS hospital is Derriford Hospital north of the city centre. The Royal Eye Infirmary is located at Derriford Hospital. South Western Ambulance Service NHS Foundation Trust operates in Plymouth and the rest of the south west; its headquarters are in Exeter.\nThe mid-19th-century burial ground at Ford Park Cemetery was reopened by a successful trust formed in 2000 and the City council operate two large early 20th century cemeteries at Weston Mill and Efford both with crematoria and chapels. There is also a privately owned cemetery on the outskirts of the city, Drake Memorial Park which does not allow headstones to mark graves, but a brass plaque set into the ground.\nLandmarks and tourist attractions.\nAfter the English Civil War the Royal Citadel was erected in 1666 towards the eastern section of Plymouth Hoe, to defend the port from naval attacks, suppress Plymothian Parliamentary leanings and to train the armed forces. Currently, guided tours are available in the summer months. Further west is Smeaton's Tower, which is a standard lighthouse that was constructed in 1759. Furthermore, Smeaton's Tower was dismantled in 1877 and the top two-thirds were reassembled on Plymouth Hoe. It is open to the public and has views over the Plymouth Sound and the city from the lantern room. Plymouth has 20 war memorials of which nine are on The Hoe including: Plymouth Naval Memorial, to remember those killed in World Wars I and II who have no known grave, and the Armada Memorial, to commemorate the defeat of the Spanish Armada.\nThe early port settlement of Plymouth, called \"Sutton\", approximates to the area now referred to as the Barbican and has 100 listed buildings and the largest concentration of cobbled streets in Britain. The Pilgrim Fathers left for the New World in 1620 near the commemorative Mayflower Steps in Sutton Pool. Also on Sutton Pool is the National Marine Aquarium which displays 400 marine species and includes Britain's deepest aquarium tank.\n upstream on the opposite side of the River Plym is the Saltram estate, which has a Jacobean and Georgian mansion.\nOn the northern outskirts of the city, Crownhill Fort is a well-restored example of a \"Palmerston's Folly\". It is owned by the Landmark Trust and is open to the public.\nTo the west of the city is Devonport, one of Plymouth's historic quarters. As part of Devonport's millennium regeneration project, the \"Devonport Heritage Trail\" has been introduced, complete with over 70 waymarkers outlining the route.\nPlymouth is often used as a base by visitors to Dartmoor, the Tamar Valley and the beaches of south-east Cornwall. Kingsand, Cawsand and Whitsand Bay are popular.\nThe Roland Levinsky Building, the landmark building of the University of Plymouth, is located in the city's central quarter. Designed by leading architect Henning Larsen, the building was opened in 2008 and houses the University's Arts faculty.\nBeckley Point, at 78m / 20 floors, is Plymouth's tallest building and was completed on 8 February 2018. It was designed by Boyes Rees Architects and built by contractors Kier.\nNotable people.\nPeople from Plymouth are known as Plymothians or less formally as Janners. Its meaning is described as a person from Devon, deriving from Cousin Jan (the Devon form of John), but more particularly in naval circles anyone from the Plymouth area.\nThe Elizabethan navigator, Sir Francis Drake was born in the nearby town of Tavistock and was the mayor of Plymouth. He was the first Englishman to circumnavigate the world and was known by the Spanish as \"El Draco\" meaning \"The Dragon\" after he raided many of their ships. He died of dysentery in 1596 off the coast of Portobelo, Panama. In 2002 a mission to recover his body and bring it to Plymouth was allowed by the Ministry of Defence. His cousin and contemporary John Hawkins was a Plymouth man.\nPainter Sir Joshua Reynolds, founder and first president of the Royal Academy was born and educated in nearby Plympton, now part of Plymouth. William Cookworthy born in Kingsbridge set up his successful porcelain business in the city and was a close friend of John Smeaton designer of the Eddystone Lighthouse. Benjamin Robert Haydon, an English painter who specialised in grand historical pictures, was born here in 1786. The naturalist William Elford Leach, who did much to pave the way in Britain for Charles Darwin, was born at Hoe Gate in 1791.\nAntarctic explorers Robert Falcon Scott who was born in Plymouth and Frank Bickerton both lived in the city. Artists include Beryl Cook whose paintings depict the culture of Plymouth and Robert Lenkiewicz, whose paintings investigated themes of vagrancy, sexual behaviour and suicide, lived in the city from the 1960s until his death in 2002. Illustrator and creator of children's series Mr Benn and King Rollo, David McKee, was born and brought up in South Devon and trained at Plymouth College of Art. Jazz musician John Surman, born in nearby Tavistock, has close connections to the area, evidenced by his 2012 album Saltash Bells. The avant-garde prepared guitarist Keith Rowe was born in the city before establishing the jazz free improvisation band AMM in London in 1965 and MIMEO in 1997. The musician and film director Cosmo Jarvis has lived in several towns in South Devon and has filmed videos in and around Plymouth. In addition, actors Sir Donald Sinden and Judi Trott were born in Plymouth. George Passmore of Turner Prize winning duo Gilbert and George was also born in the city, as was Labour politician Michael Foot whose family reside at nearby Trematon Castle.\nNotable athletes include swimmer Sharron Davies, diver Tom Daley, dancer Wayne Sleep, and footballer Trevor Francis. Other past residents include composer journalist and newspaper editor William Henry Wills, film music composer Ron Goodwin, and journalist Angela Rippon and comedian Dawn French. Canadian politician and legal scholar Chris Axworthy hailed from Plymouth. America based actor Donald Moffat, whose roles include American Vice President Lyndon B. Johnson in the film \"The Right Stuff\", and fictional President Bennett in \"Clear and Present Danger\", was born in Plymouth. Canadian actor Mark Holden was also born in Plymouth. Kevin Owen is an international TV news anchor who was born in Freedom Fields Hospital, while his father served as a Royal Navy officer. Cambridge spy Guy Burgess was born at 2 Albemarle Villas, Stoke whilst his father was a serving Royal Navy officer.\nFreedom of the City.\nThe following People, Military Units and Organisations and Groups have received the Freedom of the City of Plymouth.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23509", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23509", "title": "Plymouth England", "text": ""}
{"id": "23510", "revid": "8066546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23510", "title": "Pencil-and-paper game", "text": ""}
{"id": "23511", "revid": "35435712", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23511", "title": "Point-to-Point Protocol", "text": "Data link layer communication protocolIn computer networking, Point-to-Point Protocol (PPP) is a data link layer (layer 2) communication protocol between two routers directly without any host or any other networking in between. It can provide loop detection, authentication, transmission encryption, and data compression.\nPPP is used over many types of physical networks, including serial cable, phone line, trunk line, cellular telephone, specialized radio links, ISDN, and fiber optic links such as SONET. Since IP packets cannot be transmitted over a modem line on their own without some data link protocol that can identify where the transmitted frame starts and where it ends, Internet service providers (ISPs) have used PPP for customer dial-up access to the Internet.\nPPP is used on former dial-up networking lines. Two derivatives of PPP, Point-to-Point Protocol over Ethernet (PPPoE) and Point-to-Point Protocol over ATM (PPPoA), are used most commonly by ISPs to establish a digital subscriber line (DSL) Internet service LP connection with customers.\nDescription.\nPPP is very commonly used as a data-link-layer protocol for connection over synchronous and asynchronous circuits, where it has largely superseded the older Serial Line Internet Protocol (SLIP) and telephone company mandated standards (such as Link Access Protocol, Balanced (LAPB) in the X.25 protocol suite). The only requirement for PPP is that the circuit provided be duplex. PPP was made to work with numerous network-layer protocols, including Internet Protocol (IP), TRILL, Novell's Internetwork Packet Exchange (IPX), NBF, DEC net and AppleTalk. Like SLIP, this is a full Internet connection over telephone lines via modem. It is more reliable than SLIP because it double checks to ensure Internet packets arrive intact. It resends any damaged packets.\nPPP was designed somewhat after the original HDLC specifications. The people who had designed PPP included many additional features that had been seen only in proprietary data-link protocols up to that time. PPP is specified in RFC 1661.\nRFC 2516 describes Point-to-Point Protocol over Ethernet (PPPoE) as a method for transmitting PPP over Ethernet that is sometimes used with DSL. RFC 2364 describes Point-to-Point Protocol over ATM (PPPoA) as a method for transmitting PPP over ATM Adaptation Layer 5 (AAL5), which is also a common alternative to PPPoE used with DSL.\nPPP, PPPoE and PPPoA are widely used in WAN lines.\nPPP is a layered protocol that has three components:\nAutomatic self configuration.\nLCP initiates and terminates connections gracefully, allowing hosts to negotiate connection options. It is an integral part of PPP, and is defined in the same standard specification. LCP provides automatic configuration of the interfaces at each end (such as setting datagram size, escaped characters, and magic numbers) and for selecting optional authentication. The LCP protocol runs on top of PPP (with PPP protocol number 0xC021) and therefore a basic PPP connection has to be established before LCP is able to configure it.\nRFC 1994 describes Challenge-Handshake Authentication Protocol (CHAP), which is preferred for establishing dial-up connections with ISPs.\nAlthough deprecated, Password Authentication Protocol (PAP) is still sometimes used.\nAnother option for authentication over PPP is Extensible Authentication Protocol (EAP) described in RFC 2284.\nAfter the link has been established, additional network (layer 3) configuration may take place. Most commonly, the Internet Protocol Control Protocol (IPCP) is used, although Internetwork Packet Exchange Control Protocol (IPXCP) and AppleTalk Control Protocol (ATCP) were once popular. Internet Protocol Version 6 Control Protocol (IPv6CP) will see extended use in the future, when IPv6 replaces IPv4 as the dominant layer-3 protocol.\nMultiple network layer protocols.\nPPP permits multiple network layer protocols to operate on the same communication link. For every network layer protocol used, a separate Network Control Protocol (NCP) is provided in order to encapsulate and negotiate options for the multiple network layer protocols. It negotiates network-layer information, e.g. network address or compression options, after the connection has been established.\nFor example, IP uses IPCP, and Internetwork Packet Exchange (IPX) uses the Novell IPX Control Protocol (IPX/SPX). NCPs include fields containing standardized codes to indicate the network layer protocol type that the PPP connection encapsulates.\nThe following NCPs may be used with PPP:\nLooped link detection.\nPPP detects looped links using a feature involving magic numbers. When the node sends PPP LCP messages, these messages may include a magic number. If a line is looped, the node receives an LCP message with its own magic number, instead of getting a message with the peer's magic number.\nConfiguration options.\nThe previous section introduced the use of LCP options to meet specific WAN connection requirements. PPP may include the following LCP options:\nPPP frame.\nStructure.\nPPP frames are variants of HDLC frames:\nIf both peers agree to Address field and Control field compression during LCP, then those fields are omitted. Likewise if both peers agree to Protocol field compression, then the 0x00 byte can be omitted.\nThe Protocol field indicates the type of payload packet: 0xC021 for LCP, 0x80xy for various NCPs, 0x0021 for IP, 0x0029 AppleTalk, 0x002B for IPX, 0x003D for Multilink, 0x003F for NetBIOS, 0x00FD for MPPC and MPPE, etc. PPP is limited, and cannot contain general Layer 3 data, unlike Ether Type.\nThe Information field contains the PPP payload; it has a variable length with a negotiated maximum called the Maximum Transmission Unit. By default, the maximum is 1500 octets. It might be padded on transmission; if the information for a particular protocol can be padded, that protocol must allow information to be distinguished from padding.\nEncapsulation.\nPPP frames are encapsulated in a lower-layer protocol that provides framing and may provide other functions such as a checksum to detect transmission errors. PPP on serial links is usually encapsulated in a framing similar to HDLC, described by IETF RFC 1662.\nThe Flag field is present when PPP with HDLC-like framing is used.\nThe Address and Control fields always have the value hex FF (for \"all stations\") and hex 03 (for \"unnumbered information\"), and can be omitted whenever PPP LCP Address-and-Control-Field-Compression (ACFC) is negotiated.\nThe frame check sequence (FCS) field is used for determining whether an individual frame has an error. It contains a checksum computed over the frame to provide basic protection against errors in transmission. This is a CRC code similar to the one used for other layer two protocol error protection schemes such as the one used in Ethernet. According to RFC 1662, it can be either 16 bits (2 bytes) or 32 bits (4 bytes) in size (default is 16 bits - Polynomial \"x\"16 + \"x\"12 + \"x\"5 + 1).\nThe FCS is calculated over the Address, Control, Protocol, Information and Padding fields after the message has been encapsulated.\nOver several links.\nMultilink PPP.\nMultilink PPP (also referred to as MLPPP, MP, MPPP, MLP, or Multilink) provides a method for spreading traffic across multiple distinct PPP connections. It is defined in RFC 1990. It can be used, for example, to connect a home computer to an Internet Service Provider using two traditional 56k modems, or to connect a company through two leased lines.\nOn a single PPP line frames cannot arrive out of order, but this is possible when the frames are divided among multiple PPP connections. Therefore, Multilink PPP must number the fragments so they can be put in the right order again when they arrive.\nMultilink PPP is an example of a link aggregation technology. Cisco IOS Release 11.1 and later supports Multilink PPP. \nMulticlass PPP.\nWith PPP, one cannot establish several simultaneous distinct PPP connections over a single link.\nThat's not possible with Multilink PPP either. Multilink PPP uses contiguous numbers for all the fragments of a packet, and as a consequence it is not possible to suspend the sending of a sequence of fragments of one packet in order to send another packet. This prevents from running Multilink PPP multiple times on the same links.\nMulticlass PPP is a kind of Multilink PPP where each \"class\" of traffic uses a separate sequence number space and reassembly buffer. Multiclass PPP is defined in RFC 2686\nTunnels.\nDerived protocols.\nPPTP (Point-to-Point Tunneling Protocol) is a form of PPP between two hosts via GRE using encryption (MPPE) and compression (MPPC).\nAs a layer 2 protocol between both ends of a tunnel.\nMany protocols can be used to tunnel data over IP networks. Some of them, like SSL, SSH, or L2TP create virtual network interfaces and give the impression of direct physical connections between the tunnel endpoints. On a Linux host for example, these interfaces would be called tun0 or ppp0.\nAs there are only two endpoints on a tunnel, the tunnel is a point-to-point connection and PPP is a natural choice as a data link layer protocol between the virtual network interfaces. PPP can assign IP addresses to these virtual interfaces, and these IP addresses can be used, for example, to route between the networks on both sides of the tunnel.\nIPsec in tunneling mode does not create virtual physical interfaces at the end of the tunnel, since the tunnel is handled directly by the TCP/IP stack. L2TP can be used to provide these interfaces, this technique is called L2TP/IPsec. In this case too, PPP provides IP addresses to the extremities of the tunnel.\nIETF standards.\nPPP is defined in RFC 1661 (The Point-to-Point Protocol, July 1994). RFC 1547 (Requirements for an Internet Standard Point-to-Point Protocol, December 1993) provides historical information about the need for PPP and its development. A series of related RFCs have been written to define how a variety of network control protocols, including TCP/IP, DECnet, AppleTalk, IPX, work with PPP; they can be found on the Datatracker IETF website.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23512", "revid": "18010125", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23512", "title": "Patterson\u2013Gimlin film", "text": "Alleged film of Bigfoot\nThe Patterson\u2013Gimlin film is a 1967 American short motion picture, created by Roger Patterson and Robert Gimlin, that depicts an unidentified subject that the filmmakers stated was a Bigfoot. The footage was shot in 1967 in Northern California, and has since been subjected to many attempts to authenticate or debunk it.\nThe footage was filmed alongside Bluff Creek, a tributary of the Klamath River, about northwest of Orleans, California, in Del Norte County on the Six Rivers National Forest. The film site is roughly south of Oregon and east of the Pacific Ocean. For decades, the exact location of the site was lost, primarily because of re-growth of foliage in the streambed after the flood of 1964. It was rediscovered in 2011. It is just south of a north-running segment of the creek informally known as \"the bowling alley\".\nThe filmmakers were Roger Patterson (1933\u20131972) and Robert \"Bob\" Gimlin (born 1931). Patterson died of cancer in 1972 and \"maintained right to the end that the creature on the film was real\". Patterson's friend, Gimlin, has always denied being involved in any part of a hoax with Patterson. Gimlin mostly avoided publicly discussing the subject from at least the early 1970s until about 2005 (except for three appearances), when he began giving interviews and appearing at Bigfoot conferences.\nThe film is long (preceded by of \"horseback\" footage), has 954 frames, and runs for 59.5 seconds at 16 frames per second. If the film was shot at 18 fps, as Grover Krantz believed, the event lasted 53 seconds. The date was October 20, 1967, according to the filmmakers, although some critics believe it was shot earlier.\nBackground.\nPatterson said he became interested in Bigfoot after reading an article about the creature by Ivan T. Sanderson in \"True\" magazine in December 1959. In 1961 Sanderson published his encyclopedic \"Abominable Snowmen: Legend Come to Life,\" a worldwide survey of accounts of Bigfoot-type creatures, including recent track finds, etc. in the Bluff Creek area, which heightened his interest. Thereafter, Marian Place wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;In 1962 he visited Bluff Creek and talked with a whole host of Bigfoot-believers. In 1964 he returned and met a timber-cruiser named Pat Graves, who drove him to Laird Meadows. There Patterson saw fresh \u200cfor him an almost unbearably exciting, spine-chilling experience. What a tremendous feat it would \u200cwhat a scientific \u200cif he could obtain unshakable evidence that these tracks were not the work of a prankster, but the actual mark of a hitherto unknown creature! If he succeeded, he would be famous! And rich!\nAlas, fame and fortune were not gained that year, nor the next, nor the next. Patterson invested thousands of hours and dollars combing Bigfoot and Sasquatch territory. He fought constant ridicule and a shortage of funds[...] [and] founded[...] the Northwest Research Foundation. Through it he solicited funds.[...] The response was encouraging and enabled him to lead several expeditions.[...] In 1966 he published a paperback book at his own expense[...] [and] added the income from its sales and his lectures to the search fund. As each wilderness jaunt failed to see or capture the monster, one by one the thrill-seekers dropped out. But Patterson never gave up.\nPatterson's book, \"Do Abominable Snowmen of America Really Exist?\", was self-published in 1966. The book has been characterized as \"little more than a collection of newspaper clippings laced together with Patterson's circus-poster style prose\". The book, however, contains 20 pages of previously unpublished interviews and letters, 17 drawings by Patterson of the encounters described in the text, five hand-drawn maps (rare in subsequent Bigfoot books), and almost 20 photos and illustrations from others. It was first reprinted in 1996 by Chris Murphy, and then again re-issued by Murphy in 2005 under the title \"The Bigfoot Film Controversy,\" with 81 pages of additional material by Murphy.\nIn May/June 1967 Patterson began filming a docudrama or pseudo-documentary about cowboys being led by an old miner and a wise Indian tracker on a hunt for Bigfoot. The storyline called for Patterson, his Indian guide (Gimlin in a wig), and the cowboys to recall in flashbacks the stories of Fred Beck (of the 1924 Ape Canyon incident) and others as they tracked the beast on horseback. For actors and cameraman, Patterson used at least nine volunteer acquaintances, including Gimlin and Bob Heironimus, for three days of shooting, perhaps over the Memorial Day weekend. Patterson would have needed a costume to represent Bigfoot, if the time came to shoot such climactic scenes.\nPrior to the October 1967 filming, Patterson apparently visited Los Angeles on these occasions:\nMerritt soon moved back to Yakima and became Patterson's neighbor, and later his collaborator on his Bigfoot documentary.\nBoth Patterson and Gimlin had been rodeo riders and amateur boxers\u2014and local champions in their weight classes. Patterson had played high school football.\nIn October 1967, Patterson and his friend Gimlin set out for the Six Rivers National Forest in far Northern California. They drove in Gimlin's truck, carrying his provisions and three horses, positioned sideways. Patterson chose the area because of intermittent reports of the creatures in the past, and of their enormous footprints since 1958. His familiarity with the area and its residents from prior visits may also have been a factor.\nThe most recent of these reports was the nearby Blue Creek Mountain track find, which was investigated by journalist John Green, Bigfoot hunter Ren\u00e9 Dahinden, and archaeologist Don Abbott on and after August 28, 1967. This find was reported to Patterson (via his wife) soon thereafter by Al Hodgson, owner of the Willow Creek Variety Store.\nThough Gimlin says he doubted the existence of Sasquatch-like creatures, he agreed to Patterson's insistence that they should not attempt to shoot one with a gun.\nEncounter.\nAs their stories went, in the early afternoon of Friday, October 20, 1967, Patterson and Gimlin were riding generally northeast (upstream) on horseback along the east bank of Bluff Creek. At sometime between 1:15 and 1:40p.m., they \"came to an overturned tree with a large root system at a turn in the creek, almost as high as a room\".\nWhen they rounded it, \"there was a \u200ca 'crow's nest'\u2014\u2009\u200cleft over from the flood of '64,\" and then they spotted the figure behind it nearly simultaneously. It was either \"crouching beside the creek to their left\" or \"standing\" there, on the opposite bank. Gimlin later described himself as in a mild state of shock after first seeing the figure.\nPatterson initially estimated its height at to , and later raised his estimate to about . Some later analysts, anthropologist Grover Krantz among them, have suggested Patterson's later estimate was about too tall. Gimlin's estimate was .\nThe film shows what Patterson and Gimlin claimed was a large, hairy, bipedal, apelike figure with short, \"silvery brown\" or \"dark reddish-brown\" or \"black\" hair covering most of its body, including its prominent breasts. The figure in the film generally matches the descriptions of Bigfoot offered by others who claim to have seen one.\nPatterson estimated he was about away from the creature at his closest. Patterson said that his horse reared upon sensing the figure, and he spent about 20 seconds extricating himself from the saddle, controlling his horse, getting around to its other side, and getting his camera from a saddlebag before he could run toward the figure while operating his camera. He yelled \"Cover me\" to Gimlin, \"meaning to get the gun out\". Gimlin crossed the creek on horseback after Patterson had run well beyond it, riding on a path somewhat to the left of Patterson's and somewhat beyond his position. Patterson estimates he came within of \"Patty\". Then, rifle in hand, he dismounted, but did not point his rifle at the creature.\nThe figure had walked away from them to a distance of about before Patterson began to run after it. The resulting film (about 59.5 seconds long at 16 fps) is initially quite shaky until Patterson got about from the figure. At that point, the figure glanced over its right shoulder at the men and Patterson fell to his knees; on Krantz's map this corresponds to frame 264. To researcher John Green, Patterson would later characterize the creature's expression as one of \"contempt and disgust ... you know how it is when the umpire tells you 'one more word and you're out of the game.' That's the way it felt.\"\nShortly after this point the steady, middle portion of the film begins, containing the famous look-back frame 352. Patterson said, \"it turned a total of I think three times,\" the other times therefore being before the filming began and/or while he was running with his finger off the trigger. Shortly after glancing over its shoulder on film, the creature disappeared behind a grove of trees for 14 seconds, then reappeared in the film's final 15 seconds after Patterson moved to a better vantage point, fading into the trees again and being lost to view at a distance of as the reel of film ran out.\nGimlin remounted and followed it on horseback, keeping his distance, until it disappeared around a bend in the road away. Patterson called him back at that point, feeling vulnerable on foot without a rifle, because he feared the creature's mate might approach. The entire encounter had lasted less than two minutes.\nNext, Gimlin and Patterson rounded up Patterson's horses, which had run off in the opposite direction, downstream, before the filming began. Patterson got his second roll of film from his saddlebag and filmed the tracks. Then the men tracked \"Patty\" for either or , but \"lost it in the heavy undergrowth\". They went to their campsite south, picked up plaster, returned to the initial site, measured the creature's step-length, and made two plaster casts, one each of the best-quality right and left prints.\nDetails.\nAccording to Patterson and Gimlin, they were the only witnesses to their brief encounter with what they claimed was a sasquatch. Their statements agree in general, but author Greg Long notes a number of inconsistencies. They offered somewhat different sequences in describing how they and the horses reacted upon seeing the creature. Patterson in particular increased his estimates of the creature's size in subsequent retellings of the encounter. In a different context, Long argues, these discrepancies would probably be considered minor, but given the extraordinary claims made by Patterson and Gimlin, any apparent disagreements in perception or memory are worth noting.\nThe film's defenders have responded by saying that commercially motivated hoaxers would have \"got their stories straight\" beforehand so they would not have disagreed immediately upon being interviewed, and on so many points, and so they wouldn't have created a suit and a creature with foreseeably objectionable features and behaviors.\nA more serious objection concerns the film's \"timeline\". This is important because KodachromeII movie film, as far as is known, could be developed only by a lab containing a $60,000+ machine, and the few West Coast labs known to possess one did not do developing over weekends. Patterson's brother-in-law Al DeAtley claims not to remember where he took the film for development or where he picked it up.\nCritics claim that too much happened between the filming (at 1:15 at the earliest) and the filmmakers' arrival in Willow Creek (at 6:30 at the latest). Daegling wrote, \"All of the problems with the timeline disappear if the film is shot a few days or hours beforehand. If that is the case, one has to wonder what other details of this story are wrong.\" The film's defenders retort that although the time window was tight, it was do-able.\nChris Murphy wrote, \"I have confirmed with Bob Gimlin that Patterson definitely rode a small quarter horse (which he owned), not his Welsh pony 'Peanuts'. Also, that Patterson had arranged to borrow a horse by the name of 'Chico' from Bob Heironimus for Gimlin to use[...] Gimlin did not have a horse that was suitable (old enough) for the expedition.\" Heironimus stated that Chico (a middle-aged gelding) \"wouldn't jump or buck\".\nImmediate aftermath.\nAt approximately 6:30p.m., Patterson and Gimlin met up with Al Hodgson at his variety store in Willow Creek, approximately south by road, about by Bluff Creek Road from their camp to the 1967 roadhead by Bluff Creek, and down California State Route 96 to Willow Creek. Patterson intended to drive on to Eureka to ship his film. Either at that time, or when he arrived in the Eureka/Arcata area, he called Al DeAtley (his brother-in-law in Yakima) and told him to expect the film he was shipping. He requested Hodgson to call Donald Abbott, whom Grover Krantz described as \"the only scientist of any stature to have demonstrated any serious interest in the [Bigfoot] subject,\" hoping he would help them search for the creature by bringing a tracking dog. Hodgson called, but Abbott declined. Krantz argued that this call the same day of the encounter is evidence against a hoax, at least on Patterson's part.\nAfter shipping the film, they headed back toward their camp, where they had left their horses. On their way they \"stopped at the Lower Trinity Ranger Station, as planned, arriving about 9:00p.m. Here they met with Syl McCoy [another friend] and Al Hodgson.\" At this point Patterson called the daily \"Times-Standard\" newspaper in Eureka and related his story. They arrived back at their campsite at about midnight. At either 5 or 5:30 the next morning, after it started to rain heavily, Gimlin returned to the filmsite from the camp and covered the other prints with bark to protect them. The cardboard boxes he had been given by Al Hodgson for this purpose and had left outside were so soggy they were useless, so he left them.\nWhen he returned to the camp he and Patterson aborted their plan to remain looking for more evidence and departed for home, fearing the rain would wash out their exit. After attempting to go out along \"the low road\"\u2014Bluff Creek Road\u2014and finding it blocked by a mudslide, they went instead up the steep Onion Valley Road, off whose shoulder their truck slipped; extracting it required the (unauthorized) borrowing of a nearby front-end loader. The drive home from their campsite covered about , the initial on a low-speed logging road, and then about on twisty Route 96. Driving a truck with three horses, and allowing for occasional stops, it would have taken 13 hours to get home Saturday evening, at an average speed of ; it would have taken 14.5 hours at a average speed.\nUS Forest Service timber management assistant Lyle Laverty said, \"I [and his team of three, in a Jeep] passed the site on either Thursday the 19th or Friday the 20th\" and noticed no tracks. After reading the news of Patterson's encounter on their weekend break, Laverty and his team returned to the site on Monday, the 23rd, and made six photos of the tracks. (Laverty later served as an Assistant Secretary of the Interior under George W. Bush.) Taxidermist and outdoorsman Robert Titmus went to the site with his sister and brother-in-law nine days later. Titmus made plaster casts of 10 successive prints of the creature and plotted Patterson's and the creature's movements on a map as well as he could.\nLong-term aftermath.\nFilm-related.\nGrover Krantz writes that \"Patterson had the film developed as soon as possible. At first he thought he had brought in proof of Bigfoot's existence and really expected the scientists to accept it. But only a few scientists were willing to even look at the film,\" usually at showings at scientific organizations. These were usually arranged at the behest of zoologist, author, and media figure Ivan Sanderson, a supporter of Patterson's film. Seven showings occurred, in Vancouver, Manhattan, The Bronx, Washington, D.C., Atlanta, and Washington, D.C. again (all by the end of 1968); then, later, in Beaverton, Oregon. Of those who were quoted, most expressed various reservations, although some were willing to say they were intrigued by it.\nChristopher Murphy wrote, \"Dahinden traveled to Europe [with the film] in 1971. He visited England, Finland, Sweden, Switzerland and Russia. Although scientists in these countries were somewhat more open-minded than those in North America, their findings were basically the same . ... A real glimmer of hope, however, emerged [in Russia, where he met Bayanov, Bourtsev, and their associates].\"\nThough there was little scientific interest in the film, Patterson was still able to capitalize on it. He made a deal with the BBC, allowing the use of his footage in a docudrama made in return for letting him tour with their docudrama, into which he melded material from his own documentary and additional material he and Al DeAtley filmed. This film was shown in local movie houses around the Pacific Northwest and Midwest. A technique commonly used for nature films called \"four-walling\" was employed, involving heavy local advertising, mostly on TV, of a few days of showings. It was a modest financial success. Al DeAtley estimated that his 50% of the film's profits amounted to $75,000.\nThe film generated a fair amount of national publicity. Patterson appeared on a few popular TV talk shows to promote the film and belief in Bigfoot by showing excerpts from it: for instance, on the \"Joe Pyne Show\" in Los Angeles, in 1967, which covered most of the western US; on Merv Griffin's program, with Krantz offering his analysis of the film; on Joey Bishop's talk show, and also on Johnny Carson's \"Tonight Show\". Articles on the film appeared in \"Argosy\", \"National Wildlife Magazine\", and \"Reader's Digest\".\nOne radio interview, with Gimlin, by Vancouver-based Jack Webster in November 1967, was partly recorded by John Green and reprinted in Loren Coleman's \"Bigfoot!\" Patterson also appeared on broadcast interviews on local stations near where his film would be shown during his four-walling tour in 1968.\nPatterson subsequently sold overlapping distribution rights for the film to several parties, which resulted in costly legal entanglements.\nAfter Patterson's death, Michael McLeod wrote, \"With the consent of Al DeAtley and Patricia Patterson, the film distributor Ron Olson took over the operation of Northwest Research ... and changed its name to the North American Wildlife Research Association. ... He worked full-time compiling reports, soliciting volunteers to join the hunt, and organizing several small expeditions. A Bigfoot trap Olson and his crew built still survives. ... Olson ... continued to lobby the company [American National Enterprises] to produce a Bigfoot film. ... In 1974 ... ANE finally agreed. ... [It was released in 1975,] titled \"Bigfoot: Man or Beast\". [H]e devised a storyline involving members of a Bigfoot research party. Olson spent several years exhibiting the film around the country. He planned to make millions with the film, but says it lost money.\" Olson is profiled in Barbara Wasson's \"Sasquatch Apparitions\".\nOn November 25, 1974, CBS broadcast \"Monsters! Mystery or Myth\", a documentary about the Loch Ness Monster and Bigfoot. It was co-produced by the Smithsonian Institution, which cancelled its contract with the producer the next year. The show attracted 50 million viewers. In 1975, Sunn Classic Pictures released \"Bigfoot: The Mysterious Monster\" aka \"The Mysterious Monsters\", which remixed parts of \"Monsters! Mystery or Myth\" and another documentary called \"Land Of The Yeti\", and also included footage from the Patterson\u2013Gimlin film.\nFrom 2026, Bigfoot\u2014in a pose identical to the film\u2014will be available as an emoji officially titled \"hairy creature\".\nFilmmaker-related.\nPatterson's expensive ($369) 16 mm camera had been rented on May 13 from photographer Harold Mattson at Sheppard's Camera Shop in Yakima, but he had kept it longer than the contract had stipulated, and an arrest warrant had been issued for him on October 17; he was arrested within weeks of his return from Bluff Creek. After Patterson returned the camera in working order, this charge was dismissed, in 1969.\nWhile Patterson sought publicity, Gimlin was conspicuous by his absence. He only briefly helped to promote the film and avoided discussing his Bigfoot encounter publicly for many subsequent years; he turned down requests for interviews. He later reported that he had avoided publicity after Patterson and promoter Al DeAtley had broken their agreement to pay him a one-third share of any profits generated by the film. Another factor was that his wife objected to publicity.\nDaegling wrote, \"Bigfoot advocates emphasize that Patterson remained an active Bigfoot hunter up until his death.\" For instance, in 1969, he hired a pair of brothers to travel around in a truck chasing down leads to Bigfoot witnesses and interviewing them. Later, in December of that year, he was one of those present in Bossburg, Washington, in the aftermath of the cripplefoot tracks found there. Krantz reports that \"[a] few years after the film was made, Patterson received a letter from a man [\"a US airman stationed in Thailand\"] who assured him a Sasquatch was being held in a Buddhist monastery. Patterson spent most of his remaining money preparing an expedition to retrieve this creature\" only to learn it was a hoax. He learned this only after having sent Dennis Jenson fruitlessly to Thailand (where he concluded that the airman was \"mentally unbalanced\") and then, after receiving a second untrue letter from the man, going himself to Thailand with Jenson.\nTo obtain money to travel to Thailand, \"Patterson called Ron, who had returned to ANE, and sold the company the theatrical rights to the clip for what Olson described as a pretty good sum of money.\"\nPatterson died of Hodgkin's lymphoma in 1972. According to Michael McLeod, Greg Long, and Bill Munns, \"A few days before Roger died, he told Bigfoot-book author Peter C. Byrne that in retrospect, ... he [wished he] would have shot the thing [ie killed it] and brought out a body instead of a reel of film.\" According to Grover Krantz and Robert Pyle, years later, Patterson and Gimlin both agreed they should have tried to kill the creature, both for financial gain and to silence naysayers.\nIn 1995, almost three decades after the Patterson\u2013Gimlin filming, Greg Long, a technical writer for a technology firm who had a hobby of investigating and writing about Northwest mysteries, started years of interviewing people who knew Patterson, some of whom described him as a liar and a conman.\nLegal status.\nGreg Long reports that a 1978 legal \"settlement gave Dahinden controlling rights\u201451 percent of the film footage, 51 percent of video cassette rights, and 100 percent of all 952 frames of the footage. Patty Patterson had 100 percent of all TV rights and 49 percent rights in the film footage. Dahinden had ... bought out Gimlin, who himself had received nothing from Patterson; and Mason and Radford, promised part of the profits by Patterson, had nothing to show for their investment or efforts.\"\nOwnership of the physical films.\nFirst reel.\nThe whereabouts of the original is unknown, although there are several speculations as to what happened to it.\nAt least seven copies were made of the original film.\nBill Munns listed four other missing reels of derivative works that would be helpful to film analysts.\nSecond reel.\nThe second reel, showing Patterson and Gimlin making and displaying plaster casts of some footprints, was not shown in conjunction with the first reel at Al DeAtley's house, according to those who were there. Chris Murphy wrote, \"I believe the screening of this roll at the University of British Columbia on October 26, 1967, was the first and last major screening.\" It has subsequently been lost. John Green suspects that Al DeAtley has it.\nA ten-foot strip from that reel, or from a copy of that reel, from which still images were taken by Chris Murphy, still exists, but it, too, has gone missing.\nFilming speed.\nOne factor that complicates discussion of the Patterson film is that Patterson said he normally filmed at 24 frames per second, but in his haste to capture the Bigfoot on film, he did not note the camera's setting. His Cine-Kodak K-100 camera had markings on its continuously variable dial at 16, 24, 32, 48, and 64 frames per second, but no click-stops, and was capable of filming at any frame speed within this range. Grover Krantz wrote, \"Patterson clearly told John Green that he found, after the filming, that the camera was set on 18 frames per second (fps). ... \" It has been suggested that Patterson simply misread \"16\" as \"18\".\nAnalysis.\nThe Patterson\u2013Gimlin film has seen relatively little interest from mainstream scientists. Statements of scientists who viewed the film at a screening, or who conducted a study, are reprinted in Chris Murphy's \"Bigfoot Film Journal\". Typical objections include: Neither humans nor chimpanzees have hairy breasts as does the figure in the film, and Napier has noted that a sagittal crest is \"only very occasionally seen, to an insignificant extent, in chimpanzees [\"sic\"] females\". Critics have argued these features are evidence against authenticity. Krantz countered the latter point, saying \"a sagittal crest ... is a consequence of absolute size alone.\"\nAs anthropologist David Daegling writes, \"[t]he skeptics have not felt compelled to offer much of a detailed argument against the film; the burden of proof, rightly enough, should lie with the advocates.\" Yet, without a detailed argument against authenticity, Daegling notes that \"the film has not gone away.\" Similarly, Krantz argues that of the many opinions offered about the Patterson film, \"[o]nly a few of these opinions are based on technical expertise and careful study of the film itself.\"\nRegarding the quality of the film, second-generation copies or copies from TV and DVD productions are inferior to first-generation copies. Many early frames are blurry due to camera shake, and the quality of subsequent frames varies for the same reason. Stabilization of the film (e.g., by M. K. Davis) to counter the effect of camera shake has improved viewers' ability to analyze it. Regarding \"graininess,\" Bill Munns writes, \"Based on transparencies taken off the camera original, ... the PGF original is as fine grain as any color 16mm film can achieve.\" He adds that graininess increases as images are magnified.\nScientific studies.\nBernard Heuvelmans.\nBernard Heuvelmans\u2014a zoologist and the so-called \"father of cryptozoology\"\u2014thought the creature in the Patterson film was a suited human. He objected to the film subject's hair-flow pattern as being too uniform; to the hair on the breasts as not being like a primate; to its buttocks as being insufficiently separated; and to its too-calm retreat from the pursuing men.\nJohn Napier.\nProminent primate expert John Napier (one-time director of the Smithsonian's Primate Biology Program) was one of the few mainstream scientists not only to critique the Patterson\u2013Gimlin film but also to study then-available Bigfoot evidence in a generally sympathetic manner, in his 1973 book, \"Bigfoot: The Sasquatch and Yeti in Myth and Reality\".\nNapier conceded the likelihood of Bigfoot as a real creature, stating, \"I am convinced that Sasquatch exists.\" But he argued against the film being genuine: \"There is little doubt that the scientific evidence taken collectively points to a hoax of some kind. The creature shown in the film does not stand up well to functional analysis.\" Napier gives several reasons for his and others' skepticism that are commonly raised, but apparently his main reasons are original with him. First, the length of \"the footprints are totally at variance with its calculated height\". Second, the footprints are of the \"hourglass\" type, which he is suspicious of. (In response, Barbara Wasson criticized Napier's logic at length.)\nHe adds, \"I could not see the zipper; and I still can't. There I think we must leave the matter. Perhaps it was a man dressed up in a monkey-skin; if so it was a brilliantly executed hoax and the unknown perpetrator will take his place with the great hoaxers of the world. Perhaps it was the first film of a new type of hominid, quite unknown to science, in which case Roger Patterson deserves to rank with Dubois, the discoverer of \"Pithecanthropus erectus\", or Raymond Dart of Johannesburg, the man who introduced the world to its immediate human ancestor, \"Australopithecus africanus\".\"\nThe skeptical views of Grieve and Napier are summarized favorably by Kenneth Wylie (and those of Bayanov and Donskoy negatively) in Appendix A of his 1980 book, \"Bigfoot: A Personal Inquiry into a Phenomenon\".\nEsteban Sarmiento.\nEsteban Sarmiento is a specialist in physical anthropology at the American Museum of Natural History. He has 25 years of experience with great apes in the wild. He writes, \"I did find some inconsistencies in appearance and behavior that might suggest a fake ... but nothing that conclusively shows that this is the case.\" His most original criticism is this: \"The plantar surface of the feet is decidedly pale, but the palm of the hand seems to be dark. There is no mammal I know of in which the plantar sole differs so drastically in color from the palm.\" His most controversial statements are these: \"The gluteals, although large, fail to show a humanlike cleft (or crack).\" \"Body proportions: ... In all of the above relative values, bigfoot is well within the human range and differs markedly from any living ape and from the 'australopithecine' fossils.\" (E.g., the IM index is in the normal human range.) And: \"I estimate bigfoot's weight to be between 190 and 240 lbs[].\"\nDavid J. Daegling and Daniel O. Schmitt.\nWhen anthropologists David J. Daegling of the University of Florida and Daniel O. Schmitt examined the film, they concluded it was impossible to conclusively determine whether the subject in the film is nonhuman, and additionally argued that flaws in the studies by Krantz and others invalidated their claims. Daegling and Schmitt noted problems of uncertainties in the subject and camera positions, camera movement, poor image quality, and artifacts of the subject. They concluded: \"Based on our analysis of gait and problems inherent in estimating subject dimensions, it is our opinion that it is not possible to evaluate the identity of the film subject with any confidence.\"\nDaegling has asserted that the creature's odd walk could be replicated: \"Supposed peculiarities of subject speed, stride length, and posture are all reproducible by a human being employing this type of locomotion [a \"compliant gait\"].\"\nDaegling notes that in 1967, movie and television special effects were primitive compared to the more sophisticated effects in later decades, and allows that if the Patterson film depicts a man in a suit that \"it is not unreasonable to suggest that it is better than some of the tackier monster outfits that got thrown together for television at that time.\"\nJessica Rose and James Gamble.\nJessica Rose and James Gamble are authors of \"the definitive text on human gait\", \"Human Walking\". They operate the Motion and Gait Analysis Lab at Stanford University. They conducted a high-tech human-replication attempt of \"Patty's\" gait, in cooperation with Jeff Meldrum. Rose was certain their subject had matched Patty's gait, while Gamble was not quite as sure. Meldrum was impressed and acknowledged that \"some aspects\" of the creature's walk had been replicated, but not all. The narrator said, \"even the experts can see the gait test could not replicate all parameters of the gait.\" It was shown in an episode of the Discovery Channel's \"Best Evidence\" series.\nCliff Crook and Chris Murphy.\nA computerized visual analysis of the video conducted by Cliff Crook, who once devoted rooms to sasquatch memorabilia in his home in Bothell, Washington, and Chris Murphy, a Canadian Bigfoot buff from Vancouver, British Columbia, was released in January 1999 and exposed an object which appeared to be the suit's zip-fastener. Zooming in on four magnified frames of the 16\u00a0mm footage video exposed what appeared to be tracings of a bell-shaped fastener on the creature's waist area, presumably used to hold a person's suit together. Since both Crook and Murphy were previously staunch supporters of the video's authenticity, Associated Press journalist John W. Humbell noted \"Longtime enthusiasts smell a deserter.\"\nOther analysts.\nNike researcher Gordon Valient.\nKrantz also showed the film to Gordon Valient, a researcher for Nike shoes, who he says \"made some rather useful observations about some rather unhuman movements he could see\".\n\"MonsterQuest\".\nA first-season episode of \"MonsterQuest\" focuses on the Bigfoot phenomenon. One pair of scientists, Jurgen Konczak (director, Human Sensorimotor Control Laboratory, University of Minnesota) and Esteban Sarmiento, attempts and fails to get a mime outfitted with LEDs on his joints to mimic the Patterson Bigfoot's gait. A second pair, Daris Swindler and Owen Caddy, employs digital enhancement and observes facial movements, such as moving eyelids, lips that compress like an upset chimp's, and a mouth that is lower than it appears, due to a false-lip anomaly like that of a chimp's. The episode concludes, \"the new findings are intriguing but inconclusive, until a body is found.\"\nFilm industry personnel.\nBill Munns.\nBill Munns, retired, was a special effects and make-up artist, cameraman, and film editor. He argues that Universal and Disney were not the most knowledgeable studios to consult with. He says that Fox, MGM, and special effects artist Stuart Freeborn in England, \"who had just completed his groundbreaking ape suits for \"\"\", would have been preferable.\nMunns started posting his online analysis of the film in 2009 and summarizing it in the online Munns Report. In 2013 he and Jeff Meldrum co-authored three papers in Meldrum's online magazine, \"Relict Hominoid Inquiry\". In 2014, Munns self-published \"When Roger Met Patty\", a 488-page book incorporating material from those articles that analyzes the film and film subject from various perspectives.\nHe argues the film depicts a non-human animal, not a man in a fur suit. He proposes a new diagnostic test of authenticity, at the armpit: natural concave skin fold vs. artificial vertical crease. Munns' analysis has been featured in an episode of the History Channel series \"MonsterQuest\".\nSome time before 1976 the Guenettes reported that, in answer to their questions, \"He concluded that if the creature is a man in a suit, then it is no ordinary gorilla suit. It is not something they bought or rented in a store; it would have to be something tailor made. He also felt like it might have been made out of real animal fur.\"\nHowever, film critic David Daegling speculates that the same effect could be had by gluing the hair to a set of tight but expandable, waffle-design long johns.\n(One possible motive for the Yakima fakery would have been to make Bigfoot seem more real to local millionaire Floyd Paxton, with whom he was acquainted and from whom he hoped to obtain funding for an expedition.)\nThe film's proponents' position is that what is seen in the film is unfakable\u2014especially not by a costume beginner like Patterson. For instance, most of Bill Munns' book makes detailed examinations of film features that he argues could not have been created with 1967 special effects technology. He filmed recreation attempts of his own that failed. Daniel Perez, writing in 1992, asserted \"If the film is in fact a fake, a costumed man or a machine, surely science could duplicate the film with ease. Twenty-five years later, no one has come close.\" He later asserted, \"It has never been convincingly replicated. To any thinking person, that should speak volumes.\"\nGreg Long's response was, \"The film they have just isn't going to do it. I'm sorry. That's not evidence.\"\nHoax allegations.\nPhilip Morris.\nIn 2002, Philip Morris, owner of Morris Costumes (a North Carolina\u2013based company offering costumes, props and stage products) claimed that he made a gorilla costume that was used in the Patterson film. Morris says he discussed his role in the hoax \"at costume conventions, lectures, [and] magician conventions\" in the 1980s, but first addressed the public at large on August 16, 2002, on Charlotte, North Carolina, radio station WBT. His story was also printed in \"The Charlotte Observer\". Morris claims he was reluctant to expose the hoax earlier for fear of harming his business: giving away a performer's secrets, he said, would be widely regarded as disreputable.\nMorris said that he sold an ape suit to Patterson via mail order in 1967, thinking it was going to be used in what Patterson described as a \"prank\". (Ordinarily the gorilla suits he sold were used for a popular sideshow routine that depicted an attractive woman, supposedly from some far-flung corner of the globe, being altered by a sorcerer or scientist into a gorilla or otherwise apelike monster.) After the initial sale, Morris said that Patterson telephoned him asking how to make the \"shoulders more massive\" and the \"arms longer\". Morris says he suggested that whoever wore the suit should wear football shoulder pads and hold sticks in his hands within the suit.\nAs for the creature's walk, Morris said:\nThe Bigfoot researchers say that no human can walk that way in the film. Oh, yes they can! When you're wearing long clown's feet, you can't place the ball of your foot down first. You have to put your foot down flat. Otherwise, you'll stumble. Another thing, when you put on the gorilla head, you can only turn your head maybe a quarter of the way. And to look behind you, you've got to turn your head and your shoulders and your hips. Plus, the shoulder pads in the suit are in the way of the jaw. That's why the Bigfoot turns and looks the way he does in the film. He has to twist his entire upper body.\nMorris's wife and business partner Amy had vouched for her husband and claims to have helped frame the suit. Morris offered no evidence apart from his own testimony to support his account, the most conspicuous shortcoming being the absence of a gorilla suit or documentation that would match the detail evidenced in the film and could have been produced in 1967.\nA recreation of the PGF was undertaken on October 6, 2004, at \"Cow Camp,\" near Rimrock Lake, a location west of Yakima. This was six months after the publication of Long's book and 11 months after Long had first contacted Morris. Bigfooter Daniel Perez wrote, \"\"National Geographic's\" [producer] Noel Dockster ... noted the suit used in the re-creation ... was in no way similar to what was depicted in the P\u2013G film.\"\nMorris would not consent to release the video to \"National Geographic\", the recreation's sponsor, claiming he had not had adequate time to prepare and that the month was in the middle of his busy season.\nBob Heironimus.\nBob Heironimus claims to have been the figure depicted in the Patterson film. Heironimus says he had not previously publicly discussed his role in the hoax because he hoped to be paid eventually and was afraid of being convicted of fraud had he confessed. After speaking with his lawyer he was told that since he had not been paid for his involvement in the hoax, he could not be held accountable.\nA month after watching the December 28, 1998, Fox-television special \"World's Greatest Hoaxes: Secrets Finally Revealed?\", he went public, via a January 30 press release by his lawyer, Barry Woodard, in a Yakima newspaper story. He stated, \"I'm telling the truth. I'm tired after thirty-seven years.\" Five days later, a second newspaper story reported that his \"lawyer's office has been inundated with calls from media outlets. ... 'We're just sort of waiting for the dust to settle,' he said, explaining he and his client are evaluating offers.\" He also said, \"We anticipate that we will be telling the full story to somebody rather quickly.\"\nHeironimus's name was first publicly revealed, and his allegations first publicly detailed, five years later, in Greg Long's book, \"The Making of Bigfoot\", which includes testimony that corroborates Heironimus's claims:\nLong argues that the suit Morris says he sold to Patterson was the same suit Heironimus claims to have worn in the Patterson film. However, Long quotes Heironimus and Morris describing different ape suits in many respects. Among the notable differences are:\nBut Morris reports that the suit was made of Dynel, a lighter-weight synthetic material with little or no odor. Morris said that it was his \"standard suit that we sold to all our customers\" that cost $435 (cheaper than the competition).\nAnother contrast is that Howard reported that the horsehide was a \"real dark brown\" and Long writes that Morris \"was using brown Dynel in 1967\". But Morris wouldn't have wanted a \"real dark\" brown color, as he chose brown to contrast against the black background of the girl-to-gorilla illusion.\nBut Morris made a suit whose hands and feet were separate pieces. Long speculates that Patterson riveted or glued these parts to the suit, but offers no evidence to support this idea. If Patterson had done so, he must have done it before Heironimus did his test fitting and walk (because Heironimus describes a three-piece suit\u2014head, torso, and legs, omitting separate hands and feet)\u2014i.e., without adjusting their location to his dimensions. And Heironimus never described being measured beforehand.\nLong speculates that Patterson modified the costume, but only by attaching Morris's loose hands and feet to the costume, and by replacing Morris's mask.\nSome film proponents say that Heironimus's arms are too short to match that of a Bigfoot and that he was a few inches shorter than the creature on the film (up to shorter).\nBut Heironimus said that he wore football shoulder pads, which might explain why the shoulders and arms appear to be out of proportion to the rest of the body. However, Heironimus disclaimed the use of arm-extending sticks in his costume and said that he wore \"gloves, a little bit longer than my actual hands were . ... \"\nRay Wallace.\nAfter the death of Ray Wallace in 2002, following a request by Loren Coleman to \"The Seattle Times\" reporter Bob Young to investigate, the family of Wallace went public with claims that he had started the Bigfoot phenomenon with fake footprints (made from a wooden foot-shaped cutout) left in Californian sites in 1958.\nBooks on the subject.\nThe major hoax allegations are summarized and criticized in:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23513", "revid": "6056090", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23513", "title": "Producer", "text": "Producer(s), The Producer(s), or co-producer(s) may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "23517", "revid": "13791031", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23517", "title": "List of Polish-language poets", "text": "List of poets who have written much of their poetry in Polish. See also Discussion Page for additional poets not listed here.\nThree 19th century poets have historically been recognized as the national poets of Polish Romantic literature, dubbed the Three Bards. There have been five Polish-language Nobel Prize in Literature laureates, of which Czes\u0142aw Mi\u0142osz and Wis\u0142awa Szymborska were poets.\n&lt;templatestyles src = \"Nonumtoc/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Horizontal TOC/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Hlist/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23519", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23519", "title": "Paul Val\u00e9ry", "text": "French poet, essayist, and philosopher (1871\u20131945)\nAmbroise Paul Toussaint Jules Val\u00e9ry (; 30 October 1871 \u2013 20 July 1945) was a French poet, essayist, and philosopher. In addition to his poetry and fiction (drama and dialogues), his interests included aphorisms on art, history, letters, music, and current events.\nVal\u00e9ry was nominated for the Nobel Prize in Literature in 12 different years.\nBiography.\nVal\u00e9ry was born to a Corsican father and Genoese-Istrian mother in S\u00e8te, a town on the Mediterranean coast of the H\u00e9rault, but he was raised in Montpellier, a larger urban center close by. After a traditional Roman Catholic education, he studied law at university and then resided in Paris for most of the remainder of his life, where he was, for a while, part of the circle of St\u00e9phane Mallarm\u00e9.\nIn 1900, he married Jeannine Gobillard, a friend of St\u00e9phane Mallarm\u00e9's family, who was also a niece of the painter Berthe Morisot. The wedding was a double ceremony in which the bride's cousin, Berthe Morisot's daughter, Julie Manet, married the painter Ernest Rouart. Val\u00e9ry and Gobillard had three children: Claude, Agathe and Fran\u00e7ois.\nVal\u00e9ry served as a juror with Florence Meyer Blumenthal in awarding the Prix Blumenthal, a grant given between 1919 and 1954 to young French painters, sculptors, decorators, engravers, writers, and musicians.\nThough his earliest publications date from his mid-twenties, Val\u00e9ry did not become a full-time writer until he was fifty. Val\u00e9ry had briefly earned his living at the Ministry of War, before assuming a relatively flexible post as private secretary to the increasingly impaired Edouard Lebey, a former chief executive of the Havas news agency (later renamed \"Agence France-Presse\"). He held this position for over twenty years, until Lebey's death in 1922.\nIn 1920, he began a tumultuous affair with a fellow poet, Catherine Pozzi, which lasted for eight years.\nAfter his election to the in 1925, Val\u00e9ry became a tireless public speaker and intellectual figure in French society, touring Europe and giving lectures on cultural and social issues as well as assuming a number of official positions eagerly offered to him by an admiring French nation. He represented France on cultural matters at the League of Nations, and he served on several of its committees, including the sub-committee on Arts and Letters of the Committee on Intellectual Cooperation. The English-language collection \"The Outlook for Intelligence\" (1989) contains translations of a dozen essays related to these activities.\nIn 1931, he founded the Coll\u00e8ge International de Cannes, a private institution teaching French language and civilization. The Coll\u00e8ge is still operating today, offering professional courses for native speakers (for educational certification, law and business) as well as courses for foreign students.\nHe gave the keynote address at the 1932 German national celebration of the 100th anniversary of the death of Johann Wolfgang Goethe. This was a fitting choice, as Val\u00e9ry shared Goethe's fascination with science (specifically, biology and optics).\nIn addition to his activities as a member of the , he was also a member of the Academy of Sciences of Lisbon, and of the \"Front national des Ecrivains\". In 1937, he was appointed chief executive of what later became the University of Nice. He was the inaugural holder of the Chair of Poetics at the .\nDuring World War II, the Vichy regime stripped him of some of these jobs and distinctions because of his quiet refusal to collaborate with Vichy and the German occupation, but Val\u00e9ry continued, throughout these troubled years, to publish and to be active in French cultural life, especially as a member of the . From 1942 he became a member of the National Committee of Writers, an offshoot of the anti-Nazi resistance movement National Front.\nVal\u00e9ry was nominated for the Nobel Prize in Literature twelve times. It is believed that the Swedish Academy intended to award Val\u00e9ry the prize in 1945, had he not died that year.\nVal\u00e9ry died in Paris in July 1945. He is buried in the cemetery of his native town, S\u00e8te, the same cemetery celebrated in his famous poem \"Le Cimeti\u00e8re marin\".\nWork.\nThe great silence.\nVal\u00e9ry is best known as a poet, and he is sometimes considered to be the last of the French symbolists. However, he published fewer than a hundred poems, and none of them drew much attention. On the night of 4 October 1892, during a heavy storm, Paul Val\u00e9ry underwent an existential crisis, an event that made a huge impact on his writing career. Eventually, around 1898, he quit writing altogether, publishing not a word for nearly twenty years. This hiatus was in part due to the death of his mentor, St\u00e9phane Mallarm\u00e9. When, in 1917, he finally broke his 'great silence' with the publication of \"La Jeune Parque\", he was forty-six years of age.\n\"La Jeune Parque\".\nThis obscure, but sublimely musical, masterpiece, of 512 alexandrine lines in rhyming couplets, had taken him four years to complete, and it immediately secured his fame. With \"Le Cimeti\u00e8re marin\" and \"L'\u00c9bauche d'un serpent,\" it is often considered one of the greatest French poems of the twentieth century.\nThe title was chosen late in the poem's gestation; it refers to the youngest of the three \"Parcae\" (the minor Roman deities also called \"The Fates\"), though for some readers the connection with that mythological figure is tenuous and problematic.\nThe poem is written in the first person, and is the soliloquy of a young woman contemplating life and death, engagement and withdrawal, love and estrangement, in a setting dominated by the sea, the sky, stars, rocky cliffs, and the rising sun. However, it is also possible to read the poem as an allegory on the way fate moves human affairs or as an attempt to comprehend the horrific violence in Europe at the time of the poem's composition. The poem is not about World War I, but it does try to address the relationships between destruction and beauty, and, in this sense, it resonates with ancient Greek meditations on these matters, especially in the plays of Sophocles and Aeschylus. There are, therefore, evident links with \"le Cimeti\u00e8re marin\", which is also a seaside meditation on comparably large themes.\nOther works.\nBefore \"la Jeune Parque\", Val\u00e9ry's only publications of note were dialogues, articles, some poems, and a study of Leonardo da Vinci. In 1920 and 1922, he published two slim collections of verses. The first, \"Album des vers anciens\" (Album of old verses), was a revision of early but beautifully wrought smaller poems, some of which had been published individually before 1900. The second, \"Charmes\" (from the Latin \"carmina\", meaning \"songs\" and also \"incantations\"), further confirmed his reputation as a major French poet. The collection includes \"le Cimeti\u00e8re marin\", and many smaller poems with diverse structures.\nTechnique.\nVal\u00e9ry's technique is quite orthodox in its essentials. His verse rhymes and scans in conventional ways, and it has much in common with the work of Mallarm\u00e9. His poem \"Palme\" inspired James Merrill's celebrated 1974 poem \"Lost in Translation,\" and his cerebral lyricism also influenced American poet Edgar Bowers.\nProse works.\nVal\u00e9ry described his \u201ctrue oeuvre\u201d to be prose, and he filled more than 28,000 notebook pages over his lifetime. His far more ample prose writings, peppered with many aphorisms and \"bons mots\", reveal a skeptical outlook on human nature, verging on the cynical. His view of state power was broadly liberal insofar as he believed that state power and infringements on the individual should be severely limited. Although he had flirted with nationalist ideas during the 1890s, he moved away from them by 1899, and believed that European culture owed its greatness to the ethnic diversity and universalism of the Roman Empire. He denounced the myth of \"racial purity\" and argued that such purity, if it existed, would only lead to stagnation\u2014thus the mixing of races was necessary for progress and cultural development. In \"America as a Projection of the European Mind\", Val\u00e9ry remarked that whenever he despaired about Europe's situation, he could \"restore some degree of hope only by thinking of\nthe New World\" and mused on the \"happy variations\" which could result from European \"aesthetic ideas filtering into the powerful character of native Mexican art.\"\nRaymond Poincar\u00e9, Louis de Broglie, Andr\u00e9 Gide, Henri Bergson, and Albert Einstein all respected Val\u00e9ry's thinking and became friendly correspondents. Val\u00e9ry was often asked to write articles on topics not of his choosing; the resulting intellectual journalism was collected in five volumes titled \"Vari\u00e9t\u00e9s\".\nThe notebooks.\nVal\u00e9ry's most striking achievement is perhaps his monumental intellectual diary, called the \"Cahiers\" (Notebooks). Early every morning of his adult life, he contributed something to the \"Cahiers\", prompting him to write: \"Having dedicated those hours to the life of the mind, I thereby earn the right to be stupid for the rest of the day.\"\nThe subjects of his \"Cahiers\" entries often were, surprisingly, reflections on science and mathematics. In fact, arcane topics in these domains appear to have commanded far more of his considered attention than his celebrated poetry. The \"Cahiers\" also contain the first drafts of many aphorisms he later included in his books. To date, the \"Cahiers\" have been published in their entirety only as photostatic reproductions, and only since 1980 have they begun to receive scholarly scrutiny. The \"Cahiers\" have been translated into English in five volumes published by Peter Lang with the title \"Cahiers/Notebooks\".\nIn recent decades Val\u00e9ry's thought has been considered a touchstone in the field of constructivist epistemology, as noted, for instance, by Jean-Louis Le Moigne in his description of constructivist history.\nIn other literature.\nOne of three epigraphs in Cormac McCarthy's novel \"Blood Meridian\" is from Val\u00e9ry's \"Writing at the Yalu River\" (1895):\n\"Your ideas are terrifying and your hearts are faint. Your acts of pity and cruelty are absurd, committed with no calm, as if they were irresistible. Finally, you fear blood more and more. Blood and time\".\nIn the book \"El laberinto de la soleda\" by Octavio Paz there are three lines from Val\u00e9ry's poem \"La jeune parque\": \n&lt;poem&gt;\nJe pense, sur le bord dor\u00e9 de l\u2019univers\nA ce gout de p\u00e9rir qui prend la Pythonisse\nEn qui mugit l\u2019espoir que le monde finisse.&lt;/poem&gt;(\"I think, at the golden brink of the universe, / Of that longing for death which possessed the Sibyl / And which feeds on the hope that the last days are near.\")\nIn Ray Bradbury\u2019s \"Fahrenheit 451\", the book-burning fire chief Beatty quotes Valery: The folly of mistaking a paradox for a discovery, a metaphor for a proof, a torrent of verbiage for a spring of capital truths, and oneself for an oracle, is inborn in us.From \"Introduction \u00e0 la m\u00e9thode de L\u00e9onard de Vinci\".\nIn popular culture.\nOscar-winning Japanese director Hayao Miyazaki's 2013 film \"The Wind Rises\" and the Japanese novel of the same name (on which the film was partially based) take their title from Val\u00e9ry's verse \"Le vent se l\u00e8ve... il faut tenter de vivre !\" (\"The wind rises\u2026 We must try to live!\") in the poem \"Le Cimeti\u00e8re marin\" (\"The Graveyard by the Sea\"). The same quote is used in the closing sentences of Anthony Burgess's 1962 novel \"The Wanting Seed\". \"Le Cimeti\u00e8re marin\" is also quoted in the French comic \"Le concombre masqu\u00e9: Comment devenir ma\u00eetre du monde?\", authored by Mandryka and published in 1980.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23521", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23521", "title": "Programming language/Timeline", "text": ""}
{"id": "23523", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23523", "title": "Programming language/assembly", "text": ""}
{"id": "23528", "revid": "20483999", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23528", "title": "Pianist", "text": "Musician who plays the piano\nA pianist ( , also ) is a musician who plays the piano. A pianist's repertoire may include music from a diverse variety of styles, such as traditional classical music, jazz, blues, and popular music, including rock and roll. Most pianists can, to an extent, easily play other keyboard instruments such as the synthesizer, harpsichord, celesta, and the organ.\nPianists past and present.\nContemporary classical pianists focus on dedicating their careers to performing, recording, teaching, researching, and continually adding new compositions to their repertoire. In contrast to their 19th-century counterparts, they typically do not engage in the composition or transcription of music. While some classical pianists may specialize in accompaniment and chamber music, a smaller number opt for full-time solo careers.\nClassical.\nMozart could be considered the first concert pianist, as he performed widely on the piano. Composers Beethoven and Clementi from the Classical era were also famed for their playing, as were, from the Romantic era, Liszt, Brahms, Chopin, Mendelssohn, Rachmaninoff, and Schumann. The Romantic era also saw the emergence of pianists better known for their performances than for composing, such as Clara Schumann and Hans von B\u00fclow.\nJazz.\nJazz pianists almost always perform with other musicians. Their playing is more free than that of classical pianists, and they create an air of spontaneity in their performances. They generally do not write down their compositions; improvisation is a significant part of their work. Well known jazz pianists include Bill Evans, Art Tatum, Duke Ellington, Thelonious Monk, Oscar Peterson, Bud Powell, McCoy Tyner, Chick Corea, Herbie Hancock, and Brad Mehldau.\nPop and rock.\nPopular pianists might work as live performers (concert, theatre, etc.) or session musicians. Arrangers most likely feel at home with synthesizers and other electronic keyboard instruments. Notable popular pianists include Liberace, who at the height of his fame was one of the highest paid entertainers in the world, as well as Elton John and Billy Joel, so nicknamed \"The Piano Man\", others include Richard Clayderman, who is known for his covers of popular tunes and the late Victor Borge, who performed as a comedian.\nPianists by genre.\nA single listing of pianists in all genres would be impractical, given the multitude of musicians noted for their performances on the instrument. Below are links to lists of well-known or influential pianists divided by genres:\nPianist-composers.\nMany important composers were also virtuoso pianists. The following is an incomplete list of such musicians.\nAmateur pianism.\nSome people, having received a solid piano training in their youth, decide not to continue their musical careers but choose nonmusical ones. As a result, there are prominent communities of \"amateur pianists\" all over the world that play at quite a high level and give concerts not to earn money but just for the love of music. The International Piano Competition for Outstanding Amateurs, held annually in Paris, attracts about one thousand listeners each year and is broadcast on French radio.\nJon Nakamatsu, the Gold Medal winner of the Van Cliburn International Piano Competition for professional pianists in Fort Worth, Texas (1997) was at the moment of his victory technically an amateur: he never attended a music conservatory or majored in music, and worked as a high school German teacher at the time; it was only after the competition that he started pursuing a career as a classical pianist.\nThe German pianist Davide Martello is known for traveling around conflict zones to play his moving piano. Martello has previously been recognized by the European Parliament for his \"outstanding contribution to European cooperation and the promotion of common values\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23529", "revid": "1601788", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23529", "title": "Proverb", "text": "Traditional saying that reveals a thought truth\nA proverb (from ) or an adage is a simple, traditional saying that expresses a perceived truth based on common sense or experience. Proverbs are often metaphorical and are an example of formulaic language. A proverbial phrase or a proverbial expression is a type of a conventional saying similar to proverbs and transmitted by oral tradition. The difference is that a proverb is a fixed expression, while a proverbial phrase permits alterations to fit the grammar of the context. Collectively, they form a genre of folklore.\nSome proverbs exist in more than one language because people borrow them from languages and cultures with which they are in contact. In the West, the Bible (including, but not limited to the Book of Proverbs) and medieval Latin (aided by the work of Erasmus) have played a considerable role in distributing proverbs. Not all Biblical proverbs, however, were distributed to the same extent: one scholar has gathered evidence to show that cultures in which the Bible is the major spiritual book contain \"between three hundred and five hundred proverbs that stem from the Bible,\" whereas another shows that, of the 106 most common and widespread proverbs across Europe, 11 are from the Bible. However, almost every culture has its own unique proverbs.\nDefinitions.\nLord John Russell (c.\u20091850) observed poetically that a \"proverb is the wit of one, and the wisdom of many.\" But giving the word \"proverb\" the sort of definition theorists need has proven to be a difficult task, and although scholars often quote Archer Taylor's argument that formulating a scientific \"definition of a proverb is too difficult to repay the undertaking... An incommunicable quality tells us this sentence is proverbial and that one is not. Hence no definition will enable us to identify positively a sentence as proverbial,\" many students of proverbs have attempted to itemize their essential characteristics.\nMore constructively, Wolfgang Mieder has proposed the following definition, \"A proverb is a short, generally known sentence of the folk which contains wisdom, truth, morals, and traditional views in a metaphorical, fixed, and memorizable form and which is handed down from generation to generation\". To distinguish proverbs from idioms, cliches, etc., Norrick created a table of distinctive features, an abstract tool originally developed for linguistics. Prahlad distinguishes proverbs from some other, closely related types of sayings, \"True proverbs must further be distinguished from other types of proverbial speech, e.g. proverbial phrases, Wellerisms, maxims, quotations, and proverbial comparisons.\" Based on Persian proverbs, Zolfaghari and Ameri propose the following definition: \"A proverb is a short sentence, which is well-known and at times rhythmic, including advice, sage themes and ethnic experiences, comprising simile, metaphor or irony which is well-known among people for its fluent wording, clarity of expression, simplicity, expansiveness and generality and is used either with or without change.\"\nThere are many sayings in English that are commonly referred to as \"proverbs\", such as weather sayings. Alan Dundes, however, rejects including such sayings among truly proverbs: \"Are weather proverbs proverbs? I would say emphatically 'No!'\" The definition of \"proverb\" has also changed over the years. For example, the following was labeled \"A Yorkshire proverb\" in 1883, but would not be categorized as a proverb by most today, \"as throng as Throp's wife when she hanged herself with a dish-cloth\". The changing of the definition of \"proverb\" is also noted in Turkish.\nIn other languages and cultures, the definition of \"proverb\" also differs from English. In the Chumburung language of Ghana, \"\"a\u014base\" are literal proverbs and \"akpare\" are metaphoric ones\". Among the Bini of Nigeria, there are three words that are used to translate \"proverb\": \"ere, ivbe\", and \"itan\". The first relates to historical events, the second relates to current events, and the third was \"linguistic ornamentation in formal discourse\". Among the Balochi of Pakistan and Afghanistan, there is a word \"batal\" for ordinary proverbs and \"bass\u012bttuks\" for \"proverbs with background stories\".\nThere are also language communities that combine proverbs and riddles in some sayings, leading some scholars to create the label \"proverb riddles\".\nAnother similar construction is an idiomatic phrase. Sometimes it is difficult to draw a distinction between idiomatic phrase and proverbial expression. In both of them the meaning does not immediately follow from the phrase. The difference is that an idiomatic phrase involves figurative language in its components, while in a proverbial phrase the figurative meaning is the extension of its literal meaning. Some experts classify proverbs and proverbial phrases as types of idioms.\nSources.\nProverbs come from a variety of sources. Some are, indeed, the result of people pondering and crafting language, such as some by Confucius, Plato, Baltasar Graci\u00e1n, etc. Others are taken from such diverse sources as poetry, stories, songs, commercials, advertisements, movies, literature, etc. A number of the well known sayings of Jesus, Shakespeare, and others have become proverbs, though they were original at the time of their creation, and many of these sayings were not seen as proverbs when they were first coined. Many proverbs are based on stories, often the end of a story. For example, the proverb \"Who will bell the cat?\" is from the end of a story about the mice planning how to be safe from the cat.\nSome authors have created proverbs in their writings, such as J.R.R. Tolkien, and some of these proverbs have made their way into broader society. Similarly, C. S. Lewis is credited for a proverb regarding a lobster in a pot, which he wrote about in his book series \"Chronicles of Narnia\". In cases like this, deliberately created proverbs for fictional societies have become proverbs in real societies. In a fictional story set in a real society, the movie \"Forrest Gump\" introduced \"Life is like a box of chocolates\" into broad society. In at least one case, it appears that a proverb deliberately created by one writer has been naively picked up and used by another who assumed it to be an established Chinese proverb, Ford Madox Ford having picked up a proverb from Ernest Bramah, \"It would be hypocrisy to seek for the person of the Sacred Emperor in a Low Tea House.\"\nThe proverb with \"a longer history than any other recorded proverb in the world\", going back to \"around 1800 BC\" is in a Sumerian clay tablet, \"The bitch by her acting too hastily brought forth the blind\". Though many proverbs are ancient, they were all newly created at some point by somebody. Sometimes it is easy to detect that a proverb is newly coined by a reference to something recent, such as the Haitian proverb \"The fish that is being microwaved doesn't fear the lightning\". Similarly, there is a recent Maltese proverb, \"wil-muturi, ferh u duluri\" \"Women and motorcycles are joys and griefs\"; the proverb is clearly new, but still formed as a traditional style couplet with rhyme. Also, there is a proverb in the Kafa language of Ethiopia that refers to the forced military conscription of the 1980s, \"...the one who hid himself lived to have children.\" A Mongolian proverb also shows evidence of recent origin, \"A beggar who sits on gold; Foam rubber piled on edge.\" Another example of a proverb that is clearly recent is this from Sesotho: \"A mistake goes with the printer.\" A political candidate in Kenya popularised a new proverb in his 1995 campaign, \"Chuth ber\" \"Immediacy is best\". \"The proverb has since been used in other contexts to prompt quick action.\" Over 1,400 new English proverbs are said to have been coined and gained currency in the 20th century.\nThis process of creating proverbs is always ongoing, so that possible new proverbs are being created constantly. Those sayings that are adopted and used by an adequate number of people become proverbs in that society.\nThe creation of proverbs in many parts of the world during the Corona-virus era showed how quickly proverbs and anti-proverbs can be created.\nInterpretations.\nInterpreting proverbs is often complex, but is best done in a context. Interpreting proverbs from other cultures is much more difficult than interpreting proverbs in one's own culture. Even within English-speaking cultures, there is difference of opinion on how to interpret the proverb \"A rolling stone gathers no moss.\" Some see it as condemning a person that keeps moving, seeing moss as a positive thing, such as profit; others see the proverb as praising people that keep moving and developing, seeing moss as a negative thing, such as negative habits.\nSimilarly, among Tajik speakers, the proverb \"One hand cannot clap\" has two significantly different interpretations. Most see the proverb as promoting teamwork. Others understand it to mean that an argument requires two people. In an extreme example, one researcher working in Ghana found that for a single Akan proverb, twelve different interpretations were given. Proverb interpretation is not automatic, even for people within a culture: Owomoyela tells of a Yoruba radio program that asked people to interpret an unfamiliar Yoruba proverb, \"very few people could do so\". Siran found that people who had moved out of the traditional Vute-speaking area of Cameroon were not able to interpret Vute proverbs correctly, even though they still spoke Vute. Their interpretations tended to be literal.\nChildren will sometimes interpret proverbs in a literal sense, not yet knowing how to understand the conventionalized metaphor. Interpretation of proverbs is also affected by injuries and diseases of the brain, \"A hallmark of schizophrenia is impaired proverb interpretation.\"\nFeatures.\nGrammatical structures.\nProverbs in various languages are found with a wide variety of grammatical structures. In English, for example, we find the following structures (in addition to others):\nHowever, people will often quote only a fraction of a proverb to invoke an entire proverb, e.g. \"All is fair\" instead of \"All is fair in love and war\", and \"A rolling stone\" for \"A rolling stone gathers no moss.\"\nThe grammar of proverbs is not always the typical grammar of the spoken language. Elements are often moved around, to achieve rhyme or focus.\nAnother type of grammatical construction is the wellerism, a speaker and a quotation, often with an unusual circumstance, such as the following, a representative of a wellerism proverb found in many languages: \"The bride couldn't dance; she said, 'The room floor isn't flat.'\"\nAnother type of grammatical structure in proverbs is a short dialogue:\nConservative language.\nBecause many proverbs are both poetic and traditional, they are often passed down in fixed forms. Though spoken language may change, many proverbs are often preserved in conservative, even archaic, form. \"Proverbs often contain archaic... words and structures.\" In English, for example, \"betwixt\" is not commonly used, but a form of it is still heard (or read) in the proverb \"There is many a slip 'twixt the cup and the lip.\" The conservative form preserves the meter and the rhyme. This conservative nature of proverbs can result in archaic words and grammatical structures being preserved in individual proverbs, as has been widely documented, e.g. in Amharic, Nsenga, Polish, Venda, Hebrew, Giriama, Georgian, Karachay-Balkar, Hausa, Uzbek, Budu of Congo, Kazakh. \nIn addition, proverbs may still be used in languages which were once more widely known in a society, but are now no longer so widely known. For example, English speakers use some non-English proverbs that are drawn from languages that used to be widely understood by the educated class, e.g. \"C'est la vie\" from French and \"Carpe diem\" from Latin.\nProverbs are often handed down through generations. Therefore, \"many proverbs refer to old measurements, obscure professions, outdated weapons, unknown plants, animals, names, and various other traditional matters.\"\nTherefore, it is common that they preserve words that become less common and archaic in broader society. Archaic proverbs in solid form\u00a0\u2013 such as murals, carvings, and glass\u00a0\u2013 can be viewed even after the language of their form is no longer widely understood, such as an Anglo-French proverb in a stained glass window in York.\nBorrowing and spread.\nProverbs are often and easily translated and transferred from one language into another. \"There is nothing so uncertain as the derivation of proverbs, the same proverb being often found in all nations, and it is impossible to assign its paternity.\"\nProverbs are often borrowed across lines of language, religion, and even time. For example, a proverb of the approximate form \"No flies enter a mouth that is shut\" is currently found in Spain, France, Ethiopia, and many countries in between. It is embraced as a true local proverb in many places and should not be excluded in any collection of proverbs because it is shared by the neighbors. However, though it has gone through multiple languages and millennia, the proverb can be traced back to an ancient Babylonian proverb Another example of a widely spread proverb is \"A drowning person clutches at [frogs] foam\", found in Peshai of Afghanistan and Orma of Kenya, and presumably places in between.\nProverbs about one hand clapping are common across Asia, from Dari in Afghanistan to Japan. Some studies have been done devoted to the spread of proverbs in certain regions, such as India and her neighbors and Europe. An extreme example of the borrowing and spread of proverbs was the work done to create a corpus of proverbs for Esperanto, where all the proverbs were translated from other languages.\nIt is often not possible to trace the direction of borrowing a proverb between languages. This is complicated by the fact that the borrowing may have been through plural languages. In some cases, it is possible to make a strong case for discerning the direction of the borrowing based on an artistic form of the proverb in one language, but a prosaic form in another language. For example, in Ethiopia there is a proverb \"Of mothers and water, there is none evil.\" It is found in Amharic, Alaaba language, and Oromo, three languages of Ethiopia:\nThe Oromo version uses poetic features, such as the initial \"ha\" in both clauses with the final \"-aa\" in the same word, and both clauses ending with \"-an\". Also, both clauses are built with the vowel \"a\" in the first and last words, but the vowel \"i\" in the one syllable central word. In contrast, the Amharic and Alaaba versions of the proverb show little evidence of sound-based art.\nHowever, not all languages have proverbs. Proverbs are (nearly) universal across Europe, Asia, and Africa. Some languages in the Pacific have them, such as M\u0101ori with whakatauk\u012b. Other Pacific languages do not, e.g. \"there are no proverbs in Kilivila\" of the Trobriand Islands. In the New World, there are almost no proverbs: \"While proverbs abound in the thousands in most cultures of the world, it remains a riddle why the Native Americans have hardly any proverb tradition at all.\" Although, \"as Mieder has commented . . . the reason for the visible lack of proverbs was probably the inability of foreign researchers to identify proverbial utterances among those peoples.\" Gomez has presented some Mayan sayings that he thinks are evidence of a paremiological tradition. Hakamies has examined the matter of whether proverbs are found universally, a universal genre, concluding that they are not.\nUse.\nIn conversation.\nProverbs are used in conversation by adults more than children, partially because adults have learned more proverbs than children. Also, using proverbs well is a skill that is developed over years. Additionally, children have not mastered the patterns of metaphorical expression that are invoked in proverb use. Proverbs, because they are indirect, allow a speaker to disagree or give advice in a way that may be less offensive. Studying actual proverb use in conversation, however, is difficult since the researcher must wait for proverbs to happen. An Ethiopian researcher, Tadesse Jaleta Jirata, made headway in such research by attending and taking notes at events where he knew proverbs were expected to be part of the conversations.\nIn literature.\nMany authors have used proverbs in their writings, for a very wide variety of literary genres: epics, novels, poems, short stories.\nProbably the most famous user of proverbs in novels is J. R. R. Tolkien in his \"The Hobbit\" and \"The Lord of the Rings\" series. Herman Melville is noted for creating proverbs in \"Moby-Dick\" and in his poetry. Also, C. S. Lewis created a dozen proverbs in \"The Horse and His Boy\", and Mercedes Lackey created dozens for her invented Shin'a'in and Tale'edras cultures; Lackey's proverbs are notable in that they are reminiscent to those of Ancient Asia \u2013 e.g. \"Just because you feel certain an enemy is lurking behind every bush, it doesn't follow that you are wrong\" is like to \"Before telling secrets on the road, look in the bushes.\" These authors are notable for not only using proverbs as integral to the development of the characters and the story line, but also for creating proverbs.\nAmong medieval literary texts, Geoffrey Chaucer's Troilus and Criseyde plays a special role because Chaucer's usage seems to challenge the truth value of proverbs by exposing their epistemological unreliability. Rabelais used proverbs to write an entire chapter of Gargantua.\nThe patterns of using proverbs in literature can change over time. A study of \"classical Chinese novels\" found proverb use as frequently as one proverb every 3,500 words in the \"Water Margin\" (\"Shuihu zhuan\") and one proverb every 4,000 words in \"Wen Jou-hsiang\". But modern Chinese novels have fewer proverbs by far.\nProverbs (or portions of them) have been the inspiration for titles of books: \"The Bigger they Come\" by Erle Stanley Gardner, and \"Birds of a Feather\" (several books with this title), \"Devil in the Details\" (multiple books with this title). Sometimes a title alludes to a proverb, but does not actually quote much of it, such as \"The Gift Horse's Mouth\" by Robert Campbell. Some books or stories have titles that are twisted proverbs, anti-proverbs, such as \"No use dying over spilled milk\", \"When life gives you lululemons,\" and two books titled \"Blessed are the Cheesemakers\". The twisted proverb of last title was also used in the Monty Python movie Life of Brian, where a person mishears one of Jesus Christ's beatitudes, \"I think it was 'Blessed are the cheesemakers.'\"\nSome books and stories are built around a proverb. Some of Tolkien's books have been analyzed as having \"governing proverbs\" where \"the action of a book turns on or fulfills a proverbial saying.\" Some stories have been written with a proverb overtly as an opening, such as \"A stitch in time saves nine\" at the beginning of \"Kitty's Class Day\", one of Louisa May Alcott's \"Proverb Stories\". Other times, a proverb appears at the end of a story, summing up a moral to the story, frequently found in Aesop's Fables, such as \"Heaven helps those who help themselves\" from \"Hercules and the Wagoner\". In a novel by the Ivorian novelist Ahmadou Kourouma, \"proverbs are used to conclude each chapter\".\nProverbs have also been used strategically by poets. Sometimes proverbs (or portions of them or anti-proverbs) are used for titles, such as \"A bird in the bush\" by Lord Kennet and his stepson Peter Scott and \"The blind leading the blind\" by Lisa Mueller. Sometimes, multiple proverbs are important parts of poems, such as Paul Muldoon's \"Symposium\", which begins \"You can lead a horse to water but you can't make it hold its nose to the grindstone and hunt with the hounds. Every dog has a stitch in time...\" In Finnish there are proverb poems written hundreds of years ago. The Turkish poet Refiki wrote an entire poem by stringing proverbs together, which has been translated into English poetically yielding such verses as \"Be watchful and be wary, / But seldom grant a boon; / The man who calls the piper / Will also call the tune.\" Eliza Griswold also created a poem by stringing proverbs together, Libyan proverbs translated into English.\nBecause proverbs are familiar and often pointed, they have been used by a number of hip-hop poets. This has been true not only in the USA, birthplace of hip-hop, but also in Nigeria. Since Nigeria is so multilingual, hip-hop poets there use proverbs from various languages, mixing them in as it fits their need, sometimes translating the original. For example,\n\"They forget say ogbon ju agbaraloThey forget that wisdom is greater than power\"\nSome authors have bent and twisted proverbs, creating anti-proverbs, for a variety of literary effects. For example, in the Harry Potter novels, J. K. Rowling reshapes a standard English proverb into \"It's no good crying over spilt potion\" and Dumbledore advises Harry not to \"count your owls before they are delivered\". In a slightly different use of reshaping proverbs, in the Aubrey\u2013Maturin series of historical naval novels by Patrick O'Brian, Capt. Jack Aubrey humorously mangles and mis-splices proverbs, such as \"Never count the bear's skin before it is hatched\" and \"There's a good deal to be said for making hay while the iron is hot.\" Earlier than O'Brian's Aubrey, Beatrice Grimshaw also used repeated splicings of proverbs in the mouth of an eccentric marquis to create a memorable character in \"The Sorcerer's Stone\", such as \"The proof of the pudding sweeps clean\" (p.\u00a0109) and \"A stitch in time is as good as a mile\" (p.\u00a097).\nBecause proverbs are so much a part of the language and culture, authors have sometimes used proverbs in historical fiction effectively, but anachronistically, before the proverb was actually known. For example, the novel \"Ramage and the Rebels\", by Dudley Pope is set in approximately 1800. Captain Ramage reminds his adversary \"You are supposed to know that it is dangerous to change horses in midstream\" (p.\u00a0259), with another allusion to the same proverb three pages later. However, the proverb about changing horses in midstream is reliably dated to 1864, so the proverb could not have been known or used by a character from that period.\nSome authors have used so many proverbs that there have been entire books written cataloging their proverb usage, such as Charles Dickens, Agatha Christie, George Bernard Shaw, Miguel de Cervantes, and Friedrich Nietzsche.\nOn the non-fiction side, proverbs have also been used by authors for articles that have no connection to the study of proverbs. Some have been used as the basis for book titles, e.g. \"I Shop, Therefore I Am: Compulsive Buying and the Search for Self\" by April Lane Benson. Some proverbs been used as the basis for article titles, though often in altered form: \"All our eggs in a broken basket: How the Human Terrain System is undermining sustainable military cultural competence\" and \"Should Rolling Stones Worry About Gathering Moss?\", \"Between a Rock and a Soft Place\", and the pair \"Verbs of a feather flock together\" and \"Verbs of a feather flock together II\". Proverbs have been noted as common in subtitles of articles such as \"Discontinued intergenerational transmission of Czech in Texas: 'Hindsight is better than foresight'.\" Also, the reverse is found with a proverb (complete or partial) as the title, then an explanatory subtitle, \"To Change or Not to Change Horses: The World War II Elections\". Many authors have cited proverbs as epigrams at the beginning of their articles, e.g. \"'If you want to dismantle a hedge, remove one thorn at a time' Somali proverb\" in an article on peacemaking in Somalia. An article about research among the M\u0101ori used a M\u0101ori proverb as a title, then began the article with the M\u0101ori form of the proverb as an epigram \"Set the overgrown bush alight and the new flax shoots will spring up\", followed by three paragraphs about how the proverb served as a metaphor for the research and the present context. A British proverb has even been used as the title for a doctoral dissertation: \"Where there is muck there is brass\". Proverbs have also been used as a framework for an article.\nIn drama and film.\nSimilarly to other forms of literature, proverbs have also been used as important units of language in drama and films. This is true from the days of classical Greek works to old French to Shakespeare, to 19th Century Spanish, 19th century Russian, to today. The use of proverbs in drama and film today is still found in languages around the world, with plenty of examples from Africa, including Yor\u00f9b\u00e1 and Igbo of Nigeria.\nA film that makes rich use of proverbs is \"Forrest Gump\", known for both using and creating proverbs. Other studies of the use of proverbs in film include work by Kevin McKenna on the Russian film \"Aleksandr Nevsky\", Haase's study of an adaptation of Little Red Riding Hood, Elias Dominguez Barajas on the film \"Viva Zapata!\", and Aboneh Ashagrie on \"The Athlete\" (a movie in Amharic about Abebe Bikila).\nTelevision programs have also been named with reference to proverbs, usually shortened, such Birds of a Feather and Diff'rent Strokes.\nIn the case of \"Forrest Gump\", the screenplay by Eric Roth had more proverbs than the novel by Winston Groom, but for \"The Harder They Come\", the reverse is true, where the novel derived from the movie by Michael Thelwell has many more proverbs than the movie.\n\u00c9ric Rohmer, the French film director, directed a series of films, the \"Comedies and Proverbs\", where each film was based on a proverb: \"The Aviator's Wife\", \"The Perfect Marriage\", \"Pauline at the Beach\", \"Full Moon in Paris\" (the film's proverb was invented by Rohmer himself: \"The one who has two wives loses his soul, the one who has two houses loses his mind.\"), \"The Green Ray\", \"Boyfriends and Girlfriends\".\nMovie titles based on proverbs include \"Murder Will Out (1939 film)\", \"Try, Try Again\", and \"The Harder They Fall\". A twisted anti-proverb was the title for a Three Stooges film, \"A Bird in the Head\". The title of an award-winning Turkish film, Three Monkeys, also invokes a proverb, though the title does not fully quote it.\nThey have also been used as the titles of plays: \"Baby with the Bathwater\" by Christopher Durang, \"Dog Eat Dog\" by Mary Gallagher, and \"The Dog in the Manger\" by Charles Hale Hoyt. The use of proverbs as titles for plays is not, of course, limited to English plays: \"Il faut qu'une porte soit ouverte ou ferm\u00e9e\" (A door must be open or closed) by Paul de Musset. Proverbs have also been used in musical dramas, such as \"The Full Monty\", which has been shown to use proverbs in clever ways. In the lyrics for \"Beauty and the Beast\", Gaston plays with three proverbs in sequence, \"All roads lead to.../The best things in life are.../All's well that ends with...me.\"\nIn music.\nProverbs are often poetic in and of themselves, making them ideally suited for adapting into songs. Proverbs have been used in music from opera to country to hip-hop. Proverbs have also been used in music in many languages, such as the Akan language the Igede language, Spanish, and Igbo.\nIn English the proverb (or rather the beginning of the proverb), If the shoe fits has been used as a title for three albums and five songs. Other English examples of using proverbs in music include Elvis Presley's \"Easy come, easy go\", Harold Robe's \"Never swap horses when you're crossing a stream\", Arthur Gillespie's \"Absence makes the heart grow fonder\", Bob Dylan's \"Like a rolling stone\", Cher's \"Apples don't fall far from the tree\". Lynn Anderson made famous a song full of proverbs, \"I never promised you a rose garden\" (written by Joe South). In choral music, we find Michael Torke's \"Proverbs\" for female voice and ensemble. A number of Blues musicians have also used proverbs extensively. The frequent use of proverbs in Country music has led to published studies of proverbs in this genre. The Reggae artist Jahdan Blakkamoore has recorded a piece titled \"Proverbs Remix\". The opera \"Maldobr\u00ece\" contains careful use of proverbs. An extreme example of many proverbs used in composing songs is a song consisting almost entirely of proverbs performed by Bruce Springsteen, \"My best was never good enough\". The Mighty Diamonds recorded a song called simply \"Proverbs\".\nThe band Fleet Foxes used the proverb painting Netherlandish Proverbs for the cover of their album Fleet Foxes.\nIn addition to proverbs being used in songs themselves, some rock bands have used parts of proverbs as their names, such as the Rolling Stones, Bad Company, The Mothers of Invention, Feast or Famine, and Of Mice and Men. There have been at least two groups that called themselves \"The Proverbs\", and there is a hip-hop performer in South Africa known as \"Proverb\". In addition, many albums have been named with allusions to proverbs, such as \"Spilt milk\" (a title used by Jellyfish and also Kristina Train), \"The more things change\" by Machine Head, \"Silk purse\" by Linda Ronstadt, \"Another day, another dollar\" by DJ Scream Roccett, \"The blind leading the naked\" by Violent Femmes, \"What's good for the goose is good for the gander\" by Bobby Rush, \"Resistance is Futile\" by Steve Coleman, \"Murder will out\" by Fan the Fury. The proverb \"Feast or famine\" has been used as an album title by Chuck Ragan, Reef the Lost Cauze, Indiginus, and DaVinci. Whitehorse mixed two proverbs for the name of their album \"Leave no bridge unburned\". The band Splinter Group released an album titled \"When in Rome, Eat Lions,\" referring to the proverb \"When in Rome, do as the Romans do\". The band Downcount used a proverb for the name of their tour, \"Come and take it\".\nIn visual form.\nFrom ancient times, people around the world have recorded proverbs in visual form. This has been done in two ways. First, proverbs have been \"written\" to be displayed, often in a decorative manner, such as on pottery, cross-stitch, murals, kangas (East African women's wraps), quilts, a stained glass window, and graffiti.\nSecondly, proverbs have often been visually depicted in a variety of media, including paintings, etchings, and sculpture. Jakob Jordaens painted a plaque with a proverb about drunkenness above a drunk man wearing a crown, titled \"The King Drinks\". Probably the most famous examples of depicting proverbs are the different versions of the paintings \"Netherlandish Proverbs\" by the father and son Pieter Bruegel the Elder and Pieter Brueghel the Younger, the proverbial meanings of these paintings being the subject of a 2004 conference, which led to a published volume of studies (Mieder 2004a). The same father and son also painted versions of The Blind Leading the Blind, a Biblical proverb. These and similar paintings inspired another famous painting depicting some proverbs and also idioms (leading to a series of additional paintings), such as \"Proverbidioms\" by T. E. Breitenbach. Another painting inspired by Bruegel's work is by the Chinese artist, Ah To, who created a painting illustrating 81 Cantonese sayings. Corey Barksdale has produced a book of paintings with specific proverbs and pithy quotations. The British artist Chris Gollon has painted a work entitled \"Big Fish Eat Little Fish\", a title echoing Bruegel's painting of the same name.\nSometimes well-known proverbs are pictured on objects, without a text actually quoting the proverb, such as the three wise monkeys who remind us \"Hear no evil, see no evil, speak no evil\". When the proverb is well known, viewers are able to recognize the proverb and understand the image appropriately, but if viewers do not recognize the proverb, much of the effect of the image is lost. For example, there is a Japanese painting in the Bonsai museum in Saitama city that depicted flowers on a dead tree, but only when the curator learned the ancient (and no longer current) proverb \"Flowers on a dead tree\" did the curator understand the deeper meaning of the painting. Also in Japan, an image of Mount Fuji, a hawk/falcon, and three egg plants, leads viewers to remember the proverb, \"One Mt. Fuji, two falcons, three egg plants\", a Hatsuyume dream predicting a long life.\nA bibliography on proverbs in visual form has been prepared by Mieder and Sobieski (1999). Interpreting visual images of proverbs is subjective, but familiarity with the depicted proverb helps.\nSome artists have used proverbs and anti-proverbs for titles of their paintings, alluding to a proverb rather than picturing it. For example, Vivienne LeWitt painted a piece titled \"If the shoe doesn't fit, must we change the foot?\", which shows neither foot nor shoe, but a woman counting her money as she contemplates different options when buying vegetables.\nIn 2018, 13 sculptures depicting Maltese proverbs were installed in open spaces of downtown Valletta.\nIn cartoons.\nCartoonists, both editorial and pure humorists, have often used proverbs, sometimes primarily building on the text, sometimes primarily on the situation visually, the best cartoons combining both. Not surprisingly, cartoonists often twist proverbs, such as visually depicting a proverb literally or twisting the text as an anti-proverb. An example with all of these traits is a cartoon showing a waitress delivering two plates with worms on them, telling the customers, \"Two early bird specials... here ya go.\"\nThe traditional Three wise monkeys were depicted in Bizarro with different labels. Instead of the negative imperatives, the one with ears covered bore the sign \"See and speak evil\", the one with eyes covered bore the sign \"See and hear evil\", etc. The caption at the bottom read \"The power of positive thinking.\" Another cartoon showed a customer in a pharmacy telling a pharmacist, \"I'll have an ounce of prevention.\" The comic strip The Argyle Sweater showed an Egyptian archeologist loading a mummy on the roof of a vehicle, refusing the offer of a rope to tie it on, with the caption \"A fool and his mummy are soon parted.\" The comic One Big Happy showed a conversation where one person repeatedly posed a part of various proverb and the other tried to complete each one, resulting in such humorous results as \"Don't change horses... unless you can lift those heavy diapers.\"\nEditorial cartoons can use proverbs to make their points with extra force as they can invoke the wisdom of society, not just the opinion of the editors. In an example that invoked a proverb only visually, when a US government agency (GSA) was caught spending money extravagantly, a cartoon showed a black pot labeled \"Congress\" telling a black kettle labeled \"GSA\", \"Stop wasting the taxpayers' money!\" It may have taken some readers a moment of pondering to understand it, but the impact of the message was the stronger for it.\nCartoons with proverbs are so common that Wolfgang Mieder has published a collected volume of them, many of them editorial cartoons. For example, a German editorial cartoon linked a current politician to the Nazis, showing him with a bottle of swastika-labeled wine and the caption \"In vino veritas\".\nOne cartoonist very self-consciously drew and wrote cartoons based on proverbs for the University of Vermont student newspaper \"The Water Tower\", under the title \"Proverb place\".\nIn advertising.\nProverbs are frequently used in advertising, often in slightly modified form.\nFord once advertised its Thunderbird with, \"One drive is worth a thousand words\" (Mieder 2004b: 84). This is doubly interesting since the underlying proverb behind this, \"One picture is worth a thousand words,\" was originally introduced into the English proverb repertoire in an ad for televisions (Mieder 2004b: 83).\nA few of the many proverbs adapted and used in advertising include:\nThe GEICO company has created a series of television ads that are built around proverbs, such as \"A bird in the hand is worth two in the bush\", and \"The pen is mightier than the sword\", \"Pigs may fly/When pigs fly\", \"If a tree falls in the forest...\", and \"Words can never hurt you\". Doritos made a commercial based on the proverb, \"When pigs fly.\" Many advertisements that use proverbs shorten or amend them, such as, \"Think outside the shoebox.\"\nUse of proverbs in advertising is not limited to the English language. Seda Ba\u015fer \u00c7oban has studied the use of proverbs in Turkish advertising. Tatira has given a number of examples of proverbs used in advertising in Zimbabwe. However, unlike the examples given above in English, all of which are anti-proverbs, Tatira's examples are standard proverbs. Where the English proverbs above are meant to make a potential customer smile, in one of the Zimbabwean examples \"both the content of the proverb and the fact that it is phrased as a proverb secure the idea of a secure time-honored relationship between the company and the individuals\". When newer buses were imported, owners of older buses compensated by painting a traditional proverb on the sides of their buses, \"Going fast does not assure safe arrival\".\nVariations.\nCounter proverbs.\nThere are often proverbs that contradict each other, such as \"Look before you leap\" and \"He who hesitates is lost\", or \"Many hands make light work\" and \"Too many cooks spoil the broth\". These have been labeled \"counter proverbs\" or \"antonymous proverbs\". Stanis\u0142aw Lec observed, \"Proverbs contradict each other. And that, to be sure, is folk wisdom.\"\nWhen there are such counter proverbs, each can be used in its own appropriate situation, and neither is intended to be a universal truth. \nThe concept of \"counter proverb\" is more about pairs of contradictory proverbs than about the use of proverbs to counter each other in an argument. For example, from the Tafi language of Ghana, the following pair of proverbs are counter to each other but are each used in appropriate contexts, \"A co-wife who is too powerful for you, you address her as your mother\" and \"Do not call your mother's co-wife your mother...\" In Nepali, there is a set of totally contradictory proverbs: \"Religion is victorious and sin erodes\" and \"Religion erodes and sin is victorious\".\nAlso, the following pair are counter proverbs from the Kasena of Ghana: \"It is the patient person who will milk a barren cow\" and \"The person who would milk a barren cow must prepare for a kick on the forehead\". From Lugbara language (of Uganda and Congo), there are a pair of counter proverbs: \"The elephant's tusk does not ovewhelm the elephant\" and \"The elephant's tusks weigh the elephant down\". The two contradict each other, whether they are used in an argument or not (though indeed they were used in an argument). But the same work contains an appendix with many examples of proverbs used in arguing for contrary positions, but proverbs that are not inherently contradictory, such as \"One is better off with hope of a cow's return than news of its death\" countered by \"If you don't know a goat [before its death] you mock at its skin\". Though this pair was used in a contradictory way in a conversation, they are not a set of \"counter proverbs\".\nDiscussing counter proverbs in the Badaga language, Hockings explained that in his large collection \"a few proverbs are mutually contradictory... we can be sure that the Badagas do not see the matter that way, and would explain such apparent contradictions by reasoning that proverb \"x\" is used in one context, while \"y\" is used in quite another.\" Comparing Korean proverbs, \"when you compare two proverbs, often they will be contradictory.\" They are used for \"a particular situation\".\n\"Counter proverbs\" are not the same as a \"paradoxical proverb\", a proverb that contains a seeming paradox.\nMetaproverbs.\nIn many cultures, proverbs are so important and so prominent that there are proverbs about proverbs, that is, \"metaproverbs\". The most famous one is from Yoruba of Nigeria, \"Proverbs are the horses of speech, if communication is lost we use proverbs to find it\", used by Wole Soyinka in \"Death and the King's Horsemen\". In Mieder's bibliography of proverb studies, there are twelve publications listed as describing metaproverbs. Other metaproverbs include:\nApplications.\nThere is a growing interest in deliberately using proverbs to achieve goals, usually to support and promote changes in society. Proverbs have also been used for public health promotion, such as promoting breast feeding with a shawl bearing a Swahili proverb \"Mother's milk is sweet\". Proverbs have also been applied for helping people manage diabetes, to combat prostitution, and for community development, to resolve conflicts, and to slow the transmission of HIV.\nThe most active field deliberately using proverbs is Christian ministry, where Joseph G. Healey and others have deliberately worked to catalyze the collection of proverbs from smaller languages and the application of them in a wide variety of church-related ministries, resulting in publications of collections and applications. This attention to proverbs by those in Christian ministries is not new, many pioneering proverb collections having been collected and published by Christian workers.\nU.S. Navy Captain Edward Zellem pioneered the use of Afghan proverbs as a positive relationship-building tool during the war in Afghanistan, and in 2012 he published two bilingual collections of Afghan proverbs in Dari and English, part of an effort of nationbuilding, followed by a volume of Pashto proverbs in 2014.\nCultural values.\nThere is a longstanding debate among proverb scholars as to whether the cultural values of specific language communities are reflected (to varying degree) in their proverbs. Many claim that the proverbs of a particular culture reflect the values of that specific culture, at least to some degree. Many writers have asserted that the proverbs of their cultures reflect their culture and values; this can be seen in such titles as the following: \"An introduction to Kasena society and culture through their proverbs\", Prejudice, power, and poverty in Haiti: a study of a nation's culture as seen through its proverbs, Proverbiality and worldview in Maltese and Arabic proverbs, Fatalistic traits in Finnish proverbs, \"Vietnamese cultural patterns and values as expressed in proverbs\", \"The Wisdom and Philosophy of the Gikuyu proverbs: The Kihooto worldview\", \"Spanish Grammar and Culture through Proverbs,\" and \"How Russian Proverbs Present the Russian National Character\". Kohistani has written a thesis to show how understanding Afghan Dari proverbs will help Europeans understand Afghan culture.\nHowever, a number of scholars argue that such claims are not valid. They have used a variety of arguments. Grauberg argues that since many proverbs are so widely circulated they are reflections of broad human experience, not any one culture's unique viewpoint. Related to this line of argument, from a collection of 199 American proverbs, Jente showed that only 10 were coined in the USA, so that most of these proverbs would not reflect uniquely American values. Giving another line of reasoning that proverbs should not be trusted as a simplistic guide to cultural values, Mieder once observed \"proverbs come and go, that is, antiquated proverbs with messages and images we no longer relate to are dropped from our proverb repertoire, while new proverbs are created to reflect the mores and values of our time\", so old proverbs still in circulation might reflect past values of a culture more than its current values. Also, within any language's proverb repertoire, there may be \"counter proverbs\", proverbs that contradict each other on the surface (see section above). When examining such counter proverbs, it is difficult to discern an underlying cultural value. With so many barriers to a simple calculation of values directly from proverbs, some feel \"one cannot draw conclusions about values of speakers simply from the texts of proverbs\".\nMany outsiders have studied proverbs to discern and understand cultural values and world view of cultural communities. These outsider scholars are confident that they have gained insights into the local cultures by studying proverbs, but this is not universally accepted.\nSeeking empirical evidence to evaluate the question of whether proverbs reflect a culture's values, some have counted the proverbs that support various values. For example, Moon lists what he sees as the top ten core cultural values of the Builsa society of Ghana, as exemplified by proverbs. He found that 18% of the proverbs he analyzed supported the value of being a member of the community, rather than being independent. This was corroboration to other evidence that collective community membership is an important value among the Builsa. In studying Tajik proverbs, Bell notes that the proverbs in his corpus \"Consistently illustrate Tajik values\" and \"The most often observed proverbs reflect the focal and specific values\" discerned in the thesis.\nA study of English proverbs created since 1900 showed in the 1960s a sudden and significant increase in proverbs that reflected more casual attitudes toward sex. Since the 1960s was also the decade of the Sexual revolution, this shows a strong statistical link between the changed values of the decades and a change in the proverbs coined and used. Another study mining the same volume counted Anglo-American proverbs about religion to show that proverbs indicate attitudes toward religion are going downhill.\nThere are many examples where cultural values have been explained and illustrated by proverbs. For example, from India, the concept that birth determines one's nature \"is illustrated in the oft-repeated proverb: there can be no friendship between grass-eaters and meat-eaters, between a food and its eater\". Proverbs have been used to explain and illustrate the Fulani cultural value of \"pulaaku\". But using proverbs to \"illustrate\" a cultural value is not the same as using a collection of proverbs to \"discern\" cultural values. In a comparative study between Spanish and Jordanian proverbs it is defined the social imagination for the mother as an archetype in the context of role transformation and in contrast with the roles of husband, son and brother, in two societies which might be occasionally associated with sexist and /or rural ideologies.\nSome scholars have adopted a cautious approach, acknowledging at least a genuine, though limited, link between cultural values and proverbs: \"The cultural portrait painted by proverbs may be fragmented, contradictory, or otherwise at variance with reality... but must be regarded not as accurate renderings but rather as tantalizing shadows of the culture which spawned them.\" There is not yet agreement on the issue of whether, and how much, cultural values are reflected in a culture's proverbs.\nIt is clear that the Soviet Union believed that proverbs had a direct link to the values of a culture, as they used them to try to create changes in the values of cultures within their sphere of domination. Sometimes they took old Russian proverbs and altered them into socialist forms. These new proverbs promoted Socialism and its attendant values, such as atheism and collectivism, e.g. \"Bread is given to us not by Christ, but by machines and collective farms\" and \"A good harvest is had only by a collective farm.\" They did not limit their efforts to Russian, but also produced \"newly coined proverbs that conformed to socialist thought\" in Tajik and other languages of the USSR.\nReligion.\nMany proverbs from around the world address matters of ethics and expected of behavior. Therefore, it is not surprising that proverbs are often important texts in religions. The most obvious example is the Book of Proverbs in the Bible. Additional proverbs have also been coined to support religious values, such as the following from Dari of Afghanistan: \"In childhood you're playful, In youth you're lustful, In old age you're feeble, So when will you before God be worshipful?\"\nClearly proverbs in religion are not limited to monotheists; among the Badagas of India (Sahivite Hindus), there is a traditional proverb \"Catch hold of and join with the man who has placed sacred ash [on himself].\" Proverbs are widely associated with large religions that draw from sacred books, but they are also used for religious purposes among groups with their own traditional religions, such as the Guji Oromo. The broadest comparative study of proverbs across religions is \"The eleven religions and their proverbial lore, a comparative study. A reference book to the eleven surviving major religions of the world\" by Selwyn Gurney Champion, from 1945. Some sayings from sacred books also become proverbs, even if they were not obviously proverbs in the original passage of the sacred book. For example, many quote \"Be sure your sin will find you out\" as a proverb from the Bible, but there is no evidence it was proverbial in its original usage (Numbers 32:23).\nNot all religious references in proverbs are positive. Some are cynical, such as the Tajik and Uzbek proverb, \"Do as the mullah says, not as he does.\" An Indian proverb is cynical about devotees of Hinduism: \"[Only] When in distress, a man calls on Rama\". In the context of Tibetan Buddhism, some Ladakhi proverbs mock the lamas, e.g., \"If the lama's own head does not come out cleanly, how will he do the drawing upwards of the dead?... used for deriding the immoral life of the lamas.\" There is an Italian proverb that mocks churches, \"One barrel of wine can work more miracles than a church full of saints\". There are so many Spanish proverbs mocking Catholic clergy that there is even a book of them, \"Refranero Anticlerical\". Armenians have a proverb that mocks priests, \"Outside a priest, inside a beast.\"\nProverbs do not have to explicitly mention religion or religious figures to be used to mock a religion, seen in the fact that in a collection of 555 proverbs from the Lur, a Muslim group in Iran, the explanations for 15 of them use illustrations that mock Muslim clerics.\nDammann wrote, \"In the [African] traditional religions, specific religious ideas recede into the background... The influence of Islam manifests itself in African proverbs... Christian influences, on the contrary, are rare.\" If widely true in Africa, this is likely due to the longer presence of Islam in many parts of Africa. Reflection of Christian values is common in Amharic proverbs of Ethiopia, an area that has had a presence of Christianity for well over 1,000 years. The Islamic proverbial reproduction may also be shown in the image of some animals such as the dog. Although dog is portrayed in many European proverbs as the most faithful friend of man, it is represented in some Islamic countries as impure, dirty, vile, cowardly, ungrateful and treacherous, in addition to links to negative human superstitions such as loneliness, indifference and bad luck.\nPsychology.\nThough much proverb scholarship is done by literary scholars, those studying the human mind have used proverbs in a variety of studies. One of the earliest studies in this field is the \"Proverbs Test\" by Gorham, developed in 1956. A similar test is being prepared in German. Proverbs have been used to evaluate dementia, study the cognitive development of children, measure the results of brain injuries, and study how the mind processes figurative language.\nParemiology.\nThe study of proverbs is called paremiology which has a variety of uses in the study of such topics as philosophy, linguistics, and folklore. There are several types and styles of proverbs which are analyzed within Paremiology, as is the use and misuse of familiar expressions which are not strictly 'proverbial' in the dictionary definition of being fixed sentences.\nParemiological minimum.\nGrigorii Permjakov developed the concept of the core set of proverbs that full members of society know, which he called the \"paremiological minimum\" (1979). For example, an adult American is expected to be familiar with \"Birds of a feather flock together\", part of the American paremiological minimum. However, an average adult American is not expected to know \"Fair in the cradle, foul in the saddle\", an old English proverb that is not part of the current American paremiological minimum. Thinking more widely than merely proverbs, Permjakov observed \"every adult Russian language speaker (over 20 years of age) knows no fewer than 800 proverbs, proverbial expressions, popular literary quotations and other forms of cliches\". Studies of the paremiological minimum have been done for a limited number of languages, including Ukrainian, Russian, Hungarian, Czech, Somali, Chinese, Nepali, Gujarati, Spanish, Esperanto, Polish, Croatian and Portuguese. Two noted examples of attempts to establish a paremiological minimum in America are by Haas (2008) and Hirsch, Kett, and Trefil (1988), the latter more prescriptive than descriptive. There is not yet a recognized standard method for calculating the paremiological minimum, as seen by comparing the various efforts to establish the paremiological minimum in a number of languages. \"No really convincing criteria have been offered for the size of a paremiological minimum.\"\nSources for proverb study.\nA seminal work in the study of proverbs is Archer Taylor's \"The Proverb\" (1931), later republished by Wolfgang Mieder with Taylor's Index included (1985/1934). A good introduction to the study of proverbs is Mieder's 2004 volume, \"Proverbs: A Handbook\". Mieder has also published a series of bibliography volumes on proverb research, as well as a large number of articles and other books in the field. Stan Nussbaum has edited a large collection on proverbs of Africa, published on a CD, including reprints of out-of-print collections, original collections, and works on analysis, bibliography, and application of proverbs to Christian ministry (1998). Paczolay has compared proverbs across Europe and published a collection of similar proverbs in 55 languages (1997). There is an academic journal of proverb study, \"Proverbium\" (), many back issues of which are available online. A volume containing articles on a wide variety of topics touching on proverbs was edited by Mieder and Alan Dundes (1994/1981). \"Paremia\" is a Spanish-language journal on proverbs, with articles available online. There are also papers on proverbs published in conference proceedings volumes from the annual Interdisciplinary Colloquium on Proverbs in Tavira, Portugal. Mieder has published a two-volume \"International Bibliography of Paremiology and Phraseology\", with a topical, language, and author index. Mieder has also published a bibliography of collections of proverbs from around the world. A broad introduction to proverb study, \"Introduction to Paremiology\", edited by Hrisztalina Hrisztova-Gotthardt and Melita Aleksa Varga, has been published in both hardcover and free open access, with articles by a dozen different authors. In 2023, Wolfgang Mieder produced a new bibliography volume with 6,364 entries, available for free download from the Web: \"International Bibliography of Paremiology and Phraseology (2008-2022)\". For those who are studying traditional proverbs, there is a book of ideas and techniques for proverb study, freely downloadable: \"Proverb Studies: A Practical Manual\".\nNoteworthy proverb scholars (paremiologists and paremiographers).\nThe study of proverbs has been built by a number of notable scholars and contributors. Earlier scholars were more concerned with collecting than analyzing. Desiderius Erasmus was a Latin scholar (1466\u20131536), whose collection of Latin proverbs, known as \"Adagia\", spread Latin proverbs across Europe. Juan de Mal Lara was a 16th century Spanish scholar, one of his books being 1568 \"Philosophia vulgar\", the first part of which contains one thousand and one sayings. Hern\u00e1n N\u00fa\u00f1ez published a collection of Spanish proverbs (1555).\nIn the 19th century, a growing number of scholars published collections of proverbs, such as Samuel Adalberg who published collections of Yiddish proverbs (1888 &amp; 1890) and Polish proverbs (1889\u20131894). Samuel Ajayi Crowther, the Anglican bishop in Nigeria, published a collection of Yoruba proverbs (1852). Elias L\u00f6nnrot published a collection of Finnish proverbs (1842).\nFrom the 20th century onwards, proverb scholars were involved in not only collecting proverbs, but also analyzing and comparing proverbs. Alan Dundes was a 20th century American folklorist whose scholarly output on proverbs led Wolfgang Mieder to refer to him as a \"pioneering paremiologist\". Matti Kuusi was a 20th century Finnish paremiologist, the creator of the Matti Kuusi international type system of proverbs. With encouragement from Archer Taylor, he founded the journal \"Proverbium: Bulletin d'Information sur les Recherches Par\u00e9miologiques\", published from 1965 to 1975 by the Society for Finnish Literature, which was later restarted as an annual volume, \"Proverbium: International Yearbook of Proverb Scholarship\". Archer Taylor was a 20th century American scholar, best known for his \"magisterial\" book \"The Proverb\". Dimitrios Loukatos was a 20th century Greek proverb scholar, author of such works as \"Aetiological Tales of Modern Greek Proverbs\". Arvo Krikmann (1939\u20132017) was an Estonian proverb scholar, whom Wolfgang Mieder called \"one of the leading paremiologists in the world\" and \"master folklorist and paremiologist\". Elisabeth Piirainen was a German scholar with 50 proverb-related publications.\nCurrent proverb scholars have continued the trend to be involved in analysis as well as collection of proverbs. Claude Buridant is a 20th century French scholar whose work has concentrated on Romance languages. Galit Hasan-Rokem is an Israeli scholar, associate editor of \"Proverbium: The yearbook of international proverb scholarship\", since 1984. She has written on proverbs in Jewish traditions. Joseph G. Healey is an American Catholic missionary in Kenya who has led a movement to sponsor African proverb scholars to collect proverbs from their own language communities. This led Wolfgang Mieder to dedicate the \"International Bibliography of New and Reprinted Proverb Collections\" section of \"Proverbium\" 32 to Healey. Barbara Kirshenblatt-Gimblett is a scholar of Jewish history and folklore, including proverbs. Wolfgang Mieder is a German-born proverb scholar who has worked his entire academic career in the US. He is the editor of \"Proverbium\" and the author of the two volume \"International Bibliography of Paremiology and Phraseology\". He has been honored by four festschrift publications. He has also been recognized by biographical publications that focused on his scholarship. Dora Sakayan is a scholar who has written about German and Armenian studies, including \"Armenian Proverbs: A Paremiological Study with an Anthology of 2,500 Armenian Folk Sayings Selected and Translated into English\". An extensive introduction addresses the language and structure, as well as the origin of Armenian proverbs (international, borrowed and specifically Armenian proverbs). Mineke Schipper is a Dutch scholar, best known for her book of worldwide proverbs about women, \"Never Marry a Woman with Big Feet \u2013 Women in Proverbs from Around the World\". Edward Zellem is an American proverb scholar who has edited books of Afghan proverbs, developed a method of collecting proverbs via the Web.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23531", "revid": "764407", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23531", "title": "Portability (social security)", "text": "The portability of social security benefits is the ability of workers to preserve, maintain, and transfer acquired social security rights and social security rights in the process of being acquired from one private, occupational, or public social security scheme to another. Social security rights refer to rights stemming from pension schemes (old age, survivor, disability), unemployment insurance, health insurance, workers' compensation, and sickness benefits. \nHence, if social security benefits are portable, contributors to, for example, old-age pension schemes do not experience any disadvantage such as the loss of contributions and benefits associated with these contributions when moving from one job to another, from one occupation to another, or from the public to the private sector or vice versa.\nInternational portability of social security rights allows international migrants, who have contributed to a social security scheme for some time in a particular country, to maintain acquired benefits or benefits in the process of being acquired when moving to another country. International portability of social security benefits is therefore understood as the migrant's ability to preserve, maintain, and transfer acquired social security rights independent of nationality and country of residence.\nInternational portability of social security benefits is achieved through bilateral or multilateral social security agreements between countries. These agreements guarantee the totalization of periods of contribution to the social security systems of both countries and the extraterritorial payment of benefits. Currently it is estimated that approximately 23 per cent of migrants worldwide are covered by bilateral social security agreements.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23533", "revid": "3188090", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23533", "title": "Programming help desk", "text": ""}
{"id": "23534", "revid": "44557434", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23534", "title": "Percopsiformes", "text": "Order of fishes\nThe Percopsiformes are a small order of freshwater teleost fishes measuring less than in length, comprising the trout-perch and its allies. It contains just ten extant species, grouped into seven genera and three families. Five of these genera are monotypic.\nThey inhabit freshwater habitats in North America, and fossil evidence indicates that they have inhabited this region since the Late Cretaceous, with both suborders having diverged by the Maastrichtian. Most species in this order are known from the eastern and central regions of North America, although the two \"Percopsis\" species have a primarily boreal and western distribution, with \"P. omiscomaycus\" reaching as far north as the Arctic Circle and \"P. transmontana\" being restricted to the Pacific Northwest.\nThey are generally small fish, ranging from in adult body length. They are grouped together because of technical characteristics of their internal anatomy, and the different species may appear quite different externally. Despite their scientific name and the common names for some taxa, they are not closely related to actual perches in the order Perciformes, and rather represent a freshwater lineage of the otherwise almost entirely marine superorder Paracanthopterygii. They are more closely related to the cods, dories, and the deep-sea tube-eye, and fossil evidence suggests that their closest relative was the extinct order Sphenocephaliformes, comprising two enigmatic genera of Late Cretaceous marine fish, as well as \"Omosomopsis\", another Cretaceous marine fish from Morocco.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23535", "revid": "19814917", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23535", "title": "Photon", "text": "Elementary particle or quantum of light\nA photon (from grc \" ', ' ()\"\u00a0'light') is an elementary particle that is a quantum of the electromagnetic field, including electromagnetic radiation such as light and radio waves, and the force carrier for the electromagnetic force. Photons are massless particles that can only move at one speed, the speed of light measured in vacuum. The photon belongs to the class of boson particles.\nAs with other elementary particles, photons are best explained by quantum mechanics and exhibit wave\u2013particle duality, their behavior featuring properties of both waves and particles. The modern photon concept originated during the first two decades of the 20th century with the work of Albert Einstein, who built upon the research of Max Planck. While Planck was trying to explain how matter and electromagnetic radiation could be in thermal equilibrium with one another, he proposed that the energy stored within a material object should be regarded as composed of an integer number of discrete, equal-sized parts. To explain the photoelectric effect, Einstein introduced the idea that light itself is made of discrete units of energy. In 1926, Gilbert N. Lewis popularized the term \"photon\" for these energy units. Subsequently, many other experiments validated Einstein's approach.\nIn the Standard Model of particle physics, photons and other elementary particles are described as a necessary consequence of physical laws having a certain symmetry at every point in spacetime. The intrinsic properties of particles, such as charge, mass, and spin, are determined by gauge symmetry. The photon concept has led to momentous advances in experimental and theoretical physics, including lasers, Bose\u2013Einstein condensation, quantum field theory, and the probabilistic interpretation of quantum mechanics. It has been applied to photochemistry, high-resolution microscopy, and measurements of molecular distances. Moreover, photons have been studied as elements of quantum computers, and for applications in optical imaging and optical communication such as quantum cryptography.\nPhysical properties.\nThe photon has no electric charge, is generally considered to have zero rest mass, and is a stable particle. The experimental upper limit on the photon mass is very small, on the order of 10\u221253 g; its lifetime would be more than 1018 years. For comparison, the age of the universe is about years. \nIn a vacuum, a photon has two possible polarization states. The photon is the gauge boson for electromagnetism, and therefore all other quantum numbers of the photon (such as lepton number, baryon number, and flavour quantum numbers) are zero. Also, photons obey Bose\u2013Einstein statistics, and not Fermi\u2013Dirac statistics. That is, they do \"not\" obey the Pauli exclusion principle, and more than one photon can occupy the same bound quantum state.\nPhotons are emitted when a charge is accelerated and emits synchrotron radiation. During a molecular, atomic, or nuclear transition to a lower energy level, the photons emitted have characteristic energies ranging from radio waves to gamma rays. Photons can also be emitted when a particle and its corresponding antiparticle are annihilated (for example, electron\u2013positron annihilation).\nEnergy and momentum.\nIn a quantum mechanical model, electromagnetic waves transfer energy in photons with energy proportional to frequency (formula_1)\n formula_2\nwhere h is the Planck constant, a fundamental physical constant. The energy can be written with angular frequency (formula_3) or wavelength (\u03bb):\n formula_4\nwhere \"\u0127\" \u2261 is called the reduced Planck constant and c is the speed of light.\nThe momentum of a photon\n formula_5\nwhere k is the wave vector, where\n \u2003 is the wave number.\nSince formula_6 points in the direction of the photon's propagation, the magnitude of its momentum is\n formula_7\nThe photon energy can be written as \"E\" = \"pc\" where p is the magnitude of the momentum vector p. This consistent with the energy\u2013momentum relation of special relativity,\n formula_8\nwhen \"m\" = 0.\nPolarization and spin angular momentum.\nThe photon also carries spin angular momentum, which is related to photon polarization. (Beams of light also exhibit properties described as orbital angular momentum of light).\nThe angular momentum of the photon has two possible values, either +\u0127 or \u2212\u0127. These two possible values correspond to the two possible pure states of circular polarization. Collections of photons in a light beam may have mixtures of these two values; a linearly polarized light beam will act as if it were composed of equal numbers of the two possible angular momenta.\nThe spin angular momentum of light does not depend on its frequency, and was experimentally verified by C. V. Raman and Suri Bhagavantam in 1931.\nAntiparticle annihilation.\nThe collision of a particle with its antiparticle can create photons. In free space at least \"two\" photons must be created since, in the center of momentum frame, the colliding antiparticles have no net momentum, whereas a single photon always has momentum (determined by the photon's frequency or wavelength, which cannot be zero). Hence, conservation of momentum (or equivalently, translational invariance) requires that at least two photons are created, with zero net momentum. The energy of the two photons, or, equivalently, their frequency, may be determined from conservation of four-momentum.\nSeen another way, the photon can be considered as its own antiparticle (thus an \"antiphoton\" is simply a normal photon with opposite momentum, equal polarization, and 180\u00b0 out of phase). The reverse process, pair production, is the dominant mechanism by which high-energy photons such as gamma rays lose energy while passing through matter. That process is the reverse of \"annihilation to one photon\" allowed in the electric field of an atomic nucleus.\nThe classical formulae for the energy and momentum of electromagnetic radiation can be re-expressed in terms of photon events. For example, the pressure of electromagnetic radiation on an object derives from the transfer of photon momentum per unit time and unit area to that object, since pressure is force per unit area and force is the change in momentum per unit time.\nExperimental checks on photon mass.\nCurrent commonly accepted physical theories imply or assume the photon to be strictly massless. If photons were not purely massless, their speeds would vary with frequency, with lower-energy (redder) photons moving slightly slower than higher-energy photons. Relativity would be unaffected by this; the so-called speed of light, \"c\", would then not be the actual speed at which light moves, but a constant of nature which is the upper bound on speed that any object could theoretically attain in spacetime. Thus, it would still be the speed of spacetime ripples (gravitational waves and gravitons), but it would not be the speed of photons.\nIf a photon did have non-zero mass, there would be other effects as well. Coulomb's law would be modified and the electromagnetic field would have an extra physical degree of freedom. These effects yield more sensitive experimental probes of the photon mass than the frequency dependence of the speed of light. If Coulomb's law is not exactly valid, then that would allow the presence of an electric field to exist within a hollow conductor when it is subjected to an external electric field. This provides a means for precision tests of Coulomb's law. A null result of such an experiment has set a limit of \"m\" \u2272.\nSharper upper limits on the mass of light have been obtained in experiments designed to detect effects caused by the galactic vector potential. Although the galactic vector potential is large because the galactic magnetic field exists on great length scales, only the magnetic field would be observable if the photon is massless. In the case that the photon has mass, the mass term \"m\"2\"A\"\"\u03bc\"\"A\"\"\u03bc\" would affect the galactic plasma. The fact that no such effects are seen implies an upper bound on the photon mass of \"m\" &lt;. The galactic vector potential can also be probed directly by measuring the torque exerted on a magnetized ring. Such methods were used to obtain the sharper upper limit of () given by the Particle Data Group.\nThese sharp limits from the non-observation of the effects caused by the galactic vector potential have been shown to be model-dependent. If the photon mass is generated via the Higgs mechanism then the upper limit of \"m\" \u2272 from the test of Coulomb's law is valid.\nHistorical development.\nIn most theories up to the eighteenth century, light was pictured as being made of particles. Since particle models cannot easily account for the refraction, diffraction and birefringence of light, wave theories of light were proposed by Ren\u00e9 Descartes (1637), Robert Hooke (1665), and Christiaan Huygens (1678); however, particle models remained dominant, chiefly due to the influence of Isaac Newton. In the early 19th century, Thomas Young and August Fresnel clearly demonstrated the interference and diffraction of light, and by 1850 wave models were generally accepted. James Clerk Maxwell's 1865 prediction that light was an electromagnetic wave \u2013 which was confirmed experimentally in 1888 by Heinrich Hertz's detection of radio waves \u2013 seemed to be the final blow to particle models of light.\nThe Maxwell wave theory, however, does not account for \"all\" properties of light. The Maxwell theory predicts that the energy of a light wave depends only on its intensity, not on its frequency; nevertheless, several independent types of experiments show that the energy imparted by light to atoms depends only on the light's frequency, not on its intensity. For example, some chemical reactions are provoked only by light of frequency higher than a certain threshold; light of frequency lower than the threshold, no matter how intense, does not initiate the reaction. Similarly, electrons can be ejected from a metal plate by shining light of sufficiently high frequency on it (the photoelectric effect); the energy of the ejected electron is related only to the light's frequency, not to its intensity.\nAt the same time, investigations of black-body radiation carried out over four decades (1860\u20131900) by various researchers culminated in Max Planck's hypothesis that the energy of \"any\" system that absorbs or emits electromagnetic radiation of frequency \u03bd is an integer multiple of an energy quantum As shown by Albert Einstein, some form of energy quantization \"must\" be assumed to account for the thermal equilibrium observed between matter and electromagnetic radiation; for this explanation of the photoelectric effect, Einstein received the 1921 Nobel Prize in physics.\nSince the Maxwell theory of light allows for all possible energies of electromagnetic radiation, most physicists assumed initially that the energy quantization resulted from some unknown constraint on the matter that absorbs or emits the radiation. In 1905, Einstein was the first to propose that energy quantization was a property of electromagnetic radiation itself. Although he accepted the validity of Maxwell's theory, Einstein pointed out that many anomalous experiments could be explained if the \"energy\" of a Maxwellian light wave were localized into point-like quanta that move independently of one another, even if the wave itself is spread continuously over space. In 1909 and 1916, Einstein showed that, if Planck's law regarding black-body radiation is accepted, the energy quanta must also carry momentum making them full-fledged particles. \nAs recounted in Robert Millikan's 1923 Nobel lecture, Einstein's 1905 predicted energy relationship was verified experimentally by 1916 but the local concept of the quanta remained unsettled.\nMost physicists were reluctant to believe that electromagnetic radiation itself might be particulate and thus an example of wave-particle duality. \nThen in 1922 Arthur Compton experiment showed that photons carried momentum proportional to their wave number (1922) in an experiment now called Compton scattering that appeared to clearly support a localized quantum model. At least for Millikan, this settled the matter. Compton received the Nobel Prize in 1927 for his scattering work.\nEven after Compton's experiment, Niels Bohr, Hendrik Kramers and John Slater made one last attempt to preserve the Maxwellian continuous electromagnetic field model of light, the so-called BKS theory. An important feature of the BKS theory is how it treated the conservation of energy and the conservation of momentum. In the BKS theory, energy and momentum are only conserved on the average across many interactions between matter and radiation. However, refined Compton experiments showed that the conservation laws hold for individual interactions. Accordingly, Bohr and his co-workers gave their model \"as honorable a funeral as possible\". Nevertheless, the failures of the BKS model inspired Werner Heisenberg in his development of matrix mechanics.\nBy the late 1920, the pivotal question was how to unify Maxwell's wave theory of light with its experimentally observed particle nature. The answer to this question occupied Albert Einstein for the rest of his life, and was solved in quantum electrodynamics and its successor, the Standard Model. (See ' and ', below.)\nA few physicists persisted in developing semiclassical models in which electromagnetic radiation is not quantized, but matter appears to obey the laws of quantum mechanics. Although the evidence from chemical and physical experiments for the existence of photons was overwhelming by the 1970s, this evidence could not be considered as \"absolutely\" definitive; since it relied on the interaction of light with matter, and a sufficiently complete theory of matter could in principle account for the evidence. \nIn the 1970s and 1980s photon-correlation experiments definitively demonstrated quantum photon effects.\nThese experiments produce results that cannot be explained by any classical theory of light, since they involve anticorrelations that result from the quantum measurement process. In 1974, the first such experiment was carried out by Clauser, who reported a violation of a classical Cauchy\u2013Schwarz inequality. In 1977, Kimble \"et al.\" demonstrated an analogous anti-bunching effect of photons interacting with a beam splitter; this approach was simplified and sources of error eliminated in the photon-anticorrelation experiment of Grangier, Roger, &amp; Aspect (1986); This work is reviewed and simplified further in Thorn, Neel, \"et al.\" (2004).\nNomenclature.\nThe word \"quanta\" (singular \"quantum,\" Latin for \"how much\") was used before 1900 to mean particles or amounts of different quantities, including electricity. In 1900, the German physicist Max Planck was studying black-body radiation, and he suggested that the experimental observations, specifically at shorter wavelengths, would be explained if the energy was \"made up of a completely determinate number of finite equal parts\", which he called \"energy elements\". In 1905, Albert Einstein published a paper in which he proposed that many light-related phenomena\u2014including black-body radiation and the photoelectric effect\u2014would be better explained by modelling electromagnetic waves as consisting of spatially localized, discrete energy quanta. He called these \"a light quantum\" (German: \"ein Lichtquant\").\nThe name \"photon\" derives from the Greek word for light, \"\" (transliterated \"ph\u00f4s\"). The name was used 1916 by the American physicist and psychologist Leonard T. Troland for a unit of illumination of the retina and in several other contexts before being adopted for physics. The use of the term \"photon\" for the light quantum was popularized by Gilbert N. Lewis, who used the term in a letter to \"Nature\" on 18\u00a0December 1926. Arthur Compton, who had performed a key experiment demonstrating light quanta, cited Lewis in the 1927 Solvay conference proceedings for suggesting the name \"photon\". Einstein never did use the term. \nIn physics, a photon is usually denoted by the symbol \u03b3 (the Greek letter gamma). This symbol for the photon probably derives from gamma rays, which were discovered in 1900 by Paul Villard, named by Ernest Rutherford in 1903, and shown to be a form of electromagnetic radiation in 1914 by Rutherford and Edward Andrade. In chemistry and optical engineering, photons are usually symbolized by h\u03bd, which is the photon energy, where h is the Planck constant and the Greek letter \u03bd (nu) is the photon's frequency.\nWave\u2013particle duality and uncertainty principles.\nPhotons obey the laws of quantum mechanics, and so their behavior has both wave-like and particle-like aspects. When a photon is detected by a measuring instrument, it is registered as a single, particulate unit. However, the \"probability\" of detecting a photon is calculated by equations that describe waves. This combination of aspects is known as wave\u2013particle duality. For example, the probability distribution for the location at which a photon might be detected displays clearly wave-like phenomena such as diffraction and interference. A single photon passing through a double slit has its energy received at a point on the screen with a probability distribution given by its interference pattern determined by Maxwell's wave equations. However, experiments confirm that the photon is \"not\" a short pulse of electromagnetic radiation; a photon's Maxwell waves will diffract, but photon energy does not spread out as it propagates, nor does this energy divide when it encounters a beam splitter. Rather, the received photon acts like a point-like particle since it is absorbed or emitted \"as a whole\" by arbitrarily small systems, including systems much smaller than its wavelength, such as an atomic nucleus (\u224810\u221215 m across) or even the point-like electron.\nWhile many introductory texts treat photons using the mathematical techniques of non-relativistic quantum mechanics, this is in some ways an awkward oversimplification, as photons are by nature intrinsically relativistic. Because photons have zero rest mass, no wave function defined for a photon can have all the properties familiar from wave functions in non-relativistic quantum mechanics. In order to avoid these difficulties, physicists employ the second-quantized theory of photons described below, quantum electrodynamics, in which photons are quantized excitations of electromagnetic modes.\nAnother difficulty is finding the proper analogue for the uncertainty principle, an idea frequently attributed to Heisenberg, who introduced the concept in analyzing a thought experiment involving an electron and a high-energy photon. However, Heisenberg did not give precise mathematical definitions of what the \"uncertainty\" in these measurements meant. The precise mathematical statement of the position\u2013momentum uncertainty principle is due to Kennard, Pauli, and Weyl. The uncertainty principle applies to situations where an experimenter has a choice of measuring either one of two \"canonically conjugate\" quantities, like the position and the momentum of a particle. According to the uncertainty principle, no matter how the particle is prepared, it is not possible to make a precise prediction for both of the two alternative measurements: if the outcome of the position measurement is made more certain, the outcome of the momentum measurement becomes less so, and vice versa. A coherent state minimizes the overall uncertainty as far as quantum mechanics allows. Quantum optics makes use of coherent states for modes of the electromagnetic field. There is a tradeoff, reminiscent of the position\u2013momentum uncertainty relation, between measurements of an electromagnetic wave's amplitude and its phase. This is sometimes informally expressed in terms of the uncertainty in the number of photons present in the electromagnetic wave, formula_9, and the uncertainty in the phase of the wave, formula_10. However, this cannot be an uncertainty relation of the Kennard\u2013Pauli\u2013Weyl type, since unlike position and momentum, the phase formula_11 cannot be represented by a Hermitian operator.\nBose\u2013Einstein model of a photon gas.\nIn 1924, Satyendra Nath Bose derived Planck's law of black-body radiation without using any electromagnetism, but rather by using a modification of coarse-grained counting of phase space. Einstein showed that this modification is equivalent to assuming that photons are rigorously identical and that it implied a \"mysterious non-local interaction\", now understood as the requirement for a symmetric quantum mechanical state. This work led to the concept of coherent states and the development of the laser. In the same papers, Einstein extended Bose's formalism to material particles (bosons) and predicted that they would condense into their lowest quantum state at low enough temperatures; this Bose\u2013Einstein condensation was observed experimentally in 1995. It was later used by Lene Hau to slow, and then completely stop, light in 1999 and 2001.\nThe modern view on this is that photons are, by virtue of their integer spin, bosons (as opposed to fermions with half-integer spin). By the spin-statistics theorem, all bosons obey Bose\u2013Einstein statistics (whereas all fermions obey Fermi\u2013Dirac statistics).\nStimulated and spontaneous emission.\nIn 1916, Albert Einstein showed that Planck's radiation law could be derived from a semi-classical, statistical treatment of photons and atoms, which implies a link between the rates at which atoms emit and absorb photons. The condition follows from the assumption that functions of the emission and absorption of radiation by the atoms are independent of each other, and that thermal equilibrium is made by way of the radiation's interaction with the atoms. Consider a cavity in thermal equilibrium with all parts of itself and filled with electromagnetic radiation and that the atoms can emit and absorb that radiation. Thermal equilibrium requires that the energy density formula_12 of photons with frequency formula_1 (which is proportional to their number density) is, on average, constant in time; hence, the rate at which photons of any particular frequency are \"emitted\" must equal the rate at which they are \"absorbed\".\nEinstein began by postulating simple proportionality relations for the different reaction rates involved. In his model, the rate formula_14 for a system to \"absorb\" a photon of frequency formula_1 and transition from a lower energy formula_16 to a higher energy formula_17 is proportional to the number formula_18 of atoms with energy formula_16 and to the energy density formula_12 of ambient photons of that frequency,\n formula_21\nwhere formula_22 is the rate constant for absorption. For the reverse process, there are two possibilities: spontaneous emission of a photon, or the emission of a photon initiated by the interaction of the atom with a passing photon and the return of the atom to the lower-energy state. Following Einstein's approach, the corresponding rate formula_23 for the emission of photons of frequency formula_1 and transition from a higher energy formula_17 to a lower energy formula_16 is\n formula_27\nwhere formula_28 is the rate constant for emitting a photon spontaneously, and formula_29 is the rate constant for emissions in response to ambient photons (induced or stimulated emission). In thermodynamic equilibrium, the number of atoms in state formula_30 and those in state formula_31 must, on average, be constant; hence, the rates formula_14 and formula_23 must be equal. Also, by arguments analogous to the derivation of Boltzmann statistics, the ratio of formula_34 and formula_18 is formula_36 where formula_37 and formula_38 are the degeneracy of the state formula_30 and that of formula_31, respectively, formula_41 and formula_42 their energies, formula_43 the Boltzmann constant and formula_44 the system's temperature. From this, it is readily derived that\n formula_45\nand\n formula_46\nThe formula_28 and formula_29 are collectively known as the \"Einstein coefficients\".\nEinstein could not fully justify his rate equations, but claimed that it should be possible to calculate the coefficients formula_28, formula_22 and formula_29 once physicists had obtained \"mechanics and electrodynamics modified to accommodate the quantum hypothesis\". Not long thereafter, in 1926, Paul Dirac derived the formula_29 rate constants by using a semiclassical approach, and, in 1927, succeeded in deriving \"all\" the rate constants from first principles within the framework of quantum theory. Dirac's work was the foundation of quantum electrodynamics, i.e., the quantization of the electromagnetic field itself. Dirac's approach is also called \"second quantization\" or quantum field theory; earlier quantum mechanical treatments only treat material particles as quantum mechanical, not the electromagnetic field.\nEinstein was troubled by the fact that his theory seemed incomplete, since it did not determine the \"direction\" of a spontaneously emitted photon. A probabilistic nature of light-particle motion was first considered by Newton in his treatment of birefringence and, more generally, of the splitting of light beams at interfaces into a transmitted beam and a reflected beam. Newton hypothesized that hidden variables in the light particle determined which of the two paths a single photon would take. Similarly, Einstein hoped for a more complete theory that would leave nothing to chance, beginning his separation from quantum mechanics. Ironically, Max Born's probabilistic interpretation of the wave function was inspired by Einstein's later work searching for a more complete theory.\nQuantum field theory.\nQuantization of the electromagnetic field.\nIn 1910, Peter Debye derived Planck's law of black-body radiation from a relatively simple assumption. He decomposed the electromagnetic field in a cavity into its Fourier modes, and assumed that the energy in any mode was an integer multiple of formula_53, where formula_1 is the frequency of the electromagnetic mode. Planck's law of black-body radiation follows immediately as a geometric sum. However, Debye's approach failed to give the correct formula for the energy fluctuations of black-body radiation, which were derived by Einstein in 1909.\nIn 1925, Born, Heisenberg and Jordan reinterpreted Debye's concept in a key way. As may be shown classically, the Fourier modes of the electromagnetic field\u2014a complete set of electromagnetic plane waves indexed by their wave vector k and polarization state\u2014are equivalent to a set of uncoupled simple harmonic oscillators. Treated quantum mechanically, the energy levels of such oscillators are known to be formula_55, where formula_1 is the oscillator frequency. The key new step was to identify an electromagnetic mode with energy formula_55 as a state with formula_58 photons, each of energy formula_53. This approach gives the correct energy fluctuation formula.\nDirac took this one step further. He treated the interaction between a charge and an electromagnetic field as a small perturbation that induces transitions in the photon states, changing the numbers of photons in the modes, while conserving energy and momentum overall. Dirac was able to derive Einstein's formula_28 and formula_29 coefficients from first principles, and showed that the Bose\u2013Einstein statistics of photons is a natural consequence of quantizing the electromagnetic field correctly (Bose's reasoning went in the opposite direction; he derived Planck's law of black-body radiation by \"assuming\" B\u2013E statistics). In Dirac's time, it was not yet known that all bosons, including photons, must obey Bose\u2013Einstein statistics.\nDirac's second-order perturbation theory can involve virtual photons, transient intermediate states of the electromagnetic field; the static electric and magnetic interactions are mediated by such virtual photons. In such quantum field theories, the probability amplitude of observable events is calculated by summing over \"all\" possible intermediate steps, even ones that are unphysical; hence, virtual photons are not constrained to satisfy formula_62, and may have extra polarization states; depending on the gauge used, virtual photons may have three or four polarization states, instead of the two states of real photons. Although these transient virtual photons can never be observed, they contribute measurably to the probabilities of observable events.\nSecond-order and higher-order perturbation calculations can give infinite contributions to the sum. Such unphysical results are corrected for using the technique of renormalization.\nOther virtual particles may contribute to the summation as well; for example, two photons may interact indirectly through virtual electron\u2013positron pairs. Such photon\u2013photon scattering (see two-photon physics), as well as electron\u2013photon scattering, is meant to be one of the modes of operations of the planned particle accelerator, the International Linear Collider.\nIn modern physics notation, the quantum state of the electromagnetic field is written as a Fock state, a tensor product of the states for each electromagnetic mode\n formula_63\nwhere formula_64 represents the state in which formula_65 photons are in the mode formula_66. In this notation, the creation of a new photon in mode formula_66 (e.g., emitted from an atomic transition) is written as formula_68. This notation merely expresses the concept of Born, Heisenberg and Jordan described above, and does not add any physics.\nAs a gauge boson.\nThe electromagnetic field can be understood as a gauge field, i.e., as a field that results from requiring that a gauge symmetry holds independently at every position in spacetime. For the electromagnetic field, this gauge symmetry is the Abelian U(1) symmetry of complex numbers of absolute value 1, which reflects the ability to vary the phase of a complex field without affecting observables or real valued functions made from it, such as the energy or the Lagrangian.\nThe quanta of an Abelian gauge field must be massless, uncharged bosons, as long as the symmetry is not broken; hence, the photon is predicted to be massless, and to have zero electric charge and integer spin. The particular form of the electromagnetic interaction specifies that the photon must have spin \u00b11; thus, its helicity must be formula_69. These two spin components correspond to the classical concepts of right-handed and left-handed circularly polarized light. However, the transient virtual photons of quantum electrodynamics may also adopt unphysical polarization states.\nIn the prevailing Standard Model of physics, the photon is one of four gauge bosons in the electroweak interaction; the other three are denoted W+, W\u2212 and Z0 and are responsible for the weak interaction. Unlike the photon, these gauge bosons have mass, owing to a mechanism that breaks their SU(2) gauge symmetry. The unification of the photon with W and Z gauge bosons in the electroweak interaction was accomplished by Sheldon Glashow, Abdus Salam and Steven Weinberg, for which they were awarded the 1979 Nobel Prize in physics. Physicists continue to hypothesize grand unified theories that connect these four gauge bosons with the eight gluon gauge bosons of quantum chromodynamics; however, key predictions of these theories, such as proton decay, have not been observed experimentally.\nHadronic properties.\nMeasurements of the interaction between energetic photons and hadrons show that the interaction is much more intense than expected by the interaction of merely photons with the hadron's electric charge. Furthermore, the interaction of energetic photons with protons is similar to the interaction of photons with neutrons in spite of the fact that the electrical charge structures of protons and neutrons are substantially different. A theory called vector meson dominance (VMD) was developed to explain this effect. According to VMD, the photon is a superposition of the pure electromagnetic photon, which interacts only with electric charges, and vector mesons, which mediate the residual nuclear force. However, if experimentally probed at very short distances, the intrinsic structure of the photon appears to have as components a charge-neutral flux of quarks and gluons, quasi-free according to asymptotic freedom in QCD. That flux is described by the \"photon structure function\". A review by presented a comprehensive comparison of data with theoretical predictions.\nContributions to the mass of a system.\nThe energy of a system that emits a photon is \"decreased\" by the energy formula_70 of the photon as measured in the rest frame of the emitting system, which may result in a reduction in mass in the amount formula_71. Similarly, the mass of a system that absorbs a photon is \"increased\" by a corresponding amount. As an application, the energy balance of nuclear reactions involving photons is commonly written in terms of the masses of the nuclei involved, and terms of the form formula_71 for the gamma photons (and for other relevant energies, such as the recoil energy of nuclei).\nThis concept is applied in key predictions of quantum electrodynamics (QED, see above). In that theory, the mass of electrons (or, more generally, leptons) is modified by including the mass contributions of virtual photons, in a technique known as renormalization. Such \"radiative corrections\" contribute to a number of predictions of QED, such as the magnetic dipole moment of leptons, the Lamb shift, and the hyperfine structure of bound lepton pairs, such as muonium and positronium.\nSince photons contribute to the stress\u2013energy tensor, they exert a gravitational attraction on other objects, according to the theory of general relativity. Conversely, photons are themselves affected by gravity; their normally straight trajectories may be bent by warped spacetime, as in gravitational lensing, and their frequencies may be lowered by moving to a higher gravitational potential, as in the Pound\u2013Rebka experiment. However, these effects are not specific to photons; exactly the same effects would be predicted for classical electromagnetic waves.\nIn matter.\nLight that travels through transparent matter does so at a lower speed than \"c\", the speed of light in vacuum. The factor by which the speed is decreased is called the refractive index of the material. In a classical wave picture, the slowing can be explained by the light inducing electric polarization in the matter, the polarized matter radiating new light, and that new light interfering with the original light wave to form a delayed wave. In a particle picture, the slowing can instead be described as a blending of the photon with quantum excitations of the matter to produce quasi-particles known as polaritons. Polaritons have a nonzero effective mass, which means that they cannot travel at \"c\". Light of different frequencies may travel through matter at different speeds; this is called dispersion (not to be confused with scattering). In some cases, it can result in extremely slow speeds of light in matter. The effects of photon interactions with other quasi-particles may be observed directly in Raman scattering and Brillouin scattering.\nPhotons can be scattered by matter. For example, photons scatter so many times in the solar radiative zone after leaving the core of the Sun that radiant energy takes about a million years to reach the convection zone. However, photons emitted from the sun's photosphere take only 8.3 minutes to reach Earth.\nPhotons can also be absorbed by nuclei, atoms or molecules, provoking transitions between their energy levels. A classic example is the molecular transition of retinal (C20H28O), which is responsible for vision, as discovered in 1958 by Nobel laureate biochemist George Wald and co-workers. The absorption provokes a cis\u2013trans isomerization that, in combination with other such transitions, is transduced into nerve impulses. The absorption of photons can even break chemical bonds, as in the photodissociation of chlorine; this is the subject of photochemistry.\nTechnological applications.\nPhotons have many applications in technology. These examples are chosen to illustrate applications of photons \"per se\", rather than general optical devices such as lenses, etc. that could operate under a classical theory of light. The laser is an important application and is discussed above under stimulated emission.\nIndividual photons can be detected by several methods. The classic photomultiplier tube exploits the photoelectric effect: a photon of sufficient energy strikes a metal plate and knocks free an electron, initiating an ever-amplifying avalanche of electrons. Semiconductor charge-coupled device chips use a similar effect: an incident photon generates a charge on a microscopic capacitor that can be detected. Other detectors such as Geiger counters use the ability of photons to ionize gas molecules contained in the device, causing a detectable change of conductivity of the gas.\nPlanck's energy formula formula_73 is often used by engineers and chemists in design, both to compute the change in energy resulting from a photon absorption and to determine the frequency of the light emitted from a given photon emission. For example, the emission spectrum of a gas-discharge lamp can be altered by filling it with (mixtures of) gases with different electronic energy level configurations.\nUnder some conditions, an energy transition can be excited by \"two\" photons that individually would be insufficient. This allows for higher resolution microscopy, because the sample absorbs energy only in the spectrum where two beams of different colors overlap significantly, which can be made much smaller than the excitation volume of a single beam (see two-photon excitation microscopy). Moreover, these photons cause less damage to the sample, since they are of lower energy.\nIn some cases, two energy transitions can be coupled so that, as one system absorbs a photon, another nearby system \"steals\" its energy and re-emits a photon of a different frequency. This is the basis of fluorescence resonance energy transfer, a technique that is used in molecular biology to study the interaction of suitable proteins.\nSeveral different kinds of hardware random number generators involve the detection of single photons. In one example, for each bit in the random sequence that is to be produced, a photon is sent to a beam-splitter. In such a situation, there are two possible outcomes of equal probability. The actual outcome is used to determine whether the next bit in the sequence is 0 or 1.\nQuantum optics and computation.\nMuch research has been devoted to applications of photons in the field of quantum optics. Photons seem well-suited to be elements of an extremely fast quantum computer, and the quantum entanglement of photons is a focus of research. Nonlinear optical processes are another active research area, with topics such as two-photon absorption, self-phase modulation, modulational instability and optical parametric oscillators. However, such processes generally do not require the assumption of photons \"per se\"; they may often be modeled by treating atoms as nonlinear oscillators. The nonlinear process of spontaneous parametric down conversion is often used to produce single-photon states. Finally, photons are essential in some aspects of optical communication, especially for quantum cryptography.\nTwo-photon physics studies interactions between photons, which are rare. In 2018, Massachusetts Institute of Technology researchers announced the discovery of bound photon triplets, which may involve polaritons.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;* Advanced Photon Source at\u00a0Argonne National Laboratory\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23537", "revid": "16185737", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23537", "title": "Philipp Franz von Siebold", "text": "German biologist and traveler\nJhr. Philipp Franz Balthasar von Siebold (17 February 1796 \u2013 18 October 1866) was a German physician, botanist and traveller. He achieved prominence by his studies of Japanese flora and fauna. He was the father of the first female Japanese doctor educated in Western medicine, Kusumoto Ine.\nCareer.\nEarly life.\nBorn into a family of doctors and professors of medicine in W\u00fcrzburg (then in the Prince-Bishopric of W\u00fcrzburg, later part of Bavaria), von Siebold initially studied medicine at the University of W\u00fcrzburg from November 1815, where he became a member of the Corps Moenania W\u00fcrzburg. One of his professors was Franz Xaver Heller (1775\u20131840), author of the \"\" (\"Flora of the Grand Duchy of W\u00fcrzburg\", 1810\u20131811). Ignaz D\u00f6llinger (1770\u20131841), his professor of anatomy and physiology, however, most influenced him. D\u00f6llinger was one of the first professors to understand and treat medicine as a natural science. Von Siebold stayed with D\u00f6llinger, where he came in regular contact with other scientists. He read the books of Humboldt, a famous naturalist and explorer, which probably raised his desire to travel to distant lands. Philipp Franz von Siebold became a physician by earning his M.D. degree in 1820. He initially practiced medicine in Heidingsfeld, in the Kingdom of Bavaria, now part of W\u00fcrzburg.\nInvited to Holland by an acquaintance of his family, von Siebold applied for a position as a military physician, which would enable him to travel to the Dutch colonies. He entered the Dutch military service on 19 June 1822, and was appointed as ship's surgeon on the frigate \"Adriana\", sailing from Rotterdam to Batavia (present-day Jakarta) in the Dutch East Indies (now called Indonesia). On his trip to Batavia on the frigate \"Adriana\", von Siebold practiced his knowledge of the Dutch language and also rapidly learned Malay. During the long voyage he also began a collection of marine fauna. He arrived in Batavia on 18 February 1823.\nAs an army medical officer, von Siebold was posted to an artillery unit. However, he was given a room for a few weeks at the residence of the Governor-General of the Dutch East Indies, Baron Godert van der Capellen, to recover from an illness. With his erudition, he impressed the Governor-General, and also the director of the botanical garden at Buitenzorg (now Bogor), Caspar Georg Carl Reinwardt. These men sensed in Von Siebold a worthy successor to Engelbert Kaempfer and Carl Peter Thunberg, two former resident physicians at Dejima, a Dutch trading post in Japan, the former of whom was the author of \"\". The Royal Batavian Society of Arts and Sciences soon elected Von Siebold as a member.\nArrival in Japan.\nOn 28 June 1823, after only a few months in the Dutch East Indies, von Siebold was posted as resident physician and scientist to Dejima, a small artificial island and trading post at Nagasaki, and arrived there on 11 August 1823. During an eventful voyage to Japan he only just escaped drowning during a typhoon in the East China Sea. As only a very small number of Dutch personnel were allowed to live on this island, the posts of physician and scientist had to be combined. Dejima had been in the possession of the Dutch East India Company (known as the VOC) since the 17th century, but the Company had gone bankrupt in 1798, after which a trading post was operated there by the Dutch state for political considerations, with notable benefits to the Japanese.\nThe European tradition of sending doctors with botanical training to Japan was a long one. Sent on a mission by the Dutch East India Company, Engelbert Kaempfer (1651\u20131716), a German physician and botanist who lived in Japan from 1690 until 1692, ushered in this tradition of a combination of physician and botanist. The Dutch East India Company did not, however, actually employ the Swedish botanist and physician Carl Peter Thunberg (1743\u20131828), who had arrived in Japan in 1775.\nMedical practice.\nJapanese scientists invited von Siebold to teach them western science. After curing an influential local officer, von Siebold gained the permission to leave the trade post. He used this opportunity to treat Japanese patients in the greater area around the trade post. Von Siebold is credited with the introduction of vaccination and pathological anatomy for the first time in Japan.\nIn 1824, von Siebold started a medical school in Nagasaki, the \"Narutaki-juku\", that grew into a meeting place for around fifty \"students\". They helped him in his botanical and naturalistic studies. The Dutch language became the \"lingua franca\" (common spoken language) for these academic and scholarly contacts for a generation, until the Meiji Restoration.\nHis patients paid him in kind with a variety of objects and artifacts that would later gain historical significance. These everyday objects later became the basis of his large ethnographic collection, which consisted of everyday household goods, woodblock prints, tools and hand-crafted objects used by the Japanese people.\nJapanese family.\nDuring his stay in Japan, von Siebold \"lived together\" with Kusumoto Taki \u6960\u672c\u6edd, who gave birth to their daughter Kusumoto (O-)Ine in 1827. Von Siebold used to call his wife \"Otakusa\" (probably derived from O-Taki-san) and named a \"Hydrangea\" after her. Kusumoto Ine eventually became the first Japanese woman known to have received a physician's training and became a highly regarded practicing physician and court physician to the Empress in 1882. She died at court in 1903.\nStudies of Japanese fauna and flora.\nHis main interest, however, focused on the study of Japanese fauna and flora. He collected as much material as he could. Starting a small botanical garden behind his home (there was not much room on the small island) Von Siebold amassed over 1,000 native plants. In a specially built glasshouse he cultivated the Japanese plants to endure the Dutch climate. Local Japanese artists like Kawahara Keiga drew and painted images of these plants, creating botanical illustrations but also images of the daily life in Japan, which complemented his ethnographic collection. He hired Japanese hunters to track rare animals and collect specimens. Many specimens were collected with the help of his Japanese collaborators Keisuke Ito (1803\u20131901), Mizutani Sugeroku (1779\u20131833), \u014ckochi Zonshin (1796\u20131882) and Katsuragawa Hoken (1797\u20131844), a physician to the \"sh\u014dgun\". As well, von Siebold's assistant and later successor, Heinrich B\u00fcrger (1806\u20131858), proved to be indispensable in carrying on Von Siebold's work in Japan.\nVon Siebold first introduced to Europe such familiar garden-plants as the \"Hosta\" and the \"Hydrangea otaksa\". Unknown to the Japanese, he was also able to smuggle out germinative seeds of tea plants to the botanical garden \"\" in Batavia. Through this single act, he started the tea culture in Java, a Dutch colony at the time. Until then Japan had strictly guarded the trade in tea plants. Remarkably, in 1833, Java already could boast a half million tea plants.\nHe also introduced Japanese knotweed (\"Reynoutria japonica\", syn. \"Fallopia japonica\"), which has become a highly invasive weed in Europe and North America. All derive from a single female plant collected by von Siebold.\nDuring his stay at Dejima, von Siebold sent three shipments with an unknown number of herbarium specimens to Leiden, Ghent, Brussels and Antwerp. The shipment to Leiden contained the first specimens of the Japanese giant salamander (\"Andrias japonicus\") to be sent to Europe.\nIn 1825 the government of the Dutch-Indies provided him with two assistants: apothecary and mineralogist Heinrich B\u00fcrger (his later successor) and the painter Carl Hubert de Villeneuve. Each would prove to be useful to Von Siebold's efforts that ranged from ethnographical to botanical to horticultural, when attempting to document the exotic Eastern Japanese experience. De Villeneuve taught Kawahara the techniques of Western painting.\nReportedly, von Siebold was not the easiest man to deal with. He was in continuous conflict with his Dutch superiors who felt he was arrogant. This threat of conflict resulted in his recall in July 1827 back to Batavia. But the ship, the \"Cornelis Houtman\", sent to carry him back to Batavia, was thrown ashore by a typhoon in Nagasaki bay. The same storm badly damaged Dejima and destroyed Von Siebold's botanical garden. Repaired, the \"Cornelis Houtman\" was refloated. It left for Batavia with 89 crates of von Siebold's salvaged botanical collection, but von Siebold himself remained behind in Dejima.\nVon Siebold Incident.\nIn 1826 von Siebold made the court journey to Edo together with the Dutch \u2018opperhoofd\u2019 colonel De St\u00fcrler. During this long trip he collected many plants and animals. But he also obtained from the court astronomer Takahashi Kageyasu several detailed maps of Japan and Korea (written by In\u014d Tadataka), an act strictly forbidden by the Japanese government. When the Japanese discovered, by accident, that Von Siebold had a map of the northern parts of Japan, the government accused him of high treason and of being a spy for Russia.\nThe Japanese placed von Siebold under house arrest and expelled him from Japan on 22 October 1829. Satisfied that his Japanese collaborators would continue his work, he journeyed back on the frigate \"Java\" to his former residence, Batavia, in possession of his enormous collection of thousands of animals and plants, his books and his maps. The botanical garden of \"\" would soon house von Siebold's surviving, living flora collection of 2,000 plants. He arrived in the Netherlands on 7 July 1830. His stay in Japan and Batavia had lasted for a period of eight years.\nReturn to Europe.\nPhilipp Franz von Siebold arrived in the Netherlands in 1830, just at a time when political troubles erupted in Brussels, leading soon to Belgian independence. Hastily he salvaged his ethnographic collections in Antwerp and his herbarium specimens in Brussels and took them to Leiden, helped by Johann Baptist Fischer. He left behind his botanical collections of living plants that were sent to the University of Ghent. The consequent expansion of this collection of rare and exotic plants led to the horticultural fame of Ghent. In gratitude the University of Ghent presented him in 1841 with specimens of every plant from his original collection.\nVon Siebold settled in Leiden, taking with him the major part of his collection. The \"Philipp Franz von Siebold collection\", containing many type specimens, was the earliest botanical collection from Japan. Even today, it still remains a subject of ongoing research, a testimony to the depth of work undertaken by von Siebold. It contained about 12,000 specimens, from which he could describe only about 2,300 species. The whole collection was purchased for a handsome amount by the Dutch government. Von Siebold was also granted a substantial annual allowance by the Dutch King William II and was appointed \"Advisor to the King for Japanese Affairs\". In 1842, the King even raised von Siebold to the nobility as an esquire.\nThe \"Siebold collection\" opened to the public in 1831. He founded a museum in his home in 1837. This small, private museum would eventually evolve into the National Museum of Ethnology in Leiden. Von Siebold's successor in Japan, Heinrich B\u00fcrger, sent him three more shipments of herbarium specimens collected in Japan. This flora collection formed the basis of the Japanese collections of the National Herbarium of the Netherlands in Leiden, while the zoological specimens Von Siebold collected were kept by the Rijksmuseum van Natuurlijke Historie (\"National Museum of Natural History\") in Leiden, which later became Naturalis. Both institutions merged into Naturalis Biodiversity Center in 2010, which now maintains the entire natural history collection that von Siebold brought back to Leiden.\nIn 1845 von Siebold married Helene von Gagern (1820\u20131877), they had three sons and two daughters.\nWritings.\nDuring his stay in Leiden, Von Siebold wrote \"Nippon\" in 1832, the first part of a volume of a richly illustrated ethnographical and geographical work on Japan. The \"Archiv zur Beschreibung Nippons\" also contained a report of his journey to the Shogunate Court at Edo. He wrote six further parts, the last ones published posthumously in 1882; his sons published an edited and lower-priced reprint in 1887.\nThe \"\" appeared between 1833 and 1841. This work was co-authored by Joseph Hoffmann and Kuo Cheng-Chang, a Javanese of Chinese extraction, who had journeyed along with Von Siebold from Batavia. It contained a survey of Japanese literature and a Chinese, Japanese and Korean dictionary. Von Siebold's writing on Japanese religion and customs notably shaped early modern European conceptions of Buddhism and Shinto; he notably suggested that Japanese Buddhism was a form of Monotheism.\nThe zoologists Coenraad Temminck (1777\u20131858), Hermann Schlegel (1804\u20131884), and Wilhem de Haan (1801\u20131855) scientifically described and documented Von Siebold's collection of Japanese animals. The ', a series of monographs published between 1833 and 1850, was mainly based on von Siebold's collection, making the Japanese fauna the best-described non-European fauna \u2013 \"a remarkable feat\". A significant part of the ' was also based on the collections of Von Siebold's successor on Dejima, Heinrich B\u00fcrger.\nVon Siebold wrote his \"\" in collaboration with the German botanist Joseph Gerhard Zuccarini (1797\u20131848). It first appeared in 1835, but the work was not completed until after his death, finished in 1870 by F.A.W. Miquel (1811\u20131871), director of the Rijksherbarium in Leiden. This work expanded von Siebold's scientific fame from Japan to Europe.\nFrom the Hortus Botanicus Leiden \u2013 the botanical garden of Leiden \u2013 many of von Siebold's plants spread to Europe and from there to other countries. \"Hosta\" and \"Hortensia\", \"Azalea\", and the Japanese butterbur and the coltsfoot as well as the Japanese larch began to inhabit gardens across the world.\nInternational endeavours.\nAfter his return to Europe, von Siebold tried to exploit his knowledge of Japan. Whilst living in Boppard, from 1852 he corresponded with Russian diplomats such as Baron von Budberg-B\u00f6nninghausen, the Russian ambassador to Prussia, which resulted in an invitation to go to St Petersburg to advise the Russian government how to open trade relations with Japan. Though still employed by the Dutch government he did not inform the Dutch of this voyage until after his return.\nAmerican Naval Commodore Matthew C. Perry consulted von Siebold in advance of his voyage to Japan in 1854. He notably advised Townsend Harris on how Christianity might be spread to Japan, alleging based on his time there that the Japanese \"hated\" Christianity.\nIn 1858, the Japanese government lifted the banishment of von Siebold. He returned to Japan in 1859 as an adviser to the Agent of the Dutch Trading Society (Nederlandsche Handel-Maatschappij) in Nagasaki, Albert Bauduin. After two years the connection with the Trading Society was severed as the advice of von Siebold was considered to be of no value. In Nagasaki he fathered another child with one of his female servants.\nIn 1861 von Siebold organised his appointment as an adviser to the Japanese government and went in that function to Edo. There he tried to obtain a position between the foreign representatives and the Japanese government. As he had been specially admonished by the Dutch authorities before going to Japan that he was to abstain from all interference in politics, the Dutch Consul General in Japan, J.K. de Wit, was ordered to ask von Siebold's removal. Von Siebold was ordered to return to Batavia and from there he returned to Europe.\nAfter his return he asked the Dutch government to employ him as Consul General in Japan but the Dutch government severed all relations with von Siebold who had a huge debt because of loans given to him, except for the payment of his pension.\nVon Siebold kept trying to organise another voyage to Japan. After he did not succeed in gaining employment with the Russian government, he went to Paris in 1865 to try to interest the French government in funding another expedition to Japan, but failed. He died in Munich on 18 October 1866.\nLegacy.\nPlants named after von Siebold.\nThe botanical and horticultural spheres of influence have honored Philipp Franz von Siebold by naming some of the very garden-worthy plants that he studied after him. Examples include:\nFurther legacy.\nThough he is well known in Japan, where he is called \"Shiboruto-san\", and although mentioned in the relevant schoolbooks, von Siebold is almost unknown elsewhere, except among gardeners who admire the many plants whose names incorporate \"sieboldii\" and \"sieboldiana\". The Hortus Botanicus in Leiden has recently laid out the \"Von Siebold Memorial Garden\", a Japanese garden with plants sent by Von Siebold. The garden was laid out under a 150-year-old \"Zelkova serrata\" tree dating from Von Siebold's lifetime. Japanese visitors come and visit this garden, to pay their respect for him.\nVon Siebold museums.\nAlthough he was disillusioned by what he perceived as a lack of appreciation for Japan and his contributions to its understanding, a testimony of the remarkable character of Von Siebold is found in museums that honor him.\nHis collections laid the foundation for the ethnographic museums of Munich and Leiden. Alexander von Siebold, one of his sons by his European wife, offered for purchase some of the material left behind in W\u00fcrzburg after von Siebold's death to the British Museum in London, but the offer was declined. The Royal Scientific Academy of St. Petersburg purchased 600 colored plates of the \"\".\nAnother son, Heinrich (or Henry) von Siebold (1852\u20131908), continued part of his father's research. He is recognized, together with Edward S. Morse, as one of the founders of modern archaeological efforts in Japan. His archaeological material was sold to the British Museum.\nPublished works.\nThe standard author abbreviation Siebold is used to indicate Philipp Franz von Siebold as the author when citing a botanical name.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences and other literature.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23538", "revid": "48643156", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23538", "title": "Probability interpretations", "text": "Philosophical interpretation of the axioms of probability\nThe word \"probability\" has been used in a variety of ways since it was first applied to the mathematical study of games of chance. Does probability measure the real, physical, tendency of something to occur, or is it a measure of how strongly one believes it will occur, or does it draw on both these elements? In answering such questions, mathematicians interpret the probability values of probability theory.\nThere are two broad categories of probability interpretations which can be called \"physical\" and \"evidential\" probabilities. Physical probabilities, which are also called objective or frequency probabilities, are associated with random physical systems such as roulette wheels, rolling dice and radioactive atoms. In such systems, a given type of event (such as a die yielding a six) tends to occur at a persistent rate, or \"relative frequency\", in a long run of trials. Physical probabilities either explain, or are invoked to explain, these stable frequencies. The two main kinds of theory of physical probability are frequentist accounts (such as those of Venn, Reichenbach and von Mises) and propensity accounts (such as those of Popper, Miller, Giere and Fetzer).\nEvidential probability, also called Bayesian probability, can be assigned to any statement whatsoever, even when no random process is involved, as a way to represent its rational subjective plausibility, or the degree to which the statement is supported by the available evidence. On most accounts, evidential probabilities are considered to be rational degrees of belief, defined in terms of dispositions to gamble at certain odds. The four main evidential interpretations are the classical (e.g. Laplace's) interpretation, the subjective interpretation (de Finetti and Savage), the epistemic or inductive interpretation (Ramsey, Cox) and the logical interpretation (Keynes and Carnap). There are also evidential interpretations of probability covering groups, which are often labelled as 'intersubjective' (proposed by Gillies and Rowbottom).\nSome interpretations of probability are associated with approaches to statistical inference, including theories of estimation and hypothesis testing. The physical interpretation, for example, is taken by followers of \"frequentist\" statistical methods, such as Ronald Fisher, Jerzy Neyman and Egon Pearson. Statisticians of the opposing, Bayesian school typically accept the frequency interpretation when it makes sense (although not as a definition), but there is less agreement regarding physical probabilities. Bayesians consider the calculation of evidential probabilities to be both valid and necessary in statistics. This article, however, focuses on the interpretations of probability rather than theories of statistical inference.\nThe terminology of this topic is rather confusing, in part because probabilities are studied within a variety of academic fields. The word \"frequentist\" is especially tricky. To philosophers it refers to a particular theory of physical probability, one that has more or less been abandoned. To scientists, on the other hand, \"frequentist probability\" is just another name for physical (or objective) probability. Those who promote Bayesian inference view \"frequentist statistics\" as an approach to statistical inference that is based on the frequency interpretation of probability, usually relying on the law of large numbers and characterized by what is called 'Null Hypothesis Significance Testing' (NHST). Also the word \"objective\", as applied to probability, sometimes means exactly what \"physical\" means here, but is also used of evidential probabilities that are fixed by rational constraints, such as logical and epistemic probabilities.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;It is unanimously agreed that statistics depends somehow on probability. But, as to what probability is and how it is connected with statistics, there has seldom been such complete disagreement and breakdown of communication since the Tower of Babel. Doubtless, much of the disagreement is merely terminological and would disappear under sufficiently sharp analysis.\nPhilosophy.\nThe philosophy of probability presents problems chiefly in matters of epistemology and the uneasy interface between mathematical concepts and ordinary language as it is used by non-mathematicians.\nProbability theory is an established field of study in mathematics. It has its origins in correspondence discussing the mathematics of games of chance between Blaise Pascal and Pierre de Fermat in the seventeenth century, and was formalized and rendered axiomatic as a distinct branch of mathematics by Andrey Kolmogorov in the twentieth century. In axiomatic form, mathematical statements about probability theory carry the same sort of epistemological confidence within the philosophy of mathematics as are shared by other mathematical statements.\nThe mathematical analysis originated in observations of the behaviour of game equipment such as playing cards and dice, which are designed specifically to introduce random and equalized elements; in mathematical terms, they are subjects of indifference. This is not the only way probabilistic statements are used in ordinary human language: when people say that \"it will probably rain\", they typically do not mean that the outcome of rain versus not-rain is a random factor that the odds currently favor; instead, such statements are perhaps better understood as qualifying their expectation of rain with a degree of confidence. Likewise, when it is written that \"the most probable explanation\" of the name of Ludlow, Massachusetts \"is that it was named after Roger Ludlow\", what is meant here is not that Roger Ludlow is favored by a random factor, but rather that this is the most plausible explanation of the evidence, which admits other, less likely explanations.\nThomas Bayes attempted to provide a logic that could handle varying degrees of confidence; as such, Bayesian probability is an attempt to recast the representation of probabilistic statements as an expression of the degree of confidence by which the beliefs they express are held.\nThough probability initially had somewhat mundane motivations, its modern influence and use is widespread ranging from evidence-based medicine, through six sigma, all the way to the probabilistically checkable proof and the string theory landscape.\nClassical definition.\nThe first attempt at mathematical rigour in the field of probability, championed by Pierre-Simon Laplace, is now known as the \"classical definition\". Developed from studies of games of chance (such as rolling dice) it states that probability is shared equally between all the possible outcomes, provided these outcomes can be deemed equally likely. (3.1)\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The theory of chance consists in reducing all the events of the same kind to a certain number of cases equally possible, that is to say, to such as we may be equally undecided about in regard to their existence, and in determining the number of cases favorable to the event whose probability is sought. The ratio of this number to that of all the cases possible is the measure of this probability, which is thus simply a fraction whose numerator is the number of favorable cases and whose denominator is the number of all the cases possible.\u2014\u200a\nThis can be represented mathematically as follows:\nIf a random experiment can result in \"N\" mutually exclusive and equally likely outcomes and if \"NA\" of these outcomes result in the occurrence of the event \"A\", the probability of \"A\" is defined by\nformula_1\nThere are two clear limitations to the classical definition. Firstly, it is applicable only to situations in which there is only a 'finite' number of possible outcomes. But some important random experiments, such as tossing a coin until it shows heads, give rise to an infinite set of outcomes. And secondly, it requires an a priori determination that all possible outcomes are equally likely without falling in a trap of circular reasoning by relying on the notion of probability. (In using the terminology \"we may be equally undecided\", Laplace assumed, by what has been called the \"principle of insufficient reason\", that all possible outcomes are equally likely if there is no known reason to assume otherwise, for which there is no obvious justification.)\nFrequentism.\nFrequentists posit that the probability of an event is its relative frequency over time, (3.4) i.e., its relative frequency of occurrence after repeating a process a large number of times under similar conditions. This is also known as aleatory probability. The events are assumed to be governed by some random physical phenomena, which are either phenomena that are predictable, in principle, with sufficient information (see determinism); or phenomena which are essentially unpredictable. Examples of the first kind include tossing dice or spinning a roulette wheel; an example of the second kind is radioactive decay. In the case of tossing a fair coin, frequentists say that the probability of getting a heads is 1/2, not because there are two equally likely outcomes but because repeated series of large numbers of trials demonstrate that the empirical frequency converges to the limit 1/2 as the number of trials goes to infinity.\nIf we denote by formula_2 the number of occurrences of an event formula_3 in formula_4 trials, then if formula_5 we say that \"formula_6\".\nThe frequentist view has its own problems. It is of course impossible to actually perform an infinity of repetitions of a random experiment to determine the probability of an event. But if only a finite number of repetitions of the process are performed, different relative frequencies will appear in different series of trials. If these relative frequencies are to define the probability, the probability will be slightly different every time it is measured. But the real probability should be the same every time. If we acknowledge the fact that we only can measure a probability with some error of measurement attached, we still get into problems as the error of measurement can only be expressed as a probability, the very concept we are trying to define. This renders even the frequency definition circular; see for example \u201chttps://\u201d\nSubjectivism.\nSubjectivists, also known as \"Bayesians\" or followers of \"epistemic probability\", give the notion of probability a subjective status by regarding it as a measure of the 'rational degree of belief' of the individual assessing the uncertainty of a particular situation. Epistemic or subjective probability is sometimes called \"credence\", as opposed to the term \"chance\" for a propensity probability.\nSome examples of epistemic probability are to assign a probability to the proposition that a proposed law of physics is true or to determine how probable it is that a suspect committed a crime, based on the evidence presented.\nThe use of Bayesian probability raises the philosophical debate as to whether it can contribute valid justifications of belief. Bayesians point to the work of Ramsey (p 182) and de Finetti (p 103) as proving that subjective beliefs must follow the laws of probability if they are to be coherent (rational).\nEvidence casts doubt that individual humans routinely apply coherent beliefs, indicating that they often do not adhere to Bayesian probability.\nThe use of Bayesian probability involves specifying a prior probability. This may be obtained from consideration of whether the required prior probability is greater or lesser than a reference probability associated with an urn model or a thought experiment. The issue is that for a given problem, multiple thought experiments could apply, and choosing one is sometimes a matter of judgement: different people may assign different prior probabilities, known as the reference class problem. The \"sunrise problem\" provides an example.\nPropensity.\nPropensity theorists think of probability as a physical propensity, or disposition, or tendency of a given type of physical situation to yield an outcome of a certain kind or to yield a long run relative frequency of such an outcome. This kind of objective probability is sometimes called 'chance'.\nPropensities, or chances, are not relative frequencies, but purported causes of the observed stable relative frequencies. Propensities are invoked to explain why repeating a certain kind of experiment will generate given outcome types at persistent rates, which are known as propensities or chances. Frequentists are unable to take this approach, since relative frequencies do not exist for single tosses of a coin, but only for large ensembles or collectives (see \"single case possible\" in the table above). In contrast, a propensitist is able to use the law of large numbers to explain the behaviour of long-run frequencies. This law, which is a consequence of the axioms of probability, says that if (for example) a coin is tossed repeatedly many times, in such a way that its probability of landing heads is the same on each toss, and the outcomes are probabilistically independent, then the relative frequency of heads will be close to the probability of heads on each single toss. This law allows that stable long-run frequencies are a manifestation of invariant \"single-case\" probabilities. In addition to explaining the emergence of stable relative frequencies, the idea of propensity is motivated by the desire to make sense of single-case probability attributions in quantum mechanics, such as the probability of decay of a particular atom at a particular time.\nThe main challenge facing propensity theories is to say exactly what propensity means. (And then, of course, to show that propensity thus defined has the required properties.) At present, unfortunately, none of the well-recognised accounts of propensity comes close to meeting this challenge.\nA propensity theory of probability was given by Charles Sanders Peirce. A later propensity theory was proposed by philosopher Karl Popper, who had only slight acquaintance with the writings of C.\u00a0S. Peirce, however. Popper noted that the outcome of a physical experiment is produced by a certain set of \"generating conditions\". When we repeat an experiment, as the saying goes, we really perform another experiment with a (more or less) similar set of generating conditions. To say that a set of generating conditions has propensity \"p\" of producing the outcome \"E\" means that those exact conditions, if repeated indefinitely, would produce an outcome sequence in which \"E\" occurred with limiting relative frequency \"p\". For Popper then, a deterministic experiment would have propensity 0 or 1 for each outcome, since those generating conditions would have same outcome on each trial. In other words, non-trivial propensities (those that differ from 0 and 1) only exist for genuinely nondeterministic experiments.\nA number of other philosophers, including David Miller and Donald A. Gillies, have proposed propensity theories somewhat similar to Popper's.\nOther propensity theorists (e.g. Ronald Giere) do not explicitly define propensities at all, but rather see propensity as defined by the theoretical role it plays in science. They argued, for example, that physical magnitudes such as electrical charge cannot be explicitly defined either, in terms of more basic things, but only in terms of what they do (such as attracting and repelling other electrical charges). In a similar way, propensity is whatever fills the various roles that physical probability plays in science.\nWhat roles does physical probability play in science? What are its properties? One central property of chance is that, when known, it constrains rational belief to take the same numerical value. David Lewis called this the \"Principal Principle\", (3.3 &amp; 3.5) a term that philosophers have mostly adopted. For example, suppose you are certain that a particular biased coin has propensity 0.32 to land heads every time it is tossed. What is then the correct price for a gamble that pays $1 if the coin lands heads, and nothing otherwise? According to the Principal Principle, the fair price is 32 cents.\nLogical, epistemic, and inductive probability.\nIt is widely recognized that the term \"probability\" is sometimes used in contexts where it has nothing to do with physical randomness. Consider, for example, the claim that the extinction of the dinosaurs was \"probably\" caused by a large meteorite hitting the earth. Statements such as \"Hypothesis H is probably true\" have been interpreted to mean that the (presently available) empirical evidence (E, say) supports H to a high degree. This degree of support of H by E has been called the \"logical\", \"epistemic\", or \"inductive\" probability of H given E.\nThe differences between these interpretations are rather small, and may seem inconsequential. One of the main points of disagreement lies in the relation between probability and belief. Logical probabilities are conceived (for example in Keynes' \"Treatise on Probability\") to be objective, logical relations between propositions (or sentences), and hence not to depend in any way upon belief. They are degrees of (partial) entailment, or degrees of logical consequence, not degrees of belief. (They do, nevertheless, dictate proper degrees of belief, as is discussed below.) Frank P. Ramsey, on the other hand, was skeptical about the existence of such objective logical relations and argued that (evidential) probability is \"the logic of partial belief\". (p 157) In other words, Ramsey held that epistemic probabilities simply \"are\" degrees of rational belief, rather than being logical relations that merely \"constrain\" degrees of rational belief.\nAnother point of disagreement concerns the \"uniqueness\" of evidential probability, relative to a given state of knowledge. Rudolf Carnap held, for example, that logical principles always determine a unique logical probability for any statement, relative to any body of evidence. Ramsey, by contrast, thought that while degrees of belief are subject to some rational constraints (such as, but not limited to, the axioms of probability) these constraints usually do not determine a unique value. Rational people, in other words, may differ somewhat in their degrees of belief, even if they all have the same information.\nPrediction.\nAn alternative account of probability emphasizes the role of \"prediction\" \u2013 predicting future observations on the basis of past observations, not on unobservable parameters. In its modern form, it is mainly in the Bayesian vein. This was the main function of probability before the 20th century, but fell out of favor compared to the parametric approach, which modeled phenomena as a physical system that was observed with error, such as in celestial mechanics.\nThe modern predictive approach was pioneered by Bruno de Finetti, with the central idea of exchangeability \u2013 that future observations should behave like past observations. This view came to the attention of the Anglophone world with the 1974 translation of de Finetti's book, and has\nsince been propounded by such statisticians as Seymour Geisser.\nAxiomatic probability.\nThe mathematics of probability can be developed on an entirely axiomatic basis that is independent of any interpretation: see the articles on probability theory and probability axioms for a detailed treatment.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23539", "revid": "50676467", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23539", "title": "Probability axioms", "text": "Foundations of probability theory\nThe standard probability axioms are the foundations of probability theory introduced by Russian mathematician Andrey Kolmogorov in 1933. Like all axiomatic systems, they outline the basic assumptions underlying the application of probability to fields such as pure mathematics and the physical sciences, while avoiding logical paradoxes.\nThe probability axioms do not specify or assume any particular interpretation of probability, but may be motivated by starting from a philosophical definition of probability and arguing that the axioms are satisfied by this definition. For example,\nThe third axiom, \u03c3-additivity, is relatively modern, and originates with Lebesgue's measure theory. Some authors replace this with the strictly weaker axiom of finite additivity, which is sufficient to deal with some applications.\nKolmogorov axioms.\nIn order to state the Kolmogorov axioms, the following pieces of data must be specified:\nTaken together, these assumptions mean that formula_8 is a measure space. It is additionally assumed that formula_9, making this triple a probability space.\nFirst axiom.\nThe probability of an event is a non-negative real number. This assumption is implied by the fact that formula_10 is a measure on formula_11.\nformula_12\nTheories which assign negative probability relax the first axiom.\nSecond axiom.\nThis is the assumption of unit measure: that the probability that at least one of the elementary events in the entire sample space will occur is 1.formula_13From this axiom it follows that formula_7 is always finite, in contrast with more general measure theory.\nThird axiom.\nThis is the assumption of \u03c3-additivity: Any countable sequence of disjoint sets (synonymous with \"mutually exclusive\" events) formula_15 satisfies\nformula_16\nThis property again is implied by the fact that formula_10 is a measure. Note that, by taking formula_18 and formula_19 for all formula_20, one deduces that formula_21. This in turn shows that \u03c3-additivity implies finite additivity.\nSome authors consider merely finitely additive probability spaces, in which case one just needs an algebra of sets, rather than a \u03c3-algebra. Quasiprobability distributions in general relax the third axiom.\nElementary consequences.\nIn order to demonstrate that the theory generated by the Kolmogorov axioms corresponds with classical probability, some elementary consequences are typically derived.\nBy dividing formula_32 into the disjoint sets formula_33, formula_34 and formula_35, one arrives at a probabilistic version of the inclusion-exclusion principleformula_36In the case where formula_37 is finite, the two identities are equivalent.\nIn order to actually do calculations when formula_37 is an infinite set, it is sometimes useful to generalize from a finite sample space. For example, if formula_37 consists of all infinite sequences of tosses of a fair coin, it is not obvious how to compute the probability of any particular set of sequences (i.e. an event). If the event is \"every flip is heads\", then it is intuitive that the probability can be computed as:formula_40In order to make this rigorous, one has to prove that formula_10 is continuous, in the following sense. If formula_42 is a sequence of events increasing (or decreasing) to another event formula_43, thenformula_44\nSimple example: Coin toss.\nConsider a single coin-toss, and assume that the coin will either land heads (H) or tails (T) (but not both). No assumption is made as to whether the coin is fair.\nWe may define:\n formula_45\n formula_46\nKolmogorov's axioms imply that:\n formula_47\nThe probability of \"neither\" heads \"nor\" tails, is 0.\n formula_48\nThe probability of \"either\" heads \"or\" tails, is 1.\n formula_49\nThe sum of the probability of heads and the probability of tails, is 1.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23540", "revid": "11952314", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23540", "title": "List of topics in statistics", "text": ""}
{"id": "23542", "revid": "50779806", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23542", "title": "Probability theory", "text": "Branch of mathematics concerning probability\nProbability theory or probability calculus is the branch of mathematics concerned with probability. Although there are several different probability interpretations, probability theory treats the concept in a rigorous mathematical manner by expressing it through a set of axioms. Typically these axioms formalise probability in terms of a probability space, which assigns a measure taking values between 0 and 1, termed the probability measure, to a set of outcomes called the sample space. Any specified subset of the sample space is called an event.\nCentral subjects in probability theory include discrete and continuous random variables, probability distributions, and stochastic processes (which provide mathematical abstractions of non-deterministic or uncertain processes or measured quantities that may either be single occurrences or evolve over time in a random fashion).\nAlthough it is not possible to perfectly predict random events, much can be said about their behavior. Two major results in probability theory describing such behaviour are the law of large numbers and the central limit theorem.\nAs a mathematical foundation for statistics, probability theory is essential to many human activities that involve quantitative analysis of data. Methods of probability theory also apply to descriptions of complex systems given only partial knowledge of their state, as in statistical mechanics or sequential estimation. A great discovery of twentieth-century physics was the probabilistic nature of physical phenomena at atomic scales, described in quantum mechanics.\nHistory of probability.\nThe modern mathematical theory of probability has its roots in attempts to analyze games of chance by Gerolamo Cardano in the sixteenth century, and by Pierre de Fermat and Blaise Pascal in the seventeenth century (for example the \"problem of points\"). Christiaan Huygens published a book on the subject in 1657. In the 19th century, what is considered the classical definition of probability was completed by Pierre Laplace.\nInitially, probability theory mainly considered discrete events, and its methods were mainly combinatorial. Eventually, analytical considerations compelled the incorporation of continuous variables into the theory.\nThis culminated in modern probability theory, on foundations laid by Andrey Nikolaevich Kolmogorov. Kolmogorov combined the notion of sample space, introduced by Richard von Mises, and measure theory and presented his axiom system for probability theory in 1933. This became the mostly undisputed axiomatic basis for modern probability theory; but, alternatives exist, such as the adoption of finite rather than countable additivity by Bruno de Finetti.\nTreatment.\nMost introductions to probability theory treat discrete probability distributions and continuous probability distributions separately. The measure theory-based treatment of probability covers the discrete, continuous, a mix of the two, and more.\nMotivation.\nConsider an experiment that can produce a number of outcomes. The set of all outcomes is called the \"sample space\" of the experiment. The \"power set\" of the sample space (or equivalently, the event space) is formed by considering all different collections of possible results. For example, rolling an honest die produces one of six possible results. One collection of possible results corresponds to getting an odd number. Thus, the subset {1,3,5} is an element of the power set of the sample space of dice rolls. These collections are called \"events\". In this case, {1,3,5} is the event that the die falls on some odd number. If the results that actually occur fall in a given event, that event is said to have occurred.\nProbability is a way of assigning every \"event\" a value between zero and one, with the requirement that the event made up of all possible results (in our example, the event {1,2,3,4,5,6}) be assigned a value of one. To qualify as a probability distribution, the assignment of values must satisfy the requirement that if you look at a collection of mutually exclusive events (events that contain no common results, e.g., the events {1,6}, {3}, and {2,4} are all mutually exclusive), the probability that any of these events occurs is given by the sum of the probabilities of the events.\nThe probability that any one of the events {1,6}, {3}, or {2,4} will occur is 5/6. This is the same as saying that the probability of event {1,2,3,4,6} is 5/6. This event encompasses the possibility of any number except five being rolled. The mutually exclusive event {5} has a probability of 1/6, and the event {1,2,3,4,5,6} has a probability of 1, that is, absolute certainty.\nWhen doing calculations using the outcomes of an experiment, it is necessary that all those elementary events have a number assigned to them. This is done using a random variable. A random variable is a function that assigns to each elementary event in the sample space a real number. This function is usually denoted by a capital letter. In the case of a die, the assignment of a number to certain elementary events can be done using the identity function. This does not always work. For example, when flipping a coin the two possible outcomes are \"heads\" and \"tails\". In this example, the random variable \"X\" could assign to the outcome \"heads\" the number \"0\" (formula_1) and to the outcome \"tails\" the number \"1\" (formula_2).\nDiscrete probability distributions.\nDiscrete probability theory deals with events that occur in countable sample spaces.\nExamples: Throwing dice, experiments with decks of cards, random walk, and tossing coins.\nClassical definition:\nInitially the probability of an event to occur was defined as the number of cases favorable for the event, over the number of total outcomes possible in an equiprobable sample space: see Classical definition of probability.\nFor example, if the event is \"occurrence of an even number when a dice is rolled\", the probability is given by formula_3, since 3 faces out of the 6 have even numbers and each face has the same probability of appearing.\nModern definition:\nThe modern definition starts with a finite or countable set called the sample space, which relates to the set of all \"possible outcomes\" in classical sense, denoted by formula_4. It is then assumed that for each element formula_5, an intrinsic \"probability\" value formula_6 is attached, which satisfies the following properties:\nThat is, the probability function \"f\"(\"x\") lies between zero and one for every value of \"x\" in the sample space \"\u03a9\", and the sum of \"f\"(\"x\") over all values \"x\" in the sample space \"\u03a9\" is equal to 1. An event is defined as any subset formula_9 of the sample space formula_10. The probability of the event formula_9 is defined as\nformula_12\nSo, the probability of the entire sample space is 1, and the probability of the null event is 0.\nThe function formula_6 mapping a point in the sample space to the \"probability\" value is called a probability mass function abbreviated as pmf. \nContinuous probability distributions.\nContinuous probability theory deals with events that occur in a continuous sample space.\nClassical definition:\nThe classical definition breaks down when confronted with the continuous case. See Bertrand's paradox.\nModern definition:\nIf the sample space of a random variable \"X\" is the set of real numbers (formula_14) or a subset thereof, then a function called the cumulative distribution function (CDF) formula_15 exists, defined by formula_16. That is, \"F\"(\"x\") returns the probability that \"X\" will be less than or equal to \"x\".\nThe CDF necessarily satisfies the following properties.\nThe random variable formula_20 is said to have a continuous probability distribution if the corresponding CDF formula_21 is continuous. If formula_15 is absolutely continuous, then its derivative exists almost everywhere and integrating the derivative gives us the CDF back again. In this case, the random variable \"X\" is said to have a probability density function (PDF) or simply density formula_23\nFor a set formula_24, the probability of the random variable \"X\" being in formula_9 is\nformula_26\nIn case the PDF exists, this can be written as\nformula_27\nWhereas the \"PDF\" exists only for continuous random variables, the \"CDF\" exists for all random variables (including discrete random variables) that take values in formula_28\nThese concepts can be generalized for multidimensional cases on formula_29 and other continuous sample spaces.\nMeasure-theoretic probability theory.\nThe utility of the measure-theoretic treatment of probability is that it unifies the discrete and the continuous cases, and makes the difference a question of which measure is used. Furthermore, it covers distributions that are neither discrete nor continuous nor mixtures of the two.\nAn example of such distributions could be a mix of discrete and continuous distributions\u2014for example, a random variable that is 0 with probability 1/2, and takes a random value from a normal distribution with probability 1/2. It can still be studied to some extent by considering it to have a PDF of formula_30, where formula_31 is the Dirac delta function.\nOther distributions may not even be a mix, for example, the Cantor distribution has no positive probability for any single point, neither does it have a density. The modern approach to probability theory solves these problems using measure theory to define the probability space:\nGiven any set formula_10 (also called sample space) and a \u03c3-algebra formula_33 on it, a measure formula_34 defined on formula_33 is called a probability measure if formula_36\nIf formula_33 is the Borel \u03c3-algebra on the set of real numbers, then there is a unique probability measure on formula_33 for any CDF, and vice versa. The measure corresponding to a CDF is said to be induced by the CDF. This measure coincides with the pmf for discrete variables and PDF for continuous variables, making the measure-theoretic approach free of fallacies.\nThe \"probability\" of a set formula_9 in the \u03c3-algebra formula_33 is defined as\nformula_41\nwhere the integration is with respect to the measure formula_42 induced by formula_43\nAlong with providing better understanding and unification of discrete and continuous probabilities, measure-theoretic treatment also allows us to work on probabilities outside formula_29, as in the theory of stochastic processes. For example, to study Brownian motion, probability is defined on a space of functions.\nWhen it is convenient to work with a dominating measure, the Radon\u2013Nikodym theorem is used to define a density as the Radon\u2013Nikodym derivative of the probability distribution of interest with respect to this dominating measure. Discrete densities are usually defined as this derivative with respect to a counting measure over the set of all possible outcomes. Densities for absolutely continuous distributions are usually defined as this derivative with respect to the Lebesgue measure. If a theorem can be proved in this general setting, it holds for both discrete and continuous distributions as well as others; separate proofs are not required for discrete and continuous distributions.\nClassical probability distributions.\nCertain random variables occur very often in probability theory because they well describe many natural or physical processes. Their distributions, therefore, have gained \"special importance\" in probability theory. Some fundamental \"discrete distributions\" are the discrete uniform, Bernoulli, binomial, negative binomial, Poisson and geometric distributions. Important \"continuous distributions\" include the continuous uniform, normal, exponential, gamma and beta distributions.\nConvergence of random variables.\nIn probability theory, there are several notions of convergence for random variables. They are listed below in the order of strength, i.e., any subsequent notion of convergence in the list implies convergence according to all of the preceding notions.\nMost common shorthand notation: formula_51\nMost common shorthand notation: formula_55\nMost common shorthand notation: formula_59\nAs the names indicate, weak convergence is weaker than strong convergence. In fact, strong convergence implies convergence in probability, and convergence in probability implies weak convergence. The reverse statements are not always true.\nLaw of large numbers.\nCommon intuition suggests that if a fair coin is tossed many times, then \"roughly\" half of the time it will turn up \"heads\", and the other half it will turn up \"tails\". Furthermore, the more often the coin is tossed, the more likely it should be that the ratio of the number of \"heads\" to the number of \"tails\" will approach unity. Modern probability theory provides a formal version of this intuitive idea, known as the law of large numbers. This law is remarkable because it is not assumed in the foundations of probability theory, but instead emerges from these foundations as a theorem. Since it links theoretically derived probabilities to their actual frequency of occurrence in the real world, the law of large numbers is considered as a pillar in the history of statistical theory and has had widespread influence.\nThe law of large numbers (LLN) states that the sample average\nformula_60\nof a sequence of independent and identically distributed random variables formula_61 converges towards their common expectation (expected value) formula_62, provided that the expectation of formula_63 is finite.\nIt is in the different forms of convergence of random variables that separates the \"weak\" and the \"strong\" law of large numbers\nWeak law: formula_64 for formula_65\nStrong law: formula_66 for formula_67\nIt follows from the LLN that if an event of probability \"p\" is observed repeatedly during independent experiments, the ratio of the observed frequency of that event to the total number of repetitions converges towards \"p\".\nFor example, if formula_68 are independent Bernoulli random variables taking values 1 with probability \"p\" and 0 with probability 1-\"p\", then formula_69 for all \"i\", so that formula_70 converges to \"p\" almost surely.\nCentral limit theorem.\nThe central limit theorem (CLT) explains the ubiquitous occurrence of the normal distribution in nature, and this theorem, according to David Williams, \"is one of the great results of mathematics.\"\nThe theorem states that the average of many independent and identically distributed random variables with finite variance tends towards a normal distribution \"irrespective\" of the distribution followed by the original random variables. Formally, let formula_52 be independent random variables with mean formula_62 and variance formula_73 Then the sequence of random variables\nformula_74\nconverges in distribution to a standard normal random variable.\nFor some classes of random variables, the classic central limit theorem works rather fast, as illustrated in the Berry\u2013Esseen theorem. For example, the distributions with finite first, second, and third moment from the exponential family; on the other hand, for some random variables of the heavy tail and fat tail variety, it works very slowly or may not work at all: in such cases one may use the Generalized Central Limit Theorem (GCLT).\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\n The first major treatise blending calculus with probability theory, originally in French: \"Th\u00e9orie Analytique des Probabilit\u00e9s\".\n An English translation by Nathan Morrison appeared under the title \"Foundations of the Theory of Probability\" (Chelsea, New York) in 1950, with a second edition in 1956.\n A lively introduction to probability theory for the beginner."}
{"id": "23543", "revid": "2051880", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23543", "title": "Probability distribution", "text": "Mathematical function for the probability a given outcome occurs in an experiment\nIn probability theory and statistics, a probability distribution is a function that gives the probabilities of occurrence of possible events for an experiment. It is a mathematical description of a random phenomenon in terms of its sample space and the probabilities of events (subsets of the sample space).\nFor instance, if X is used to denote the outcome of a coin toss (\"the experiment\"), then the probability distribution of X would take the value 0.5 (1 in 2 or 1/2) for \"X\" = heads, and 0.5 for \"X\" = tails (assuming that the coin is fair). More commonly, probability distributions are used to compare the relative occurrence of many different random values.\nProbability distributions can be defined in different ways and for discrete or for continuous variables. Distributions with special properties or for especially important applications are given specific names.\nIntroduction.\nA probability distribution is a mathematical description of the probabilities of events, subsets of the sample space. The sample space, often represented in notation by formula_1 is the set of all possible outcomes of a random phenomenon being observed. The sample space may be any set: a set of real numbers, a set of descriptive labels, a set of vectors, a set of arbitrary non-numerical values, etc. For example, the sample space of a coin flip could be \nTo define probability distributions for the specific case of random variables (so the sample space can be seen as a numeric set), it is common to distinguish between discrete and continuous random variables. In the discrete case, it is sufficient to specify a probability mass function formula_2 assigning a probability to each possible outcome (e.g. when throwing a fair die, each of the six digits \u201c1\u201d to \u201c6\u201d, corresponding to the number of dots on the die, has probability formula_3 The probability of an event is then defined to be the sum of the probabilities of all outcomes that satisfy the event; for example, the probability of the event \"the die rolls an even value\" is\nformula_4\nIn contrast, when a random variable takes values from a continuum then by convention, any individual outcome is assigned probability zero. For such continuous random variables, only events that include infinitely many outcomes such as intervals have probability greater than 0.\nFor example, consider measuring the weight of a piece of ham in the supermarket, and assume the scale can provide arbitrarily many digits of precision. Then, the probability that it weighs \"exactly\" 500\u00a0g must be zero because no matter how high the level of precision chosen, it cannot be assumed that there are no non-zero decimal digits in the remaining omitted digits ignored by the precision level.\nHowever, for the same use case, it is possible to meet quality control requirements such as that a package of \"500\u00a0g\" of ham must weigh between 490\u00a0g and 510\u00a0g with at least 98% probability. This is possible because this measurement does not require as much precision from the underlying equipment.\nContinuous probability distributions can be described by means of the cumulative distribution function, which describes the probability that the random variable is no larger than a given value (i.e., \"P\"(\"X\" \u2264 \"x\") for some x. The cumulative distribution function is the area under the probability density function from -\u221e to x, as shown in figure 1.\nMost continuous probability distributions encountered in practice are not only continuous but also absolutely continuous. Such distributions can be described by their probability density function. Informally, the probability density formula_5 of a random variable formula_6 describes the infinitesimal probability that formula_6 takes any value formula_8 \u2014 that is formula_9 as formula_10 becomes is arbitrarily small. The probability that formula_6 lies in a given interval can be computed rigorously by integrating the probability density function over that interval.\nGeneral probability definition.\nLet formula_12 be a probability space, formula_13 be a measurable space, and formula_14 be a formula_13-valued random variable. Then the probability distribution of formula_6 is the pushforward measure of the probability measure formula_17 onto formula_13 induced by formula_6. Explicitly, this pushforward measure on formula_13 is given by\nformula_21 for formula_22\nAny probability distribution is a probability measure on formula_13 (in general different from formula_17, unless formula_6 happens to be the identity map).\nA probability distribution can be described in various forms, such as by a probability mass function or a cumulative distribution function. One of the most general descriptions, which applies for absolutely continuous and discrete variables, is by means of a probability function formula_26 whose input space formula_27 is a \u03c3-algebra, and gives a real number probability as its output, particularly, a number in formula_28.\nThe probability function formula_17 can take as argument subsets of the sample space itself, as in the coin toss example, where the function formula_17 was defined so that \"P\"(heads) = 0.5 and \"P\"(tails) = 0.5. However, because of the widespread use of random variables, which transform the sample space into a set of numbers (e.g., formula_31, formula_32), it is more common to study probability distributions whose argument are subsets of these particular kinds of sets (number sets), and all probability distributions discussed in this article are of this type. It is common to denote as formula_33 the probability that a certain value of the variable formula_6 belongs to a certain event formula_35.\nThe above probability function only characterizes a probability distribution if it satisfies all the Kolmogorov axioms, that is:\nThe concept of probability function is made more rigorous by defining it as the element of a probability space formula_41, where formula_6 is the set of possible outcomes, formula_27 is the set of all subsets formula_44 whose probability can be measured, and formula_17 is the probability function, or probability measure, that assigns a probability to each of these measurable subsets formula_46.\nProbability distributions usually belong to one of two classes. A discrete probability distribution is applicable to the scenarios where the set of possible outcomes is discrete (e.g. a coin toss, a roll of a die) and the probabilities are encoded by a discrete list of the probabilities of the outcomes; in this case the discrete probability distribution is known as probability mass function. On the other hand, absolutely continuous probability distributions are applicable to scenarios where the set of possible outcomes can take on values in a continuous range (e.g. real numbers), such as the temperature on a given day. In the absolutely continuous case, probabilities are described by a probability density function, and the probability distribution is by definition the integral of the probability density function. The normal distribution is a commonly encountered absolutely continuous probability distribution. More complex experiments, such as those involving stochastic processes defined in continuous time, may demand the use of more general probability measures.\nA probability distribution whose sample space is one-dimensional (for example real numbers, list of labels, ordered labels or binary) is called univariate, while a distribution whose sample space is a vector space of dimension 2 or more is called multivariate. A univariate distribution gives the probabilities of a single random variable taking on various different values; a multivariate distribution (a joint probability distribution) gives the probabilities of a random vector \u2013 a list of two or more random variables \u2013 taking on various combinations of values. Important and commonly encountered univariate probability distributions include the binomial distribution, the hypergeometric distribution, and the normal distribution. A commonly encountered multivariate distribution is the multivariate normal distribution.\nBesides the probability function, the cumulative distribution function, the probability mass function and the probability density function, the moment generating function and the characteristic function also serve to identify a probability distribution, as they uniquely determine an underlying cumulative distribution function.\nTerminology.\nSome key concepts and terms, widely used in the literature on the topic of probability distributions, are listed below.\nCumulative distribution function.\nIn the special case of a real-valued random variable, the probability distribution can equivalently be represented by a cumulative distribution function instead of a probability measure. The cumulative distribution function of a random variable formula_6 with regard to a probability distribution formula_2 is defined as\nformula_64\nThe cumulative distribution function of any real-valued random variable has the properties:\nConversely, any function formula_65 that satisfies the first four of the properties above is the cumulative distribution function of some probability distribution on the real numbers.\nAny probability distribution can be decomposed as the mixture of a discrete, an absolutely continuous and a singular continuous distribution, and thus any cumulative distribution function admits a decomposition as the convex sum of the three according cumulative distribution functions.\nDiscrete probability distribution.\nA discrete probability distribution is the probability distribution of a random variable that can take on only a countable number of values (almost surely) which means that the probability of any event formula_35 can be expressed as a (finite or countably infinite) sum:\nformula_67\nwhere formula_68 is a countable set with formula_69. Thus the discrete random variables (i.e. random variables whose probability distribution is discrete) are exactly those with a probability mass function formula_70. In the case where the range of values is countably infinite, these values have to decline to zero fast enough for the probabilities to add up to 1. For example, if formula_71 for formula_72, the sum of probabilities would be formula_73.\nWell-known discrete probability distributions used in statistical modeling include the Poisson distribution, the Bernoulli distribution, the binomial distribution, the geometric distribution, the negative binomial distribution and categorical distribution. When a sample (a set of observations) is drawn from a larger population, the sample points have an empirical distribution that is discrete, and which provides information about the population distribution. Additionally, the discrete uniform distribution is commonly used in computer programs that make equal-probability random selections between a number of choices.\nCumulative distribution function.\nA real-valued discrete random variable can equivalently be defined as a random variable whose cumulative distribution function increases only by jump discontinuities\u2014that is, its cdf increases only where it \"jumps\" to a higher value, and is constant in intervals without jumps. The points where jumps occur are precisely the values which the random variable may take.\nThus the cumulative distribution function has the form\nformula_74\nThe points where the cdf jumps always form a countable set; this may be any countable set and thus may even be dense in the real numbers.\nDirac delta representation.\nA discrete probability distribution is often represented with Dirac measures, also called one-point distributions (see below), the probability distributions of deterministic random variables. For any outcome formula_75, let formula_76 be the Dirac measure concentrated at formula_75. Given a discrete probability distribution, there is a countable set formula_68 with formula_69 and a probability mass function formula_2. If formula_35 is any event, then\nformula_82\nor in short,\nformula_83\nSimilarly, discrete distributions can be represented with the Dirac delta function as a generalized probability density function formula_5, where\nformula_85\nwhich means\nformula_86\nfor any event formula_87\nIndicator-function representation.\nFor a discrete random variable formula_6, let formula_89 be the values it can take with non-zero probability. Denote\nformula_90\nThese are disjoint sets, and for such sets\nformula_91\nIt follows that the probability that formula_6 takes any value except for formula_89 is zero, and thus one can write formula_6 as\nformula_95\nexcept on a set of probability zero, where formula_96 is the indicator function of formula_68. This may serve as an alternative definition of discrete random variables.\nOne-point distribution.\nA special case is the discrete distribution of a random variable that can take on only one fixed value, in other words, a Dirac measure. Expressed formally, the random variable formula_6 has a one-point distribution if it has a possible outcome formula_8 such that formula_100 All other possible outcomes then have probability 0. Its cumulative distribution function jumps immediately from 0 before formula_8 to 1 at formula_8. It is closely related to a deterministic distribution, which cannot take on any other value, while a one-point distribution can take other values, though only with probability 0. For most practical purposes the two notions are equivalent.\nAbsolutely continuous probability distribution.\nAn absolutely continuous probability distribution is a probability distribution on the real numbers with uncountably many possible values, such as a whole interval in the real line, and where the probability of any event can be expressed as an integral. More precisely, a real random variable formula_6 has an absolutely continuous probability distribution if there is a function formula_104 such that for each interval formula_105 the probability of formula_6 belonging to formula_107 is given by the integral of formula_5 over formula_107:\nformula_110\nThis is the definition of a probability density function, so that absolutely continuous probability distributions are exactly those with a probability density function.\nIn particular, the probability for formula_6 to take any single value formula_112 (that is, formula_113) is zero, because an integral with coinciding upper and lower limits is always equal to zero.\nIf the interval formula_114 is replaced by any measurable set formula_68, the according equality still holds:\nformula_116\nAn absolutely continuous random variable is a random variable whose probability distribution is absolutely continuous.\nThere are many examples of absolutely continuous probability distributions: normal, uniform, chi-squared, and others.\nCumulative distribution function.\nAbsolutely continuous probability distributions as defined above are precisely those with an absolutely continuous cumulative distribution function.\nIn this case, the cumulative distribution function formula_117 has the form\nformula_118\nwhere formula_5 is a density of the random variable formula_6 with regard to the distribution formula_17.\n\"Note on terminology:\" Absolutely continuous distributions ought to be distinguished from continuous distributions, which are those having a continuous cumulative distribution function. Every absolutely continuous distribution is a continuous distribution but the inverse is not true, there exist singular distributions, which are neither absolutely continuous nor discrete nor a mixture of those, and do not have a density. An example is given by the Cantor distribution. Some authors however use the term \"continuous distribution\" to denote all distributions whose cumulative distribution function is absolutely continuous, i.e. refer to absolutely continuous distributions as continuous distributions. \nFor a more general definition of density functions and the equivalent absolutely continuous measures see absolutely continuous measure.\nKolmogorov definition.\nIn the measure-theoretic formalization of probability theory, a random variable is defined as a measurable function formula_6 from a probability space formula_123 to a measurable space formula_124. Given that probabilities of events of the form formula_125 satisfy Kolmogorov's probability axioms, the probability distribution of formula_6 is the image measure formula_127 of formula_6 , which is a probability measure on formula_124 satisfying formula_130.\nOther kinds of distributions.\nAbsolutely continuous and discrete distributions with support on formula_131 or formula_132 are extremely useful to model a myriad of phenomena, since most practical distributions are supported on relatively simple subsets, such as hypercubes or balls. However, this is not always the case, and there exist phenomena with supports that are actually complicated curves formula_133 within some space formula_134 or similar. In these cases, the probability distribution is supported on the image of such curve, and is likely to be determined empirically, rather than finding a closed formula for it.\nOne example is shown in the figure to the right, which displays the evolution of a system of differential equations (commonly known as the Rabinovich\u2013Fabrikant equations) that can be used to model the behaviour of Langmuir waves in plasma. When this phenomenon is studied, the observed states from the subset are as indicated in red. So one could ask what is the probability of observing a state in a certain position of the red subset; if such a probability exists, it is called the probability measure of the system.\nThis kind of complicated support appears quite frequently in dynamical systems. It is not simple to establish that the system has a probability measure, and the main problem is the following. Let formula_135 be instants in time and formula_136 a subset of the support; if the probability measure exists for the system, one would expect the frequency of observing states inside set formula_136 would be equal in interval formula_138 and formula_139, which might not happen; for example, it could oscillate similar to a sine, formula_140, whose limit when formula_141 does not converge. Formally, the measure exists only if the limit of the relative frequency converges when the system is observed into the infinite future. The branch of dynamical systems that studies the existence of a probability measure is ergodic theory.\nNote that even in these cases, the probability distribution, if it exists, might still be termed \"absolutely continuous\" or \"discrete\" depending on whether the support is uncountable or countable, respectively.\nRandom number generation.\nMost algorithms are based on a pseudorandom number generator that produces numbers formula_6 that are uniformly distributed in the half-open interval [0, 1). These random variates formula_6 are then transformed via some algorithm to create a new random variate having the required probability distribution. With this source of uniform pseudo-randomness, realizations of any random variable can be generated.\nFor example, suppose U has a uniform distribution between 0 and 1. To construct a random Bernoulli variable for some 0 &lt; p &lt; 1, define\nformula_144 also known in this context as the \"quantile function\" or \"inverse distribution function\":\nformula_145\nThen, \"F\"inv(\"p\") \u2264 \"x\" if and only if \"p\" \u2264 \"F\"(\"x\"). As a result, if U is uniformly distributed on [0, 1], then the cumulative distribution function of \"X\" \n \"F\"inv(\"U\") is F.\nFor example, suppose we want to generate a random variable having an exponential distribution with parameter formula_146 \u2014 that is, with cumulative distribution function formula_147\nformula_148\nso formula_149, and if U has a uniform distribution on [0, 1) then formula_150 has an exponential distribution with parameter formula_151\nAlthough from a theoretical point of view this method always works, in practice the inverse distribution function is unknown and/or cannot be computed efficiently. In this case, other methods (such as the Monte Carlo method) are used.\nCommon probability distributions and their applications.\nThe concept of the probability distribution and the random variables which they describe underlies the mathematical discipline of probability theory, and the science of statistics. There is spread or variability in almost any value that can be measured in a population (e.g. height of people, durability of a metal, sales growth, traffic flow, etc.); almost all measurements are made with some intrinsic error; in physics, many processes are described probabilistically, from the kinetic properties of gases to the quantum mechanical description of fundamental particles. For these and many other reasons, simple numbers are often inadequate for describing a quantity, while probability distributions are often more appropriate.\nThe following is a list of some of the most common probability distributions, grouped by the type of process that they are related to. For a more complete list, see list of probability distributions, which groups by the nature of the outcome being considered (discrete, absolutely continuous, multivariate, etc.)\nAll of the univariate distributions below are singly peaked; that is, it is assumed that the values cluster around a single point. In practice, actually observed quantities may cluster around multiple values. Such quantities can be modeled using a mixture distribution.\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23545", "revid": "23939382", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23545", "title": "Psychological statistics", "text": "Use of statistics in psychology\nPsychological statistics is application of formulas, theorems, numbers and laws to psychology. \nStatistical methods for psychology include development and application statistical theory and methods for modeling psychological data. \nThese methods include psychometrics, factor analysis, experimental designs, and Bayesian statistics. The article also discusses journals in the same field.\nPsychometrics.\nPsychometrics deals with measurement of psychological attributes. It involves developing and applying statistical models for mental measurements. The measurement theories are divided into two major areas: (1) Classical test theory; (2) Item Response Theory.\nClassical test theory.\nThe classical test theory or true score theory or reliability theory in statistics is a set of statistical procedures useful for development of psychological tests and scales. It is based on a fundamental equation, \nX = T + E\nwhere, X is total score, T is a true score and E is error of measurement. For each participant, it assumes that there exist a true score and it need to be obtained score (X) has to be as close to it as possible. The closeness of X has with T is expressed in terms of ratability of the obtained score. The reliability in terms of classical test procedure is correlation between true score and obtained score. The typical test construction procedures has following steps:\n(1) Determine the construct \n(2) Outline the behavioral domain of the construct\n(3) Write 3 to 5 times more items than desired test length\n(4) Get item content analyzed by experts and cull items\n(5) Obtain data on initial version of the test \n(8) After the second cull, make final version\n(9) Use it for research\nReliability.\nThe reliability is computed in specific ways. \n(A) Inter-Rater reliability: Inter-Rater reliability is estimate of agreement between independent raters. This is most useful for subjective responses. Cohen's Kappa, Krippendorff's Alpha, Intra-Class correlation coefficients, Correlation coefficients, Kendal's concordance coefficient, etc. are useful statistical tools. \n(B) Test-Retest Reliability: Test-Retest Procedure is estimation of temporal consistency of the test. A test is administered twice to the same sample with a time interval. Correlation between two sets of scores is used as an estimate of reliability. Testing conditions are assumed to be identical. \n(C) Internal Consistency Reliability: Internal consistency reliability estimates consistency of items with each other. Split-half reliability (Spearman- Brown Prophecy) and Cronbach Alpha are popular estimates of this reliability. \n(D) Parallel Form Reliability: It is an estimate of consistency between two different instruments of measurement. The inter-correlation between two parallel forms of a test or scale is used as an estimate of parallel form reliability.\nValidity.\nValidity of a scale or test is ability of the instrument to measure what it purports to measure. Construct validity, Content Validity, and Criterion Validity are types of validity. \nConstruct validity is estimated by convergent and discriminant validity and factor analysis. Convergent and discriminant validity are ascertained by correlation between similar of different constructs. \nContent Validity: Subject matter experts evaluate content validity. \nCriterion Validity is correlation between the test and a criterion variable (or variables) of the construct. Regression analysis, Multiple regression analysis, and Logistic regression are used as an estimate of criterion validity. \nSoftware applications: The R software has \u2018psych\u2019 package that is useful for classical test theory analysis.\nModern test theory.\nThe modern test theory is based on latent trait model. Every item estimates the ability of the test taker. The ability parameter is called as theta (\u03b8). The difficulty parameter is called b. the two important assumptions are local independence and unidimensionality. \nThe Item Response Theory has three models. They are one parameter logistic model, two parameter logistic model and three parameter logistic model. In addition, Polychromous IRT Model are also useful.\nThe R Software has \u2018ltm\u2019, packages useful for IRT analysis.\nFactor analysis.\nFactor analysis is at the core of psychological statistics. It has two schools: (1) Exploratory Factor analysis (2) Confirmatory Factor analysis.\nExploratory factor analysis (EFA).\nThe exploratory factor analysis begins without a theory or with a very tentative theory. It is a dimension reduction technique. It is useful in psychometrics, multivariate analysis of data and data analytics. \nTypically a k-dimensional correlation matrix or covariance matrix of variables is reduced to k X r factor pattern matrix where r &lt; k. Principal Component analysis and common factor analysis are two ways of extracting data. Principal axis factoring, ML factor analysis, alpha factor analysis and image factor analysis is most useful ways of EFA. \nIt employs various factor rotation methods which can be classified into orthogonal (resulting in uncorrelated factors) and oblique (resulting correlated factors).\nThe \u2018psych\u2019 package in R is useful for EFA.\nConfirmatory factor analysis (CFA).\nConfirmatory Factor Analysis (CFA) is a factor analytic technique that begins with a theory and test the theory by carrying out factor analysis. \nThe CFA is also called as latent structure analysis, which considers factor as latent variables causing actual observable variables. The basic equation of the CFA is\nX = \u039b\u03be + \u03b4\nwhere, X is observed variables, \u039b are structural coefficients, \u03be are latent variables (factors) and \u03b4 are errors. \nThe parameters are estimated using ML methods however; other methods of estimation are also available. The chi-square test is very sensitive and hence various fit measures are used.\nR package \u2018sem\u2019, \u2018lavaan\u2019 are useful for the same.\nExperimental design.\nExperimental methods are very popular in psychology, going back more than 100 years. Experimental psychology is a sub-discipline of psychology .\nStatistical methods applied for designing and analyzing experimental psychological data include the t-test, ANOVA, ANCOVA, MANOVA, MANCOVA, binomial test, chi-square, etc.\nMultivariate behavioral research.\nMultivariate behavioral research is becoming very popular in psychology. These methods include Multiple Regression and Prediction; Moderated and Mediated Regression Analysis; Logistics Regression; Canonical Correlations; Cluster analysis; Multi-level modeling; Survival-Failure analysis; Structural Equations Modeling; hierarchical linear modelling, etc. are very useful for psychological statistics.\nJournals for statistical applications for psychology.\nThere are many specialized journals that publish advances in statistical analysis for psychology:\nSoftware packages for psychological research.\nVarious software packages are available for statistical methods for psychological research. They can be classified as commercial software (e.g., JMP and SPSS) and open-source (e.g., R). Among the open-source offerings, the R software is the most popular. There are many online references for R and specialized books on R for Psychologists are also being written. The \"psych\" package of R is very useful for psychologists. Among others, \"lavaan\", \"sem\", \"ltm\", \"ggplot2\" are some of the popular packages. PSPP and KNIME are other free packages. Commercial packages include JMP, SPSS and SAS. JMP and SPSS are commonly reported in books."}
{"id": "23547", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23547", "title": "Peter Cook", "text": "British comedian, actor, satirist (1937\u20131995)\nPeter Edward Cook (17 November 1937 \u2013 9 January 1995) was an English comedian, actor, satirist, playwright and screenwriter. He was the leading figure of the British satire boom of the 1960s, and he was associated with the anti-establishment comedic movement that emerged in the United Kingdom in the late 1950s.\nBorn in Torquay, he was educated at the University of Cambridge. There he became involved with the Footlights Club, of which he later became president. After graduating, 1960 saw him create the comedy stage revue \"Beyond the Fringe\", alongside Alan Bennett, Jonathan Miller and Dudley Moore. In 1961, Cook opened the comedy club The Establishment in Soho. After leaving \"Beyond the Fringe\", Cook and Moore began a television career with the sketch comedy show \"Not Only... But Also\" in 1965. Cook's deadpan monologues contrasted with Moore's buffoonery. They received the 1966 British Academy Television Award for Best Entertainment Performance. \nFollowing the success of the show, the duo appeared together in the films \"The Wrong Box\" (1966) and \"Bedazzled\" (1967). The 1970s saw Cook and Moore work on a final series of \"Not Only... But Also\", several stand-up tours, and the Derek and Clive series of comedy albums. After 1978, Cook no longer collaborated with Moore, apart from a few cameo appearances, but continued to be a regular performer in British television and film.\nReferred to as \"the father of modern satire\" by \"The Guardian\" in 2005, Cook was ranked number one in the \"Comedians' Comedian\", a poll of more than 300 comics, comedy writers, producers and directors in the English-speaking world.\nEarly life.\nCook was born at his parents' house, \"Shearbridge\", in Middle Warberry Road, Torquay, Devon. He was the only son, and eldest of the three children, of Alexander Edward \"Alec\" Cook (1906\u20131984), a colonial civil servant, and his wife Ethel Catherine Margaret (1908\u20131994), daughter of solicitor Charles Mayo. His father served as a political officer and later as a district officer in Nigeria, then as financial secretary to the colony of Gibraltar, followed by a return to Nigeria as Permanent Secretary of the Eastern Region, based at Enugu. \nCook's grandfather, Edward Arthur Cook (1869\u20131914), had also been a colonial civil servant, traffic manager for the Federated Malay States Railway in Kuala Lumpur, Malaya. The stress he suffered in the lead-up to an interview regarding promotion led him to commit suicide. His wife, Minnie Jane (1869\u20131957), daughter of Thomas Wreford, of Thelbridge and Witheridge, Devon, and of Stratford-upon-Avon, of a prominent Devonshire family traced back to 1440, kept this fact secret. Peter Cook only discovered the truth when later researching his family.\nCook was educated at Radley College and then went up to Pembroke College, Cambridge, where he read French and German. As a student, Cook initially intended to become a career diplomat like his father, but Britain \"had run out of colonies\", as he put it. Although largely apathetic politically, particularly in later life when he displayed a deep distrust of politicians of all hues, he joined the Cambridge University Liberal Club. At Pembroke, Cook performed and wrote comedy sketches as a member of the Cambridge Footlights Club, of which he became president in 1960. His hero was fellow Footlights writer and Cambridge magazine writer David Nobbs.\nWhile still at university, Cook wrote for Kenneth Williams, providing several sketches for Williams' hit West End comedy revue \"Pieces of Eight\" and much of the follow-up, \"One Over the Eight\".\nCareer.\n1960s.\nCook first came to prominence in his own right in the satirical stage show \"Beyond the Fringe\", alongside Jonathan Miller, Alan Bennett, and Dudley Moore. \"Beyond the Fringe\" became a great success in London after being first performed at the Edinburgh Festival in 1960, and included Cook impersonating the prime minister, Harold Macmillan. This was one of the first occasions satirical political mimicry had been attempted in live theatre, and it shocked audiences. During one performance, Macmillan was in the theatre and Cook departed from his script and attacked him verbally.\nIn 1961, Cook opened The Establishment, a club at 18 Greek Street in Soho in central London, presenting fellow comedians in a nightclub setting, including American Lenny Bruce. Cook later joked that it was a satirical venue modelled on \"those wonderful Berlin cabarets ... which did so much to stop the rise of Hitler and prevent the outbreak of the Second World War\". As a members-only venue, it was outside the censorship restrictions. The Establishment's regular cabaret performers were Eleanor Bron, John Bird, and John Fortune.\nCook befriended and supported Australian comedian and actor Barry Humphries, who began his British solo career at the club. Humphries said in his autobiography, \"My Life As Me\", that he found Cook's lack of interest in art and literature off-putting. Dudley Moore's jazz trio played in the basement of the club during the early 1960s.\nCook also opened an Establishment club in New York in 1963, with Lenny Bruce being one of the comedians who performed there.\nIn 1962, the BBC commissioned a pilot for a television series of satirical sketches based on the Establishment Club, but it was not immediately picked up and Cook went to New York City for a year to perform \"Beyond the Fringe\" on Broadway. When he returned, the pilot had been refashioned as \"That Was the Week That Was\" and had made a television star of David Frost, something Cook made no secret of resenting. He complained that Frost's success was based on directly copying Cook's own stage persona and Cook dubbed him \"the bubonic plagiarist\", and said that his only regret in life, according to Alan Bennett, had been saving Frost from drowning. This incident occurred in the summer of 1963, when the rivalry between the two men was at its height. Cook had realised that Frost's potential drowning would have looked deliberate if he had not been rescued.\nBy the mid 1960s the satire boom was coming to an end and Cook said: \"England was about to sink giggling into the sea.\" Around this time, Cook provided substantial financial backing for the satirical magazine \"Private Eye\", supporting it through difficult periods, particularly in libel trials. Cook invested his own money and solicited investment from his friends. For a time, the magazine was produced from the premises of the Establishment Club. In 1963, Cook married Wendy Snowden. The couple had two daughters, Lucy and Daisy, but the marriage ended in 1970.\nCook's first regular television spot was on Granada Television's \"On the Braden Beat\" with Bernard Braden, where he featured his most enduring character: the static, dour and monotonal E. L. Wisty, whom Cook had conceived for Radley College's Marionette Society.\nCook's comedy partnership with Dudley Moore led to \"Not Only... But Also\". This was originally intended by the BBC as a vehicle for Moore's music, but Moore invited Cook to write sketches and appear with him. Using few props, they created dry, absurd television that proved hugely popular and lasted for three series between 1965 and 1970. Cook played characters such as Sir Arthur Streeb-Greebling and the two men created their Pete and Dud alter egos. Other sketches included \"Superthunderstingcar\", a parody of the Gerry Anderson marionette TV shows, and Cook's pastiche of 1960s trendy arts documentaries \u2013 satirised in a parodic segment on Greta Garbo.\nWhen Cook learned a few years later that the videotapes of the series were to be wiped, a common practice at the time, he offered to buy the recordings from the BBC but was refused because of copyright issues. He suggested he could purchase new tapes so that the BBC would have no need to erase the originals, but this was also turned down. Of the original 22 programmes, only eight still survive complete. A compilation of six half-hour programmes, \"The Best of... What's Left of... Not Only...But Also\" was shown on television and has been released on both VHS and DVD.\nWith \"The Wrong Box\" (1966) and \"Bedazzled\" (1967), Cook and Moore began to act in films together. Directed by Stanley Donen, the underlying story of \"Bedazzled\" is credited to Cook and Moore and its screenplay to Cook. A comic parody of Faust, it stars Cook as George Spigott (the Devil) who tempts Stanley Moon (Moore), a frustrated short-order chef, with the promise of gaining his heart's desire \u2013 the unattainable beauty and waitress at his cafe, Margaret Spencer (Eleanor Bron) \u2013 in exchange for his soul, but repeatedly tricks him. The film features cameo appearances by Barry Humphries as Envy and Raquel Welch as Lust. Moore composed the soundtrack music and co-wrote (with Cook) the songs performed in the film. His jazz trio backed Cook on the theme, a parodic anti-love song, which Cook delivered in a deadpan monotone and included his familiar put-down, \"you fill me with inertia\".\nIn 1968, Cook and Moore briefly switched to ATV for four one-hour programmes titled \"Goodbye Again\", based on the Pete and Dud characters. Cook's increasing alcoholism led him to become reliant on cue cards. The show was not a popular success, owing in part to a strike causing the suspension of the publication of the ITV listings magazine \"TV Times\". John Cleese was also a cast member, who would become lifelong friends with Cook and later collaborated on projects together.\n1970s.\nIn 1970, Cook took over a project initiated by David Frost for a satirical film about an opinion pollster who rises to become Prime Minister of Great Britain. Under Cook's guidance, the character became modelled on Frost. The film, \"The Rise and Rise of Michael Rimmer\", was not a success, although the cast contained notable names (including Cleese and Graham Chapman, who were co-writers).\nCook became a favourite of the chat show circuit but his effort at hosting such a show for the BBC in 1971, \"Where Do I Sit?\", was said by the critics to have been a disappointment. It was axed after only three episodes and was replaced by Michael Parkinson, the start of Parkinson's career as a chat show host. Parkinson later asked Cook what his ambitions were, Cook replied jocularly \"[...] in fact, my ambition is to shut you up altogether you see!\"\nCook and Moore fashioned sketches from \"Not Only...But Also\" and \"Goodbye Again\" with new material into the stage revue called \"Behind the Fridge\". This show toured Australia in 1972, where a TV special was made of it by GTV-9, before transferring to New York City in 1973, retitled as \"Good Evening\". Cook frequently appeared on and off stage the worse for drink. Nonetheless, the show proved very popular and it won Tony and Grammy Awards. When it finished, Moore stayed in the United States to pursue his film acting ambitions in Hollywood. Cook returned to Britain and in 1973, married the actress and model Judy Huxtable.\nLater, the more risqu\u00e9 humour of Pete and Dud went further on such LPs as \"Derek and Clive\". The first recording was initiated by Cook to alleviate boredom during the Broadway run of \"Good Evening\" and used material conceived years before for the two characters but considered too outrageous. One of these audio recordings was also filmed and therein tensions between the duo are seen to rise. Chris Blackwell circulated bootleg copies to friends in the music business. The popularity of the recording convinced Cook to release it commercially, although Moore was initially reluctant, fearing that his rising fame as a Hollywood star would be undermined. Two further \"Derek and Clive\" albums were released, the last accompanied by a film.\nCook and Moore hosted \"Saturday Night Live\" on 24 January 1976 during the show's first season. They did a number of their classic stage routines, including \"One Leg Too Few\" and \"Frog and Peach\" among others, in addition to participating in some skits with the show's ensemble cast. In 1978, Cook appeared on the British music series \"Revolver\" as the manager of a ballroom where emerging punk and new wave acts played. For some groups, these were their first appearances on television. Cook's acerbic commentary was a distinctive aspect of the programme. In 1979, Cook recorded comedy-segments as B-sides to the Sparks 12-inch singles \"Number One Song in Heaven\" and \"Tryouts for the Human Race\". The main songwriter Ron Mael often began with a banal situation in his lyrics and then went at surreal tangents in the style of Cook and S. J. Perelman.\nAmnesty International performances.\nCook appeared at the first three fund-raising galas staged by Cleese and Martin Lewis on behalf of Amnesty International. From the third show in 1979 the benefits were dubbed \"The Secret Policeman's Balls\". He performed on all three nights of the first show in April 1976, \"A Poke in the Eye (With a Sharp Stick)\", as an individual performer and as a member of the cast of \"Beyond the Fringe\", which reunited for the first time since the 1960s. He also appeared in a Monty Python sketch, taking the place of Eric Idle. Cook was on the cast album of the show and in the film, \"Pleasure at Her Majesty's\". He was in the second Amnesty gala in May 1977, \"An Evening Without Sir Bernard Miles\". It was retitled \"The Mermaid Frolics\" for the cast album and TV special. Cook performed monologues and skits with Terry Jones.\nIn June 1979, Cook performed all four nights of \"The Secret Policeman's Ball\", teaming with Cleese. Cook performed a couple of solo pieces and a sketch with Eleanor Bron. He also led the ensemble in the finale \u2013 the \"End of the World\" sketch from \"Beyond the Fringe\".\nIn response to a barb in \"The Daily Telegraph\" that the show was recycled material, Cook wrote a satire of the summing-up by Justice Cantley in the trial of former Liberal Party leader Jeremy Thorpe, a summary now widely thought to show bias in favour of Thorpe. Cook performed it that same night (Friday 29 June \u2013 the third of the four nights) and the following night. The nine-minute opus, \"Entirely a Matter for You\", is considered by many fans and critics to be one of the finest works of Cook's career. Along with Cook, producer of the show Martin Lewis brought out an album on Virgin Records entitled \"Here Comes the Judge: Live\", containing the live performance together with three studio tracks that further lampooned the Thorpe trial.\nAlthough unable to take part in the 1981 gala, Cook supplied the narration over the animated opening title sequence of the 1982 film of the show. With Lewis, he wrote and voiced radio commercials to advertise the film in the UK. He also hosted a spoof film awards ceremony that was part of the world premi\u00e8re of the film in London in March 1982.\nFollowing Cook's 1987 stage reunion with Moore for the annual American benefit for the homeless, Comic Relief (not related to the UK Comic Relief benefits), Cook repeated the reunion for a British audience by performing with Moore at the 1989 Amnesty benefit \"The Secret Policeman's Biggest Ball\".\n\"Consequences\" album.\nCook played multiple roles on the 1977 concept album \"Consequences\", written and produced by former 10cc members Kevin Godley and Lol Creme. A mixture of spoken comedy and progressive rock with an environmental subtext, \"Consequences\" started as a single that Godley and Creme planned to make to demonstrate their invention, an electric guitar effect called the Gizmo, which they developed in 10cc. The project grew into a three-LP box set. The comedy sections were originally intended to be performed by a cast including Spike Milligan and Peter Ustinov, but Godley and Creme eventually settled on Cook once they realised he could perform most parts himself.\nThe storyline centres on the impending divorce of ineffectual Englishman Walter Stapleton (Cook) and his French wife Lulu (Judy Huxtable). While meeting their lawyers \u2013 the bibulous Mr. Haig and overbearing Mr. Pepperman (both played by Cook) \u2013 the encroaching global catastrophe interrupts proceedings with bizarre and mysterious happenings, which seem to centre on Mr. Blint (Cook), a musician and composer living in the flat below Haig's office, to which it is connected by a large hole in the floor.\nAlthough it has since developed a cult following, \"Consequences\" was released as punk was sweeping the UK and proved a resounding commercial failure, savaged by critics who found the music self-indulgent. The script and story have evident connections to Cook's own life \u2013 his then-wife Judy Huxtable plays Walter's wife. Cook's struggles with alcohol are mirrored in Haig's drinking, and there is a parallel between the fictional divorce of Walter and Lulu and Cook's own divorce from his first wife. The voice and accent Cook used for the character of Stapleton are similar to those of Cook's \"Beyond the Fringe\" colleague, Alan Bennett, and a book on Cook's comedy, \"How Very Interesting: Peter Cook's Universe and All That Surrounds It\", speculates that the characters Cook plays in \"Consequences\" are his verbal caricatures of the four \"Beyond the Fringe\" cast members \u2013 the alcoholic Haig represents Cook himself, the tremulous Stapleton is Bennett, the parodically Jewish Pepperman is Miller, and the pianist Blint represents Moore.\n1980s.\nCook starred in the LWT special \"Peter Cook &amp; Co.\" in 1980. The show included comedy sketches, including a \"Tales of the Unexpected\" parody \"Tales of the Much As We Expected\". This involved Cook as Roald Dahl, explaining his name had been Ronald before he dropped the \"n\". The cast included Cleese, Rowan Atkinson, Beryl Reid, Paula Wilcox, and Terry Jones. Partly spurred by Moore's growing film star status, Cook moved to Hollywood in that year, and appeared as an uptight English butler to a wealthy American woman in a short-lived United States television sitcom, \"The Two of Us\", also making cameo appearances in a couple of undistinguished films.\nIn 1983, Cook played the role of Richard III in the first episode of \"Blackadder\", \"The Foretelling\", which parodies Laurence Olivier's portrayal. In 1984, he played the role of Nigel, the mathematics teacher, in Jeannot Szwarc's film \"Supergirl\", working alongside the evil Selena played by Faye Dunaway. He then narrated the short film \"Diplomatix\" by Norwegian comedy trio Kirkvaag, Lystad, and Mj\u00f8en, which won the \"Special Prize of the City of Montreux\" at the Montreux Comedy Festival in 1985. In 1986, he partnered Joan Rivers on her UK talk show. He appeared as Mr Jolly in 1987 in \"The Comic Strip Presents...\" episode \"Mr. Jolly Lives Next Door\", playing an assassin who covers the sound of his murders by playing Tom Jones records. \nThat same year, Cook appeared in \"The Princess Bride\" as the \"Impressive Clergyman\" who officiates at the wedding ceremony between Buttercup and Prince Humperdinck. Also that year, he spent time working with humourist Martin Lewis on a political satire about the 1988 US presidential elections for HBO, but the script went unproduced. Lewis suggested that Cook team with Moore for the US Comic Relief telethon for the homeless. The duo reunited and performed their \"One Leg Too Few\" sketch. Cook again collaborated with Moore for the 1989 Amnesty International benefit show, \"The Secret Policeman's Biggest Ball\".\nA 1984 commercial for John Harvey &amp; Sons showed Cook at a poolside party drinking Harvey's Bristol Cream sherry. He then says to \"throw away those silly little glasses\" whereupon the other party guests toss their sunglasses in the swimming pool.\nIn 1988, Cook appeared as a contestant on the improvisation comedy show \"Whose Line Is It Anyway?\" He was declared the winner, his prize being to read the credits in the style of a New York cab driver \u2013 a character he had portrayed in \"Peter Cook &amp; Co.\"\nCook occasionally called in to Clive Bull's night-time phone-in radio show on LBC in London. Using the name \"Sven from Swiss Cottage\", he mused on love, loneliness, and herrings in a mock Norwegian accent. Jokes included Sven's attempts to find his estranged wife, in which he often claimed to be telephoning the show from all over the world, and his dislike of his fellow Norwegians' obsession with fish. While Bull was clearly aware that Sven was fictional and was happy to play along with the joke, he did not learn of the caller's real identity until later.\nRevival.\nIn late 1989, Cook married for the third time, to Malaysian-born property developer Chiew Lin Chong in Torbay, Devon. She provided him with some stability in his personal life, and he reduced his drinking to the extent that for a time he was teetotal. He lived alone in a small 18th-century house in Perrins Walk, Hampstead, while she kept her own property just away.\nCook returned to the BBC as Sir Arthur Streeb-Greebling for an appearance with Ludovic Kennedy in \"A Life in Pieces\". The 12 interviews saw Sir Arthur recount his life, based on the song \"Twelve Days of Christmas\". Unscripted interviews with Cook as Streeb-Greebling and satirist Chris Morris were recorded in late 1993 and broadcast as \"Why Bother?\" on BBC Radio 3 in 1994. Morris described them:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;It was a very different style of improvisation from what I'd been used to, working with people like Steve Coogan, Doon Mackichan and Rebecca Front, because \"On the Hour\" and \"The Day Today\" were about trying to establish a character within a situation, and Cook was really doing 'knight's move' and 'double knight's move' thinking to construct jokes or ridiculous scenes flipping back on themselves, and it was amazing. I mean, I held out no great hopes that he wouldn't be a boozy old sack of lard with his hair falling out and scarcely able to get a sentence out, because he hadn't given much evidence that that wouldn't be the case. But, in fact, he stumbled in with a Safeways bag full of Kestrel lager and loads of fags and then proceeded to skip about mentally with the agility of a grasshopper. Really quite extraordinary.\nOn 17 December 1993, Cook appeared on \"Clive Anderson Talks Back\" as four characters \u2013 biscuit tester and alien abductee Norman House, football manager and motivational speaker Alan Latchley, judge Sir James Beauchamp, and rock legend Eric Daley. The following day, he appeared on BBC2 performing links for \"Arena\"'s \"Radio Night\". He also appeared in the 1993 Christmas special of \"One Foot in the Grave\" (\"One Foot in the Algarve\"), playing a muckraking tabloid photographer. Before the end of the following year, his mother died, and a grief-stricken Cook returned to heavy drinking. He made his last television appearance on the show \"Pebble Mill at One\" in November 1994.\nPersonal life, health and death.\nCook was married three times. He married Wendy Snowden, whom he met at university, in 1963. They had two daughters. The couple divorced in 1971. Cook then married the actress Judy Huxtable, in 1973; the marriage ended in divorce in 1989, after they had been separated for some years. He married Chiew Lin Chong in 1989, to whom he remained married until his death. Cook became stepfather to Chong's daughter, Nina. Following Cook's death, Chong suffered from depression, deriving both from her loss and the difficulties arising from raising Nina, who had learning difficulties. Chong died aged 71, in November 2016.\nCook was an avid spectator of most popular English sports (except rugby league) and was a supporter of Tottenham Hotspur football club, though he also maintained support for his hometown team Torquay United.\nCook was a heavy smoker. As a regular interviewee on his friend Michael Parkinson's chat show Parkinson, he was usually to be seen with a lighted cigarette in his hand or mouth during their broadcast interviews.\nCook died aged 57, whilst in a coma, on 9 January 1995, at the Royal Free Hospital in Hampstead, London, from a gastrointestinal haemorrhage, a complication resulting from years of heavy drinking. His body was cremated at Golders Green Crematorium, and his ashes were buried in an unmarked plot behind St John-at-Hampstead, not far from his home in Perrins Walk.\nDudley Moore attended Cook's memorial service at St John-at-Hampstead on 1 May 1995. He and Martin Lewis presented a two-night memorial for Cook at The Improv in Los Angeles, on 15 and 16 November 1995, to mark what would have been Cook's 58th birthday.\nLegacy.\nCook is widely acknowledged as a strong influence on the many British comedians who followed him from the amateur dramatic clubs of British universities to the Edinburgh Festival Fringe, and then to radio and television. On his death, some critics choose to see Cook's life as tragic, insofar as the brilliance of his youth had not been sustained in his later years. However, Cook maintained he was \"comfortable with limited ambition\" not necessarily for the sustained international success that Dudley Moore achieved. He assessed happiness by his friendships and his enjoyment of life. Eric Idle said Cook had not wasted his talent, but rather that the newspapers had tried to waste him.\nIn 1995 premiered \"Play Wisty For Me \u2013 The Life of Peter Cook\", an original play to pay tribute to Cook.\nSeveral friends honoured him with a dedication in the closing credits of \"Fierce Creatures\" (1997), a comedy film written by John Cleese about a zoo in peril of being closed. It starred Cleese alongside Jamie Lee Curtis, Kevin Kline, and Michael Palin. The dedication displays photos and the lifespan dates of Cook and of naturalist and humorist Gerald Durrell.\nIn 1999, the minor planet 20468 Petercook, in the main asteroid belt, was named after Cook.\nChannel 4 broadcast \"Not Only But Always\", a television film dramatising the relationship between Cook and Moore, with Rhys Ifans portraying Cook. At the 2005 Edinburgh Festival Fringe, a play, \"\" written by Chris Bartlett and Nick Awde, examined the relationship from Moore's view. The play was transferred to London's West End at The Venue in 2006 and toured the UK the following year. During the West End run, Tom Goodman-Hill starred as Cook, with Kevin Bishop as Moore.\nA green plaque to honour Cook was unveiled by the Westminster City Council and the Heritage Foundation at the site of the Establishment Club, at 18 Greek Street, on 15 February 2009.\nA blue plaque was unveiled by the Torbay Civic Society on 17 November 2014 at Cook's place of birth, \"Shearbridge\", Middle Warberry Road, Torquay, with his widow Lin and other members of the family in attendance. A further blue plaque was commissioned and erected at the home of Torquay United, Plainmoor, Torquay, in 2015.\nDiscography.\nUK chart singles:\nboth with Dudley Moore\nAlbums:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23549", "revid": "42536815", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23549", "title": "Psychedelic rock", "text": "Music genre\nPsychedelic rock is a subgenre of rock music that originally emerged during the mid-1960s, inspired by psychedelic culture and primarily centered around the influence of psychoactive and hallucinogenic drugs. The music incorporated new electronic sound effects and recording techniques, extended instrumental solos, and improvisation. Many psychedelic groups differ in style with the label often applied spuriously.\nOriginating in the mid-1960s among British and American musicians, the sound of psychedelic rock invokes three core effects of LSD: depersonalization, dechronicization (the bending of time), and dynamization (when fixed, ordinary objects dissolve into moving, dancing structures), all of which detach the user from everyday reality. Musically, the effects may be represented via novelty studio tricks, electronic or non-Western instrumentation, disjunctive song structures, and extended instrumental segments. Some of the earlier 1960s psychedelic rock musicians were based in folk, jazz, and the blues, while others showcased an explicit Indian classical influence called \"raga rock\". In the 1960s, there existed two main variants of the genre: the more whimsical, surrealist British psychedelia and the harder American West Coast \"acid rock\". While \"acid rock\" is sometimes deployed interchangeably with the term \"psychedelic rock\", it also refers more specifically to the heavier, harder, and more extreme ends of the genre.\nThe peak years of psychedelic rock were between 1967 and 1969, with milestone events including the 1967 Summer of Love and the 1969 Woodstock Festival, spearheading an international phenomena that birthed a widespread counterculture and the hippie movement before declining as changing attitudes, the loss of some key individuals, and a back-to-basics approach led surviving performers to move into new musical areas. The genre bridged the transition from early blues and folk-based rock to progressive rock and hard rock, and as a result contributed to the development of sub-genres such as heavy metal. Since the late 1970s it has been revived in various forms of neo-psychedelia.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nEtymology.\nAs a musical style, psychedelic rock incorporated new electronic sound effects and recording effects, extended solos, and improvisation. Features mentioned in relation to the genre include:\nThe term \"psychedelic\" was coined in 1956 by psychiatrist Humphry Osmond in a letter to LSD exponent Aldous Huxley and used as an alternative descriptor for hallucinogenic drugs in the context of psychedelic psychotherapy. As the countercultural scene developed in San Francisco, the terms acid rock and psychedelic rock were used in 1966 to describe the new drug-influenced music and were being widely used by 1967. The earliest known use of the term \"psychedelic rock\" would be made by a Michigan newspaper in 1963. In January 1966, Texan band the 13th Floor Elevators would adopt the term on business cards containing an image of a third eye. The two terms are often used interchangeably, but acid rock may be distinguished as a more extreme variation that was heavier, louder, relied on long jams, focused more directly on LSD, and made greater use of distortion.\nOriginal psychedelic era.\n1960\u201365: Precursors and influences.\nMusic critic Richie Unterberger says that attempts to \"pin down\" the first psychedelic record are \"nearly as elusive as trying to name the first rock &amp; roll record\". Some of the \"far-fetched claims\" include the instrumental \"Telstar\" (produced by Joe Meek for the Tornados in 1962) and the Dave Clark Five's \"massively reverb-laden\" \"Any Way You Want It\" (1964). The first mention of LSD on a rock record was the Gamblers' 1960 surf instrumental \"LSD 25\". A 1962 single by the Ventures, \"The 2000 Pound Bee\", issued forth the buzz of a distorted, \"fuzztone\" guitar, and the quest into \"the possibilities of heavy, transistorised distortion\" and other effects, like improved reverb and echo, began in earnest on London's fertile rock 'n' roll scene. By 1964 fuzztone could be heard on singles by P.J. Proby, and the Beatles had employed feedback in \"I Feel Fine\", their sixth consecutive number 1 hit in the UK.\nAccording to AllMusic, the emergence of psychedelic rock in the mid-1960s resulted from British groups who made up the British Invasion of the US market and folk rock bands seeking to broaden \"the sonic possibilities of their music\". Writing in his 1969 book \"The Rock Revolution\", Arnold Shaw said the genre in its American form represented generational escapism, which he identified as a development of youth culture's \"protest against the sexual taboos, racism, violence, hypocrisy and materialism of adult life\".\nAmerican folk singer Bob Dylan's influence was central to the creation of the folk rock movement in 1965, and his lyrics remained a touchstone for the psychedelic songwriters of the late 1960s. Virtuoso sitarist Ravi Shankar had begun in 1956 a mission to bring Indian classical music to the West, inspiring jazz, classical and folk musicians. By the mid-1960s, his influence extended to a generation of young rock musicians who soon made raga rock part of the psychedelic rock aesthetic and one of the many intersecting cultural motifs of the era. In the British folk scene, blues, drugs, jazz and Eastern influences blended in the early 1960s work of Davy Graham, who adopted modal guitar tunings to transpose Indian ragas and Celtic reels. Graham was highly influential on Scottish folk virtuoso Bert Jansch and other pioneering guitarists across a spectrum of styles and genres in the mid-1960s. Jazz saxophonist and composer John Coltrane had a similar impact, as the exotic sounds on his albums \"My Favorite Things\" (1960) and \"A Love Supreme\" (1965), the latter influenced by the ragas of Shankar, were source material for guitar players and others looking to improvise or \"jam\".\nOne of the first musical uses of the term \"psychedelic\" in the folk scene was by the New York-based folk group the Holy Modal Rounders on their version of Lead Belly's 'Hesitation Blues' in 1964. Folk/avant-garde guitarist John Fahey recorded several songs in the early 1960s experimented with unusual recording techniques, including backwards tapes, and novel instrumental accompaniment including flute and sitar. His nineteen-minute \"The Great San Bernardino Birthday Party\" \"anticipated elements of psychedelia with its nervy improvisations and odd guitar tunings\". Similarly, folk guitarist Sandy Bull's early work \"incorporated elements of folk, jazz, and Indian and Arabic-influenced dronish modes\". His 1963 album \"Fantasias for Guitar and Banjo\" explores various styles and \"could also be accurately described as one of the very first psychedelic records\".\n1965: Formative psychedelic scenes and sounds.\nBarry Miles, a leading figure in the 1960s UK underground, says that \"Hippies didn't just pop up overnight\" and that \"1965 was the first year in which a discernible youth movement began to emerge [in the US]. Many of the key 'psychedelic' rock bands formed this year.\" On the US West Coast, underground chemist Augustus Owsley Stanley III and Ken Kesey (along with his followers known as the Merry Pranksters) helped thousands of people take uncontrolled trips at Kesey's Acid Tests and in the new psychedelic dance halls. In Britain, Michael Hollingshead opened the World Psychedelic Centre and Beat Generation poets Allen Ginsberg, Lawrence Ferlinghetti and Gregory Corso read at the Royal Albert Hall. Miles adds: \"The readings acted as a catalyst for underground activity in London, as people suddenly realized just how many like-minded people there were around. This was also the year that London began to blossom into colour with the opening of the Granny Takes a Trip and Hung On You clothes shops.\" Thanks to media coverage, use of LSD became widespread.\nAccording to music critic Jim DeRogatis, writing in his book on psychedelic rock, \"Turn on Your Mind\", the Beatles are seen as the \"Acid Apostles of the New Age\". Producer George Martin, who was initially known as a specialist in comedy and novelty records, responded to the Beatles' requests by providing a range of studio tricks that ensured the group played a leading role in the development of psychedelic effects. Anticipating their overtly psychedelic work, \"Ticket to Ride\" (April 1965) introduced a subtle, drug-inspired drone suggestive of India, played on rhythm guitar. Musicologist William Echard writes that the Beatles employed several techniques in the years up to 1965 that soon became elements of psychedelic music, an approach he describes as \"cognate\" and reflective of how they, like the Yardbirds, were early pioneers in psychedelia. As important aspects the group brought to the genre, Echard cites the Beatles' rhythmic originality and unpredictability; \"true\" tonal ambiguity; leadership in incorporating elements from Indian music and studio techniques such as vari-speed, tape loops and reverse tape sounds; and their embrace of the avant-garde.\nIn Unterberger's opinion, the Byrds, emerging from the Los Angeles folk rock scene, and the Yardbirds, from England's blues scene, were more responsible than the Beatles for \"sounding the psychedelic siren\". Drug use and attempts at psychedelic music moved out of acoustic folk-based music towards rock soon after the Byrds, inspired by the Beatles' 1964 film \"A Hard Day's Night\", adopted electric instruments to produce a chart-topping version of Dylan's \"Mr. Tambourine Man\" in the summer of 1965. On the Yardbirds, Unterberger identifies lead guitarist Jeff Beck as having \"laid the blueprint for psychedelic guitar\", and says that their \"ominous minor key melodies, hyperactive instrumental breaks (called rave-ups), unpredictable tempo changes, and use of Gregorian chants\" (Still I'm Sad) helped to define the \"manic eclecticism\" typical of early psychedelic rock. The band's \"Heart Full of Soul\" (June 1965), which includes a distorted guitar riff that replicates the sound of a sitar, peaked at number 2 in the UK and number 9 in the US. In Echard's description, the song \"carried the energy of a new scene\" as the guitar-hero phenomenon emerged in rock, and it heralded the arrival of new Eastern sounds. The Kinks provided the first example of sustained Indian-style drone in rock when they used open-tuned guitars to mimic the tambura on \"See My Friends\" (July 1965), which became a top 10 hit in the UK.\nThe Beatles' \"Norwegian Wood\" from the December 1965 album \"Rubber Soul\" marked the first released recording on which a member of a Western rock group played the sitar. The Yardbirds had experimented with the instrument earlier, alongside the tabla, during recording sessions for \"Heart Full of Soul\" in April 1965, but dissatisfied with the results, guitarist Jeff Beck ultimately opted for a fuzz-driven electric guitar instead. Norwegian Wood sparked a craze for the sitar and other Indian instrumentation \u2013 a trend that fueled the growth of raga rock as the India exotic became part of the essence of psychedelic rock. Music historian George Case recognises \"Rubber Soul\" as the first of two Beatles albums that \"marked the authentic beginning of the psychedelic era\", while music critic Robert Christgau similarly wrote that \"Psychedelia starts here\". San Francisco historian Charles Perry recalled the album being \"the soundtrack of the Haight-Ashbury, Berkeley and the whole circuit\", as pre-hippie youths suspected that the songs were inspired by drugs.\nAlthough psychedelia was introduced in Los Angeles through the Byrds, according to Shaw, San Francisco emerged as the movement's capital on the West Coast. Several California-based folk acts followed the Byrds into folk rock, bringing their psychedelic influences with them, to produce the \"San Francisco Sound\". Music historian Simon Philo writes that although some commentators would state that the centre of influence had moved from London to California by 1967, it was British acts like the Beatles and the Rolling Stones that helped inspire and \"nourish\" the new American music in the mid-1960s, especially in the formative San Francisco scene. The music scene there developed in the city's Haight-Ashbury neighborhood in 1965 at basement shows organised by Chet Helms of the Family Dog; and as Jefferson Airplane founder Marty Balin and investors opened The Matrix nightclub that summer and began booking his and other local bands such as the Grateful Dead, the Steve Miller Band and Country Joe &amp; the Fish. Helms and San Francisco Mime Troupe manager Bill Graham in the fall of 1965 organised larger scale multi-media community events/benefits featuring the Airplane, the Diggers and Allen Ginsberg. By early 1966 Graham had secured booking at The Fillmore, and Helms at the Avalon Ballroom, where in-house psychedelic-themed light shows replicated the visual effects of the psychedelic experience. Graham became a major figure in the growth of psychedelic rock, attracting most of the major psychedelic rock bands of the day to The Fillmore.\nAccording to author Kevin McEneaney, the Grateful Dead \"invented\" acid rock in front of a crowd of concertgoers in San Jose, California on 4 December 1965, the date of the second Acid Test held by novelist Ken Kesey and the Merry Pranksters. Their stage performance involved the use of strobe lights to reproduce LSD's \"surrealistic fragmenting\" or \"vivid isolating of caught moments\". The Acid Test experiments subsequently launched the entire psychedelic subculture.\n1966: Growth and early popularity.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nPsychedelia. I know it's hard, but make a note of that word because it's going to be scattered round the in-clubs like punches at an Irish wedding. It already rivals \"mom\" as a household word in New York and Los Angeles ...\n\u2014\"Melody Maker\", October 1966\nEchard writes that in 1966, \"the psychedelic implications\" advanced by recent rock experiments \"became fully explicit and much more widely distributed\", and by the end of the year, \"most of the key elements of psychedelic topicality had been at least broached.\" DeRogatis says the start of psychedelic (or acid) rock is \"best listed at 1966\". Music journalists Pete Prown and Harvey P. Newquist locate the \"peak years\" of psychedelic rock between 1966 and 1969. In 1966, media coverage of rock music changed considerably as the music became reevaluated as a new form of art in tandem with the growing psychedelic community.\nIn February and March, two singles were released that later achieved recognition as the first psychedelic hits: the Yardbirds' \"Shapes of Things\" and the Byrds' \"Eight Miles High\". The former reached number 3 in the UK and number 11 in the US, and continued the Yardbirds' exploration of guitar effects, Eastern-sounding scales, and shifting rhythms. By overdubbing guitar parts, Beck layered multiple takes for his solo, which included extensive use of fuzz tone and harmonic feedback. The song's lyrics, which Unterberger describes as \"stream-of-consciousness\", have been interpreted as pro-environmental or anti-war. The Yardbirds became the first British band to have the term \"psychedelic\" applied to one of its songs. On \"Eight Miles High\", Roger McGuinn's 12-string Rickenbacker guitar provided a psychedelic interpretation of free jazz and Indian raga, channelling Coltrane and Shankar, respectively. The song's lyrics were widely taken to refer to drug use, although the Byrds denied it at the time. \"Eight Miles High\" peaked at number 14 in the US and reached the top 30 in the UK. In April 1966, British band the Pretty Things released \"Come See Me\" backed with \"\u00a3. s. d.\", the b-side used the abbreviation for Pounds, Shillings, and Pence as a double entendre for the drug LSD, which led to the song being banned by the BBC for drug references. In June 1966, Frank Zappa's the Mothers of Invention released the album \"Freak Out!\" which originally made use of the word \"psychedelic\" on the track \"Help, I'm a Rock (Third Movement: It Can't Happen Here)\" though later censored by their label Verve Records.\nDonovan's July 1966 single \"Sunshine Superman\" became one of the first psychedelic pop/rock singles to top the Billboard charts in the US. Influenced by Aldous Huxley\u2019s \"The Doors of Perception\", and with lyrics referencing LSD, it contributed to bringing psychedelia to the mainstream. Contributing to psychedelia's emergence into the pop mainstream was the release of the Beach Boys' \"Pet Sounds\" (May 1966) and the Beatles' \"Revolver\" (August 1966). \"Pet Sounds\" contained many elements that would be incorporated into psychedelia, with its artful experiments, psychedelic lyrics based on emotional longings and self-doubts, elaborate sound effects and new sounds on both conventional and unconventional instruments. The album track \"I Just Wasn't Made for These Times\" contained the first use of theremin sounds on a rock record. Scholar Philip Auslander says that even though psychedelic music is not normally associated with the Beach Boys, the \"odd directions\" and experiments in \"Pet Sounds\" \"put it all on the map. ... basically that sort of opened the door \u2013 not for groups to be formed or to start to make music, but certainly to become as visible as say Jefferson Airplane or somebody like that.\" Subsequently, the Beach Boys' October 1966 single \"Good Vibrations\" was another early pop song to incorporate psychedelic lyrics and sounds. The single's success prompted an unexpected revival in theremins and increased the awareness of analog synthesizers. As psychedelia gained prominence, Beach Boys-style harmonies would be ingrained into the newer psychedelic pop.\nDeRogatis views \"Revolver\" as another of \"the first psychedelic rock masterpieces\", along with \"Pet Sounds\". The Beatles' May 1966 B-side \"Rain\", recorded during the \"Revolver\" sessions, was the first pop recording to contain reversed sounds. Together with further studio tricks such as varispeed, the song includes a droning melody that reflected the band's growing interest in non-Western musical form and lyrics conveying the division between an enlightened psychedelic outlook and conformism. Philo cites \"Rain\" as \"the birth of British psychedelic rock\" and describes \"Revolver\" as \"[the] most sustained deployment of Indian instruments, musical form and even religious philosophy\" heard in popular music up to that time. Author Steve Turner recognises the Beatles' success in conveying an LSD-inspired worldview on \"Revolver\", particularly with \"Tomorrow Never Knows\", as having \"opened the doors to psychedelic rock (or acid rock)\". In author Shawn Levy's description, it was \"the first true drug album, not [just] a pop record with some druggy insinuations\", while musicologists Russell Reising and Jim LeBlanc credit the Beatles with \"set[ting] the stage for an important subgenre of psychedelic music, that of the messianic pronouncement\".\nGarage psychedelia.\nEchard highlights early records by the 13th Floor Elevators and Love among the key psychedelic releases of 1966, along with \"Shapes of Things\", \"Eight Miles High\", \"Rain\" and \"Revolver\". Originating from Austin, Texas, the 13th Floor Elevators formed in late 1965 with the aim of spreading LSD consciousness, they commissioned business cards containing an image of the third eye and one of the earliest known uses of the term \"Psychedelic rock\" in January 1966. That same month, they released their debut single \"You're Gonna Miss Me\" which peaked at number 55 on the \"Billboard\" Hot 100. The band later released their debut album, \"The Psychedelic Sounds of the 13th Floor Elevators\" in October that year. It was the first rock album to include the adjective in its title. Two other bands also used the word in titles of LPs released in November 1966: The Blues Magoos' \"Psychedelic Lollipop\", and the Deep's \"Psychedelic Moods\". \"Rolling Stone\" highlights the 13th Floor Elevators as arguably \"the most important early progenitors of psychedelic garage rock\". \nMusic critic Lester Bangs writing in 1981 in his essay \"Protopunk: The Garage Bands\" noted that during the mid-1960s, American garage rock bands such as the Count Five, the Seeds, the Standells, the Music Machine and the Electric Prunes began to draw influences from the early psychedelic music scene: \"The next phase of protopunk coincided with the rise of psychedelia and the fall of folk rock in 1966. Now the garage bands entered their golden age, as new technical developments like fuzztone and the electric 12-string guitar put truly awesome sonic possibilities within the reach of the most limited musicians. What\u2019s more, just about the time they were also discovering acid, all these guys found out about instant ragas: to approximate the sounds of the mystic East, all they had to do was play scales up and down their fretboards\".\n1967\u201369: Continued development.\nPeak era.\nIn 1967, psychedelic rock received widespread media attention and a larger audience beyond local psychedelic communities. From 1967 to 1968, it was the prevailing sound of rock music, either in the more whimsical British variant, or the harder American West Coast acid rock. Music historian David Simonelli says the genre's commercial peak lasted \"a brief year\", with San Francisco and London recognised as the two key cultural centres. Compared with the American form, British psychedelic music was often more arty in its experimentation, and it tended to stick within pop song structures. Music journalist Mark Prendergast writes that it was only in US garage-band psychedelia that the often whimsical traits of UK psychedelic music were found. He says that aside from the work of the Byrds, Love and the Doors, there were three categories of US psychedelia: the \"acid jams\" of the San Francisco bands, who favoured albums over singles; pop psychedelia typified by groups such as the Beach Boys and Buffalo Springfield; and the \"wigged-out\" music of bands following in the example of the Beatles and the Yardbirds, such as the Electric Prunes, the Nazz, the Chocolate Watchband and the Seeds.\nThe Doors' self-titled debut album (January 1967) is notable for possessing a darker sound and subject matter than many contemporary psychedelic albums, which would become very influential to the later gothic rock movement. Aided by the No. 1 single, \"Light My Fire\", the album became very successful, reaching number 2 on the \"Billboard\" chart.\nIn February 1967, the Beatles released the double A-side single \"Strawberry Fields Forever\" / \"Penny Lane\", which Ian MacDonald says launched both the \"English pop-pastoral mood\" typified by bands such as Pink Floyd, Family, Traffic and Fairport Convention, and English psychedelia's LSD-inspired preoccupation with \"nostalgia for the innocent vision of a child\". The Mellotron parts on \"Strawberry Fields Forever\" remain the most celebrated example of the instrument on a pop or rock recording. According to Simonelli, the two songs heralded the Beatles' brand of Romanticism as a central tenet of psychedelic rock.\nJefferson Airplane's \"Surrealistic Pillow\" (February 1967) was one of the first albums to come out of San Francisco that sold well enough to bring national attention to the city's music scene. The LP tracks \"White Rabbit\" and \"Somebody to Love\" subsequently became top 10 hits in the US.\nThe Hollies psychedelic B-side \"All the World Is Love\" (February 1967) was released as the flipside to the hit single \"On a Carousel\".\nPink Floyd's \"Arnold Layne\" (March 1967) and \"See Emily Play\" (June 1967), both written by Syd Barrett, helped set the pattern for pop-psychedelia in the UK. There, \"underground\" venues like the UFO Club, Middle Earth Club, The Roundhouse, the Country Club and the Art Lab drew capacity audiences with psychedelic rock and ground-breaking liquid light shows. A major figure in the development of British psychedelia was the American promoter and record producer Joe Boyd, who moved to London in 1966. He co-founded venues including the UFO Club, produced Pink Floyd's \"Arnold Layne\", and went on to manage folk and folk rock acts including Nick Drake, the Incredible String Band and Fairport Convention.\nPsychedelic rock's popularity accelerated following the release of the Beatles' album \"Sgt. Pepper's Lonely Hearts Club Band\" (May 1967) and the staging of the Monterey Pop Festival in June. \"Sgt. Pepper\" was the first commercially successful work that critics recognised as a landmark aspect of psychedelia, and the Beatles' mass appeal meant that the record was played virtually everywhere. The album was highly influential on bands in the US psychedelic rock scene and its elevation of the LP format benefited the San Francisco bands. Among many changes brought about by its success, artists sought to imitate its psychedelic effects and devoted more time to creating their albums; the counterculture was scrutinised by musicians; and acts adopted its non-conformist sentiments.\nThe 1967 Summer of Love saw a huge number of young people from across America and the world travel to Haight-Ashbury, boosting the area's population from 15,000 to around 100,000. It was prefaced by the Human Be-In event in January and reached its peak at the Monterey Pop Festival in June, the latter helping to make major American stars of Janis Joplin, lead singer of Big Brother and the Holding Company, Jimi Hendrix, and the Who. Several established British acts joined the psychedelic revolution, including Eric Burdon (previously of the Animals) and the Who, whose \"The Who Sell Out\" (December 1967) included the psychedelic-influenced \"I Can See for Miles\" and \"Armenia City in the Sky\". Other major British Invasion acts who absorbed psychedelia in 1967 include the Hollies with the album \"Butterfly\", and The Rolling Stones album \"Their Satanic Majesties Request\". The Incredible String Band's \"The 5000 Spirits or the Layers of the Onion\" (July 1967) developed their folk music into a pastoral form of psychedelia.\nMany famous established recording artists from the early rock era also fell under psychedelia and recorded psychedelic-inspired tracks, including Del Shannon's \"Color Flashing Hair\", Bobby Vee's \"I May Be Gone\", The Four Seasons' \"Watch the Flowers Grow\", Roy Orbison's \"Southbound Jericho Parkway\" and The Everly Brothers' \"Mary Jane\".\nAccording to author Edward Macan, there ultimately existed three distinct branches of British psychedelic music. The first, dominated by Cream, the Yardbirds and Hendrix, was founded on a heavy, electric adaptation of the blues played by the Rolling Stones, adding elements such as the Who's power chord style and feedback. The second, considerably more complex form drew strongly from jazz sources and was typified by Traffic, Colosseum, If, and Canterbury scene bands such as Soft Machine and Caravan. The third branch, represented by the Moody Blues, Pink Floyd, Procol Harum and the Nice, was influenced by the later music of the Beatles. Several of the post-\"Sgt. Pepper\" English psychedelic groups developed the Beatles' classical influences further than either the Beatles or contemporaneous West Coast psychedelic bands. Among such groups, the Pretty Things abandoned their R&amp;B roots to create \"S.F. Sorrow\" (December 1968), one of the earliest examples of a rock opera.\nInternational variants.\nThe US and UK were the major centres of psychedelic music, but in the late 1960s scenes developed across the world, including continental Europe, Australasia, Asia and south and Central America. In the later 1960s psychedelic scenes developed in a large number of countries in continental Europe, including the Netherlands with bands like The Outsiders, Denmark, where it was pioneered by Steppeulvene, Yugoslavia, with bands like Kameleoni, Dogovor iz 1804., Pop Ma\u0161ina and Igra Staklenih Perli, and Germany, where musicians fused music of psychedelia and the electronic avant-garde. 1968 saw the first major German rock festival, the Internationale Essener Songtage in Essen, and the foundation of the Zodiak Free Arts Lab in Berlin by Hans-Joachim Roedelius, and Conrad Schnitzler, which helped bands like Tangerine Dream and Amon D\u00fc\u00fcl achieve cult status.\nA thriving psychedelic music scene in Cambodia, influenced by psychedelic rock and soul broadcast by US forces radio in Vietnam, was pioneered by artists such as Sinn Sisamouth and Ros Serey Sothea. In South Korea, Shin Jung-Hyeon, often considered the godfather of Korean rock, played psychedelic-influenced music for the American soldiers stationed in the country. Following Shin Jung-Hyeon, the band San Ul Lim (Mountain Echo) often combined psychedelic rock with a more folk sound. In Turkey, Anatolian rock artist Erkin Koray blended classic Turkish music and Middle Eastern themes into his psychedelic-driven rock, helping to found the Turkish rock scene with artists such as Cem Karaca, Mogollar, Bar\u0131\u015f Man\u00e7o and Erkin Koray. In Brazil, the Tropicalia movement merged Brazilian and African rhythms with psychedelic rock. Musicians who were part of the movement include Caetano Veloso, Gilberto Gil, Os Mutantes, Gal Costa, Tom Z\u00e9, and the poet/lyricist Torquato Neto, all of whom participated in the 1968 album \"\", which served as a musical manifesto.\n1969\u201371: Decline.\nBy the end of the 1960s, psychedelic rock was in retreat. Psychedelic trends climaxed in the 1969 Woodstock Festival, which saw performances by most of the major psychedelic acts, including Jimi Hendrix, Jefferson Airplane and the Grateful Dead. LSD had been made illegal in the United Kingdom in September 1966 and in California in October; by 1967, it was outlawed throughout the United States. In 1969, the murders of Sharon Tate and Leno and Rosemary LaBianca by Charles Manson and his cult of followers, claiming to have been inspired by The Beatles' songs such as \"Helter Skelter\", has been seen as contributing to an anti-hippie backlash. At the end of the same year, the Altamont Free Concert in California, headlined by the Rolling Stones, became notorious for the fatal stabbing of black teenager Meredith Hunter by Hells Angels security guards.\nGeorge Clinton's ensembles Funkadelic and Parliament and their various spin-offs took psychedelia and funk to create their own unique style, producing over forty singles, including three in the US top ten, and three platinum albums.\nBrian Wilson of the Beach Boys, Brian Jones of the Rolling Stones, Peter Green and Danny Kirwan of Fleetwood Mac, Skip Spence of Jefferson Airplane and Moby Grape, and Syd Barrett of Pink Floyd suffered permanent brain damage from the use of hallucinogens, with their departures helping to shift the focus of the respective bands of which they had been leading figures. Some groups, such as the Beatles, the Jimi Hendrix Experience and Cream, broke up. Hendrix died in London in September 1970, shortly after recording \"Band of Gypsys\" (1970), Janis Joplin died of a heroin overdose in October 1970 and they were closely followed by Jim Morrison of the Doors, who died in Paris in July 1971. By this point, many surviving acts had moved away from psychedelia into either more back-to-basics \"roots rock\", traditional-based, pastoral or whimsical folk, the wider experimentation of progressive rock, or riff-based heavy rock. \nRecord executive Mike Curb was instrumental in having musicians who were promoting drug use dropped from or forced out of MGM Records, where Curb was employed in 1970, replacing them with acts not known for drug use but were known for their conservative appeal, most prominently the Osmonds.\nRevivals and successors.\nPsychedelic soul.\nFollowing the lead of Hendrix in rock, psychedelia influenced African American musicians, particularly the stars of the Motown label. This psychedelic soul was influenced by the civil rights movement, giving it a darker and more political edge than much psychedelic rock. Building on the funk sound of James Brown, it was pioneered from about 1968 by Sly and the Family Stone and The Temptations. Acts that followed them into this territory included Edwin Starr and the Undisputed Truth. George Clinton's interdependent Funkadelic and Parliament ensembles and their various spin-offs took the genre to its most extreme lengths, making funk almost a religion in the 1970s, producing over forty singles, including three in the US top ten, and three platinum albums.\nWhile psychedelic rock wavered at the end of the 1960s, psychedelic soul continued into the 1970s, peaking in popularity in the early years of the decade, and only disappearing in the late 1970s as tastes changed. Songwriter Norman Whitfield wrote psychedelic soul songs for The Temptations and Marvin Gaye.\nProg, heavy metal, and krautrock.\nMany of the British musicians and bands that had embraced psychedelia went on to create progressive rock in the 1970s, including Pink Floyd, Soft Machine and members of Yes. The Moody Blues album \"In Search of the Lost Chord\" (1968), which is steeped in psychedelia, including prominent use of Indian instruments, is noted as an early predecessor to and influence on the emerging progressive movement. King Crimson's album \"In the Court of the Crimson King\" (1969) has been seen as an important link between psychedelia and progressive rock. While bands such as Hawkwind maintained an explicitly psychedelic course into the 1970s, most dropped the psychedelic elements in favour of wider experimentation. The incorporation of jazz into the music of bands like Soft Machine and Can also contributed to the development of the jazz rock of bands like Colosseum. As they moved away from their psychedelic roots and placed increasing emphasis on electronic experimentation, German bands like Kraftwerk, Tangerine Dream, Can, Neu! and Faust developed a distinctive brand of electronic rock, known as kosmische musik, or in the British press as \"Kraut rock\". The adoption of electronic synthesisers, pioneered by Popol Vuh from 1970, together with the work of figures like Brian Eno (for a time the synth player with Roxy Music), would be a major influence on subsequent electronic rock.\nPsychedelic rock, with its distorted guitar sound, extended solos and adventurous compositions, has been seen as an important bridge between blues-oriented rock and later heavy metal. American bands whose loud, repetitive psychedelic rock emerged as early heavy metal included the Amboy Dukes and Steppenwolf. From England, two former guitarists with the Yardbirds, Jeff Beck and Jimmy Page, moved on to form key acts in the genre, The Jeff Beck Group and Led Zeppelin respectively. Other major pioneers of the genre had begun as blues-based psychedelic bands, including Black Sabbath, Deep Purple, Judas Priest and UFO. Psychedelic music also contributed to the origins of glam rock, with Marc Bolan changing his psychedelic folk duo into rock band T. Rex and becoming the first glam rock star from 1970. From 1971 David Bowie moved on from his early psychedelic work to develop his Ziggy Stardust persona, incorporating elements of professional make up, mime and performance into his act.\nThe jam band movement, which began in the late 1980s, was influenced by the Grateful Dead's improvisational and psychedelic musical style. The Vermont band Phish developed a sizable and devoted fan following during the 1990s, and were described as \"heirs\" to the Grateful Dead after the death of Jerry Garcia in 1995.\nEmerging in the 1990s, stoner rock combined elements of psychedelic rock and doom metal. Typically using a slow-to-mid tempo and featuring low-tuned guitars in a bass-heavy sound, with melodic vocals, and 'retro' production, it was pioneered by the Californian bands Kyuss and Sleep. Modern festivals focusing on psychedelic music include Austin Psych Fest in Texas, founded in 2008, Liverpool Psych Fest, and Desert Daze in Southern California.\nNeo-psychedelia.\nThere were occasional mainstream acts that dabbled in neo-psychedelia, a style of music which emerged in late 1970s post-punk circles. Although it has mainly been an influence on alternative and indie rock bands, neo-psychedelia sometimes updated the approach of 1960s psychedelic rock. Neo-psychedelia may include forays into psychedelic pop, jangly guitar rock, heavily distorted free-form jams, or recording experiments. Some of the scene's bands, including the Soft Boys, the Teardrop Explodes, Wah!, Echo &amp; the Bunnymen, became major figures of neo-psychedelia. In the US in the early 1980s it was joined by the Paisley Underground movement, based in Los Angeles and fronted by acts such as Dream Syndicate, the Bangles and Rain Parade. \nIn the late '80s in the UK the genre of Madchester emerged in the Manchester area, in which artists merged alternative rock with acid house and dance culture as well as other sources, including psychedelic music and 1960s pop. The label was popularised by the British music press in the early 1990s. Erchard talks about it as being part of a \"thread of 80s psychedelic rock\" and lists as main bands in it the Stone Roses, Happy Mondays and Inspiral Carpets. The rave-influenced scene is widely seen as heavily influenced by drugs, especially ecstasy (MDMA), and it is seen by Erchard as central to a wider phenomenon of what he calls a \"rock rave crossover\" in the late '80s and early '90s UK indie scene, which also included the \"Screamadelica\" album by Scottish band Primal Scream.\nIn the 1990s, Elephant 6 collective bands such as The Olivia Tremor Control and The Apples in Stereo mixed the genre with lo-fi influences.\nLater according to Treblezine's Jeff Telrich: \"Primal Scream made [neo-psychedelia] dancefloor ready. The Flaming Lips and Spiritualized took it to orchestral realms. And Animal Collective\u2014well, they kinda did their own thing.\"\nNotes, references, sources.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;"}
{"id": "23550", "revid": "770058", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23550", "title": "Philips", "text": "Dutch health technology company\nKoninklijke Philips N.V. (lit.\u2009'Royal Philips'), simply branded Philips, is a Dutch multinational health technology and former consumer electronics company that was founded in Eindhoven in 1891. Since 1997, its world headquarters have been situated in Amsterdam, though the Benelux headquarters is still in Eindhoven. The company gained its royal honorary title in 1998.\nPhilips was founded by Gerard Philips and his father Frederik, with their first products being light bulbs. Through the 20th century, it grew into one of the world's largest electronics conglomerates, with global market dominance in products ranging from kitchen appliances and electric shavers to light bulbs, televisions, cassettes, and compact discs (both of which were invented by Philips). At one point, it played a dominant role in the entertainment industry (through PolyGram). However in the 2010s the company began downsizing, selling its TV manufacturing (becoming TP Vision), lighting (becoming Signify), and home appliance units (becoming Versuni), eventually becoming a healthcare-focused company.\nAs of 2024, Philips is organized into three main divisions: Diagnosis and Treatment (manufacturing healthcare products such as MRI, CT and ultrasound scanners), Connected Care (manufacturing patient monitors, as well as respiratory care products under the Respironics brand), and Personal Health (manufacturing electric shavers, Sonicare electric toothbrushes and Avent childcare products).\nPhilips has a primary listing on the Euronext Amsterdam stock exchange and is a component of the Euro Stoxx 50 stock market index. It has a secondary listing on the New York Stock Exchange. Acquisitions included Signetics and Magnavox. It also founded a multidisciplinary sports club called PSV Eindhoven in 1913.&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHistory.\nThe Philips Company was founded in 1891, by Dutch entrepreneur Gerard Philips and his father Frederik Philips. Frederik, a banker based in Zaltbommel, financed the purchase and setup of an empty factory building in Eindhoven, where the company started the production of carbon-filament lamps and other electro-technical products in 1892. This first factory has since been adapted and is used as a museum.\nIn 1895, after a difficult first few years and near-bankruptcy, the Philipses brought in Anton, Gerard's younger brother by sixteen years. Though he had earned a degree in engineering, Anton started work as a sales representative; soon, however, he began to contribute many important business ideas. With Anton's arrival, the family business began to expand rapidly, resulting in the founding of Philips Metaalgloeilampfabriek N.V. (Philips Metal Filament Lamp Factory Ltd.) in Eindhoven in 1908, followed in 1912 by the foundation of Philips Gloeilampenfabrieken N.V. (Philips Lightbulb Factories Ltd.). After Gerard and Anton Philips changed their family business by founding the Philips corporation, they laid the foundations for the later multinational company.\nIn the 1920s, the company started to manufacture other products, such as vacuum tubes. For this purpose the Van Arkel\u2013de Boer process was invented.\nIn 1924, Philips joined with German lamp trust Osram to form the Phoebus cartel.\nRadio.\nOn 11 March 1927, Philips went on the air, inaugurating the shortwave radio station PCJJ (later PCJ) which was joined in 1929 by a sister station (Philips Omroep Holland-Indi\u00eb, later PHI). PHOHI broadcast in Dutch to the Dutch East Indies (now Indonesia). Later PHI broadcast in English and other languages to the Eastern hemisphere, while PCJJ broadcast in English, Spanish and German to the rest of the world.\nThe international program Sundays commenced in 1928, with host Eddie Startz hosting the \"Happy Station\" show, which became the world's longest-running shortwave program. \nIn the early 1930s, Philips introduced the \"Chapel\", a radio with a built-in loudspeaker.\nBroadcasts from the Netherlands were interrupted by the German invasion in May 1940. The Germans commandeered the transmitters in Huizen to use for pro-Nazi broadcasts, some originating from Germany, others concerts from Dutch broadcasters under German control.\nPhilips Radio was absorbed shortly after liberation when its two shortwave stations were nationalized in 1947 and renamed Radio Netherlands Worldwide, the Dutch International Service. Some PCJ programs, such as \"Happy Station\", continued on the new station.\nStirling engine.\nPhilips was instrumental in the revival of the Stirling engine when, in the early 1930s, company management decided that offering a low-power portable generator would assist in expanding sales of its radios into parts of the world where electricity was unavailable or where there was an unreliable supply of batteries. Engineers at the company's research lab carried out a systematic comparison of various power sources and determined that the almost forgotten Stirling engine would be most suitable, citing its quiet operation (both audibly and in terms of radio interference) and ability to run on a variety of heat sources (common lamp oil\u00a0\u2013 \"cheap and available everywhere\"\u00a0\u2013 was favored). They were also aware that, unlike steam and internal combustion engines, virtually no serious development work had been carried out on the Stirling engine for many years. Philips asserted that modern materials and know-how would enable great improvements.\nEncouraged by their first experimental engine, which produced 16\u00a0W of shaft power from a bore and stroke of 30 mm \u00d7 25 mm, various development models were produced in a program which continued throughout World War II. By the late 1940s, the \"Type 10\" was ready to be handed over to Philips' subsidiary Johan de Witt in Dordrecht to be produced and incorporated into a generator set as originally planned. The result, rated at 180/200\u00a0W electrical output from a bore and stroke of 55 mm \u00d7 27 mm, was designated MP1002CA (known as the \"Bungalow set\"). Production of an initial batch of 250 began in 1951, but it became clear that they could not be made at a competitive price, besides the advent of transistor radios with their much lower power requirements meant that the original rationale for the set was disappearing. Approximately 150 of these sets were eventually produced.\nIn parallel with the generator set, Philips developed experimental Stirling engines for a wide variety of applications and continued to work in the field until the late 1970s, though the only commercial success was the \"reversed Stirling engine\" cryocooler. The company filed a large number of patents and amassed a wealth of information, which they later licensed to other companies.\nShavers.\nThe first Philips shaver was introduced in 1939, and was simply called Philishave. In the US, it was called Norelco. The Philishave remains part of the Philips product line-up to the present.\nWorld War II.\nOn 9 May 1940, the Philips directors learned that the German invasion of the Netherlands was to take place the following day. Being prepared, Anton Philips and his son-in-law Frans Otten, as well as other Philips family members, fled to the United States taking a large amount of the company capital with them. Operating from the US as the North American Philips Company, they managed to run the company throughout the war. At the same time, the company was moved (on paper) to the Netherlands Antilles to keep it out of German hands.\nOn 6 December 1942, the British No. 2 Group RAF undertook Operation Oyster, which heavily damaged the Philips Radio factory in Eindhoven with few casualties among the Dutch workers and civilians. The Philips location in Eindhoven was bombed again by the RAF on 30 March 1943.\nFrits Philips, the son of Anton, was the only Philips family member to stay in the Netherlands. He saved the lives of 382 Jews by convincing the Nazis that they were indispensable for the production process at Philips. In 1943, he was held at the Vught internment camp for political prisoners for several months because a strike at his factory reduced production. For his actions in saving the hundreds of Jews, he was recognized by Yad Vashem in 1995 as a \"Righteous Among the Nations\".\nPost-WWII growth.\nAfter the war, the company was moved back to the Netherlands, with their headquarters in Eindhoven.\nIn 1949, the company began selling television sets. In 1950, it formed Philips Records, which eventually formed part of PolyGram in 1962. Philips introduced the compact cassette audio tape format in 1963, and it was wildly successful. Cassettes were initially used for dictation machines for office typing stenographers and by professional journalists. As their sound quality improved, cassettes would also be used to record sound, and became the second mass media alongside vinyl records used to sell recorded music.\nPhilips introduced the first combination portable radio and cassette recorder, which was marketed as the \"radio recorder\", now better known as the boombox. Later, the cassette was used in telephone answering machines, including a special form of cassette where the tape was wound on an endless loop. The C-cassette was used as the first mass storage device for early personal computers in the 1970s and 1980s. Philips reduced the cassette size for professional needs with the mini-cassette, although it was not as successful as the Olympus microcassette. The mini-cassette became the predominant dictation medium up to the advent of fully digital dictation machines. Philips continued manufacturing computer products through the early 1990s as Philips Computers.\nIn 1972, Philips launched the world's first home videocassette recorder, in the UK, the N1500. Its relatively bulky video cassettes could record 30 minutes or 45 minutes. Later one-hour tapes were also offered. As the competition came from Sony's Betamax and the VHS group of manufacturers, Philips introduced the N1700 system which allowed double-length recording. For the first time, a 2-hour movie could fit onto one video cassette. In 1977, the company unveiled a special promotional film for this system in the UK, featuring comedy writer and presenter Denis Norden. The concept was quickly copied by the Japanese makers, whose tapes were significantly cheaper. Philips made one last attempt at a new standard for video recorders with the Video 2000 system, with tapes that could be used on both sides and had 8 hours of total recording time. As Philips only sold its systems on the PAL standard and in Europe, and the Japanese makers sold globally, the scale advantages of the Japanese proved insurmountable and Philips withdrew the V2000 system and joined the VHS Coalition.\nPhilips had developed a LaserDisc early on for selling movies, but delayed its commercial launch for fear of cannibalizing its video recorder sales. Later Philips joined with MCA to launch the first commercial LaserDisc standard and players. In 1982, Philips teamed with Sony to launch the compact disc; this format evolved into the CD-R, CD-RW, DVD and later Blu-ray, which Philips launched with Sony in 1997 and 2006 respectively.\nIn 1984, the Dutch Philips Group bought out nearly a one-third share and took over the management of the German company Grundig. Also in 1984, Philips split off its activities on the field of photolithographic integrated circuit production equipment, the so-called wafer steppers, into a joint venture with ASM International, located in Veldhoven under the name ASML. Over the years, this new company has evolved into the world's leading manufacturer of chip production machines at the expense of competitors like Nikon and Canon. \n1980s\u20132000s: Decline.\nPhilips partnered with Sony again later to develop a new \"interactive\" disc format called CD-i, described by them as a \"new way of interacting with a television set\". Philips created the majority of CD-i compatible players. After low sales, Philips repositioned the format as a video game console, but it was soon discontinued after being heavily criticized amongst the gaming community.\nIn the 1980s, Philips's profit margin dropped below 1 percent, and in 1990 the company lost more than US$2 billion (biggest corporate loss in Dutch history). Troubles for the company continued into the 1990s as its status as a leading electronics company was swiftly lost. In 1985, Philips was the largest founding investor in TSMC which was established as a joint venture between Philips, the Taiwan government and other private investors.\nIn 1990, the newly appointed CEO, Jan Timmer, decided to sell off all businesses that dealt with computers which meant the end of Philips Data Systems as well as other computer activities. In 1991, the businesses were acquired by Digital Equipment Corporation. In 1991, the company's name was changed from N.V. Philips Gloeilampenfabrieken to Philips Electronics N.V. At the same time, North American Philips was formally dissolved, and a new corporate division was formed in the US with the name Philips Electronics North America Corp.\nIn 1997, the company officers decided to move the headquarters from Eindhoven to Amsterdam along with the corporate name change to Koninklijke Philips Electronics N.V., the latter of which was finalized on 16 March 1998. In 1997, Philips introduced at CES and CeBIT the first large (42-inch) commercially available flat-panel TV, using Fujitsu plasma displays. In 1998, looking to spur innovation, Philips created an Emerging Businesses group for its Semiconductors unit, based in Silicon Valley. The group was designed to be an incubator where promising technologies and products could be developed.\nThe move of the headquarters to Amsterdam was completed in 2001. Initially, the company was housed in the Rembrandt Tower. In 2002, it moved to the Breitner Tower. Philips Lighting, Philips Research, Philips Semiconductors (spun off as NXP in September 2006), and Philips Design, are still based in Eindhoven. Philips Healthcare is headquartered in both Best, Netherlands (near Eindhoven) and Andover, Massachusetts, (north of Boston).\nIn 2000, Philips bought Optiva Corporation, the maker of Sonicare electric toothbrushes. The company was renamed Philips Oral Healthcare and made a subsidiary of Philips DAP. In 2001, Philips acquired Agilent Technologies' Healthcare Solutions Group (HSG) for EUR 2 billion. Philips created a computer monitors joint venture with LG called LG.Philips Displays in 2001. In 2001, after growing the unit's Emerging Businesses group to nearly $1 billion in revenue, Scott A. McGregor was named the new president and CEO of Philips Semiconductors. McGregor's appointment completed the company's shift to having dedicated CEOs for all five of the company's product divisions, which would in turn leave the Board of Management to concentrate on issues confronting the Philips Group as a whole. In February 2001 Philips sold its remaining interest in battery manufacturing to its then partner Matsushita (which itself became Panasonic in 2008).\nIn 2004, Philips abandoned the slogan \"Let's make things better\" in favor of a new one: \"Sense and Simplicity\". In December 2005, Philips announced its intention to sell or demerge its semiconductor division. On 1 September 2006, it was announced in Berlin that the name of the new company formed by the division would be NXP Semiconductors. On 2 August 2006, Philips completed an agreement to sell a controlling 80.1% stake in NXP Semiconductors to a consortium of private equity investors consisting of Kohlberg Kravis Roberts &amp; Co. (KKR), Silver Lake Partners and AlpInvest Partners. On 21 August 2006, Bain Capital and Apax Partners announced that they had signed definitive commitments to join the acquiring consortium, a process which was completed on 1 October 2006.\nIn 2006, Philips bought out the company Lifeline Systems headquartered in Framingham, Massachusetts, in a deal valued at $750 million, its biggest move yet to expand its consumer-health business (M). In August 2007, Philips acquired the company Ximis, Inc. headquartered in El Paso, Texas, for their Medical Informatics Division. In October 2007, it purchased a Moore Microprocessor Patent (MPP) Portfolio license from The TPL Group.\nOn 21 December 2007, Philips and Respironics, Inc. announced a definitive agreement pursuant to which Philips acquired all of the outstanding shares of Respironics for US$66 per share, or a total purchase price of approximately \u20ac3.6\u00a0 billion (US$5.1\u00a0billion) in cash. On 21 February 2008, Philips completed the acquisition of VISICU in Baltimore, Maryland, through the merger of its indirect wholly owned subsidiary into VISICU. As a result of that merger, VISICU has become an indirect wholly owned subsidiary of Philips. VISICU was the creator of the eICU concept of the use of Telemedicine from a centralized facility to monitor and care for ICU patients.\nThe Philips physics laboratory was scaled down in the early 21st century, as the company ceased trying to be innovative in consumer electronics through fundamental research.\nIn 2010, Philips introduced the Airfryer brand of convection oven at the IFA Berlin consumer electronics fair. Philips announced the sale of its Assembl\u00e9on subsidiary which made pick-and-place machines for the electronics industry.\nPhilips made several acquisitions during 2011, announcing on 5 January 2011 that it had acquired Optimum Lighting, a manufacturer of LED based luminaires. In January 2011, Philips agreed to acquire the assets of Preethi, a leading India-based kitchen appliances company. On 27 June 2011, Philips acquired Sectra Mamea AB, the mammography division of Sectra AB.\nBecause net profit slumped 85 percent in Q3 2011, Philips announced a cut of 4,500 jobs to match part of an \u20ac800 million ($1.1 billion) cost-cutting scheme to boost profits and meet its financial target. In 2011, the company posted a loss of \u20ac1.3 billion, but earned a net profit in Q1 and Q2 2012, however the management wanted \u20ac1.1 billion cost-cutting which was an increase from \u20ac800 million and may cut another 2,200 jobs until end of 2014.\nIn March 2012, Philips announced its intention to sell, or demerge its television manufacturing operations to TPV Technology.\n2011\u2013: Focus on healthcare.\nAfter two decades in decline, Philips went through a major restructuring, shifting its focus from electronics to healthcare. Particularly from 2011 when a new CEO was appointed, Frans van Houten. The new health and medical strategy have helped Philips to thrive again in the 2010s. On 5 December 2012, the antitrust regulators of the European Union fined Philips and several other major companies for fixing prices of TV cathode-ray tubes in two cartels lasting nearly a decade.\nOn 29 January 2013, it was announced that Philips had agreed to sell its audio and video operations to the Japan-based Funai Electric for \u20ac150 million, with the audio business planned to transfer to Funai in the latter half of 2013, and the video business in 2017. As part of the transaction, Funai was to pay a regular licensing fee to Philips for the use of the Philips brand. The purchase agreement was terminated by Philips in October because of breach of contract and the consumer electronics operations remained under Philips. Philips said it would seek damages for breach of contract in the US$200-million sale. In April 2016, the International Court of Arbitration ruled in favour of Philips, awarding compensation of \u20ac135 million in the process.\nIn April 2013, Philips announced a collaboration with Paradox Engineering for the realization and implementation of a \"pilot project\" on network-connected street-lighting management solutions. This project was endorsed by the San Francisco Public Utilities Commission (SFPUC).\nIn 2013, Philips removed the word \"Electronics\" from its name \u2013 becoming Royal Philips N.V. On 13 November 2013, Philips unveiled its new brand line \"Innovation and You\" and a new design of its shield mark. The new brand positioning is cited by Philips to signify company's evolution and emphasize that innovation is only meaningful if it is based on an understanding of people's needs and desires. On 28 April 2014, Philips agreed to sell their Woox Innovations subsidiary (consumer electronics) to Gibson Brands for $US135 million. On 23 September 2014, Philips announced a plan to split the company into two, separating the lighting business from the healthcare and consumer lifestyle divisions. It moved to complete this in March 2015 to an investment group for $3.3 billion.\nIn February 2015, Philips acquired Volcano Corporation to strengthen its position in non-invasive surgery and imaging. In June 2016, Philips spun off its lighting division to focus on the healthcare division. In June 2017, Philips announced it would acquire US-based Spectranetics Corp, a manufacturer of devices to treat heart disease, for \u20ac1.9 billion (\u00a31.68 billion) expanding its image-guided therapy business.\nIn May 2016, Philips' lighting division Philips Lighting went through a spin-off process, and became an independent public company named Philips Lighting N.V. In 2017, Philips launched Philips Ventures, with a health technology venture fund as its main focus. Philips Ventures invested in companies including Mytonomy (2017) and DEARhealth (2019). On 18 July 2017, Philips announced its acquisition of TomTec Imaging Systems GmbH.\nIn 2018, the independent Philips Lighting N.V. was renamed Signify N.V. However, it continues to produce and market Philips-branded products such as Philips Hue color-changing LED light bulbs.\nIn 2021, Philips Domestic Appliances was purchased by Hillhouse Capital for $4.4 billion. The company, now known as Versuni, continues to sell small appliances under the Philips brand under license.\nIn 2022, Philips announced that Frans Van Houten, who had served as CEO for 12 years would be stepping down, after a key product recall cut the company's market value by more than half over the previous year. He was to be replaced by Philips's EVP and Chief Business Leader of Connected Care, Roy Jakobs, effective 15 October 2022. In 2023, the company announced that it would be cutting 6,000 jobs from the company worldwide over the next two years after reporting 1.6 billion euros in losses during the 2022 financial year. The cuts came in addition to a 4,000-person staff reduction announced in October 2022.\nIn August 2023, Exor N.V., the holding company owned by the Agnelli family, took a 15% stake in Philips. The transaction was worth roughly \u20ac2.6 billion. On 17 September 2024, Philips announced the introduction of the 160\u00a0cm FDA approved version of its unique LumiGuide endovascular navigation wire. It also marked the 1000th patient treated with its breakthrough 3D device guidance technology.\nCorporate affairs.\nCEOs.\nPast and present CEOs:\nCEOs lighting:\nCFOs.\nPast and present CFOs (chief financial officer)\nExecutive committee.\nSource:\nAcquisitions.\nCompanies acquired by Philips through the years include ADAC Laboratories, Agilent Healthcare Solutions Group, Amperex, ATL Ultrasound, EKCO, Lifeline Systems, Magnavox, Marconi Medical Systems, Mullard, Optiva, Preethi, Pye, Respironics, Inc., Sectra Mamea AB, Signetics, Teletrol, VISICU, Volcano, VLSI, Ximis, portions of Westinghouse and the consumer electronics operations of Philco and Sylvania. Philips abandoned the Sylvania trademark, which is now owned by Havells Sylvania, except in Australia, Canada, Mexico, New Zealand, and Puerto Rico and the rest of the US, where it is owned by Osram. Formed in November 1999 as an equal joint venture between Philips and Agilent Technologies, the light-emitting diode manufacturer Lumileds became a subsidiary of Philips Lighting in August 2005 and a fully owned subsidiary in December 2006. An 80.1 percent stake in Lumileds was sold to Apollo Global Management in 2017.\nOn 18 July 2017, Philips announced its acquisition of TomTec Imaging Systems GmbH On 19 September 2018, Philips reported that it had acquired Canada-based Blue Willow Systems, a developer of a cloud-based senior living community resident safety platform.\nOn 7 March 2019, Philips announced that it was acquiring the Healthcare Information Systems business of Carestream Health Inc., a US-based provider of medical imaging and healthcare IT solutions for hospitals, imaging centers, and specialty medical clinics.\nOn 18 July 2019, Philips announced that it has expanded its patient management solutions in the US with the acquisition of Boston-based start-up company Medumo. On 27 August 2020, Philips announced the acquisition of Intact Vascular, Inc., a US-based developer of medical devices for minimally invasive peripheral vascular procedures. On 18 December 2020, Philips and BioTelemetry, Inc., a leading US-based provider of remote cardiac diagnostics and monitoring, announced that they had entered into a definitive merger agreement.\nOn 19 January 2021, Philips announced the acquisition of Capsule Technologies, Inc., a provider of medical device integration and data technologies for hospitals and healthcare organizations. On 9 November 2021, Philips announced the acquisition of Cardiologs, an AI-powered cardiac diagnostic technology developer, to expand its cardiac diagnostics and monitoring portfolio.\nOperations.\nPhilips is registered in the Netherlands as a \"naamloze vennootschap\" (public corporation) and has its global headquarters in Amsterdam. At the end of 2013, Philips had 111 manufacturing facilities, 59 R&amp;D facilities across 26 countries, and sales and service operations in around 100 countries.\nPhilips is organized into three main divisions: Philips Consumer Lifestyle (formerly Philips Consumer Electronics and Philips Domestic Appliances and Personal Care), Philips Healthcare (formerly Philips Medical Systems), and Philips Lighting (former). Philips achieved total revenues of \u20ac22.579billion in 2011, of which \u20ac8.852billion were generated by Philips Healthcare, \u20ac7.638billion by Philips Lighting, \u20ac5.823billion by Philips Consumer Lifestyle, and \u20ac266million from group activities. At the end of 2011, Philips had a total of 121,888 employees, of whom around 44% were employed in Philips Lighting, 31% in Philips Healthcare and 15% in Philips Consumer Lifestyle. The lighting division was spun out as a new company called Signify, which uses the Philips brand under license.\nPhilips invested a total of \u20ac1.61billion in research and development in 2011, equivalent to 7.10% of sales. Philips Intellectual Property and Standards is the group-wide division responsible for licensing, trademark protection and patenting. Philips holds around 54,000 patent rights, 39,000 trademarks, 70,000 design rights and 4,400 domain name registrations. In the 2024 review of WIPO's annual World Intellectual Property Indicators Philips ranked 7th in the world for its 294 industrial design registrations being published under the Hague System during 2023.\nAsia.\nThailand.\nPhilips Thailand was established in 1952. It is a subsidiary that produces healthcare, lifestyle, and lighting products. Philips started manufacturing in Thailand in 1960 with an incandescent lamp factory. Philips has diversified its production facilities to include a fluorescent lamp factory and a luminaries factory, serving Thai and worldwide markets.\nHong Kong.\nPhilips Hong Kong began operations in 1948. Philips Hong Kong houses the global headquarters of Philips' Audio Business Unit. It also house Philips' Asia Pacific regional office and headquarters for its Design Division, Domestic Appliances &amp; Personal Care Products Division, Lighting Products Division and Medical System Products Division.\nIn 1974, Philips opened a lamp factory in Hong Kong. This has a capacity of 200\u00a0million pieces a year and is certified with ISO 9001:2000 and ISO 14001. Its product portfolio includes prefocus, lensend and E10 miniature light bulbs.\nChina.\nPhilips established its first 50/50 joint venture company Beijing Philips Audio/Video Corporation (\u5317\u4eac\u98de\u5229\u6d66\u6709\u9650\u516c\u53f8) with Beijing Radio Factory (\u5317\u4eac\u65e0\u7ebf\u7535\u5382) to manufacture audio consumer electronic products in Beijing in 1987. In 1990, a factory was set up in Zhuhai, Guangdong, mainly manufactures Philishaves and healthcare products. In early 2008, Philips Lighting, a division of Royal Philips Electronics, opened a small engineering center in Shanghai to adapt the company's products to vehicles in Asia. Today, Philips has 27 WOFE/JVs in China, employing more than 17,500 people. China is its second-largest market.\nIndia.\nPhilips began operations in India in 1930, with the establishment of Philips Electrical Co. (India) Pvt Ltd in Kolkata (then Calcutta) as a sales outlet for imported Philips lamps. In 1938, Philips established its first Indian lamp manufacturing factory in Kolkata. In 1948, Philips began manufacturing radios in Kolkata. In 1959, a second radio factory was established near Pune. This was closed and sold around 2006. In 1957, the company converted into a public limited company, renamed \"Philips India Ltd\". In 1970, a new consumer electronics factory began operations in Pimpri near Pune. Also, a manufacturing facility was started in Chakan, Pune in 2012. In 1996, the Philips Software Centre was established in Bangalore, later renamed the Philips Innovation Campus. In 2008, Philips India entered the water purifier market. In 2014, Philips was ranked 12th among India's most-trusted brands according to the Brand Trust Report, a study conducted by Trust Research Advisory.\nNow Philips India is one of the most diversified health care companies and focuses on imaging, sleep and respiratory care products, ultrasound, monitoring and analytics items, as well as therapeutic care products. In 2020, Philips introduced mobile ICUs in order to support clinicians to meet the rising demand of ICU beds due to the COVID-19 pandemic.\nIsrael.\nPhilips has been active in Israel since 1948 and in 1998, set up a wholly owned subsidiary, Philips Electronics (Israel) Ltd. The company has over 700 employees in Israel and generated sales of over $300\u00a0million in 2007.\nPhilips Medical Systems Technologies Ltd. (Haifa) is a developer and manufacturer of computerized tomography (CT), diagnostic and medical imaging systems. The company was founded in 1969 as Elscint by Elron Electronic Industries and was acquired by Marconi Medical Systems in 1998, which was itself acquired by Philips in 2001. Philips Semiconductors formerly had major operations in Israel; these now form part of NXP Semiconductors.\nOn 1August 2019, Philips acquired Carestream HCIS division from Onex Corporation. As part of the acquisition, Algotec Systems LTD (Carestream HCIS R&amp;D) located in Raanana Israel changed ownership in a share deal. In addition to that, Algotec changed its name to Philips Algotec and is part of Philips HCIS. Philips HCIS is a provider of medical imaging systems.\nPakistan.\nPhilips has been active in Pakistan since 1948 and has a wholly owned subsidiary, Philips Pakistan Limited (Formerly Philips Electrical Industries of Pakistan Limited). The head office is in Karachi with regional sales offices in Lahore and Rawalpindi.\nSingapore.\nPhilips began operations in Singapore in 1951, initially as a local distributor of imported Philips products. Philips later established manufacturing sites at Boon Keng Road and Jurong Industrial Estate in 1968 and 1970 respectively. Since 1972, its regional headquarters has been based in the central HDB town of Toa Payoh, which from the 1990s until the early 2010s consisted of four interconnected buildings housing offices and factory spaces. In 2016, a new Philips APAC HQ building was opened on the site of one of the former 1972 buildings.\nEurope.\nDenmark.\nPhilips Denmark was founded in Copenhagen in 1927, and is now headquartered in Frederiksberg.\nIn 1963, Philips established the Philips TV &amp; Test Equipment laboratory in Amager (moved to Br\u00f8ndby Municipality in 1989) which was where engineers Erik Helmer Nielsen and Finn Hendil (1939\u20132011) created and developed some of Philips' most iconic television test cards, such as the monochrome PM5540 and the colour PM5544 and TVE test cards. In 1998 Philips TV &amp; Test Equipment was spun off as ProTeleVision Technologies A/S and sold to PANTA Electronics B.V. which was owned by a consortium of investors led by Advent International. ProTeleVision Technologies A/S was dissolved in 2001 with products transferring to https:// , DK-Audio A/S (dissolved 2018) and AREPA Test &amp; Calibration.\nFrance.\nPhilips France has its headquarters in Suresnes. The company employs over 3600 people nationwide.\nPhilips Lighting has manufacturing facilities in Chalon-sur-Sa\u00f4ne (fluorescent lamps), Chartres (automotive lighting), Lamotte-Beuvron (architectural lighting by LEDs and professional indoor lighting), Longvic (lamps), Miribel (outdoor lighting), Nevers (professional indoor lighting). All manufacturing in France were sold or discontinued before the Lighting spin-off in 2016.\nGermany.\nPhilips Germany was founded in 1926 in Berlin. Now its headquarters is located in Hamburg. Over 4900 people are employed in Germany.\nGreece.\nPhilips' Greece is headquartered in Chalandri in Attica. As of 2012, Philips has no manufacturing plants in Greece, although previously there were audio, lighting and telecommunications factories.\nItaly.\nPhilips founded its Italian subsidiary in 1923, basing it in Milan where it still operates. After the closure of the company's industrial operations, mainly manufacturing TVs in Monza and conventional light bulbs near Turin, Philips Italia exists for commercial activities only.\nHungary.\nPhilips founded PACH (Philips Assembly Centre Hungary) in 1992, producing televisions and consumer electronics in Sz\u00e9kesfeh\u00e9rv\u00e1r. After TPV entering the Philips TV business, the factory was moved under TP Vision, the new joint-venture company in 2011. Products have been transferred to Poland and China and factory was closed in 2013.\nBy Philips acquiring PLI in 2007, another Hungarian Philips factory emerged in Tam\u00e1si, producing lamps under the name of Philips IPSC Tam\u00e1si, later Philips Lighting. The factory was renamed to Signify in 2017, still producing Philips lighting products.\nPoland.\nPhilips' operations in Poland include: a European financial and accounting centre in \u0141\u00f3d\u017a; Philips Lighting facilities in Bielsko-Bia\u0142a, Pi\u0142a, and K\u0119trzyn; and a Philips Domestic Appliances facility in Bia\u0142ystok.\nPortugal.\nPhilips started business in Portugal in 1927, as \"Philips Portuguesa S.A.R.L.\". Philips Portuguesa S.A. is headquartered in Oeiras near Lisbon. There were three Philips factories in Portugal: the FAPAE lamp factory in Lisbon; the Carnaxide magnetic-core memory factory near Lisbon, where the Philips Service organization was also based; and the Ovar factory in northern Portugal making camera components and remote control devices. The company still operates in Portugal with divisions for commercial lighting, medical systems and domestic appliances.\nSweden.\nPhilips Sweden has two main sites: Kista, Stockholm County, with regional sales, marketing and a customer support organization; and Solna, Stockholm County, with the main office of the mammography division.\nThe company was a major supplier of defence electronics to the Swedish Armed Forces operating under the name Philips Elektronikindustrier AB with its final location in J\u00e4rf\u00e4lla, a suburb of Stockholm. What remains of that division is now part of Saab AB.\nUnited Kingdom.\nPhilips UK has its headquarters in Guildford. The company employs over 2,500 people nationwide.\nIn the past, Philips UK also included:\nNorth America.\nCanada.\nPhilips Canada was founded in 1941 when it acquired Small Electric Motors Limited. It is well known in medical systems for diagnosis and therapy, lighting technologies, shavers, and consumer electronics. The Canadian headquarters are located in Markham, Ontario.\nFor several years, Philips manufactured lighting products in two Canadian factories. The London, Ontario, plant opened in 1971. It produced A19 lamps (including the \"Royale\" long life bulbs), PAR38 lamps and T19 lamps (originally a Westinghouse lamp shape). Philips closed the factory in May 2003. The Trois-Rivi\u00e8res, Quebec, plant was a Westinghouse facility which Philips continued to run it after buying Westinghouse's lamp division in 1983. Philips closed this factory a few years later, in the late 1980s.\nMexico.\nPhilips Mexico Commercial SA de CV is headquartered in Mexico City. This entity was incorporated in FY2016 to sales consumer lifestyle and healthcare portfolios in the market.\nUnited States.\nPhilips' Electronics North American headquarters is in Cambridge, Massachusetts. Philips Lighting has its corporate office in Somerset, New Jersey; with manufacturing plants in Danville, Kentucky; Salina, Kansas; Dallas and Paris, Texas; and distribution centers in Mountain Top, Pennsylvania; El Paso, Texas; Ontario, California; and Memphis, Tennessee. Philips Healthcare is headquartered in Cambridge, Massachusetts, and operates a health-tech hub in Nashville with over 1,000 jobs. The North American sales organization is based in Bothell, Washington. There are also manufacturing facilities in Bothell, Washington; Baltimore, Maryland; Cleveland, Ohio; Foster City, California; Gainesville, Florida; Milpitas, California; and Reedsville, Pennsylvania. Philips Healthcare formerly had a factory in Knoxville, Tennessee. Philips Consumer Lifestyle has its corporate office in Stamford, Connecticut. Philips Lighting has a Color Kinetics office in Burlington, Massachusetts. Philips Research North American headquarters is in Cambridge.\nFrom the early 1940s, Philco was legally able to prevent Philips from using the name \"Philips\" on any products marketed in the United States, because the two names were judged to sound similar enough to cause consumer confusion and potentially lead to claims of trademark infringement. This was made official and legally binding on January 19, 1943, when the court ruled in favor of the plaintiff in the corresponding case of \"Philco Corporation v. Philips Mfg. Co.\", that allowed Philco to prevent Philips from using their name on their products sold in the US. As a result, Philips instead used the name Norelco, an acronym for \"North American Philips [electrical] Company\". Philips continued to use that name for all their U.S. products until 1974, when Philips purchased The Magnavox Company. Philips then relabeled their U.S. consumer electronics products as Magnavox, but retained the Norelco name for their other U.S. products. When Philips bought Philco in 1981, Philips was able to freely use the Philips name for all of their U.S. products, but they chose to retain the Norelco name for personal care appliances, and the Magnavox name for economy-priced consumer electronics.\nBy mid-1980s, the company used different brand names for its products in the United States - Magnavox, Sylvania, Philco, Norelco and even Philips - holding 10% of the American color television market, 9% of the compact-disk player market and 9% of the video cassette recorder market, selling VCRs made by Matsushita. In December 1986, Philips took direct control of its United States units - the North American Philips Company and the Signetics Corporation, which had been legally owned by a trust set up during World War II that was controlled by Philips. Philips tightened its operations and centralized its planning functions to prevent being \"picked off piecemeal by the Japanese\".\nIn 2007, Philips entered into a definitive merger agreement with the Genlyte Group, which provided the company with a leading position in the North American luminaires (also known as \"lighting fixtures\"), controls and related products for a wide variety of applications, including solid state lighting. The company also acquired Respironics, which was a significant gain for its healthcare sector. On 21 February 2008, Philips completed the acquisition of Baltimore-based VISICU. VISICU was the creator of the eICU concept of the use of Telemedicine from a centralized facility to monitor and care for ICU patients.\nIn April 2020, the United States Department of Health &amp; Human Services (HHS) entered into a contract with Philips Respironics for 43,000 bundled Trilogy Evo Universal ventilator (EV300) hospital ventilators. This included the production and delivery of ventilators to the Strategic National Stockpile\u2014about 156,000 by the end of August 2020 and 187,000 more by the end of 2020. During the COVID-19 pandemic, beginning in March 2020, in response to an international demand, Philips increased production of the ventilators fourfold within five months. Production lines were added in the United States with employees working around the clock in factories producing ventilators, in Western Pennsylvania and California, for example.\nIn March 2020, ProPublica published a series of articles on the Philips ventilator contract as negotiated by trade adviser Peter Navarro. In response to the ProPublica series, in August, the United States House of Representatives undertook a \"congressional investigation\" into the acquisition of the Philips ventilators. The lawmakers investigation found \"evidence of fraud, waste and abuse\".\u2014the deal negotiated by Navarro had resulted in an over-payment to Philips by the US government of \"hundreds of millions\".\nOceania.\nAustralia and New Zealand.\nPhilips Australia was founded in 1927 and is headquartered in North Ryde, New South Wales; it also manages the New Zealand operation from there. The company employs about 800 people. Regional sales and support offices are located in Melbourne, Brisbane, Adelaide, Perth, and Auckland.\nActivities include: Philips Healthcare (also responsible for New Zealand operations); Philips Lighting (also responsible for New Zealand operations); Philips Oral Healthcare, Philips Professional Dictation Solutions, Philips Professional Display Solutions, Philips AVENT Professional, Philips Consumer Lifestyle (also responsible for New Zealand operations); Philips Sleep &amp; Respiratory Care (formerly Respironics), with its ever-increasing national network of Sleepeasy Centres; Philips Dynalite (Lighting Control systems, acquired in 2009, global design and manufacturing centre) and Philips Selecon NZ (Lighting Entertainment product design and manufacture).\nSouth America.\nBrazil.\nPhilips do Brasil was founded in 1924 in Rio de Janeiro. In 1929, Philips began selling radio receivers. In the 1930s, Philips was making its light bulbs and radio receivers in Brazil. From 1939 to 1945, World War II forced Brazilian branch of Philips to sell bicycles, refrigerators and insecticides. After the war, Philips had a great industrial expansion in Brazil, and was among the first groups to establish in Manaus Free Zone. In the 1970s, Philips Records was a major player in Brazil recording industry. Now Philips do Brasil is one of the largest foreign-owned companies in Brazil. Philips uses the brand Walita for domestic appliances in Brazil.\nColor television.\nColor television was introduced in South America by Cor Dillen (CFO, 1960\u20131968; CEO, 1981\u20131982), with continent-wide service in the early 1980s.\nFormer operations.\nPhilips subsidiary Philips-Duphar manufactured pharmaceuticals for human and veterinary use and products for crop protection. Duphar was sold to Solvay in 1990. Since then Solvay sold off all divisions to other companies (crop protection to UniRoyal, now Chemtura, the veterinary division to Fort Dodge, a division of Wyeth, and the pharmaceutical division to Abbott Laboratories).\nPolyGram, Philips' music television and movies division, was sold to Seagram in 1998 and merged into Universal Music Group. Philips Records continues to operate as record label of UMG, its name is licensed from its former parent. In 1980, Philips acquired Marantz, a company renowned for high-end audio and video products, based at Kanagawa, Japan. In 2002, Marantz Japan merged with Denon to form D&amp;M Holdings and Philips sold its remaining stake in D&amp;M Holdings in 2008.\nOrigin, now part of Atos Origin, is a former division of Philips. ASM Lithography is a spin-off from a division of Philips. Hollandse Signaalapparaten was a manufacturer of military electronics. The business was sold to Thomson-CSF in 1990 and is now Thales Nederland. NXP Semiconductors, formerly known as Philips Semiconductors, was sold a consortium of private equity investors in 2006. On 6 August 2010, NXP completed its IPO, with shares trading on NASDAQ.\nIgnis, of Comerio, in the province of Varese, Italy, producing washing machines, dishwashers and microwave ovens, was one of the leading companies in the domestic appliance market, holding a 38% share in 1960. In 1970, 50% of the company's capital was taken over by Philips, which acquired full control in 1972. Ignis was in those years, after Zanussi, the second largest domestic appliance manufacturer, and in 1973 its factories numbered over 10,000 employees only in Italy. With the transfer of ownership to the Dutch multinational, the corporate name of the company was changed, which became \"IRE SpA\" (\"Industrie Riunite Eurodomestici\"). Thereafter Philips used to sell major household appliances (whitegoods) under the name Philips. After selling the Major Domestic Appliances division to Whirlpool Corporation it changed from Philips Whirlpool to Whirlpool Philips and finally to just Whirlpool. Whirlpool bought a 53% stake in Philips' major appliance operations to form Whirlpool International. Whirlpool bought Philips' remaining interest in Whirlpool International in 1991.\nPhilips Cryogenics was split off in 1990 to form the Stirling Cryogenics BV, Netherlands. This company is still active in the development and manufacturing of Stirling cryocoolers and cryogenic cooling systems. North American Philips distributed AKG Acoustics products under the AKG of America, Philips Audio/Video, Norelco and AKG Acoustics Inc. branding until AKG set up its North American division in San Leandro, California, in 1985. (AKG's North American division has since moved to Northridge, California.)\nPolymer Vision was a Philips spin-off which manufactured a flexible e-ink display screen. The company was acquired by Taiwanese contract electronics manufacturer Wistron in 2009 and it was shut down in 2012, after repeated failed attempts to find a potential buyer.\nProducts.\nPhilips' core products are personal health products including shavers, beauty appliances, mother and childcare appliances, electric toothbrushes and healthcare products (including CT scanners, ECG equipment, mammography equipment, monitoring equipment, MRI scanners, radiography equipment, resuscitation equipment, ultrasound equipment and X-ray equipment).\nIn January 2020 Philips announced that it wanted to sell its domestic appliances division, which includes products like coffee machines, air purifiers, and air fryers.\nHealthcare products.\nPhilips healthcare products include:\nPatient care and clinical informatics.\nIn 2021, Philips acquired medical device company Capsule Technologies.\nLogo evolution.\nThe Philips logo with the stars and waves was designed by Dutch architect Louis Kalff (1897\u20131976), who said that the emblem had been created as a coincidence as he did not know how a radio system worked.\nSponsorships.\nIn 1913, in celebration of the 100th anniversary of the liberation of the Netherlands, Philips founded (Philips Sports Club, now commonly known as PSV). The club is active in numerous sports but is now best known for its football team, PSV Eindhoven, and swimming team. Philips owns the naming rights to Philips Stadium in Eindhoven, which is the home ground of PSV Eindhoven.\nOutside of the Netherlands, Philips sponsors and has sponsored numerous sports clubs, sports facilities and events. In November 2008, Philips renewed and extended its F1 partnership with AT&amp;T Williams. Philips owns the naming rights to the \"Philips Championship\", the premier basketball league in Australia, traditionally known as the National Basketball League. From 1988 to 1993, Philips was the principal sponsor of the Australian rugby league team The Balmain Tigers and Indonesian football club side Persiba Balikpapan. From 1998 to 2000, Philips sponsored the Winston Cup No. 7 entry for Geoff Bodine Racing, later Ultra Motorsports, for drivers Geoff Bodine and Michael Waltrip. From 1999 to 2018, Philips held the naming rights to Philips Arena in Atlanta, home of the Atlanta Hawks of the National Basketball Association and former home of the defunct Atlanta Thrashers of the National Hockey League. In 2024, Philips became a sponsor for La Liga team FC Barcelona.\nOutside of sports, Philips sponsored the international \"Philips Monsters of Rock festival\".\nRespironics recall.\nIn June 2021, Philips announced a voluntary recall of several of its Respironics ventilators, BiPAP, and CPAP machines due to potential health risks. Gradual degradation of foam in the devices, intended to reduce noise and vibrations during operation, could result in patients inhaling particulates or certain chemicals. The recall involved around 3 to 4 million machines which, in addition to the COVID-19 pandemic, contributed to a supply chain crisis impeding the availability of these devices to patients. Originally, Philips described the risks as potentially \"life-threatening\" but that there had been no reports of death as a result of the issues. Since then, the FDA has received 385 reports of death allegedly caused by the foam issue.\nIn 2023, ProPublica and the Pittsburgh Post-Gazette reported that Philips had received thousands of patient reports and returned machines affected by the degrading foam as far back as 2010, and many of these reports were not disclosed to the FDA as Philips was legally obligated to do.\nIn October 2022, dozens of lawsuits against Philips related to the safety concerns were consolidated into one class-action lawsuit. Philips settled this lawsuit in September 2023 for at least $479 million. In January 2024, Philips agreed to halt the sale of any new sleep apnea devices in the US as part of an agreement with the FDA. As part of the deal, Philips would need to meet certain conditions in its US manufacturing plants, a process that Philips CEO Roy Jakobs said could take five to seven years.\nEnvironmental record.\nPlanned obsolescence.\nPhilips was a member of the 1925 Phoebus cartel along with Osram, Tungsram, Associated Electrical Industries, ELIN, Compagnie des Lampes, International General Electric, and the GE Overseas Group, holding shares in the Swiss corporation proportional to their lamp sales. The cartel lowered operational costs and worked to standardize the life expectancy of light bulbs at 1,000 hours (down from 2,500 hours), and raised prices without fear of competition. The cartel tested their bulbs and fined manufacturers for bulbs that lasted more than 1,000 hours.\nGreen initiatives.\nPhilips also runs the EcoVision initiative, which commits to a number of environmentally positive improvements, focusing on energy efficiency. The company marks its \"green\" products with the Philips Green Logo, identifying them as products which have a significantly better environmental performance than their competitors or predecessors.\nL-Prize competition.\nIn 2011, Philips won a $10 million cash prize from the US Department of Energy for winning its L-Prize competition, to produce a high-efficiency, long operating life replacement for a standard 60-W incandescent lightbulb. The winning LED lightbulb, which was made available to consumers in April 2012, produces slightly more than 900\u00a0lumens at an input power of 10 W.\nGreenpeace ranking.\nIn Greenpeace's 2012 Guide to Greener Electronics that ranks electronics manufacturers on sustainability, climate and energy and how green their products are, Philips ranked 10th of 16 companies with a score of 3.8/10. The company was the top scorer in the Energy section due to its energy advocacy work calling upon the EU to adopt a 30% reduction for greenhouse gas emissions by 2020. It was also praised for its new products which are free from PVC plastic and BFRs. However, the guide criticized Philips' sourcing of fibres for paper, arguing it must develop a paper procurement policy which excludes suppliers involved in deforestation and illegal logging.\nPhilips has made progress since 2007 (when it was first ranked in the guide started in 2006), in particular by supporting the Individual Producer Responsibility principle meaning that the company is accepting the responsibility for the toxic impacts of its products on e-waste dumps around the world.\nDubai Lamp.\nIn 2016 Philips introduced a series of LED lamps with an efficiency up to 200lm/W. The Dubai Lamp produces 600 lumens at an input power of 3 W.\nCountry and Language.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23551", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23551", "title": "Perciformes", "text": "Order of ray-finned fishes\nPerciformes (), also called the Acanthopteri, is an order or superorder of ray-finned fish in the clade Percomorpha. \"Perciformes\" means \"perch-like\". Among the well-known members of this group are perches and darters (Percidae), and also sea basses and groupers (Serranidae). This order contains many familiar freshwater temperate and tropical marine fish groups, but also extremophiles that have successfully colonized both the North and South Poles, as well as the deepest depths of the ocean.\nTaxonomy.\nFormerly, this group was thought to be even more diverse than it is thought to be now, containing about 41% of all bony fish (about 10,000 species) and about 160 families, which is the most of any order within the vertebrates. However, many of these other families have since been reclassified within their own orders within the clade Percomorpha, significantly reducing the size of the group. In contrast to this splitting, other groups formerly considered distinct, such as the Scorpaeniformes, are now classified in the Perciformes.\nEvolution.\nThe earliest fossil perciform is the extinct stem group-perciform \"Paleoserranus\" (originally considered an early serranid) from the Early Paleocene of Mexico, but potential records of \"percoids\" are known from the Maastrichtian, including \"Eoserranus\" and \"Prolates\", although their exact taxonomic identity remains uncertain. The earliest crown-group perciform fossils are known from the Early Eocene, including the scorpaenoid \"Eosynanceja\" and platycephalid otoliths from New Zealand.\nClassification.\nClassification of this group has long been controversial, with various families being placed in and out of Perciformes depending on the study. Only in recent decades, with the advent of molecular phylogenetics, has the classification of the family been largely resolved. Based on these studies, many suborders formerly placed within the Perciformes are better placed elsewhere in the Percomorpha, but former members of the Scorpaeniformes, Gasterosteiformes, and some members of the Trachiniformes (including the type genus) are now considered true perciforms.\nPresent classification.\nThe following classification is based on \"Eschmeyer's Catalog of Fishes\":\nThe following fossil families may also belong to Perciformes \"sensu stricto\", although this is uncertain:\nPast classifications.\nAs traditionally defined before the introduction of cladistics, the Perciformes are almost certainly paraphyletic. Other orders that should possibly be included as suborders are the Scorpaeniformes, Tetraodontiformes, and Pleuronectiformes.\nOf the presently recognized suborders, several may be paraphyletic, as well. These are grouped by suborder/superfamily, generally following the text \"Fishes of the World\".\nCharacteristics.\nThe dorsal and anal fins are divided into anterior spiny and posterior soft-rayed portions, which may be partially or completely separated. The pelvic fins usually have one spine and up to five soft rays, positioned unusually far forward under the chin or under the belly. Scales are usually ctenoid (rough to the touch), although sometimes they are cycloid (smooth to the touch) or otherwise modified.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23553", "revid": "2276154", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23553", "title": "Asimina", "text": "North American Genus of fruit trees\nAsimina is a genus of small trees or shrubs described as a genus in 1763. \"Asimina\" is the only temperate genus in the tropical and subtropical flowering plant family Annonaceae. \"Asimina\" have large, simple leaves and large fruit. It is native to eastern North America and collectively referred to as pawpaw. The genus includes the widespread common pawpaw \"Asimina triloba,\" which bears the largest edible fruit indigenous to the United States. Pawpaws are native to 26 states of the U.S. and to Ontario in Canada. The common pawpaw is a patch-forming (clonal) understory tree found in well-drained, deep, fertile bottomland and hilly upland habitat. Pawpaws are in the same plant family (Annonaceae) as the custard apple, cherimoya, sweetsop, soursop, and ylang-ylang; the genus is the only member of that family not confined to the tropics. Fossils date to the Cretaceous.\nNames.\nThe genus name \"Asimina\" was first described and named by Michel Adanson, a French naturalist of Scottish descent. The name is adapted from a Native American term of unknown origin, \"assimin,\" through the French colonial \"asiminier.\"\nThe common name (American) pawpaw, also spelled paw paw, paw-paw, and papaw, probably derives from the Spanish \"papaya\", perhaps because of the superficial similarity of their fruits.\nDescription.\nPawpaws are shrubs or small trees to tall. The northern, cold-tolerant common pawpaw (\"A. triloba\") is deciduous, while the southern species are often evergreen.\nThe leaves are alternate, obovate, entire, long and broad.\nThe flowers of pawpaws are produced singly or in clusters of up to eight together; they are large, 4\u20136\u00a0cm across, perfect, with three sepals and six petals (three large outer petals, three smaller inner petals). The petal color varies from white to purple or red-brown. Pawpaw flowers are noted to smell like fermenting grapes, or rotting food.\nThe fruit of the common pawpaw is a large, edible berry, long and broad, weighing from , with numerous seeds; it is green when unripe, maturing to yellow or brown. It has a flavor somewhat similar to both banana and mango, varying significantly by cultivar, and has more protein than most fruits.\nSpecies and their distributions.\n11 species and several natural interspecies hybrids are accepted.\nEcology.\nThe common pawpaw is native to shady, rich bottom lands, where it often forms a dense undergrowth in the forest, often appearing as a patch or thicket of individual, small, slender trees.\nPawpaw flowers are insect-pollinated, but fruit production is limited since few if any pollinators are attracted to the flower's faint, or sometimes nonexistent scent. The flowers produce an odor similar to that of rotting meat to attract blowflies or carrion beetles for cross pollination. Other insects that are attracted to pawpaw plants include scavenging fruit flies, carrion flies and beetles. Because of difficult pollination, some believe the flowers are self-incompatible.\nPawpaw fruit may be eaten by foxes, opossums, squirrels, and raccoons. Pawpaw leaves and twigs are seldom consumed by rabbits or deer.\nThe leaves, twigs, and bark of the common pawpaw tree contain natural insecticides known as acetogenins.\nLarvae of the zebra swallowtail butterfly feed exclusively on young leaves of the various pawpaw species, but never occur in great numbers on the plants.\nThe pawpaw is considered an evolutionary anachronism, where a now-extinct evolutionary partner, such as a Pleistocene megafauna species, formerly consumed the fruit and assisted in seed dispersal.\nCultivation and uses.\nWild-collected fruits of the common pawpaw (\"A. triloba\") have long been a popular treat throughout the tree's extensive native range in eastern North America. Pawpaws have never been widely cultivated for fruit, but interest in pawpaw cultivation has increased in recent decades. Fresh pawpaw fruits are commonly eaten raw; however, once ripe they store only a few days at room temperature and do not ship well unless frozen. Other methods of preservation include dehydration, production of jams or jellies, and pressure canning. The fruit pulp is also often used locally in baked dessert recipes, with pawpaw often substituted in a number of banana-based recipes.\nThe common pawpaw is of interest in ecological restoration plantings, since this tree grows well in wet soil and has a strong tendency to form well-rooted clonal thickets.\nHistory.\nThe earliest documentation of pawpaws is in the 1541 report of the Spanish de Soto expedition, who found Native Americans cultivating it east of the Mississippi River. Chilled pawpaw fruit was a favorite dessert of George Washington, and Thomas Jefferson planted it at his home in Virginia, Monticello. The Lewis and Clark Expedition sometimes subsisted on pawpaws during their travels. Daniel Boone was also a consumer and fan of the pawpaw. The common pawpaw was designated as the Ohio state native fruit in 2009. Multiple pawpaw festivals have celebrated the plant and its fruit.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23555", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23555", "title": "Pentecostalism", "text": "Denominational renewal movement of Protestant Christianity\nPentecostalism or classical Pentecostalism is a movement within the evangelical wing of Protestant Christianity that emphasizes direct personal experience of God through baptism with the Holy Spirit. The term \"Pentecostal\" is derived from Pentecost, an event that commemorates the descent of the Holy Spirit upon the Apostles and other followers of Jesus Christ while they were in Jerusalem celebrating the Feast of Weeks, as described in the Acts of the Apostles (Acts 2:1\u201331).\nLike other forms of evangelical Protestantism, Pentecostalism adheres to the inerrancy of the Bible and the necessity of being born again: an individual repenting of their sin and \"accepting Jesus Christ as their personal Lord and Savior\". It is distinguished by belief in both the \"baptism in the Holy Spirit\" and baptism by water, that enables a Christian to \"live a Spirit-filled and empowered life\". This empowerment includes the use of spiritual gifts: such as speaking in tongues and divine healing. Because of their commitment to biblical authority, spiritual gifts, and the miraculous, Pentecostals see their movement as reflecting the same kind of spiritual power and teachings that were found in the Apostolic Age of the Early Church. For this reason, some Pentecostals also use the term \"Apostolic\" or \"Full Gospel\" to describe their movement.\nHoliness Pentecostalism emerged in the early 20th century among adherents of the Wesleyan-Holiness movement, who were energized by Christian revivalism and expectation of the imminent Second Coming of Christ. Believing that they were living in the end times, they expected God to spiritually renew the Christian Church and bring to pass the restoration of spiritual gifts and the evangelization of the world. In 1900, Charles Parham, an American evangelist and faith healer, began teaching that speaking in tongues was the Biblical evidence of Spirit baptism. Along with William J. Seymour, a Wesleyan-Holiness preacher, he taught that this was the third work of grace. The three-year-long Azusa Street Revival, founded and led by Seymour in Los Angeles, California, resulted in the growth of Pentecostalism throughout the United States and the rest of the world. Visitors carried the Pentecostal experience back to their home churches or felt called to the mission field. While virtually all Pentecostal denominations trace their origins to Azusa Street, the movement has had several divisions and controversies. Early disputes centered on challenges to the doctrine of entire sanctification, and later on, the Holy Trinity. As a result, the Pentecostal movement is divided between Holiness Pentecostals who affirm three definite works of grace, and Finished Work Pentecostals who are partitioned into trinitarian and non-trinitarian branches, the latter giving rise to Oneness Pentecostalism.\nComprising over 700 denominations and many independent churches, Pentecostalism is highly decentralized. No central authority exists, but many denominations are affiliated with the Pentecostal World Fellowship. With over 279\u00a0million classical Pentecostals worldwide, the movement is growing in many parts of the world, especially the Global South and Third World countries. Since the 1960s, Pentecostalism has increasingly gained acceptance from other Christian traditions, and Pentecostal beliefs concerning the baptism of the Holy Spirit and spiritual gifts have been embraced by non-Pentecostal Christians in Protestant and Catholic churches through their adherence to the Charismatic movement. Together, worldwide Pentecostal and Charismatic Christianity numbers over 644\u00a0million adherents. While the movement originally attracted mostly lower classes in the global South, there is a new appeal to middle classes. Middle-class congregations tend to have fewer members. Pentecostalism is believed to be the fastest-growing religious movement in the world.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHistory.\nBackground.\nEarly Pentecostals have considered the movement a latter-day restoration of the church's apostolic power, and historians such as Cecil M. Robeck Jr. and Edith Blumhofer write that the movement emerged from late 19th-century radical evangelical revival movements in America and in Great Britain.\nWithin this radical evangelicalism, expressed most strongly in the Wesleyan\u2013holiness and Higher Life movements, themes of restorationism, premillennialism, faith healing, and greater attention on the person and work of the Holy Spirit were central to emerging Pentecostalism. Believing that the second coming of Christ was imminent, these Christians expected an endtime revival of apostolic power, spiritual gifts, and miracle-working. Figures such as Dwight L. Moody and R. A. Torrey began to speak of an experience available to all Christians which would empower believers to evangelize the world, often termed \"baptism with the Holy Spirit\".\nCertain Christian leaders and movements had important influences on early Pentecostals. The essentially universal belief in the continuation of all the spiritual gifts in the Keswick and Higher Life movements constituted a crucial historical background for the rise of Pentecostalism. Albert Benjamin Simpson (1843\u20131919) and his Christian and Missionary Alliance (founded in 1887) was very influential in the early years of Pentecostalism, especially on the development of the Assemblies of God. Another early influence on Pentecostals was John Alexander Dowie (1847\u20131907) and his Christian Catholic Apostolic Church (founded in 1896). Pentecostals embraced the teachings of Simpson, Dowie, Adoniram Judson Gordon (1836\u20131895) and Maria Woodworth-Etter (1844\u20131924; she later joined the Pentecostal movement) on healing. Edward Irving's Catholic Apostolic Church (founded c. 1831) also displayed many characteristics later found in the Pentecostal revival.\nIsolated Christian groups were experiencing charismatic phenomena such as divine healing and speaking in tongues. The Holiness Pentecostal movement provided a theological explanation for what was happening to these Christians, and they adapted a modified form of Wesleyan soteriology to accommodate their new understanding.\nEarly revivals: 1900\u20131929.\nCharles Fox Parham, an independent holiness evangelist who believed strongly in divine healing, was an important figure to the emergence of Pentecostalism as a distinct Christian movement. Parham, who was raised as a Methodist, started a spiritual school near Topeka, Kansas in 1900, which he named Bethel Bible School. There he taught that speaking in tongues was the scriptural evidence for the reception of the baptism with the Holy Spirit. On January 1, 1901, after a watch night service, the students prayed for and received the baptism with the Holy Spirit with the evidence of speaking in tongues. Parham received this same experience sometime later and began preaching it in all his services. Parham believed this was xenoglossia and that missionaries would no longer need to study foreign languages. Parham closed his Topeka school after 1901 and began a four-year revival tour throughout Kansas and Missouri. He taught that the baptism with the Holy Spirit was a third experience, subsequent to conversion and sanctification. Sanctification cleansed the believer, but Spirit baptism empowered for service.\nAt about the same time that Parham was spreading his doctrine of initial evidence in the Midwestern United States, news of the Welsh Revival of 1904\u20131905 ignited intense speculation among radical evangelicals around the world and particularly in the US of a coming move of the Spirit which would renew the entire Christian Church. This revival saw thousands of conversions and also exhibited speaking in tongues.\nParham moved to Houston, Texas in 1905, where he started a Bible training school. One of his students was William J. Seymour, a one-eyed black preacher. Seymour traveled to Los Angeles where his preaching sparked the three-year-long Azusa Street Revival in 1906. The revival first broke out on Monday April 9, 1906 at 214 Bonnie Brae Street and then moved to 312 Azusa Street on Friday, April 14, 1906. Worship at the racially integrated Azusa Mission featured an absence of any order of service. People preached and testified as moved by the Spirit, spoke and sung in tongues, and fell (were slain) in the Spirit. The revival attracted both religious and secular media attention, and thousands of visitors flocked to the mission, carrying the \"fire\" back to their home churches. Despite the work of various Wesleyan groups such as Parham's and D. L. Moody's revivals, the beginning of the widespread Pentecostal movement in the US is generally considered to have begun with Seymour's Azusa Street Revival.\nThe crowds of African-Americans and whites worshiping together at William Seymour's Azusa Street Mission set the tone for much of the early Pentecostal movement. During the period of 1906\u20131924, Pentecostals defied social, cultural and political norms of the time that called for racial segregation and the enactment of Jim Crow laws. The Church of God in Christ, the Church of God (Cleveland), the Pentecostal Holiness Church, and the Pentecostal Assemblies of the World were all interracial denominations before the 1920s. These groups, especially in the Jim Crow South were under great pressure to conform to segregation. Ultimately, North American Pentecostalism would divide into white and African-American branches. Though it never entirely disappeared, interracial worship within Pentecostalism would not reemerge as a widespread practice until after the civil rights movement.\nWomen were vital to the early Pentecostal movement. Believing that whoever received the Pentecostal experience had the responsibility to use it towards the preparation for Christ's second coming, Pentecostal women held that the baptism in the Holy Spirit gave them empowerment and justification to engage in activities traditionally denied to them. The first person at Parham's Bible college to receive Spirit baptism with the evidence of speaking in tongues was a woman, Agnes Ozman. Women such as Florence Crawford, Ida Robinson, and Aimee Semple McPherson founded new denominations, and many women served as pastors, co-pastors, and missionaries. Women wrote religious songs, edited Pentecostal papers, and taught and ran Bible schools. The unconventionally intense and emotional environment generated in Pentecostal meetings dually promoted, and was itself created by, other forms of participation such as personal testimony and spontaneous prayer and singing. Women did not shy away from engaging in this forum, and in the early movement the majority of converts and church-goers were female. Nevertheless, there was considerable ambiguity surrounding the role of women in the church. The subsiding of the early Pentecostal movement allowed a socially more conservative approach to women to settle in, and, as a result, female participation was channeled into more supportive and traditionally accepted roles. Auxiliary women's organizations were created to focus women's talents on more traditional activities. Women also became much more likely to be evangelists and missionaries than pastors. When they were pastors, they often co-pastored with their husbands.\nThe majority of early Pentecostal denominations taught Christian pacifism and adopted military service articles that advocated conscientious objection.\nSpread and opposition.\nAzusa participants returned to their homes carrying their new experience with them. In many cases, whole churches were converted to the Pentecostal faith, but many times Pentecostals were forced to establish new religious communities when their experience was rejected by the established churches. One of the first areas of involvement was the African continent, where, by 1907, American missionaries were established in Liberia, as well as in South Africa by 1908. Because speaking in tongues was initially believed to always be actual foreign languages, it was believed that missionaries would no longer have to learn the languages of the peoples they evangelized because the Holy Spirit would provide whatever foreign language was required. (When the majority of missionaries, to their disappointment, learned that tongues speech was unintelligible on the mission field, Pentecostal leaders were forced to modify their understanding of tongues.) Thus, as the experience of speaking in tongues spread, a sense of the immediacy of Christ's return took hold, and that energy would be directed into missionary and evangelistic activity. Early Pentecostals saw themselves as outsiders from mainstream society, dedicated solely to preparing the way for Christ's return.\nAn associate of Seymour's, Florence Crawford, brought the message to the Northwest, forming what would become the Apostolic Faith Church\u2014a Holiness Pentecostal denomination\u2014by 1908. After 1907, Azusa participant William Howard Durham, pastor of the North Avenue Mission in Chicago, returned to the Midwest to lay the groundwork for the movement in that region. It was from Durham's church that future leaders of the Pentecostal Assemblies of Canada would hear the Pentecostal message. One of the most well known Pentecostal pioneers was Gaston B. Cashwell (the \"Apostle of Pentecost\" to the South), whose evangelistic work led three Southeastern holiness denominations into the new movement.\nThe Pentecostal movement, especially in its early stages, was typically associated with the impoverished and marginalized of America, especially African Americans and Southern Whites. With the help of many healing evangelists such as Oral Roberts, Pentecostalism spread across America by the 1950s.\nInternational visitors and Pentecostal missionaries would eventually export the revival to other nations. The first foreign Pentecostal missionaries were Alfred G. Garr and his wife, who were Spirit baptized at Azusa and traveled to India and later Hong Kong. On being Spirit baptized, Garr spoke in Bengali, a language he did not know, and becoming convinced of his call to serve in India came to Calcutta with his wife Lilian and began ministering at the Bow Bazar Baptist Church. The Norwegian Methodist pastor T. B. Barratt was influenced by Seymour during a tour of the United States. By December 1906, he had returned to Europe, and he is credited with beginning the Pentecostal movement in Sweden, Norway, Denmark, Germany, France and England. A notable convert of Barratt was Alexander Boddy, the Anglican vicar of All Saints' in Sunderland, England, who became a founder of British Pentecostalism. Other important converts of Barratt were German minister Jonathan Paul who founded the first German Pentecostal denomination (the M\u00fclheim Association) and Lewi Pethrus, the Swedish Baptist minister who founded the Swedish Pentecostal movement.\nThrough Durham's ministry, Italian immigrant Luigi Francescon received the Pentecostal experience in 1907 and established Italian Pentecostal congregations in the US, Argentina (Christian Assembly in Argentina), and Brazil (Christian Congregation of Brazil). In 1908, Giacomo Lombardi led the first Pentecostal services in Italy. In November 1910, two Swedish Pentecostal missionaries arrived in Belem, Brazil and established what would become the Assembleias de Deus (Assemblies of God of Brazil). In 1908, John G. Lake, a follower of Alexander Dowie who had experienced Pentecostal Spirit baptism, traveled to South Africa and founded what would become the Apostolic Faith Mission of South Africa and the Zion Christian Church. As a result of this missionary zeal, practically all Pentecostal denominations today trace their historical roots to the Azusa Street Revival. Eventually, the first missionaries realized that they definitely needed to learn the local language and culture, needed to raise financial support, and develop long-term strategies for the development of indigenous churches.\nThe first generation of Pentecostal believers faced immense criticism and ostracism from other Christians, most vehemently from the Holiness movement from which they originated. Alma White, leader of the Pillar of Fire Church\u2014a Holiness Methodist denomination, wrote a book against the movement titled \"Demons and Tongues\" in 1910. She called Pentecostal tongues \"satanic gibberish\" and Pentecostal services \"the climax of demon worship\". Famous Holiness Methodist preacher W. B. Godbey characterized those at Azusa Street as \"Satan's preachers, jugglers, necromancers, enchanters, magicians, and all sorts of mendicants\". To Dr. G. Campbell Morgan, Pentecostalism was \"the last vomit of Satan\", while Dr. R. A. Torrey thought it was \"emphatically not of God, and founded by a Sodomite\". The Pentecostal Church of the Nazarene, one of the largest holiness groups, was strongly opposed to the new Pentecostal movement. To avoid confusion, the church changed its name in 1919 to the Church of the Nazarene.\nA. B. Simpson's Christian and Missionary Alliance\u2014a Keswickian denomination\u2014negotiated a compromise position unique for the time. Simpson believed that Pentecostal tongues speaking was a legitimate manifestation of the Holy Spirit, but he did not believe it was a necessary evidence of Spirit baptism. This view on speaking in tongues ultimately led to what became known as the \"Alliance position\" articulated by A. W. Tozer as \"seek not\u2014forbid not\".\nEarly controversies.\nThe first Pentecostal converts were mainly derived from the Holiness movement and adhered to a Wesleyan understanding of entire sanctification as a definite, instantaneous experience and second work of grace. Problems with this view arose when large numbers of converts entered the movement from non-Wesleyan backgrounds, especially from Baptist churches. In 1910, William Durham of Chicago first articulated the Finished Work, a doctrine which located sanctification at the moment of salvation and held that after conversion the Christian would progressively grow in grace in a lifelong process. This teaching polarized the Pentecostal movement into two factions: Holiness Pentecostalism and Finished Work Pentecostalism. The Wesleyan doctrine was strongest in the Apostolic Faith Church, which views itself as being the successor of the Azusa Street Revival, as well as in the Calvary Holiness Association, Congregational Holiness Church, Church of God (Cleveland), Church of God in Christ, Free Gospel Church and the Pentecostal Holiness Church; these bodies are classed as Holiness Pentecostal denominations. The Finished Work, however, would ultimately gain ascendancy among Pentecostals, in denominations such as the Assemblies of God, which was the first Finished Work Pentecostal denomination. After 1911, most new Pentecostal denominations would adhere to Finished Work sanctification.\nIn 1914, a group of 300 predominately white Pentecostal ministers and laymen from all regions of the United States gathered in Hot Springs, Arkansas, to create a new, national Pentecostal fellowship\u2014the General Council of the Assemblies of God. By 1911, many of these white ministers were distancing themselves from an existing arrangement under an African-American leader. Many of these white ministers were licensed by the African-American, C. H. Mason under the auspices of the Church of God in Christ, one of the few legally chartered Pentecostal organizations at the time credentialing and licensing ordained Pentecostal clergy. To further such distance, Bishop Mason and other African-American Pentecostal leaders were not invited to the initial 1914 fellowship of Pentecostal ministers. These predominately white ministers adopted a congregational polity, whereas the COGIC and other Southern groups remained largely episcopal and rejected a Finished Work understanding of Sanctification. Thus, the creation of the Assemblies of God marked an official end of Pentecostal doctrinal unity and racial integration.\nAmong these Finished Work Pentecostals, the new Assemblies of God would soon face a \"new issue\" which first emerged at a 1913 camp meeting. During a baptism service, the speaker, R. E. McAlister, mentioned that the Apostles baptized converts once in the name of Jesus Christ, and the words \"Father, Son, and Holy Ghost\" were never used in baptism. This inspired Frank Ewart who claimed to have received as a divine prophecy revealing a nontrinitarian conception of God. Ewart believed that there was only one personality in the Godhead\u2014Jesus Christ. The terms \"Father\" and \"Holy Ghost\" were titles designating different aspects of Christ. Those who had been baptized in the Trinitarian fashion needed to submit to rebaptism in Jesus's name. Furthermore, Ewart believed that Jesus's name baptism and the gift of tongues were essential for salvation. Ewart and those who adopted his belief, which is known as Oneness Pentecostalism, called themselves \"oneness\" or \"Jesus's Name\" Pentecostals, but their opponents called them \"Jesus Only\".\nAmid great controversy, the Assemblies of God rejected the Oneness teaching, and many of its churches and pastors were forced to withdraw from the denomination in 1916. They organized their own Oneness groups. Most of these joined Garfield T. Haywood, an African-American preacher from Indianapolis, to form the Pentecostal Assemblies of the World. This church maintained an interracial identity until 1924 when the white ministers withdrew to form the Pentecostal Church, Incorporated. This church later merged with another group forming the United Pentecostal Church International. This controversy among the Finished Work Pentecostals caused Holiness Pentecostals to further distance themselves from Finished Work Pentecostals, who they viewed as heretical.\n1930\u20131959.\nWhile Pentecostals shared many basic assumptions with conservative Protestants, the earliest Pentecostals were rejected by Fundamentalist Christians who adhered to cessationism. In 1928, the World Christian Fundamentals Association labeled Pentecostalism \"fanatical\" and \"unscriptural\". By the early 1940s, this rejection of Pentecostals was giving way to a new cooperation between them and leaders of the \"new evangelicalism\", and American Pentecostals were involved in the founding of the 1942 National Association of Evangelicals. Pentecostal denominations also began to interact with each other both on national levels and international levels through the Pentecostal World Fellowship, which was founded in 1947.\nThough Pentecostals began to find acceptance among evangelicals in the 1940s, the previous decade was widely viewed as a time of spiritual dryness, when healings and other miraculous phenomena were perceived as being less prevalent than in earlier decades of the movement. It was in this environment that the Latter Rain Movement, the most important controversy to affect Pentecostalism since World War II, began in North America and spread around the world in the late 1940s. Latter Rain leaders taught the restoration of the fivefold ministry led by apostles. These apostles were believed capable of imparting spiritual gifts through the laying on of hands. There were prominent participants of the early Pentecostal revivals, such as Stanley Frodsham and Lewi Pethrus, who endorsed the movement citing similarities to early Pentecostalism. However, Pentecostal denominations were critical of the movement and condemned many of its practices as unscriptural. One reason for the conflict with the denominations was the sectarianism of Latter Rain adherents. Many autonomous churches were birthed out of the revival.\nA simultaneous development within Pentecostalism was the postwar Healing Revival. Led by healing evangelists William Branham, Oral Roberts, Gordon Lindsay, and T. L. Osborn, the Healing Revival developed a following among non-Pentecostals as well as Pentecostals. Many of these non-Pentecostals were baptized in the Holy Spirit through these ministries. The Latter Rain and the Healing Revival influenced many leaders of the charismatic movement of the 1960s and 1970s.\n1960\u2013present.\nBefore the 1960s, most non-Pentecostal Christians who experienced the Pentecostal baptism in the Holy Spirit typically kept their experience a private matter or joined a Pentecostal church afterward. The 1960s saw a new pattern develop where large numbers of Spirit baptized Christians from mainline churches in the US, Europe, and other parts of the world chose to remain and work for spiritual renewal within their traditional churches. This initially became known as New or Neo-Pentecostalism (in contrast to the older classical Pentecostalism) but eventually became known as the Charismatic Movement. While cautiously supportive of the Charismatic Movement, the failure of Charismatics to embrace traditional Pentecostal teachings, such as the prohibition of dancing, abstinence from alcohol and other drugs such as tobacco, as well as restrictions on dress and appearance following the doctrine of outward holiness, initiated an identity crisis for classical Pentecostals, who were forced to reexamine long held assumptions about what it meant to be Spirit filled. The liberalizing influence of the Charismatic Movement on classical Pentecostalism can be seen in the disappearance of many of these taboos since the 1960s, apart from certain Holiness Pentecostal denominations, such as the Apostolic Faith Church, which maintain these standards of outward holiness. Because of this, the cultural differences between classical Pentecostals and charismatics have lessened over time. The global renewal movements manifest many of these tensions as inherent characteristics of Pentecostalism and as representative of the character of global Christianity.\nBeliefs.\nPentecostalism is an evangelical faith, emphasizing the reliability of the Bible and the need for the transformation of an individual's life through faith in Jesus. Like other evangelicals, Pentecostals generally adhere to the Bible's divine inspiration and inerrancy\u2014the belief that the Bible, in the original manuscripts in which it was written, is without error. Pentecostals emphasize the teaching of the \"full gospel\" or \"foursquare gospel\". The term \"foursquare\" refers to the four fundamental beliefs of Pentecostalism: Jesus saves according to ; baptizes with the Holy Spirit according to Acts 2:4; heals bodily according to James 5:15; and is coming again to receive those who are saved according to 1 Thessalonians 4:16\u201317.\nSalvation.\nThe central belief of classical Pentecostalism is that through the death, burial, and resurrection of Jesus Christ, sins can be forgiven and humanity reconciled with God. This is the Gospel or \"good news\". The fundamental requirement of Pentecostalism is that one be born again. The new birth is received by the grace of God through faith in Christ as Lord and Savior. In being born again, the believer is regenerated, justified, adopted into the family of God, and the Holy Spirit's work of sanctification is initiated.\nClassical Pentecostal soteriology is generally Arminian rather than Calvinist. The security of the believer is a doctrine held within Pentecostalism; nevertheless, this security is conditional upon continual faith and repentance. Pentecostals believe in both a literal heaven and hell, the former for those who have accepted God's gift of salvation and the latter for those who have rejected it.\nFor most Pentecostals there is no other requirement to receive salvation. Baptism with the Holy Spirit and speaking in tongues are not generally required, though Pentecostal converts are usually encouraged to seek these experiences. A notable exception is Jesus's Name Pentecostalism, most adherents of which believe both water baptism and Spirit baptism are integral components of salvation.\nBaptism with the Holy Spirit.\nPentecostals identify three distinct uses of the word \"baptism\" in the New Testament:\nWhile the figure of Jesus Christ and his redemptive work are at the center of Pentecostal theology, that redemptive work is believed to provide for a fullness of the Holy Spirit of which believers in Christ may take advantage. The majority of Pentecostals believe that at the moment a person is born again, the new believer has the presence (indwelling) of the Holy Spirit. While the Spirit \"dwells\" in every Christian, Pentecostals believe that all Christians should seek to be \"filled\" with him. The Spirit's \"filling\", \"falling upon\", \"coming upon\", or being \"poured out upon\" believers is called the baptism with the Holy Spirit. Pentecostals define it as a definite experience occurring after salvation whereby the Holy Spirit comes upon the believer to anoint and empower them for special service. It has also been described as \"a baptism into the love of God\".\nThe main purpose of the experience is to grant power for Christian service. Other purposes include power for spiritual warfare (the Christian struggles against spiritual enemies and thus requires spiritual power), power for overflow (the believer's experience of the presence and power of God in their life flows out into the lives of others), and power for ability (to follow divine direction, to face persecution, to exercise spiritual gifts for the edification of the church, etc.).\nPentecostals believe that the baptism with the Holy Spirit is available to all Christians. Repentance from sin and being born again are fundamental requirements to receive it. There must also be in the believer a deep conviction of needing more of God in their life, and a measure of consecration by which the believer yields themself to the will of God. Citing instances in the Book of Acts where believers were Spirit baptized before they were baptized with water, most Pentecostals believe a Christian need not have been baptized in water to receive Spirit baptism. However, Pentecostals do believe that the biblical pattern is \"repentance, regeneration, water baptism, and then the baptism with the Holy Ghost\". There are Pentecostal believers who have claimed to receive their baptism with the Holy Spirit while being water baptized.\nIt is received by having faith in God's promise to fill the believer and in yielding the entire being to Christ. Certain conditions, if present in a believer's life, could cause delay in receiving Spirit baptism, such as \"weak faith, unholy living, imperfect consecration, and egocentric motives\". In the absence of these, Pentecostals teach that seekers should maintain a persistent faith in the knowledge that God will fulfill his promise. For Pentecostals, there is no prescribed manner in which a believer will be filled with the Spirit. It could be expected or unexpected, during public or private prayer.\nPentecostals expect certain results following baptism with the Holy Spirit. Some of these are immediate while others are enduring or permanent. Most Pentecostal denominations teach that speaking in tongues is an immediate or initial physical evidence that one has received the experience. Some teach that any of the gifts of the Spirit can be evidence of having received Spirit baptism. Other immediate evidences include giving God praise, having joy, and desiring to testify about Jesus. Enduring or permanent results in the believer's life include Christ glorified and revealed in a greater way, a \"deeper passion for souls\", greater power to witness to nonbelievers, a more effective prayer life, greater love for and insight into the Bible, and the manifestation of the gifts of the Spirit.\nHoliness Pentecostals, with their background in the Wesleyan-Holiness movement, historically teach that baptism with the Holy Spirit, as evidenced by glossolalia, is the third work of grace, which follows the new birth (first work of grace) and entire sanctification (second work of grace).\nWhile the baptism with the Holy Spirit is a definite experience in a believer's life, Pentecostals view it as just the beginning of living a Spirit-filled life. Pentecostal teaching stresses the importance of continually being filled with the Spirit. There is only one baptism with the Spirit, but there should be many infillings with the Spirit throughout the believer's life.\nDivine healing.\nPentecostalism is a holistic faith, and the belief that Jesus is Healer is one quarter of the full gospel. Pentecostals cite four major reasons for believing in divine healing: 1) it is reported in the Bible, 2) Jesus's healing ministry is included in his atonement (thus divine healing is part of salvation), 3) \"the whole gospel is for the whole person\"\u2014spirit, soul, and body, 4) sickness is a consequence of the Fall of Man and salvation is ultimately the restoration of the fallen world. In the words of Pentecostal scholar Vernon L. Purdy, \"Because sin leads to human suffering, it was only natural for the Early Church to understand the ministry of Christ as the alleviation of human suffering, since he was God's answer to sin ... The restoration of fellowship with God is the most important thing, but this restoration not only results in spiritual healing but many times in physical healing as well.\" In the book \"In Pursuit of Wholeness: Experiencing God's Salvation for the Total Person\", Pentecostal writer and Church historian Wilfred Graves Jr. describes the healing of the body as a physical expression of salvation.\nFor Pentecostals, spiritual and physical healing serves as a reminder and testimony to Christ's future return when his people will be completely delivered from all the consequences of the fall. However, not everyone receives healing when they pray. It is God in his sovereign wisdom who either grants or withholds healing. Common reasons that are given in answer to the question as to why all are not healed include: God teaches through suffering, healing is not always immediate, lack of faith on the part of the person needing healing, and personal sin in one's life (however, this does not mean that all illness is caused by personal sin). Regarding healing and prayer Purdy states:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;On the other hand, it appears from Scripture that when we are sick we should be prayed for, and as we shall see later in this chapter, it appears that God's normal will is to heal. Instead of expecting that it is not God's will to heal us, we should pray with faith, trusting that God cares for us and that the provision He has made in Christ for our healing is sufficient. If He does not heal us, we will continue to trust Him. The victory many times will be procured in faith (see Heb. 10:35\u201336; 1 John 5:4\u20135).\nPentecostals believe that prayer and faith are central in receiving healing. Pentecostals look to scriptures such as James 5:13\u201316 for direction regarding healing prayer. One can pray for one's own healing (verse 13) and for the healing of others (verse 16); no special gift or clerical status is necessary. Verses 14\u201316 supply the framework for congregational healing prayer. The sick person expresses their faith by calling for the elders of the church who pray over and anoint the sick with olive oil. The oil is a symbol of the Holy Spirit.\nBesides prayer, there are other ways in which Pentecostals believe healing can be received. One way is based on Mark 16:17\u201318 and involves believers laying hands on the sick. This is done in imitation of Jesus who often healed in this manner. Another method that is found in some Pentecostal churches is based on the account in Acts 19:11\u201312 where people were healed when given handkerchiefs or aprons worn by the Apostle Paul. This practice is described by Duffield and Van Cleave in \"Foundations of Pentecostal Theology\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Many Churches have followed a similar pattern and have given out small pieces of cloth over which prayer has been made, and sometimes they have been anointed with oil. Some most remarkable miracles have been reported from the use of this method. It is understood that the prayer cloth has no virtue in itself, but provides an act of faith by which one's attention is directed to the Lord, who is the Great Physician.\nDuring the initial decades of the movement, Pentecostals thought it was sinful to take medicine or receive care from doctors. Over time, Pentecostals moderated their views concerning medicine and doctor visits; however, a minority of Pentecostal churches continues to rely exclusively on prayer and divine healing. For example, doctors in the United Kingdom reported that a minority of Pentecostal HIV patients were encouraged to stop taking their medicines and parents were told to stop giving medicine to their children, trends that placed lives at risk.\nEschatology.\nThe last element of the gospel is that Jesus is the \"Soon Coming King\". For Pentecostals, \"every moment is eschatological\" since at any time Christ may return. This \"personal and imminent\" Second Coming is for Pentecostals the motivation for practical Christian living including: personal holiness, meeting together for worship, faithful Christian service, and evangelism (both personal and worldwide). Globally, Pentecostal attitudes to the End Times range from enthusiastic participation in the prophecy subculture to a complete lack of interest through to the more recent, optimistic belief in the coming restoration of God's kingdom.\nHistorically, however, they have been premillennial dispensationalists believing in a pretribulation rapture. Pre-tribulation rapture theology was popularized extensively in the 1830s by John Nelson Darby, and further popularized in the United States in the early 20th century by the wide circulation of the Scofield Reference Bible.\nSpiritual gifts.\nPentecostals are continuationists, meaning they believe that all of the spiritual gifts, including the miraculous or \"sign gifts\", found in http://, http://, http://, and http:// continue to operate within the Church in the present time. Pentecostals place the gifts of the Spirit in context with the fruit of the Spirit. The fruit of the Spirit is the result of the new birth and continuing to abide in Christ. It is by the fruit exhibited that spiritual character is assessed. Spiritual gifts are received as a result of the baptism with the Holy Spirit. As gifts freely given by the Holy Spirit, they cannot be earned or merited, and they are not appropriate criteria with which to evaluate one's spiritual life or maturity. Pentecostals see in the biblical writings of Paul an emphasis on having both character and power, exercising the gifts in love.\nJust as fruit should be evident in the life of every Christian, Pentecostals believe that every Spirit-filled believer is given some capacity for the manifestation of the Spirit. The exercise of a gift is considered to be a manifestation of the Spirit, not of the gifted person, and though the gifts operate through people, they are primarily gifts given to the Church. They are valuable only when they minister spiritual profit and edification to the body of Christ. Pentecostal writers point out that the lists of spiritual gifts in the New Testament do not seem to be exhaustive. It is generally believed that there are as many gifts as there are useful ministries and functions in the Church. A spiritual gift is often exercised in partnership with another gift. For example, in a Pentecostal church service, the gift of tongues might be exercised followed by the operation of the gift of interpretation.\nAccording to Pentecostals, all manifestations of the Spirit are to be judged by the church. This is made possible, in part, by the gift of discerning of spirits, which is the capacity for discerning the source of a spiritual manifestation\u2014whether from the Holy Spirit, an evil spirit, or from the human spirit. While Pentecostals believe in the current operation of all the spiritual gifts within the church, their teaching on some of these gifts has generated more controversy and interest than others. There are different ways in which the gifts have been grouped. W. R. Jones suggests three categories, illumination (Word of Wisdom, word of knowledge, discerning of spirits), action (Faith, working of miracles and gifts of healings) and communication (Prophecy, tongues and interpretation of tongues). Duffield and Van Cleave use two categories: the vocal and the power gifts.\nVocal gifts.\nThe gifts of prophecy, tongues, interpretation of tongues, and words of wisdom and knowledge are called the vocal gifts. Pentecostals look to http:// for instructions on the proper use of the spiritual gifts, especially the vocal ones. Pentecostals believe that prophecy is the vocal gift of preference, a view derived from 1 Corinthians 14. Some teach that the gift of tongues is equal to the gift of prophecy when tongues are interpreted. Prophetic and glossolalic utterances are not to replace the preaching of the Word of God nor to be considered as equal to or superseding the written Word of God, which is the final authority for determining teaching and doctrine.\nWord of wisdom and word of knowledge.\nPentecostals understand the word of wisdom and the word of knowledge to be supernatural revelations of wisdom and knowledge by the Holy Spirit. The word of wisdom is defined as a revelation of the Holy Spirit that applies scriptural wisdom to a specific situation that a Christian community faces. The word of knowledge is often defined as the ability of one person to know what God is currently doing or intends to do in the life of another person.\nProphecy.\nPentecostals agree with the Protestant principle of \"sola Scriptura\". The Bible is the \"all sufficient rule for faith and practice\"; it is \"fixed, finished, and objective revelation\". Alongside this high regard for the authority of scripture is a belief that the gift of prophecy continues to operate within the Church. Pentecostal theologians Duffield and van Cleave described the gift of prophecy in the following manner: \"Normally, in the operation of the gift of prophecy, the Spirit heavily anoints the believer to speak forth to the body not premeditated words, but words the Spirit supplies spontaneously in order to uplift and encourage, incite to faithful obedience and service, and to bring comfort and consolation.\"\nAny Spirit-filled Christian, according to Pentecostal theology, has the potential, as with all the gifts, to prophesy. Sometimes, prophecy can overlap with preaching \"where great unpremeditated truth or application is provided by the Spirit, or where special revelation is given beforehand in prayer and is empowered in the delivery\".\nWhile a prophetic utterance at times might foretell future events, this is not the primary purpose of Pentecostal prophecy and is never to be used for personal guidance. For Pentecostals, prophetic utterances are fallible, i.e. subject to error. Pentecostals teach that believers must discern whether the utterance has edifying value for themselves and the local church. Because prophecies are subject to the judgement and discernment of other Christians, most Pentecostals teach that prophetic utterances should never be spoken in the first person (e.g. \"I, the Lord\") but always in the third person (e.g. \"Thus saith the Lord\" or \"The Lord would have...\").\nTongues and interpretation.\nA Pentecostal believer in a spiritual experience may vocalize fluent, unintelligible utterances (glossolalia) or articulate a natural language previously unknown to them (xenoglossy). Commonly termed \"speaking in tongues\", this vocal phenomenon is believed by Pentecostals to include an endless variety of languages. According to Pentecostal theology, the language spoken (1) may be an unlearned human language, such as the Bible claims happened on the Day of Pentecost, or (2) it might be of heavenly (angelic) origin. In the first case, tongues could work as a sign by which witness is given to the unsaved. In the second case, tongues are used for praise and prayer when the mind is superseded and \"the speaker in tongues speaks to God, speaks mysteries, and ... no one understands him\".\nWithin Pentecostalism, there is a belief that speaking in tongues serves two functions. Tongues as the \"initial evidence\" of the third work of grace, baptism with the Holy Spirit, and in individual prayer serves a different purpose than tongues as a spiritual gift. All Spirit-filled believers, according to initial evidence proponents, will speak in tongues when baptized in the Spirit and, thereafter, will be able to express prayer and praise to God in an unknown tongue. This type of tongue speaking forms an important part of many Pentecostals' personal daily devotions. When used in this way, it is referred to as a \"prayer language\" as the believer is speaking unknown languages not for the purpose of communicating with others but for \"communication between the soul and God\". Its purpose is for the spiritual edification of the individual. Pentecostals believe the private use of tongues in prayer (i.e. \"prayer in the Spirit\") \"promotes a deepening of the prayer life and the spiritual development of the personality\". From http://, Pentecostals believe that the Spirit intercedes for believers through tongues; in other words, when a believer prays in an unknown tongue, the Holy Spirit is supernaturally directing the believer's prayer.\nBesides acting as a prayer language, tongues also function as the \"gift of tongues\". Not all Spirit-filled believers possess the gift of tongues. Its purpose is for gifted persons to publicly \"speak with God in praise, to pray or sing in the Spirit, or to speak forth in the congregation\". There is a division among Pentecostals on the relationship between the gifts of tongues and prophecy. One school of thought believes that the gift of tongues is always directed from man to God, in which case it is always prayer or praise spoken to God but in the hearing of the entire congregation for encouragement and consolation. Another school of thought believes that the gift of tongues can be prophetic, in which case the believer delivers a \"message in tongues\"\u2014a prophetic utterance given under the influence of the Holy Spirit\u2014to a congregation.\nWhether prophetic or not, however, Pentecostals are agreed that all public utterances in an unknown tongue must be interpreted in the language of the gathered Christians. This is accomplished by the gift of interpretation, and this gift can be exercised by the same individual who first delivered the message (if he or she possesses the gift of interpretation) or by another individual who possesses the required gift. If a person with the gift of tongues is not sure that a person with the gift of interpretation is present and is unable to interpret the utterance themself, then the person should not speak. Pentecostals teach that those with the gift of tongues should pray for the gift of interpretation. Pentecostals do not require that an interpretation be a literal word-for-word translation of a glossolalic utterance. Rather, as the word \"interpretation\" implies, Pentecostals expect only an accurate explanation of the utterance's meaning.\nBesides the gift of tongues, Pentecostals may also use glossolalia as a form of praise and worship in corporate settings. Pentecostals in a church service may pray aloud in tongues while others pray simultaneously in the common language of the gathered Christians. This use of glossolalia is seen as an acceptable form of prayer and therefore requires no interpretation. Congregations may also corporately sing in tongues, a phenomenon known as singing in the Spirit.\nSpeaking in tongues is not universal among Pentecostal Christians. In 2006, a ten-country survey by the Pew Forum on Religion and Public Life found that 49 percent of Pentecostals in the US, 50 percent in Brazil, 41 percent in South Africa, and 54 percent in India said they \"never\" speak or pray in tongues.\nPower gifts.\nThe gifts of power are distinct from the vocal gifts in that they do not involve utterance. Included in this category are the gift of faith, gifts of healing, and the gift of miracles. The gift of faith (sometimes called \"special\" faith) is different from \"saving faith\" and normal Christian faith in its degree and application. This type of faith is a manifestation of the Spirit granted only to certain individuals \"in times of special crisis or opportunity\" and endues them with \"a divine certainty ... that triumphs over everything\". It is sometimes called the \"faith of miracles\" and is fundamental to the operation of the other two power gifts.\nTrinitarianism and Oneness.\nDuring the 1910s, the Finished Work Pentecostal movement split over the nature of the Godhead into two camps \u2013 Trinitarian and Oneness. The Oneness doctrine viewed the doctrine of the Trinity as polytheistic.\nThe majority of Pentecostal denominations believe in the doctrine of the Trinity, which is considered by them to be Christian orthodoxy; these include Holiness Pentecostals and Finished Work Pentecostals. Oneness Pentecostals are nontrinitarian Christians, believing in the Oneness theology about God.\nIn Oneness theology, the Godhead is not three persons united by one substance, but one God who reveals himself in three different modes. Thus, God relates himself to humanity as our Father within creation, he manifests himself in human form as the Son by virtue of his incarnation as Jesus Christ (), and he is the Holy Spirit () by way of his activity in the life of the believer. Oneness Pentecostals believe that Jesus is the name of God and therefore baptize in the name of Jesus Christ as performed by the apostles (), fulfilling the instructions left by Jesus Christ in the Great Commission (), they believe that Jesus is the only name given to mankind by which we must be saved ().\nThe Oneness doctrine may be considered a form of Modalism, an ancient teaching considered heresy by the Roman Catholic Church and other trinitarian denominations. In contrast, Trinitarian Pentecostals hold to the doctrine of the Trinity, that is, the Godhead is not seen as simply three modes or titles of God manifest at different points in history, but is constituted of three completely distinct persons who are co-eternal with each other and united as one substance. The Son is from all eternity who became incarnate as Jesus, and likewise the Holy Spirit is from all eternity, and both are with the eternal Father from all eternity.\nWorship.\nTraditional Pentecostal worship has been described as a \"gestalt made up of prayer, singing, sermon, the operation of the gifts of the Spirit, altar intercession, offering, announcements, testimonies, musical specials, Scripture reading, and occasionally the Lord's supper\". Russell P. Spittler identified five values that govern Pentecostal spirituality. The first was individual experience, which emphasizes the Holy Spirit's personal work in the life of the believer. Second was orality, a feature that might explain Pentecostalism's success in evangelizing nonliterate cultures. The third was spontaneity; members of Pentecostal congregations are expected to follow the leading of the Holy Spirit, sometimes resulting in unpredictable services. The fourth value governing Pentecostal spirituality was \"otherworldliness\" or asceticism, which was partly informed by Pentecostal eschatology. The final and fifth value was a commitment to biblical authority, and many of the distinctive practices of Pentecostals are derived from a literal reading of scripture.\nSpontaneity is a characteristic element of Pentecostal worship. This was especially true in the movement's earlier history, when anyone could initiate a song, chorus, or spiritual gift. Even as Pentecostalism has become more organized and formal, with more control exerted over services, the concept of spontaneity has retained an important place within the movement and continues to inform stereotypical imagery, such as the derogatory \"holy roller\". The phrase \"Quench not the Spirit\", derived from 1 Thessalonians 5:19, is used commonly and captures the thought behind Pentecostal spontaneity.\nPrayer plays an important role in Pentecostal worship. Collective oral prayer, whether glossolalic or in the vernacular or a mix of both, is common. While praying, individuals may lay hands on a person in need of prayer, or they may raise their hands in response to biblical commands (1 Timothy 2:8). The raising of hands (which itself is a revival of the ancient orans posture) is an example of some Pentecostal worship practices that have been widely adopted by the larger Christian world. Pentecostal musical and liturgical practice have also played an influential role in shaping contemporary worship trends, popularized by the leading producers of Christian music from artists such as Chris Tomlin, Michael W. Smith, Zach Williams, Darlene Zschech, Matt Maher, Phil Wickham, Grace Larson, Don Moen and bands such as Hillsong Worship, Bethel Worship, Jesus Culture and Sovereign Grace Music.\nSeveral spontaneous practices have become characteristic of Pentecostal worship. Being \"slain in the Spirit\" or \"falling under the power\" is a form of prostration in which a person falls backwards, as if fainting, while being prayed over. It is at times accompanied by glossolalic prayer; at other times, the person is silent. It is believed by Pentecostals to be caused by \"an overwhelming experience of the presence of God\", and Pentecostals sometimes receive the baptism in the Holy Spirit in this posture. Another spontaneous practice is \"dancing in the Spirit\". This is when a person leaves their seat \"spontaneously 'dancing' with eyes closed without bumping into nearby persons or objects\". It is explained as the worshipper becoming \"so enraptured with God's presence that the Spirit takes control of physical motions as well as the spiritual and emotional being\". Pentecostals derive biblical precedent for dancing in worship from 2 Samuel 6, where David danced before the Lord. A similar occurrence is often called \"running the aisles\". The \"Jericho march\" (inspired by Book of Joshua 6:1\u201327) is a celebratory practice occurring at times of high enthusiasm. Members of a congregation began to spontaneously leave their seats and walk in the aisles inviting other members as they go. Eventually, a full column forms around the perimeter of the meeting space as worshipers march with singing and loud shouts of praise and jubilation. Another spontaneous manifestation found in some Pentecostal churches is holy laughter, in which worshippers uncontrollably laugh. In some Pentecostal churches, these spontaneous expressions are primarily found in revival services (especially those that occur at tent revivals and camp meetings) or special prayer meetings, being rare or non-existent in the main services.\nOrdinances.\nLike other Christian churches, Pentecostals believe that certain rituals or ceremonies were instituted as a pattern and command by Jesus in the New Testament. Pentecostals commonly call these ceremonies ordinances. Many Christians call these sacraments, but this term is not generally used by Pentecostals and certain other Protestants as they do not see ordinances as imparting grace. Instead the term sacerdotal ordinance is used to denote the distinctive belief that grace is received directly from God by the congregant with the officiant serving only to facilitate rather than acting as a conduit or vicar.\nThe ordinance of water baptism is an outward symbol of an inner conversion that has already taken place. Therefore, most Pentecostal groups practice believer's baptism by immersion. The majority of Pentecostals do not view baptism as essential for salvation, and likewise, most Pentecostals are Trinitarian and use the traditional Trinitarian baptismal formula. However, Oneness Pentecostals view baptism as an essential and necessary part of the salvation experience and, as non-Trinitarians, reject the use of the traditional baptismal formula. For more information on Oneness Pentecostal baptismal beliefs, see the following section on Statistics and denominations.\nThe ordinance of Holy Communion, or the Lord's Supper, is seen as a direct command given by Jesus at the Last Supper, to be done in remembrance of him. Pentecostal denominations, who traditionally support the temperance movement, reject the use of wine as part of communion, using grape juice instead.\nCertain Pentecostal denominations observe the ordinance of women's headcovering in obedience to .\nFoot washing is also held as an ordinance by some Pentecostals. It is considered an \"ordinance of humility\" because Jesus showed humility when washing his disciples' feet in John 13:14\u201317. Other Pentecostals do not consider it an ordinance; however, they may still recognize spiritual value in the practice.\nStatistics and denominations.\nAccording to various scholars and sources, Pentecostalism is the fastest-growing religious movement in the world; this growth is primarily due to religious conversion to Pentecostal and Charismatic Christianity. According to Pulitzer Center 35,000 people become Pentecostal or \"Born again\" every day. According to scholar Keith Smith of Georgia State University \"many scholars claim that Pentecostalism is the fastest growing religious phenomenon in human history\", and according to scholar Peter L. Berger of Boston University \"the spread of Pentecostal Christianity may be the fastest growing movement in the history of religion\".\nIn 1995, David Barrett estimated there were 217\u00a0million \"Denominational Pentecostals\" throughout the world. In 2011, a Pew Forum study of global Christianity found that there were an estimated 279\u00a0million classical Pentecostals, making 4 percent of the total world population and 12.8 percent of the world's Christian population Pentecostal. The study found \"Historically Pentecostal denominations\" (a category that did not include independent Pentecostal churches) to be the largest Protestant denominational family.\nThe largest percentage of Pentecostals are found in Sub-Saharan Africa (44 percent), followed by the Americas (37 percent) and Asia and the Pacific (16 percent). The movement is witnessing its greatest surge today in the global South, which includes Africa, Central and Latin America, and most of Asia. There are 740 recognized Pentecostal denominations, but the movement also has a significant number of independent churches that are not organized into denominations.\nAmong the over 700 Pentecostal denominations, 240 are classified as part of Wesleyan, Holiness, or \"Methodistic\" Pentecostalism. Until 1910, Pentecostalism was universally Wesleyan in doctrine, and Holiness Pentecostalism continues to predominate in the Southern United States. Wesleyan Pentecostals teach that there are three crisis experiences within a Christian's life: conversion, sanctification, and Spirit baptism. They inherited the holiness movement's belief in entire sanctification. According to Wesleyan Pentecostals, entire sanctification is a definite event that occurs after salvation but before Spirit baptism. This inward experience cleanses and enables the believer to live a life of outward holiness. This personal cleansing prepares the believer to receive the baptism in the Holy Spirit. Holiness Pentecostal denominations include the Apostolic Faith Church, Calvary Holiness Association, Congregational Holiness Church, Free Gospel Church, Church of God in Christ, Church of God (Cleveland, Tennessee), and the Pentecostal Holiness Church. In the United States, many Holiness Pentecostal clergy are educated at the Heritage Bible College in Savannah, Georgia and the Free Gospel Bible Institute in Murrysville, Pennsylvania.\nAfter William H. Durham began preaching his Finished Work doctrine in 1910, many Pentecostals rejected the Wesleyan doctrine of entire sanctification and began to teach that there were only two definite crisis experiences in the life of a Christian: conversion and Spirit baptism. These Finished Work Pentecostals (also known as \"Baptistic\" or \"Reformed\" Pentecostals because many converts were originally drawn from Baptist and Presbyterian backgrounds) teach that a person is initially sanctified at the moment of conversion. After conversion, the believer grows in grace through a lifelong process of progressive sanctification. There are 390 denominations that adhere to the finished work position. They include the Assemblies of God, the Foursquare Gospel Church, the Pentecostal Church of God, and the Open Bible Churches.\nThe 1904\u20131905 Welsh Revival laid the foundation for British Pentecostalism including a distinct family of denominations known as Apostolic Pentecostalism (not to be confused with Oneness Pentecostalism). These Pentecostals are led by a hierarchy of living apostles, prophets, and other charismatic offices. Apostolic Pentecostals are found worldwide in 30 denominations, including the Apostolic Church based in the United Kingdom.\nThere are 80 Pentecostal denominations that are classified as Jesus's Name or Oneness Pentecostalism (often self identifying as \"Apostolic Pentecostals\"). These differ from the rest of Pentecostalism in several significant ways. Oneness Pentecostals reject the doctrine of the Trinity. They do not describe God as three persons but rather as three manifestations of the one living God. Oneness Pentecostals practice Jesus's Name Baptism\u2014water baptisms performed in the name of Jesus Christ, rather than that of the Trinity. Oneness Pentecostal adherents believe repentance, baptism in Jesus's name, and Spirit baptism are all essential elements of the conversion experience. Oneness Pentecostals hold that repentance is necessary before baptism to make the ordinance valid, and receipt of the Holy Spirit manifested by speaking in other tongues is necessary afterwards, to complete the work of baptism. This differs from other Pentecostals, along with evangelical Christians in general, who see only repentance and faith in Christ as essential to salvation. This has resulted in Oneness believers being accused by some (including other Pentecostals) of a \"works-salvation\" soteriology, a charge they vehemently deny. Oneness Pentecostals insist that salvation comes by grace through faith in Christ, coupled with obedience to his command to be \"born of water and of the Spirit\"; hence, no good works or obedience to laws or rules can save anyone. For them, baptism is not seen as a \"work\" but rather the indispensable means that Jesus himself provided to come into his kingdom. The major Oneness churches include the United Pentecostal Church International and the Pentecostal Assemblies of the World.\nIn addition to the denominational Pentecostal churches, there are many Pentecostal churches that choose to exist independently of denominational oversight. Some of these churches may be doctrinally identical to the various Pentecostal denominations, while others may adopt beliefs and practices that differ considerably from classical Pentecostalism, such as Word of Faith teachings or Kingdom Now theology. Some of these groups have been successful in utilizing the mass media, especially television and radio, to spread their message.\nAccording to a denomination census in 2024, the Assemblies of God, the largest Pentecostal denomination in the world, has 450,106 churches and 86,143,293 members worldwide. The other major international Pentecostal denominations are the Apostolic Church with 15,000,000 members, the Church of God (Cleveland) with 36,000 churches and 7,000,000 members, The Foursquare Church with 67,500 churches and 8,800,000 members, and the United Pentecostal Church International with 45,521 church and 5,800,000 members.\nAmong the censuses carried out by Pentecostal denominations published in 2020, those claiming the most members were on each continent:\nIn Africa, the Redeemed Christian Church of God, with 14,000 churches and 5 million members.\nIn North America, the Assemblies of God USA with 12,986 churches and 1,810,093 members.\nIn South America, the General Convention of the Assemblies of God in Brazil with 12,000,000 members.\nIn Asia, the Indonesian Bethel Church with 5,000 churches and 3,000,000 members.\nIn Europe, the Assemblies of God of France with 658 churches and 40,000 members.\nIn Oceania, the Australian Christian Churches with 1,000 churches and 375,000 members.\nAssessment from the social sciences.\nZora Neale Hurston.\nZora Neale Hurston performed anthropological and sociological studies examining the spread of Pentecostalism, published posthumously in a collection of essays called \"The Sanctified Church\". According to scholar of religion Ashon Crawley, Hurston's analysis is important because she understood the class struggle that this seemingly new religiocultural movement articulated: \"The Sanctified Church is a protest against the high-brow tendency in Negro Protestant congregations as the Negroes gain more education and wealth.\" She stated that this sect was \"a revitalizing element in Negro music and religion\" and that this collection of groups was \"putting back into Negro religion those elements which were brought over from Africa and grafted onto Christianity.\" Crawley would go on to argue that the shouting that Hurston documented was evidence of what Martinique psychoanalyst Frantz Fanon called the refusal of positionality wherein \"no strategic position is given preference\" as the creation of, the grounds for, social form.\nRural Pentecostalism.\nPentecostalism is a religious phenomenon more visible in the cities. However, it has attracted significant rural populations in Latin America, Africa, and Eastern Europe. Sociologist David Martin has called attention on an overview on the rural Protestantism in Latin America, focusing on the indigenous and peasant conversion to Pentecostalism. The cultural change resulting from the countryside modernization has reflected on the peasant way of life. Consequently, many peasants \u2013 especially in Latin America \u2013 have experienced collective conversion to different forms of Pentecostalism and interpreted as a response to modernization in the countryside.\nRather than a mere religious shift from folk Catholicism to Pentecostalism, Peasant Pentecostals have dealt with agency to employ many of their cultural resources to respond development projects in a modernization framework.\nResearching Guatemalan peasants and indigenous communities, Sheldon Annis argued that conversion to Pentecostalism was a way to quit the burdensome obligations of the cargo-system. Mayan folk Catholicism has many fiestas with a rotation leadership who must pay the costs and organize the yearly patron-saint festivities. One of the socially-accepted ways to opt out those obligations was to convert to Pentecostalism. By doing so, the Pentecostal Peasant engage in a \"penny capitalism\". In the same lines of moral obligations but with different mechanism economic self-help, Paul Chandler has compared the differences between Catholic and Pentecostal peasants, and has found a web of reciprocity among Catholics compadres, which the Pentecostals lacked. However, Alves has found that the different Pentecostal congregations replaces the compadrazgo system and still provide channels to exercise the reciprocal obligations that the peasant moral economy demands.\nConversion to Pentecostalism provides a rupture with a socially disrupted past while allowing to maintain elements of the peasant ethos. Brazil has provided many cases to evaluate this thesis. Hoekstra has found out that rural Pentecostalism more as a continuity of the traditional past though with some ruptures. Anthropologist Brand\u00e3o sees the small town and rural Pentecostalism as another face for folk religiosity instead of a path to modernization. With similar finding, Abumanssur regards Pentecostalism as an attempt to conciliate traditional worldviews of folk religion with modernity.\nIdentity shift has been noticed among rural converts to Pentecostalism. Indigenous and peasant communities have found in the Pentecostal religion a new identity that helps them navigate the challenges posed by modernity. This identity shift corroborates the thesis that the peasant Pentecostals pave their own ways when facing modernization.\nPentecostalism in Academia.\nAt the heart of Pentecostalism's distinctive doctrine is a divergence from the typical understanding of the function of the Holy Spirit in the life of a believer. This nuanced approach to the function of the Holy Spirit is based on the Day of Pentecost narrative from Acts 2 and has caused significant tension with other Christian traditions. Thus, foundational Pentecostal scholarship explores how a Pentecostal understands the function of the Holy Spirit, the hermenuetical apparatus a Pentecostal may use to interpret and exposit the Day of Pentecost narrative, the resulting Pentecostal ecclessiology and its significance. Roger Stronstad with his \"The Charismatic Theology of St. Luke\" serves as the progenitor of Pentecostal scholarship.\nControversies and criticism.\nVarious Christian groups have criticized the Pentecostal and charismatic movement for too much attention to mystical manifestations, such as glossolalia (which, for a believer, would be the obligatory sign of a baptism with the Holy Spirit); along with falls to the ground, moans and cries during worship services, as well as anti-intellectualism.\nA particularly controversial doctrine in the Evangelical Churches is that of the prosperity theology, which spread in the 1970s and 1980s in the United States, mainly through Pentecostals and charismatic televangelists. This doctrine is centered on the teaching of Christian faith as a means to enrich oneself financially and materially through a \"positive confession\" and a contribution to Christian ministries. Promises of divine healing and prosperity are guaranteed in exchange for certain amounts of donation. Some pastors threaten those who do not tithe with curses, attacks from the devil and poverty. The collections of offerings are multiple or separated in various baskets or envelopes to stimulate the contributions of the faithful. The offerings and the tithe occupies a lot of time in some worship services. Often associated with the mandatory tithe, this doctrine is sometimes compared to a religious business. In 2012, the National Council of Evangelicals of France published a document denouncing this doctrine, mentioning that prosperity was indeed possible for a believer, but that this theology taken to the extreme leads to materialism and to idolatry, which is not the purpose of the gospel. Pentecostal pastors adhering to prosperity theology have been criticized by journalists for their lavish lifestyle (luxury clothes, big houses, high end cars, private aircraft, etc.).\nIn Pentecostalism, rifts accompanied the teaching of faith healing. In some churches, pricing for prayer against promises of healing has been observed. Some pastors and evangelists have been charged with claiming false healings. Some churches have advised their members against vaccination or other medicine, stating that it is for those weak in the faith and that with a positive confession, they would be immune from the disease. Pentecostal churches that discourage the use of medicine have caused preventable deaths, sometimes leading to parents being sentenced to prison for the deaths of their children. This position is not representative of most Pentecostal churches. \"The Miraculous Healing\", published in 2015 by the National Council of Evangelicals of France, describes medicine as one of the gifts given by God to humanity. Churches and certain evangelical humanitarian organizations are also involved in medical health programs.\nIn Pentecostalism, health and sickness is understood holistically. They are not just physical, concurrently, psychological and spiritual, i.e. diseases and despair are from evil forces; devil, sin. Through spiritual intimacy with ultimate divinity any illness can be healed. Today's Pentecostals accept biomedicine, but believe that divine intervention heals even where biomedicine fails. But critics argue that Pentecostal healers induce merely a placebo effect. In the anthropological view, the placebo effect mirrors that humans are a \"socio-psycho-physical entity\", thus through symbolic manipulation i.e. strong belief on divinity, rituals and miracles, it may induce an actual healing effect on the physical level. In Pentecostalism, healing mainly is a spiritual experience. Being worthy of having an intimacy with God (i.e. ability to confess, forgiveness) gives a cathartic effect which leads to inner healing; accepting of self, healing from memories, which cleanse the root of emotional wounds and sufferings. Divine healing also addresses socially born distresses; socio gender inequalities, racial hatreds which often emerge as physical ailments by empowering patients.\nPentecostalism's divine healing practice is frequently dismissed as emotional or illogical, yet anthropological research reveals its profound cultural and social significance. Hefner demonstrates how deeply rooted Pentecostal healing is in the social structures of countries like Indonesia. Healing techniques are not superstitious; rather, they are an expression of, and response to local power structures and social hierarchies. By functioning as tools for negotiating social roles and upholding communal ties, they show that these activities address genuine social issues and are not isolated from ordinary life.\nMeyer shows how Pentecostal healing has a similar entanglement with broader cultural frameworks. Giving them a sense of empowerment dispels the notion that these activities are only a means of escape and group support. \nThe focus on divine healing frequently reflects cultural perspectives on health and wellbeing, where social and spiritual dimensions are vital to comprehending and regulating health. Even while Pentecostals occasionally choose not to receive traditional medical care, this decision is influenced by a larger cultural framework that places a high importance on spiritual guidance and communal support.\nPentecostalism's doctrine belief in faith healing has been criticized for more than just its aversion to modern medicine, their tendency to attribute mental health conditions to demonic activity has also been questioned. Faith healing has been the subject of numerous studies with a vast number of scholars aiming to either debunk or prove the effects of its use. One study however aimed rather to explore faith healing as a social construction. The study tracked the healing progress of over 100 participants. Throughout the study a significant number of participants went on to redefine their problem, such as one woman whose original problem was severe back pain; however at the conclusion of the study, she claims her troublesome relationship with her son was healed. Further the study found a correlation between those who redefine their issue and those who are more likely to claim they were healed. These findings suggest that these healings may not be a result of divine intervention. Glik stated that \"redefinitions may mirror therapeutic processes of self-discovery\" meaning these acts of faith healing may simply be the result of self-growth or the result of the restructure of one's world view as they progress into a religious world view.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;"}
{"id": "23558", "revid": "2666701", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23558", "title": "Pangenesis", "text": "Darwin's proposed mechanism for heredity\nPangenesis was Charles Darwin's hypothetical mechanism for heredity, in which he proposed that each part of the body continually emitted its own type of small organic particles called gemmules that aggregated in the gonads, contributing heritable information to the gametes. He presented this 'provisional hypothesis' in his 1868 work \"The Variation of Animals and Plants Under Domestication\", intending it to fill what he perceived as a major gap in evolutionary theory at the time. The etymology of the word comes from the Greek words \"pan\" (a prefix meaning \"whole\", \"encompassing\") and \"genesis\" (\"birth\") or \"genos\" (\"origin\"). Pangenesis mirrored ideas originally formulated by Hippocrates and other pre-Darwinian scientists, but using new concepts such as cell theory, explaining cell development as beginning with gemmules which were specified to be necessary for the occurrence of new growths in an organism, both in initial development and regeneration. It also accounted for regeneration and the Lamarckian concept of the inheritance of acquired characteristics, as a body part altered by the environment would produce altered gemmules. This made Pangenesis popular among the neo-Lamarckian school of evolutionary thought. This hypothesis was made effectively obsolete after the 1900 rediscovery among biologists of Gregor Mendel's theory of the particulate nature of inheritance.\nEarly history.\nPangenesis was similar to ideas put forth by Hippocrates, Democritus and other pre-Darwinian scientists in proposing that the whole of parental organisms participate in heredity (thus the prefix \"pan\"). Darwin wrote that Hippocrates' pangenesis was \"almost identical with mine\u2014merely a change of terms\u2014and an application of them to classes of facts necessarily unknown to the old philosopher.\"\nThe historian of science Conway Zirkle wrote that:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The hypothesis of pangenesis is as old as the belief in the inheritance of acquired characters. It was endorsed by Hippocrates, Democritus, Galen, Clement of Alexandria, Lactantius, St. Isidore of Seville, Bartholomeus Anglicus, St. Albert the Great, St. Thomas of Aquinas, Peter of Crescentius, Paracelsus, Jerome Cardan, Levinus Lemnius, Venette, John Ray, Buffon, Bonnet, Maupertuis, von Haller and Herbert Spencer.\nZirkle demonstrated that the idea of inheritance of acquired characteristics had become fully accepted by the 16th century and remained immensely popular through to the time of Lamarck's work, at which point it began to draw more criticism due to lack of hard evidence. He also stated that pangenesis was the only scientific explanation ever offered for this concept, developing from Hippocrates' belief that \"the semen was derived from the whole body.\" In the 13th century, pangenesis was commonly accepted on the principle that semen was a refined version of food unused by the body, which eventually translated to 15th and 16th century widespread use of pangenetic principles in medical literature, especially in gynecology. Later pre-Darwinian important applications of the idea included hypotheses about the origin of the differentiation of races.\nA theory put forth by Pierre Louis Maupertuis in 1745 called for particles from both parents governing the attributes of the child, although some historians have called his remarks on the subject cursory and vague.\nIn 1749, the French naturalist Georges-Louis Leclerc, Comte de Buffon developed a hypothetical system of heredity much like Darwin's pangenesis, wherein 'organic molecules' were transferred to offspring during reproduction and stored in the body during development. Commenting on Buffon's views, Darwin stated, \"If Buffon had assumed that his organic molecules had been formed by each separate unit throughout the body, his view and mine would have been very closely similar.\"\nIn 1801, Erasmus Darwin advocated a hypothesis of pangenesis in the third edition of his book \"Zoonomia\". In 1809, Jean-Baptiste Lamarck in his \"Philosophie Zoologique\" put forth evidence for the idea that characteristics acquired during the lifetime of an organism, from either environmental or behavioural effects, may be passed on to the offspring. Charles Darwin first had significant contact with Lamarckism during his time at the University of Edinburgh Medical School in the late 1820s, both through Robert Edmond Grant, whom he assisted in research, and in Erasmus's journals. Darwin's first known writings on the topic of Lamarckian ideas as they related to inheritance are found in a notebook he opened in 1837, also entitled \"Zoonomia\". Historian Jonathan Hodge states that the theory of pangenesis itself first appeared in Darwin's notebooks in 1841.\nIn 1861, the Irish physician Henry Freke developed a variant of pangenesis in his book \"Origin of Species by Means of Organic Affinity\". Freke proposed that all life was developed from microscopic organic agents which he named \"granules\", which existed as 'distinct species of organizing matter' and would develop into different biological structures.\nFour years before the publication of \"Variation\", in his 1864 book \"Principles of Biology\", Herbert Spencer proposed a theory of \"physiological units\" similar to Darwin's gemmules, which likewise were said to be related to specific body parts and responsible for the transmission of characteristics of those body parts to offspring. He supported the Lamarckian idea of transmission of acquired characteristics.\nDarwin had debated whether to publish a theory of heredity for an extended period of time due to its highly speculative nature. He decided to include pangenesis in \"Variation\" after sending a 30-page manuscript to his close friend and supporter Thomas Huxley in May 1865, which was met by significant criticism from Huxley that made Darwin even more hesitant. However, Huxley eventually advised Darwin to publish, writing: \"Somebody rummaging among your papers half a century hence will find Pangenesis &amp; say 'See this wonderful anticipation of our modern Theories\u2014and that stupid ass, Huxley, prevented his publishing them'\" Darwin's initial version of pangenesis appeared in the first edition of \"Variation\" in 1868, and was later reworked for the publication of a second edition in 1875.\nTheory.\nDarwin.\nDarwin's pangenesis theory attempted to explain the process of sexual reproduction, inheritance of traits, and complex developmental phenomena such as cellular regeneration in a unified mechanistic structure. Longshan Liu wrote that in modern terms, pangenesis deals with issues of \"dominance inheritance, graft hybridization, reversion, xenia, telegony, the inheritance of acquired characters, regeneration and many groups of facts pertaining to variation, inheritance and development.\" Mechanistically, Darwin proposed pangenesis to occur through the transfer of organic particles which he named 'gemmules.' Gemmules, which he also sometimes referred to as \"plastitudes,\" pangenes, granules, or germs, were supposed to be shed by the organs of the body and carried in the bloodstream to the reproductive organs where they accumulated in the germ cells or gametes. Their accumulation was thought to occur by some sort of a 'mutual affinity.' Each gemmule was said to be specifically related to a certain body part- as described, they did not contain information about the entire organism. The different types were assumed to be dispersed through the whole body, and capable of self-replication given 'proper nutriment'. When passed on to offspring via the reproductive process, gemmules were thought to be responsible for developing into each part of an organism and expressing characteristics inherited from both parents. Darwin thought this to occur in a literal sense: he explained cell proliferation to progress as gemmules to bind to more developed cells of their same character and mature. In this sense, the uniqueness of each individual would be due to their unique mixture of their parents' gemmules, and therefore characters. Similarity to one parent over the other could be explained by a quantitative superiority of one parent's gemmules. Yongshen Lu points out that Darwin knew of cells' ability to multiply by self-division, so it is unclear how Darwin supposed the two proliferation mechanisms to relate to each other. He did clarify in a later statement that he had always supposed gemmules to only bind to and proliferate from developing cells, not mature ones. Darwin hypothesized that gemmules might be able to survive and multiply outside of the body in a letter to J. D. Hooker in 1870.\nSome gemmules were thought to remain dormant for generations, whereas others were routinely expressed by all offspring. Every child was built up from selective expression of the mixture of the parents and grandparents' gemmules coming from either side. Darwin likened this to gardening: a flowerbed could be sprinkled with seeds \"most of which soon germinate, some lie for a period dormant, whilst others perish.\" He did not claim gemmules were in the blood, although his theory was often interpreted in this way. Responding to Fleming Jenkin's review of \"On the Origin of Species\", he argued that pangenesis would permit the preservation of some favourable variations in a population so that they wouldn't die out through blending.\nDarwin thought that environmental effects that caused altered characteristics would lead to altered gemmules for the affected body part. The altered gemmules would then have a chance of being transferred to offspring, since they were assumed to be produced throughout an organism's life. Thus, pangenesis theory allowed for the Lamarckian idea of transmission of characteristics acquired through use and disuse. Accidental gemmule development in incorrect parts of the body could explain deformations and the 'monstrosities' Darwin cited in \"Variation\".\nDe Vries.\nHugo de Vries characterized his own version of pangenesis theory in his 1889 book \"Intracellular Pangenesis\" with two propositions, of which he only accepted the first:\nI. In the cells there are numberless particles which differ from each other, and represent the individual cells, organs, functions and qualities of the whole individual. These particles are much larger than the chemical molecules and smaller than the smallest known organisms; yet they are for the most part comparable to the latter, because, like them, they can divide and multiply through nutrition and growth. They are transmitted, during cell-division, to the daughter-cells: this is the ordinary process of heredity.\nII. In addition to this, the cells of the organism, at every stage of development, throw off such particles, which are conducted to the germ-cells and transmit to them those characters which the respective cells may have acquired during development.\nOther variants.\nThe historian of science Janet Browne points out that while Spencer and Carl von N\u00e4geli also put forth ideas for systems of inheritance involving gemmules, their version of gemmules differed from Darwin's in that it contained \"a complete microscopic blueprint for an entire creature.\" Spencer published his theory of \"physiological units\" three years prior to Darwin's publication of \"Variation\". Browne adds that Darwin believed specifically in gemmules from each body part because they might explain how environmental effects could be passed on as characteristics to offspring.\nInterpretations and applications of pangenesis continued to appear frequently in medical literature up until Weismann's experiments and subsequent publication on germ-plasm theory in 1892. For instance, an address by Huxley spurred on substantial work by Dr. James Ross in linking ideas found in Darwin's pangenesis to the germ theory of disease. Ross cites the work of both Darwin and Spencer as key to his application of pangenetic theory.\nCollapse.\nGalton's experiments on rabbits.\nDarwin's half-cousin Francis Galton conducted wide-ranging inquiries into heredity which led him to refute Charles Darwin's hypothetical theory of pangenesis. In consultation with Darwin, he set out to see if gemmules were transported in the blood. In a long series of experiments from 1869 to 1871, he transfused the blood between dissimilar breeds of rabbits, and examined the features of their offspring. He found no evidence of characters transmitted in the transfused blood.\nGalton was troubled because he began the work in good faith, intending to prove Darwin right, and having praised pangenesis in \"Hereditary Genius\" in 1869. Cautiously, he criticized his cousin's theory, although qualifying his remarks by saying that Darwin's gemmules, which he called \"pangenes\", might be temporary inhabitants of the blood that his experiments had failed to pick up.\nDarwin challenged the validity of Galton's experiment, giving his reasons in an article published in \"Nature\" where he wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Now, in the chapter on Pangenesis in my \"Variation of Animals and Plants under Domestication,\" I have not said one word about the blood, or about any fluid proper to any circulating system. It is, indeed, obvious that the presence of gemmules in the blood can form no necessary part of my hypothesis; for I refer in illustration of it to the lowest animals, such as the Protozoa, which do not possess blood or any vessels; and I refer to plants in which the fluid, when present in the vessels, cannot be considered as true blood.\" He goes on to admit: \"Nevertheless, when I first heard of Mr. Galton's experiments, I did not sufficiently reflect on the subject, and saw not the difficulty of believing in the presence of gemmules in the blood.\nAfter the circulation of Galton's results, the perception of pangenesis quickly changed to severe skepticism if not outright disbelief.\nWeismann.\nAugust Weismann's idea, set out in his 1892 book \"Das Keimplasma: eine Theorie der Vererbung\" (The Germ Plasm: a Theory of Inheritance), was that the hereditary material, which he called the germ plasm, and the rest of the body (the soma) had a one-way relationship: the germ-plasm formed the body, but the body did not influence the germ-plasm, except indirectly in its participation in a population subject to natural selection. This distinction is commonly referred to as the Weismann Barrier. If correct, this made Darwin's pangenesis wrong and Lamarckian inheritance impossible. His experiment on mice, cutting off their tails and showing that their offspring had normal tails across multiple generations, was proposed as a proof of the non-existence of Lamarckian inheritance, although Peter Gauthier has argued that Weismann's experiment showed only that injury did not affect the germ plasm and neglected to test the effect of Lamarckian use and disuse. Weismann argued strongly and dogmatically for Darwinism and against neo-Lamarckism, polarising opinions among other scientists. This increased anti-Darwinian feeling, contributing to its eclipse.\nAfter pangenesis.\nDarwin's pangenesis theory was widely criticised, in part for its Lamarckian premise that parents could pass on traits acquired in their lifetime. Conversely, the neo-Lamarckians of the time seized upon pangenesis as evidence to support their case. Italian Botanist Federico Delpino's objection that gemmules' ability to self-divide is contrary to their supposedly innate nature gained considerable traction; however, Darwin was dismissive of this criticism, remarking that the particulate agents of smallpox and scarlet fever seem to have such characteristics. Lamarckism fell from favour after August Weismann's research in the 1880s indicated that changes from use (such as lifting weights to increase muscle mass) and disuse (such as being lazy and becoming weak) were not heritable. However, some scientists continued to voice their support in spite of Galton's and Weismann's results: notably, in 1900 Karl Pearson wrote that pangenesis \"is no more disproved by the statement that 'gemmules have not been found in the blood,' than the atomic theory is disproved by the fact that no atoms have been found in the air.\" Finally, the rediscovery of Mendel's Laws of Inheritance in 1900 led to pangenesis being fully set aside. Julian Huxley has observed that the later discovery of chromosomes and the research of T. H. Morgan also made pangenesis untenable.\nSome of Darwin's pangenesis principles do relate to heritable aspects of phenotypic plasticity, although the status of gemmules as a distinct class of organic particles has been firmly rejected. However, starting in the 1950s, many research groups in revisiting Galton's experiments found that heritable characteristics could indeed arise in rabbits and chickens following DNA injection or blood transfusion. This type of research originated in the Soviet Union in the late 1940s in the work of Sopikov and others, and was later corroborated by researchers in Switzerland as it was being further developed by the Soviet scientists. Notably, this work was supported in the USSR in part due to its conformation with the ideas of Trofim Lysenko, who espoused a version of neo-Lamarckism as part of Lysenkoism. Further research of this heritability of acquired characteristics developed into, in part, the modern field of epigenetics. Darwin himself had noted that \"the existence of free gemmules is a gratuitous assumption\"; by some accounts in modern interpretation, gemmules may be considered a prescient mix of DNA, RNA, proteins, prions, and other mobile elements that are heritable in a non-Mendelian manner at the molecular level. Liu points out that Darwin's ideas about gemmules replicating outside of the body are predictive of \"in vitro\" gene replication used, for instance, in PCR.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23559", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23559", "title": "Pheromones", "text": ""}
{"id": "23560", "revid": "50617487", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23560", "title": "Proboscidea", "text": "Order of mammals including elephants\nProboscidea (; from la, from grc \" \"\" ()\"\u00a0'elephant's trunk') is a taxonomic order of Afrotheria paenungulate mammals described by J. Illiger in 1811. It encompasses the elephants (family Elephantidae) and their extinct relatives. Three living species of elephant are currently recognised: the African bush elephant, the African forest elephant, and the Asian elephant.\nExtinct members of Proboscidea include the deinotheres, mastodons, gomphotheres, amebelodonts and stegodonts. The family Elephantidae also contains several extinct groups, including mammoths and \"Palaeoloxodon\". Proboscideans include some of the largest known land mammals, with the elephant \"Palaeoloxodon namadicus\" and mastodon \"\"Mammut\" borsoni\" suggested to have body masses surpassing , rivalling or exceeding paraceratheres, the otherwise largest known land mammals in size. The largest living proboscidean is the African bush elephant, with a recorded maximum size of 4 meters (13.1 feet) at the shoulder and a weight of 10.4 tonnes (11.5 short tons). In addition to their enormous size, later proboscideans are distinguished by tusks and long, muscular trunks, which were less developed or absent in early proboscideans.\nEvolution.\nOver 180 extinct members of Proboscidea have been described. The earliest members of Proboscidea like \"Eritherium\" are known from the Paleocene of Africa, around 60 million years ago, the earliest proboscideans were much smaller than living elephants, with \"Eritherium\" having a body mass of around . By the late Eocene, some members of Proboscidea like \"Barytherium\" had reached considerable size, with an estimated mass of around 2 tonnes, while others like \"Moeritherium\" are suggested to have been semi-aquatic.\nA major event in proboscidean evolution was the collision of Afro-Arabia with Eurasia, during the Early Miocene, around 18-19 million years ago allowing proboscideans to disperse from their African homeland across Eurasia, and later, around 16-15 million years ago into North America across the Bering Land Bridge. Proboscidean groups prominent during the Miocene include the deinotheres, along with the more advanced elephantimorphs, including mammutids (mastodons), gomphotheres, amebelodontids (which includes the \"shovel tuskers\" like \"Platybelodon\"), choerolophodontids and stegodontids. Around 10 million years ago, the earliest members of the family Elephantidae emerged in Africa, having originated from gomphotheres. The Late Miocene saw major climatic changes, which resulted in the decline and extinction of many proboscidean groups such as amebelodontids and choerolophodontids. The earliest members of modern genera of Elephantidae appeared during the latest Miocene-early Pliocene around 6-5 million years ago. The elephantid genera \"Elephas\" (which includes the living Asian elephant) and \"Mammuthus\" (mammoths) migrated out of Africa during the late Pliocene, around 3.6 to 3.2 million years ago.\nOver the course of the Early Pleistocene, all non-elephantid probobscideans outside of the Americas became extinct (including mammutids, gomphotheres and deinotheres), with the exception of \"Stegodon\". Gomphotheres dispersed into South America during this era as part of the Great American interchange, and mammoths migrating into North America around 1.5 million years ago. At the end of the Early Pleistocene, around 800,000 years ago the elephantid genus \"Palaeoloxodon\" dispersed outside of Africa, becoming widely distributed in Eurasia. By the beginning of the Late Pleistocene, proboscideans were represented by around 23 species. Proboscideans underwent a dramatic decline during the Late Pleistocene as part of the Late Pleistocene megafauna extinctions, with all remaining non-elephantid proboscideans (including \"Stegodon\", mastodons, and the American gomphotheres \"Cuvieronius\" and \"Notiomastodon\") and \"Palaeoloxodon\" becoming extinct, with mammoths only surviving in relict populations on islands around the Bering Strait into the Holocene, with their latest survival being on Wrangel Island around 4,000 years ago.\nThe following cladogram is based on endocasts.\nMorphology.\nOver the course of their evolution, proboscideans experienced a significant increase in body size. Some members of the families Deinotheriidae, Mammutidae, Stegodontidae and Elephantidae are thought to have exceeded modern elephants in size, with shoulder heights over and masses over , with average fully grown males of the mammutid \"\"Mammut\" borsoni\" having an estimated body mass of , making it one the largest and perhaps the largest land mammal ever, with a fragmentary specimen of the Indian elephant species \"Palaeoloxodon namadicus\" only known from a partial femur being speculatively estimated in the same study to have possibly reached a body mass of . As with other megaherbivores, including the extinct sauropod dinosaurs, the large size of proboscideans likely developed to allow them to survive on vegetation with low nutritional value. Their limbs grew longer and the feet shorter and broader. The feet were originally plantigrade and developed into a digitigrade stance with cushion pads and the sesamoid bone providing support, with this change developing around the common ancestor of Deinotheriidae and Elephantiformes. Members of Elephantiformes and Deinotheriidae have retracted nasal regions of the skull indicating the development of a trunk.\nThe skull grew larger, especially the cranium, while the neck shortened to provide better support for the skull. The increase in size led to the development and elongation of the mobile trunk to provide reach. The number of premolars, incisors and canines decreased. The cheek teeth (molars and premolars) became larger and more specialised. In Elephantiformes, the second upper incisor and lower incisor were transformed into ever growing tusks on the upper and lower jaws, while in Deinotheriidae there are only tusks on the lower jaw. The tusks are proportionally heavy for their size, being primarily composed of dentine. In primitive proboscideans, a band of enamel covers part of the tusk surface, though in many later groups including modern elephants the band is lost, with elephants only having enamel on the tusk tips of juveniles. The upper tusks were initially modest in size, but from the Late Miocene onwards proboscideans developed increasingly large tusks, with the longest ever recorded tusk being long belonging to the mammutid \"\"Mammut\" borsoni\" found in Greece, with some mammoth tusks likely weighing over . The lower tusks are generally smaller than the upper tusks, but could grow to large sizes in some species, like in \"Deinotherium\" (which lacks upper tusks), where they could grow over long, the amebelodontid \"Konobelodon\" has lower tusks long, with the longest lower tusks ever recorded being from the primitive elephantid \"Stegotetrabelodon\" which are around long.\nThe molar teeth changed from being replaced vertically as in other mammals to being replaced horizontally in the clade Elephantimorpha. While early Elephantimorpha generally had lower jaws with an elongated mandibular symphysis at the front of the jaw with well developed lower tusks/incisors, from the Late Miocene onwards, many groups convergently developed brevirostrine (shortened) lower jaws with vestigial or no lower tusks. Elephantids are distinguished from other proboscideans by a major shift in the molar morphology to parallel lophs rather than the cusps of earlier proboscideans, allowing them to become higher crowned (hypsodont) and more efficient in consuming grass.\nDwarfism.\nSeveral species of proboscideans lived on islands and experienced insular dwarfism. This occurred primarily during the Pleistocene, when some elephant populations became isolated by fluctuating sea levels, although dwarf elephants did exist earlier in the Pliocene. These elephants likely grew smaller on islands due to a lack of large or viable predator populations and limited resources. By contrast, small mammals such as rodents develop gigantism in these conditions. Dwarf proboscideans are known to have lived in Indonesia, the Channel Islands of California, and several islands of the Mediterranean.\n\"Elephas celebensis\" of Sulawesi is believed to have descended from \"Elephas planifrons\". \"Elephas falconeri\" of Malta and Sicily was only , and had probably evolved from the straight-tusked elephant. Other descendants of the straight-tusked elephant existed in Cyprus. Dwarf elephants of uncertain descent lived in Crete, Cyclades and Dodecanese, while dwarf mammoths are known to have lived in Sardinia. The Columbian mammoth colonised the Channel Islands and evolved into the pygmy mammoth. This species reached a height of and weighed . A population of small woolly mammoths survived on Wrangel Island as recently as 4,000 years ago. After their discovery in 1993, they were considered dwarf mammoths. This classification has been re-evaluated and since the Second International Mammoth Conference in 1999, these animals are no longer considered to be true \"dwarf mammoths\".\nEcology.\nIt has been suggested that members of Elephantimorpha, including mammutids, gomphotheres, and stegodontids, lived in herds like modern elephants. Analysis of remains of the American mastodon (\"Mammut americanum\") suggest that like modern elephants, that herds consisted of females and juveniles and that adult males lived solitarily or in small groups, and that adult males periodically engaged in fights with other males during periods similar to musth found in living elephants. These traits are suggested to be inherited from the last common ancestor of elephantimorphs, with musth-like behaviour also suggested to have occurred in gomphotheres. All elephantimorphs are suggested to have been capable of communication via infrasound, as found in living elephants. Deinotheres may have also lived in herds, based on tracks found in the Late Miocene of Romania. Over the course of the Neogene and Pleistocene, various members of Elephantida shifted from a browse-dominated diet towards mixed feeding or grazing.\nClassification.\nBelow is a taxonomy of proboscidean genera as of 2019.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23561", "revid": "2141280", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23561", "title": "Paranthropus", "text": "Contested extinct genus of hominins\nParanthropus is a genus of extinct hominin which contains two widely accepted species: \"P. robustus\" and \"P. boisei\". However, the validity of \"Paranthropus\" is contested, and it is sometimes considered to be synonymous with \"Australopithecus\". They are also referred to as the robust australopithecines. They lived between approximately 2.9 and at least 1 million years ago (mya) from the end of the Pliocene to the Middle Pleistocene.\n\"Paranthropus\" is characterised by robust skulls, with a prominent gorilla-like sagittal crest along the midline\u2014which suggest strong chewing muscles\u2014and broad, herbivorous teeth used for grinding. However, they likely preferred soft food over tough and hard food. Typically, \"Paranthropus\" species were generalist feeders, but while \"P. robustus\" was likely an omnivore, \"P. boisei\" seems to have been herbivorous, possibly preferring abundant bulbotubers. Paranthropoids were bipeds. Despite their robust heads, they had comparatively small bodies. Average weight and height are estimated to be at for \"P. robustus\" males, at for \"P. boisei\" males, at for \"P. robustus\" females, and at for \"P. boisei\" females.\nThey were possibly polygamous and patrilocal, but there are no modern analogues for australopithecine societies. They are associated with bone tools and contested as the earliest evidence of fire usage. They typically inhabited woodlands, and coexisted with some early human species, namely \"A. africanus\", \"H. habilis\" and \"H. erectus\". They were preyed upon by the large carnivores of the time, specifically crocodiles, leopards, sabertoothed cats and hyenas. \"Paranthropus\", specifically \"P. boisei\", was also the likely origin of genital herpes in modern humans.\nTaxonomy.\nSpecies.\n&lt;mapframe text=\"Selected Paranthropus sites from the https:// (CC BY-SA 4.0 ROCEEH)\" width=\"250\", height=\"300\"&gt;\n \"type\": \"ExternalData\",\n \"service\": \"page\",\n \"title\": \"ROCEEH/Paranthropus.map\"\n&lt;/mapframe&gt;\n\"P. robustus\".\nThe genus \"Paranthropus\" was first erected by Scottish-South African palaeontologist Robert Broom in 1938, with the type species \"P. robustus\". \"Paranthropus\" derives from Ancient Greek \u03c0\u03b1\u03c1\u03b1 \"para\" beside or alongside; and \u03ac\u03bd\u03b8\u03c1\u03c9\u03c0\u03bf\u03c2 \"\u00e1nthropos\" man. The type specimen, a male braincase, TM 1517, was discovered by schoolboy Gert Terblanche at the Kromdraai fossil site, about southwest of Pretoria, South Africa. By 1988, at least six individuals were unearthed in around the same area, now known as the Cradle of Humankind.\nIn 1948, at Swartkrans Cave, in about the same vicinity as Kromdraai, Broom and South African palaeontologist John Talbot Robinson described \"P. crassidens\" based on a subadult jaw, SK 6. He believed later \"Paranthropus\" were morphologically distinct from earlier \"Paranthropus\" in the cave\u2014that is, the Swartkrans \"Paranthropus\" were reproductively isolated from Kromdraai \"Paranthropus\" and the former eventually speciated. By 1988, several specimens from Swartkrans had been placed into \"P. crassidens\". However, this has since been synonymised with \"P. robustus\" as the two populations do not seem to be very distinct.\n\"P. boisei\".\nIn 1959, \"P. boisei\" was discovered by Mary Leakey at Olduvai Gorge, Tanzania (specimen OH 5). Her husband Louis named it \"Zinjanthropus boisei\" because he believed it differed greatly from \"Paranthropus\" and \"Australopithecus\". The name derives from \"Zinj\", an ancient Arabic word for the coast of East Africa, and \"boisei\", referring to their financial benefactor Charles Watson Boise. However, this genus was rejected at Mr. Leakey's presentation before the 4th Pan-African Congress on Prehistory, as it was based on a single specimen. The discovery of the Peninj Mandible made the Leakeys reclassify their species as \"Australopithecus (Zinjanthropus) boisei\" in 1964, but in 1967, South African palaeoanthropologist Phillip V. Tobias subsumed it into \"Australopithecus\" as \"A. boisei\". However, as more specimens were found, the combination \"Paranthropus boisei\" became more popular.\nIt is debated whether the wide range of variation in jaw size indicates simply sexual dimorphism or a grounds for identifying a new species. It could be explained as groundmass filling in cracks naturally formed after death, inflating the perceived size of the bone. \"P. boisei\" also has a notably wide range of variation in skull anatomy, but these features likely have no taxonomic bearing.\n\"P. aethiopicus\".\nIn 1968, French palaeontologists Camille Arambourg and Yves Coppens described \"Paraustralopithecus aethiopicus\" based on a toothless mandible from the Shungura Formation, Ethiopia (Omo 18). In 1976, American anthropologist Francis Clark Howell and Breton anthropologist Yves Coppens reclassified it as \"A. africanus\". In 1986, after the discovery of the skull KNM WT 17000 by English anthropologist Alan Walker and Richard Leakey classified it into \"Paranthropus\" as \"P. aethiopicus\". There is debate whether this is synonymous with \"P. boisei\", the main argument for separation being the skull seems less adapted for chewing tough vegetation.\nIn 1989, palaeoartist and zoologist Walter Ferguson reclassified KNM WT 17000 into a new species, \"walkeri\", because he considered the skull's species designation questionable as it comprised the skull whereas the holotype of \"P. aethiopicus\" comprised only the mandible. Ferguson's classification is almost universally ignored, and is considered to be synonymous with \"P. aethiopicus\".\nOthers.\nIn 2015, Ethiopian palaeoanthropologist Yohannes Haile-Selassie and colleagues described the 3.5\u20133.2 Ma \"A. deyiremeda\" based on three jawbones from the Afar Region, Ethiopia. They noted that, though it shares many similarities with \"Paranthropus\", it may not have been closely related because it lacked enlarged molars which characterize the genus. Nonetheless, in 2018, independent researcher Johan Nygren recommended moving it to \"Paranthropus\" based on dental and presumed dietary similarity.\nA 1.4 million year old jaw, designated \"SK 15\" that was discovered in 1949 in Swartkrans, initially named \"Telanthropus capensis\" and later attributed to \"Homo ergaster\" was suggested to belong to the genus \"Parathropus\" by palaeoanthropologist Cl\u00e9ment Zanolli, based on high-resolution X-ray scans and virtual 3D modeling.\nValidity.\nIn 1951, American anthropologists Sherwood Washburn and Bruce D. Patterson were the first to suggest that \"Paranthropus\" should be considered a junior synonym of \"Australopithecus\" as the former was only known from fragmentary remains at the time, and dental differences were too minute to serve as justification. In face of calls for subsumation, Leakey and Robinson continued defending its validity. Various other authors were still unsure until more complete remains were found. \"Paranthropus\" is sometimes classified as a subgenus of \"Australopithecus\".\nThere is currently no clear consensus on the validity of \"Paranthropus\". The argument rests upon whether the genus is monophyletic\u2014is composed of a common ancestor and all of its descendants\u2014and the argument against monophyly (that the genus is paraphyletic) says that \"P. robustus\" and \"P. boisei\" evolved similar gorilla-like heads independently of each other by coincidence (convergent evolution), as chewing adaptations in hominins evolve very rapidly and multiple times at various points in the family tree (homoplasy). In 1999, a chimp-like ulna forearm bone was assigned to \"P. boisei\", the first discovered ulna of the species, which was markedly different from \"P. robustus\" ulnae, which could suggest paraphyly.\nEvolution.\n\"P. aethiopicus\" is the earliest member of the genus, with the oldest remains, from the Ethiopian Omo Kibish Formation, dated to 2.6 mya at the end of the Pliocene. It is sometimes regarded as the direct ancestor of \"P. boisei\" and \"P. robustus\". It is possible that \"P. aethiopicus\" evolved even earlier, up to 3.3 mya, on the expansive Kenyan floodplains of the time. The oldest \"P. boisei\" remains date to about 2.3 mya from Malema, Malawi. \"P. boisei\" changed remarkably little over its nearly one-million-year existence. \"Paranthropus\" had spread into South Africa by 2 mya with the earliest \"P. robustus\" remains.\nIt is sometimes suggested that \"Paranthropus\" and \"Homo\" are sister taxa, both evolving from \"Australopithecus\". This may have occurred during a drying trend 2.8\u20132.5 mya in the Great Rift Valley, which caused the retreat of woodland environments in favor of open savanna, with forests growing only along rivers and lakes. \"Homo\" evolved in the former, and \"Paranthropus\" in the latter riparian environment. However, the classifications of \"Australopithecus\" species is problematic.\nAccording to a 2025 study of palaeoproteomics of \"Paranthropus\" teeth from Swartkrans Cave was able to assign the individual teeth to sex and identify patterns of diversity suggesting the existence of multiple populations. \nEvolutionary tree according to a 2019 study:\nDescription.\nSkull.\n\"Paranthropus\" had a massively built, tall and flat skull, with a prominent gorilla-like sagittal crest along the midline which anchored large temporalis muscles used in chewing. Like other australopithecines, \"Paranthropus\" exhibited sexual dimorphism, with males notably larger than females. They had large molars with a relatively thick tooth enamel coating (post-canine megadontia), and comparatively small incisors (similar in size to modern humans), possibly adaptations to processing abrasive foods. The teeth of \"P. aethiopicus\" developed faster than those of \"P. boisei\".\n\"Paranthropus\" had adaptations to the skull to resist large bite loads while feeding, namely the expansive squamosal sutures. The notably thick palate was once thought to have been an adaptation to resist a high bite force, but is better explained as a byproduct of facial lengthening and nasal anatomy.\nIn \"P. boisei\", the jaw hinge was adapted to grinding food side-to-side (rather than up-and-down in modern humans), which is better at processing the starchy abrasive foods that likely made up the bulk of its diet. \"P. robustus\" may have chewed in a front-to-back direction instead, and had less exaggerated (less derived) anatomical features than \"P. boisei\" as it perhaps did not require them with this kind of chewing strategy. This may have also allowed \"P. robustus\" to better process tougher foods.\nThe braincase volume averaged about , comparable to gracile australopithecines, but smaller than \"Homo\". Modern human brain volume averages for men and for women.\nLimbs and locomotion.\nUnlike \"P. robustus\", the forearms of \"P. boisei\" were heavily built, which might suggest habitual suspensory behaviour as in orangutans and gibbons. A \"P. boisei\" shoulder blade indicates long infraspinatus muscles, which is also associated with suspensory behavior. A \"P. aethiopicus\" ulna, on the other hand, shows more similarities to \"Homo\" than \"P. boisei\".\n\"Paranthropus\" were bipeds, and their hips, legs and feet resemble \"A. afarensis\" and modern humans. The pelvis is similar to \"A. afarensis\", but the hip joints are smaller in \"P. robustus\". The physical similarity implies a similar walking gait. Their modern-humanlike big toe indicates a modern-humanlike foot posture and range of motion, but the more distal ankle joint would have inhibited the modern human toe-off gait cycle. By 1.8 mya, \"Paranthropus\" and \"H. habilis\" may have achieved about the same grade of bipedality.\nHeight and weight.\nIn comparison to the large, robust head, the body was rather small. Average weight for \"P. robustus\" may have been for males and for females; and for \"P. boisei\" for males and for females. At Swartkrans Cave Members 1 and 2, about 35% of the \"P. robustus\" individuals are estimated to have weighed , 22% about , and the remaining 43% bigger than the former but less than . At Member 3, all individuals were about . Female weight was about the same in contemporaneous \"H. erectus\", but male \"H. erectus\" were on average heavier than \"P. robustus\" males. \"P. robustus\" sites are oddly dominated by small adults, which could be explained as heightened predation or mortality of the larger males of a group. The largest-known \"Paranthropus\" individual was estimated at .\nAccording to a 1991 study, based on femur length and using the dimensions of modern humans, male and female \"P. robustus\" are estimated to have stood on average , respectively, and \"P. boisei\" . However, the latter estimates are problematic as there were no positively identified male \"P. boisei\" femurs at the time. In 2013, a 1.34 Ma male \"P. boisei\" partial skeleton was estimated to be at least and .\nPathology.\n\"Paranthropus\" seems to have had notably high rates of pitting enamel hypoplasia (PEH), where tooth enamel formation is spotty instead of mostly uniform. In \"P. robustus\", about 47% of baby teeth and 14% of adult teeth were affected, in comparison to about 6.7% and 4.3%, respectively, in any other tested hominin species. The condition of these holes covering the entire tooth is consistent with the modern human ailment amelogenesis imperfecta. However, since circular holes in enamel coverage are uniform in size, only present on the molar teeth, and have the same severity across individuals, the PEH may have been a genetic condition. It is possible that the coding-DNA concerned with thickening enamel also left them more vulnerable to PEH.\nThere have been 10 identified cases of cavities in \"P. robustus\", indicating a rate similar to modern humans. A molar from Drimolen, South Africa, showed a cavity on the tooth root, a rare occurrence in fossil great apes. In order for cavity-creating bacteria to reach this area, the individual would have had to have also presented either alveolar resportion, which is commonly associated with gum disease; or super-eruption of teeth which occurs when teeth become worn down and have to erupt a bit more in order to maintain a proper bite, and this exposed the root. The latter is most likely, and the exposed root seems to have caused hypercementosis to anchor the tooth in place. The cavity seems to have been healing, which may have been caused by a change in diet or mouth microbiome, or the loss of the adjacent molar.\nPalaeobiology.\nDiet.\nIt was once thought \"P. boisei\" cracked open nuts with its powerful teeth, giving OH 5 the nickname \"Nutcracker Man\". However, like gorillas, \"Paranthropus\" likely preferred soft foods, but would consume tough or hard food during leaner times, and the powerful jaws were used only in the latter situation. In \"P. boisei\", thick enamel was more likely used to resist abrasive gritty particles rather than to minimize chipping while eating hard foods. In fact, there is a distinct lack of tooth fractures which would have resulted from such activity.\n\"Paranthropus\" were generalist feeders, but diet seems to have ranged dramatically with location. The South African \"P. robustus\" appears to have been an omnivore, with a diet similar to contemporaneous \"Homo\" and nearly identical to the later \"H. ergaster\", and subsisted on mainly C4 savanna plants and C3 forest plants, which could indicate either seasonal shifts in diet or seasonal migration from forest to savanna. In leaner times it may have fallen back on brittle food. It likely also consumed seeds and possibly tubers or termites. A high cavity rate could indicate honey consumption.\nThe East African \"P. boisei\", on the other hand, seems to have been largely herbivorous and fed on C4 plants. Its powerful jaws allowed it to consume a wide variety of different plants, though it may have largely preferred nutrient-rich bulbotubers as these are known to thrive in the well-watered woodlands it is thought to have inhabited. Feeding on these, \"P. boisei\" may have been able to meet its daily caloric requirements of approximately 9,700 kJ after about 6 hours of foraging.\nJuvenile \"P. robustus\" may have relied more on tubers than adults, given the elevated levels of strontium compared to adults in teeth from Swartkrans Cave, which, in the area, was most likely sourced from tubers. Dentin exposure on juvenile teeth could indicate early weaning, or a more abrasive diet than adults which wore away the cementum and enamel coatings, or both. It is also possible juveniles were less capable of removing grit from dug-up food rather than purposefully seeking out more abrasive foods.\nTechnology.\nOldowan toolkits were uncovered at an excavation site on the Homa Peninsula in western Kenya. Stone tools called \"oldowan toolkits\" are used to pound and shape other rocks or plant materials. These tools are thought to be between 2.6 and 3 million years old. The stone tools were found near Paranthropus teeth.\nBone tools dating between 2.3 and 0.6 mya have been found in abundance in Swartkrans, Kromdraai and Drimolen caves, and are often associated with \"P. robustus\". Though \"Homo\" is also known from these caves, their remains are comparatively scarce to \"Paranthropus\", making \"Homo\"-attribution unlikely. The tools also cooccur with \"Homo\"-associated Oldawan and possibly Acheulian stone tool industries. The bone tools were typically sourced from the shaft of long bones from medium- to large-sized mammals, but tools made sourced from mandibles, ribs and horn cores have also been found. Bone tools have also been found at Oldawan Gorge and directly associated with \"P. boisei\", the youngest dating to 1.34 mya, though a great proportion of other bone tools from here have ambiguous attribution. Stone tools from Kromdraai could possibly be attributed to \"P. robustus\", as no \"Homo\" have been found there yet.\nThe bone tools were not manufactured or purposefully shaped for a task. However, since the bones display no weathering (and were not scavenged randomly), and there is a preference displayed for certain bones, raw materials were likely specifically hand-picked. This could indicate a similar cognitive ability to contemporary Stone Age \"Homo\".\nBone tools may have been used to cut or process vegetation, or dig up tubers or termites, The form of \"P. robustus\" incisors appear to be intermediate between \"H. erectus\" and modern humans, which could indicate less food processing done by the teeth due to preparation with simple tools.\nBurnt bones were also associated with the inhabitants of Swartkrans, which could indicate some of the earliest fire usage. However, these bones were found in Member 3, where \"Paranthropus\" remains are rarer than \"H. erectus\", and it is also possible the bones were burned in a wildfire and washed into the cave as it is known the bones were not burned onsite.\nSocial structure.\nGiven the marked anatomical and physical differences with modern great apes, there may be no modern analogue for australopithecine societies, so comparisons drawn with modern primates will not be entirely accurate.\n\"Paranthropus\" had pronounced sexual dimorphism, with males notably larger than females, which is commonly correlated with a male-dominated polygamous society. \"P. robustus\" may have had a harem society similar to modern forest-dwelling silverback gorillas, where one male has exclusive breeding rights to a group of females, as male-female size disparity is comparable to gorillas (based on facial dimensions), and younger males were less robust than older males (delayed maturity is also exhibited in gorillas).\nHowever, if \"P. robustus\" preferred a savanna habitat, a multi-male society would have been more productive to better defend the troop from predators in the more exposed environment, much like savanna baboons. Further, among primates, delayed maturity is also exhibited in the rhesus monkey which has a multi-male society, and may not be an accurate indicator of social structure.\nA 2011 strontium isotope study of \"P. robustus\" teeth from the dolomite Sterkfontein Valley found that, like other hominins, but unlike other great apes, \"P. robustus\" females were more likely to leave their place of birth (patrilocal). This also discounts the plausibility of a harem society, which would have resulted in a matrilocal society due to heightened male\u2013male competition. Males did not seem to have ventured very far from the valley, which could either indicate small home ranges, or that they preferred dolomitic landscapes due to perhaps cave abundance or factors related to vegetation growth.\nLife history.\nDental development seems to have followed about the same timeframe as it does in modern humans and most other hominins, but, since \"Paranthropus\" molars are markedly larger, rate of tooth eruption would have been accelerated. Their life history may have mirrored that of gorillas as they have the same brain volume, which (depending on the subspecies) reach physical maturity from 12\u201318 years and have birthing intervals of 40\u201370 months.\nPalaeoecology.\nHabitat.\nIt is generally thought that \"Paranthropus\" preferred to inhabit wooded, riverine landscapes. The teeth of \"Paranthropus\", \"H. habilis\" and \"H. erectus\" are all known from various overlapping beds in East Africa, such as at Olduvai Gorge and the Turkana Basin. \"P. robustus\" and \"H. erectus\" also appear to have coexisted.\n\"P. boisei\", known from the Great Rift Valley, may have typically inhabited wetlands along lakes and rivers, wooded or arid shrublands, and semiarid woodlands, though their presence in the savanna-dominated Malawian Chiwondo Beds implies they could tolerate a range of habitats. During the Pleistocene, there seem to have been coastal and montane forests in Eastern Africa. More expansive river valleys\u2014namely the Omo River Valley\u2014may have served as important refuges for forest-dwelling creatures. Being cut off from the forests of Central Africa by a savanna corridor, these East African forests would have promoted high rates of endemism, especially during times of climatic volatility.\nThe Cradle of Humankind, the only area \"P. robustus\" is known from, was mainly dominated by the springbok \"Antidorcas recki\", but other antelope, giraffes and elephants were also seemingly abundant megafauna. Other known primates are early \"Homo\", the hamadryas baboon, and the extinct colobine monkey \"Cercopithecoides williamsi\".\nPredators.\nThe left foot of a \"P. boisei\" specimen (though perhaps actually belonging to \"H. habilis\") from Olduvai Gorge seems to have been bitten off by a crocodile, possibly \"Crocodylus anthropophagus\", and another's leg shows evidence of leopard predation. Other likely Olduvan predators of great apes include the hunting hyena \"Chasmaporthetes nitidula\", and the sabertoothed cats \"Dinofelis\" and \"Megantereon\". The carnivore assemblage at the Cradle of Humankind comprises the two sabertooths, and the hyena \"Lycyaenops silberbergi\".\nMale \"P. robustus\" appear to have had a higher mortality rate than females. It is possible that males were more likely to be kicked out of a group, and these lone males had a higher risk of predation.\nExtinction.\nIt was once thought that \"Paranthropus\" had become a specialist feeder, and were inferior to the more adaptable tool-producing \"Homo\", leading to their extinction, but this has been called into question. However, smaller brain size may have been a factor in their extinction along with gracile australopithecines. \"P. boisei\" may have died out due to an arid trend starting 1.45 mya, causing the retreat of woodlands, and more competition with savanna baboons and \"Homo\" for alternative food resources.\nSouth African \"Paranthropus\" appear to have outlasted their East African counterparts. The youngest record of \"P. boisei\" comes from Konso, Ethiopia about 1.4 mya; however, there are no East African sites dated between 1.4 and 1 mya, so it may have persisted until 1 mya. \"P. robustus\", on the other hand, was recorded in Swartkrans until Member 3 dated to 1\u20130.6 mya (the Middle Pleistocene), though more likely the younger side of the estimate.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23562", "revid": "1909773", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23562", "title": "Perissodactyla", "text": "Order of hoofed mammals\nPerissodactyla (, from grc \" \"\u03c0\u03b5\u03c1\u03b9\u03c3\u03c3\u03cc\u03c2\", periss\u00f3s\"\u00a0'odd' and \" \"\u03b4\u03ac\u03ba\u03c4\u03c5\u03bb\u03bf\u03c2\", d\u00e1ktylos\"\u00a0'finger, toe'), or odd-toed ungulates, is an order of ungulates. The order includes about 17 living species divided into three families: Equidae (horses, asses, and zebras), Rhinocerotidae (rhinoceroses), and Tapiridae (tapirs). They typically have reduced the weight-bearing toes to three or one of the five original toes, though tapirs retain four toes on their front feet. The nonweight-bearing toes are either present, absent, vestigial, or positioned posteriorly. By contrast, artiodactyls (even-toed ungulates) bear most of their weight equally on four or two (an even number) of the five toes: their third and fourth toes. Another difference between the two is that perissodactyls digest plant cellulose in their intestines, rather than in one or more stomach chambers as artiodactyls, with the exception of Suina, do.\nThe order was considerably more diverse in the past, with notable extinct groups including the brontotheres, palaeotheres, chalicotheres, and the paraceratheres, with the paraceratheres including the largest known land mammals to have ever existed.\nDespite their very different appearances, they were recognized as related families in the 19th century by the zoologist Richard Owen, who also coined the order's name.\nAnatomy.\nThe largest odd-toed ungulates are rhinoceroses, and the extinct \"Paraceratherium\", a hornless rhino from the Oligocene, is considered one of the largest land mammals of all time. At the other extreme, an early member of the order, the prehistoric horse \"Eohippus\", had a withers height of only . Apart from dwarf varieties of the domestic horse and donkey, living perissodactyls reach a body length of and a weight of . While rhinos have only sparse hair and exhibit a thick epidermis, tapirs and horses have dense, short coats. Most species are grey or brown, although zebras and young tapirs are striped.\nLimbs.\nThe main axes of both the front and rear feet pass through the third toe, which is always the largest. The remaining toes have been reduced in size to varying degrees. Tapirs, which are adapted to walking on soft ground, have four toes on their fore feet and three on their hind feet. Living rhinos have three toes on both the front and hind feet. Modern equines possess only a single toe; however, their feet are equipped with hooves, which almost completely cover the toe. Rhinos and tapirs, by contrast, have hooves covering only the leading edge of the toes, with the bottom being soft.\nUngulates have stances that require them to stand on the tips of their toes. Equine ungulates with only one digit or hoof have decreased mobility in their limbs, which allows for faster running speeds and agility.\nDifferences in limb structure and physiology between ungulates and other mammals can be seen in the shape of the humerus. For example, often shorter, thicker, bones belong to the largest and heaviest ungulates like the rhinoceros.\nThe ulnae and fibulae are reduced in horses. A common feature that clearly distinguishes this group from other mammals is the articulation between the astragalus, the scaphoid and the cuboid, which greatly restricts the mobility of the foot. The thigh is relatively short, and the clavicle is absent.\nSkull and teeth.\nOdd-toed ungulates have a long upper jaw with an extended diastema between the front and cheek teeth, giving them an elongated head. The various forms of snout between families are due to differences in the form of the premaxilla. The lacrimal bone has projecting cusps in the eye sockets and a wide contact with the nasal bone. The temporomandibular joint is high and the mandible is enlarged.\nRhinos have one or two horns made of agglutinated keratin, unlike the horns of even-toed ungulates (Bovidae and pronghorn), which have a bony core.\nThe number and form of the teeth vary according to diet. The incisors and canines can be very small or completely absent, as in the two African species of rhinoceros. In horses, usually only the males possess canines. The surface shape and height of the molars is heavily dependent on whether soft leaves or hard grass make up the main component of their diets. Three or four cheek teeth are present on each jaw half, so the dental formula of odd-toed ungulates is: \n0-3 . 0-1 . 2-4 . 31-3 . 1 . 2-4 . 3\u00d7\u20092 = 30-44\nThe guttural pouch, a small outpocketing of the auditory tube that drains the middle ear, is a characteristic feature of Perissodactyla. The guttural pouch is of particular concern in equine veterinary practice, due to its frequent involvement in some serious infections. Aspergillosis (infection with \"Aspergillus\" mould) of the guttural pouch (also called guttural pouch mycosis) can cause serious damage to the tissues of the pouch, as well as surrounding structures including important cranial nerves (nerves IX-XII: glossopharyngeal, vagus, accessory and hypoglossal nerves) and the internal carotid artery. Strangles (\"Streptococcus equi equi\" infection) is a highly transmissible respiratory infection of horses that can cause pus to accumulate in the guttural pouch; horses with \"S. equi equi\" colonising their guttural pouch can continue to intermittently shed the bacteria for several months, and should be isolated from other horses during this time to prevent transmission. Due to the intermittent nature of \"S. equi equi\" shedding, prematurely reintroducing an infected horse may risk exposing other horses to the infection, even though the shedding horse appears well and may have previously returned negative samples. The function of the guttural pouch has been difficult to determine, but it is now believed to play a role in cooling blood in the internal carotid artery before it enters the brain.\nGut.\nAll perissodactyls are hindgut fermenters. In contrast to ruminants, hindgut fermenters store digested food that has left the stomach in an enlarged cecum, where the food begins digestion by microbes, with the fermentation continuing in the large colon. No gallbladder is present. The stomach of perissodactyls is simply built, while the cecum accommodates up to in horses. The small intestine is very long, reaching up to in horses. Extraction of nutrients from food is relatively inefficient, which probably explains why no odd-toed ungulates are small; nutritional requirements per unit of body weight are lower for large animals, as their surface-area-to-volume ratio is smaller.\nLack of carotid rete.\nUnlike artiodactyls, perissodactyls lack a carotid rete, a heat exchange that reduces the dependence of the temperature of the brain on that of the body. As a result, perissodactyls have limited thermoregulatory flexibility compared to artiodactyls which has restricted them to habitats of low seasonality and rich in food and water, such as tropical forests. In contrast, artiodactyls occupy a wide range of habits ranging from the Arctic Circle to deserts and tropical savannahs.\nDistribution.\nMost extant perissodactyl species occupy a small fraction of their original range. Members of this group are now found only in Central and South America, eastern and southern Africa, and central, southern, and southeastern Asia. During the peak of odd-toed ungulate existence, from the Eocene to the Oligocene, perissodactyls were distributed over much of the globe, the major exceptions being Australia and Antarctica. Horses and tapirs arrived in South America after the formation of the Isthmus of Panama around 3 million years ago in the Pliocene. Their North American counterparts died out around 10,000 years ago, leaving only Baird's tapir with a range extending to what is now southern Mexico. The tarpans were pushed to extinction in 19th century Europe. Hunting and habitat destruction have reduced the surviving perissodactyl species to fragmented populations. In contrast, domesticated horses and donkeys have gained a worldwide distribution, and feral animals of both species are now also found in regions outside their original range, such as in Australia.\nLifestyle and diet.\nPerissodactyls inhabit a number of different habitats, leading to different lifestyles. Tapirs are solitary and inhabit mainly tropical rainforests. Rhinos tend to live alone in rather dry savannas, and in Asia, wet marsh or forest areas. Horses inhabit open areas such as grasslands, steppes, or semi-deserts, and live together in groups. Odd-toed ungulates are exclusively herbivores that feed, to varying degrees, on grass, leaves, and other plant parts. A distinction is often made between primarily grass feeders (white rhinos, equines) and leaf feeders (tapirs, other rhinos).\nReproduction and development.\nOdd-toed ungulates are characterized by a long gestation period and a small litter size, usually delivering a single young. The gestation period is 330\u2013500 days, being longest in rhinos. Newborn perissodactyls are precocial, meaning offspring are born already quite independent: for example, young horses can begin to follow the mother after a few hours. The young are nursed for a relatively long time, often into their second year, with rhinos reaching sexual maturity around eight or ten years old, but horses and tapirs maturing around two to four years old. Perissodactyls are long-lived, with several species, such as rhinos, reaching an age of almost 50 years in captivity.\nTaxonomy.\nOuter taxonomy.\nTraditionally, the odd-toed ungulates were classified with other mammals such as artiodactyls, hyraxes, elephants and other \"ungulates\". A close family relationship with hyraxes was suspected based on similarities in the construction of the ear and the course of the carotid artery.\nMolecular genetic studies, however, have shown the ungulates to be polyphyletic, meaning that in some cases the similarities are the result of convergent evolution rather than common ancestry. Elephants and hyraxes are now considered to belong to Afrotheria, so are not closely related to the perissodactyls. These in turn are in the Laurasiatheria, a superorder that had its origin in the former supercontinent Laurasia. Molecular genetic findings suggest that the cloven Artiodactyla (containing the cetaceans as a deeply nested subclade) are the sister taxon of the Perissodactyla; together, the two groups form the Euungulata. More distant are the bats (Chiroptera) and Ferae (a common taxon of carnivorans, Carnivora, and pangolins, Pholidota). In a discredited alternative scenario, a close relationship exists between perissodactyls, carnivorans, and bats, this assembly comprising the Pegasoferae.\nAccording to studies published in March 2015, odd-toed ungulates are in a close family relationship with at least some of the so-called Meridiungulata, a very diverse group of mammals living from the Paleocene to the Pleistocene in South America, whose systematic unity is largely unexplained. Some of these were classified based on their paleogeographic distribution. However, a close relationship can be worked out to perissodactyls by protein sequencing and comparison with fossil collagen from remnants of phylogenetically young members of the Meridiungulata (specifically \"Macrauchenia\" from the Litopterna and \"Toxodon\" from the Notoungulata). Both kinship groups, the odd-toed ungulates and the Litopterna-Notoungulata, are now in the higher-level taxon of Panperissodactyla. This kinship group is included among the Euungulata, which also contains the even-toed ungulates (Artiodactyla). The separation of the Litopterna-Notoungulata group from the perissodactyls probably took place before the Cretaceous\u2013Paleogene extinction event. \"Condylarths\" can probably be considered the starting point for the development of the two groups, as they represent a heterogeneous group of primitive ungulates that mainly inhabited the northern hemisphere in the Paleogene.\nModern members.\nOdd-toed ungulates comprise three living families with around 17 species\u2014in horses, however, the exact count is still controversial. Rhinos and tapirs are more closely related to each other than to horses. According to molecular genetic analysis, the separation of horses from other perissodactyls took place in the Paleocene some 56 million years ago, while the rhinos and tapirs split off in the lower-middle Eocene, about 47 million years ago. \nPrehistoric members.\nThere are many perissodactyl fossils of multivariant form. The major lines of development include the following groups:\nHigher classification of perissodactyls.\nRelationships within the large group of odd-toed ungulates are not fully understood. Initially, after the establishment of \"Perissodactyla\" by Richard Owen in 1848, the present-day representatives were considered equal in rank. In the first half of the 20th century, a more systematic differentiation of odd-toed ungulates began, based on a consideration of fossil forms, and they were placed in two major suborders: Hippomorpha and Ceratomorpha. The Hippomorpha comprises today's horses and their extinct members (Equoidea); the Ceratomorpha consist of tapirs and rhinos plus their extinct members (Tapiroidea and Rhinocerotoidea). The names Hippomorpha and Ceratomorpha were introduced in 1937 by Horace Elmer Wood, in response to criticism of the name \"Solidungula\" that he proposed three years previously. It had been based on the grouping of horses and Tridactyla and on the rhinoceros/tapir complex. The extinct brontotheriidae were also classified under Hippomorpha and therefore possess a close relationship to horses. Some researchers accept this assignment because of similar dental features, but there is also the view that a very basal position within the odd-toed ungulates places them rather in the group of \"Titanotheriomorpha\".\nOriginally, the Chalicotheriidae were seen as members of Hippomorpha, and presented as such in 1941. William Berryman Scott thought that, as claw-bearing perissodactyls, they belong in the new suborder Ancylopoda (where Ceratomorpha and Hippomorpha as odd-toed ungulates were combined in the group of Chelopoda). The term Ancylopoda, coined by Edward Drinker Cope in 1889, had been established for chalicotheres. However, further morphological studies from the 1960s showed a middle position of Ancylopoda between Hippomorpha and Ceratomorpha. Leonard Burton Radinsky saw all three major groups of odd-toed ungulates as peers, based on the extremely long and independent phylogenetic development of the three lines. In the 1980s, Jeremy J. Hooker saw a general similarity between Ancylopoda and Ceratomorpha based on dentition, especially in the earliest members, leading to the unification in 1984 of the two submissions in the interim order, \"Tapiromorpha\". At the same time, he expanded the Ancylopoda to include the \"Lophiodontidae\". The name \"Tapiromorpha\" goes back to Ernst Haeckel, who coined it in 1873, but it was long considered synonymous to Ceratomorpha because Wood had not considered it in 1937 when Ceratomorpha were named, since the term had been used quite differently in the past. Also in 1984, Robert M. Schoch used the conceptually similar term Moropomorpha, which today applies synonymously to Tapiromorpha. Included within the Tapiromorpha are the now extinct Isectolophidae, a sister group of the Ancylopoda-Ceratomorpha group and thus the most primitive members of this relationship complex.\nEvolutionary history.\nOrigins.\nThe evolutionary development of Perissodactyla is well documented in the fossil record. Numerous finds are evidence of the adaptive radiation of this group, which was once much more varied and widely dispersed. \"Radinskya\" from the late Paleocene of East Asia is often considered to be one of the oldest close relatives of the ungulates. Its 8\u00a0cm skull must have belonged to a very small and primitive animal with a \u03c0-shaped crown pattern on the enamel of its rear molars similar to that of perissodactyls and their relatives, especially the rhinos. Finds of \"Cambaytherium\" and \"Kalitherium\" in the Cambay shale of western India indicate an origin in Asia dating to the Lower Eocene roughly 54.5 million years ago. Their teeth also show similarities to \"Radinskya\" as well as to the Tethytheria clade. The saddle-shaped configuration of the navicular joints and the mesaxonic construction of the front and hind feet also indicates a close relationship to Tethytheria. However, this construction deviates from that of \"Cambaytherium\", indicating that it is actually a member of a sister group. Ancestors of Perissodactyla may have arrived via an island bridge from the Afro-Arab landmass onto the Indian subcontinent as it drifted north towards Asia. A study on \"Cambaytherium\" suggests an origin in India prior or near its collision with Asia.\nThe alignment of hyopsodontids and phenacodontids to Perissodactyla in general suggests an older Laurasian origin and distribution for the clade, dispersed across the northern continents already in the early Paleocene. These forms already show a fairly well-developed molar morphology, with no intermediary forms as evidence of the course of its development. The close relationship between meridiungulate mammals and perissoodactyls in particular is of interest since the latter appeared in South America soon after the K\u2013T event, implying rapid ecological radiation and dispersal after mass extinction.\nPhylogeny.\nThe Perissodactyla appeared relatively abruptly at the beginning of the Lower Paleocene about 63\u00a0million years ago, both in North America and Asia, in the form of phenacodontids and hyopsodontids. The oldest finds from an extant group originate among other sources, from \"Sifrhippus\", an ancestor of the horses from the Willswood lineup in northwestern Wyoming. The distant ancestors of tapirs appeared not too long after that in the Ghazij lineup in Balochistan, such as \"Ganderalophus\", as well as \"Litolophus\" from the Chalicotheriidae line, or \"Eotitanops\" from the group of brontotheriidae. Initially, the members of the different lineages looked quite similar, with an arched back and generally four toes on the front and three on the hind feet. \"Eohippus\", which is considered a member of the horse family, outwardly resembled \"Hyrachyus\", the first representative of the rhino and tapir line. All were small compared to later forms and lived as fruit and foliage eaters in forests. The first of the megafauna to emerge were the brontotheres, in the Middle and Upper Eocene. \"Megacerops\", known from North America, reached a withers height of and could have weighed just over . The decline of brontotheres at the end of the Eocene is associated with competition arising from the advent of more successful herbivores.\nMore successful lines of odd-toed ungulates emerged at the end of the Eocene when dense jungles gave way to steppe, such as the chalicotheriid rhinos, and their immediate relatives; their development also began with very small forms. \"Paraceratherium\", one of the largest mammals ever to walk the earth, evolved during this era. They weighed up to and lived throughout the Oligocene in Eurasia. About 20\u00a0million years ago, at the onset of the Miocene, the perissodactyls first reached Africa when it became connected to Eurasia because of the closing of the Tethys Ocean. For the same reason, however, new animals such as the mammoths also entered the ancient settlement areas of odd-toed ungulates, creating competition that led to the extinction of some of their lines. The rise of ruminants, which occupied similar ecological niches and had a much more efficient digestive system, is also associated with the decline in diversity of odd-toed ungulates. A significant cause for the decline of perissodactyls was climate change during the Miocene, leading to a cooler and drier climate accompanied by the spread of open landscapes. However, some lines flourished, such as the horses and rhinos; anatomical adaptations made it possible for them to consume tougher grass food. This led to open land forms that dominated newly created landscapes. With the emergence of the Isthmus of Panama in the Pliocene, perissodactyls and other megafauna were given access to one of their last habitable continents: South America. However, many perissodactyls became extinct at the end of the ice ages, including American horses and the \"Elasmotherium\". Whether over-hunting by humans (overkill hypothesis), climatic change, or a combination of both factors was responsible for the extinction of ice age mega-fauna, remains controversial.\nResearch history.\nIn 1758, in his seminal work \"Systema Naturae\", Linnaeus (1707\u20131778) classified horses (\"Equus\") together with hippos (\"Hippopotamus\"). At that time, this category also included the tapirs (\"Tapirus\"), more precisely the lowland or South American tapir (\"Tapirus terrestus\"), the only tapir then known in Europe. Linnaeus classified this tapir as \"Hippopotamus terrestris\" and put both genera in the group of the \"Belluae\" (\"beasts\"). He combined the rhinos with the Glires, a group now consisting of the lagomorphs and rodents. Mathurin Jacques Brisson (1723\u20131806) first separated the tapirs and hippos in 1762 with the introduction of the concept \"le tapir\". He also separated the rhinos from the rodents, but did not combine the three families now known as the odd-toed ungulates. In the transition to the 19th century, the individual perissodactyl genera were associated with various other groups, such as the proboscidean and even-toed ungulates. In 1795, \u00c9tienne Geoffroy Saint-Hilaire (1772\u20131844) and Georges Cuvier (1769\u20131832) introduced the term \"pachyderm\" (Pachydermata), including in it not only the rhinos and elephants, but also the hippos, pigs, peccaries, tapirs and hyrax. The horses were still generally regarded as a group separate from other mammals and were often classified under the name \"Solidungula\" or \"Solip\u00e8des\", meaning \"one-hoof animal\".\nIn 1861, Henri Marie Ducrotay de Blainville (1777\u20131850) classified ungulates by the structure of their feet, differentiating those with an even number of toes from those with an odd number. He moved the horses as \"solidungulate\" over to the tapirs and rhinos as \"multungulate\" animals and referred to all of them together as \"onguligrades \u00e0 doigts impairs\", coming close to the concept of the odd-toed ungulate as a systematic unit. Richard Owen (1804\u20131892) quoted Blainville in his study on fossil mammals of the Isle of Wight and introduced the name \"Perissodactyla\".\nIn 1884, Othniel Charles Marsh (1831\u20131899) came up with the concept \"Mesaxonia\", which he used for what are today called the odd-toed ungulates, including their extinct relatives, but explicitly excluding the hyrax. \"Mesaxonia\" is now considered a synonym of \"Perissodactyla\", but it was sometimes also used for the true odd-toed ungulates as a subcategory (rhinos, horses, tapirs), while \"Perissodactyla\" stood for the entire order, including the hyrax. The assumption that hyraxes were \"Perissodactyla\" was held well into the 20th century. Only with the advent of molecular genetic research methods had it been recognized that the hyrax was not closely related to perissodactyls but rather to elephants and manatees.\nInteractions with humans.\nThe domestic horse and the donkey play an important role in human history, particularly as transport, work and pack animals. The domestication of both species began several millennia BCE. Due to the motorisation of agriculture and the spread of automobile traffic, such use has declined sharply in Western industrial countries; riding is usually undertaken more as a hobby or sport. In less developed regions of the world, traditional uses for these animals are, however, still widespread. To a lesser extent, horses and donkeys are also kept for their meat and their milk.\nIn contrast, the existence in the wild of almost all other odd-toed ungulates species has declined dramatically because of hunting and habitat destruction. The quagga is extinct and Przewalski's horse was once eradicated in the wild.\nPresent threat levels, according to the International Union for Conservation of Nature (2012):\nConservation.\nHunting and habitat loss due to land conversion and human encroachment are the most significant threats to the three endangered species of tapir. The Malayan tapir's inland forest habitat is of particular concern, as this land is being deforested rapidly and converted into palm oil plantations. Climate change is shifting the suitable range of mountain tapirs further up the Andes Mountains, reducing their available habitat. Hunting of mountain and Baird's tapirs in Central and South America for their meat is common and is made easier by climate change, as population densities are forcibly increased. Although hunting is illegal in protected areas throughout this region, regulations are often ignored or unenforced. Conservation efforts for tapirs primarily consist of legal protections from hunting and international trade, though proposals of habitat protection and restoration at the local level are underway in all affected countries.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23563", "revid": "13286072", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23563", "title": "Philosophical", "text": ""}
{"id": "23564", "revid": "202276", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23564", "title": "Poison ivy rash", "text": ""}
{"id": "23565", "revid": "42945107", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23565", "title": "Pai gow", "text": "Chinese gambling game using tiles\nPai gow ( ; ) is a Chinese gambling game, played with a set of 32 Chinese dominoes. It is played in major casinos in China (including Macau); the United States (including Boston, Massachusetts; Las Vegas, Nevada; Reno, Nevada; Connecticut; Atlantic City, New Jersey; Pennsylvania; Mississippi; and cardrooms in California); Canada (including Edmonton, Alberta and Calgary, Alberta); Australia; and New Zealand.\nThe name \"pai gow\" is sometimes used to refer to a card game called pai gow poker (or \"double-hand poker\"), which is loosely based on pai gow. The act of playing pai gow is also colloquially known as \"eating dog meat\".\nHistory.\nAlthough some claim that Pai Gow is the first documented form of dominoes, originating in China before or during the Song dynasty, which can only apply to \"gu pai\" \u9aa8\u724c, that is, Chinese dominoes, the game of \"pai gow\" (Mandarin \"paijiu\") is not recorded until the late 19th century. Its earliest description is to be found in a collection of Cantonese games published in Hong Kong in 1886.\nThe name literally means \"card nine\", after the normal maximum hand. It is assumed that the original game was modeled after both a Chinese creation myth, and military organization in China at that time (ranks one through nine), but no document supports this theory.\nRules.\nStarting.\nTiles are shuffled on the table and are arranged into eight face-down stacks of four tiles each in an assembly known as the \"woodpile\". Individual stacks or tiles may then be moved in specific ways to rearrange the woodpile, after which the players place their bets.\nNext, each player (including the dealer) is given one stack of tiles and must use them to form two hands of two tiles each. The hand with the lower value is called the \"front hand\", and the hand with the higher value is called the \"rear hand\". If a player's front hand beats the dealer's front hand, and the player's rear hand beats the dealer's rear hand, then that player wins the bet and is paid off at 1:1 odds (even money). If a player's front and rear hands both lose to the dealer's respective hands, the player loses the bet. If one hand wins and the other loses, the player is said to \"push\", and gets back only the money they bet. Generally seven players will play, and each player's hands are compared only against the dealer's hands; comparisons are always front-front and rear-rear, never one of each.\nThere are 35,960 possible ways to select 4 of the 32 tiles when the 32 tiles are considered distinguishable. However, there are 3,620 distinct sets of 4 tiles when the tiles of a pair are considered indistinguishable. There are 496 ways to select 2 of the 32 tiles when the 32 tiles are considered distinguishable. There are 136 distinct hands (pairs of tiles) when the tiles of a pair are considered indistinguishable.\nScoring.\nEach player groups their four tiles into two hands of two tiles each. The two hands are referred to as the \"high\" and \"low\" hands, based on their score.\nThe highest-ranked hands are formed from the sixteen \"named pairs\". Otherwise, the next highest-ranked hand results from creating a \"Gong\" or \"Wong\", which are specific combinations with the \"Day\" and \"Teen\" tiles. If the four tiles drawn for the two hands do not permit the formation of a named pair, Gong, or Wong, then the total number of pips on both tiles in a hand are added using modular arithmetic (modulo 10), equivalent to how a hand in baccarat is scored.\nThe name \"pai gow\" is loosely translated as \"make nine\" or \"card nine\". This reflects the fact that, with the exception of named pairs, Gong, or Wong, the maximum score for a hand of mixed tiles is nine.\nNamed pairs.\nThe 32 tiles in a Chinese dominoes set can be arranged into 16 named pairs. Eleven of these pairs have identical tiles, and five of these pairs are made up of two tiles that have the same total number of pips, but in different groupings. The latter group includes the Gee Joon tiles, which can score the same, whether as three or six.\nAny hand consisting of a pair outscores a non-pair, regardless of the pip counts. Named pairs are often thought of as being worth 12 points each, but there is a hierarchy within the named pairs.\nThe pairs are considered to tell the story of creation:\nEach subsequent pair is another step in the story...robes (\"Bon\") for man to wear, a hatchet (\"Foo\") to chop wood, partitions (\"Ping\") for a house, man's seventh (\"Tit\") and eighth (\"Look\") children.\nOnly the sixteen named pairs are valid. For example, if a hand contained a \"Yun\" (4-4) and a \"Chop Bot\" (3-5 or 2-6), these would not form a pair at all, despite both tiles having eight pips each. A Yun (4-4) exclusively pairs with the other Yun, and likewise only the two Chop Bot tiles can be paired together. Likewise, tiles with six pips (\"Look\", 1-5, pairs with another Look, not the \"Gee Joon\" 2-4) and seven pips (\"Tit\", 1-6, pairs with another Tit, not the two \"Chop Chit\" tiles 2-5 and 3-4, which pair with each other) are subject to the same pairing restrictions.\nWhen the player and dealer both have a pair, the higher-ranked pair wins. Ranking pairs is determined not by the sum of the tiles' pips, but rather by aesthetics; the order must be memorized. The highest pairs are the Gee Joon tiles, the Teens, the Days, and the red eights. The lowest pairs are the mismatched nines, eights, sevens, and fives.\nWongs and Gongs.\nThe double-one tiles and double-six tiles are known as the \"Day\" and \"Teen\" tiles, respectively. The combination of a Day or Teen with a nine (\"Gow\", 5-4 or 6-3) creates a \"Wong\", worth 11 points, while putting either of them with an eight (either \"Yun\", 4-4; or \"Bot\", 5-3 or 6-2) results in a \"Gong\", worth 10. Gongs and Wongs formed with a Teen tile are ranked higher than those formed with a Day tile.\nHowever, if a Day or Teen is grouped in a single hand with any other tile, the standard scoring rules apply. The combination of a Day or Teen with a seven (\"Tit\", 1-6; or \"Chit\", 2-5 or 3-4) is sometimes referred to as a \"high nine\", as the score is the maximum (nine) when added together, and the group contains a high-rank tile for potential tiebreaking purposes.\nModular arithmetic.\nWhen a hand is formed from two tiles that are not a named pair, Wong, or Gong, the total pips on both tiles are counted and any tens digit is dropped; the resulting ones digit (the sum of all pips modulo 10) gives the final score.\nThere is one exception. The 1-2 and the 2-4 tiles which form the \"Gee Joon\" pair together, can act as limited wild cards singly. When used as part of a hand of mixed tiles, these tiles may be scored as either 3 or 6, whichever results in a higher hand value. For example, a hand of 1-2 (scored as +6 instead of the face value of +3) and 5-6 (+11) scores as seven rather than four.\nIf the player has both the 1-2 and 2-4 tiles, those collectively form the highest-ranked named pair and should be used together to form an unbeatable rear hand.\nTies.\nWhen the player and dealer display hands with the same score, the one with the highest-valued tile (based on the named pair rankings described above) is the winner. For example, a player's hand of 3-4 and 2-2 (\"Chit\" and \"Bon\") and a dealer's hand of 5-6 and 5-5 (\"Foo\" and \"Mooy\") would each score one point. However, since the dealer's 5-5 (\"Mooy\") outranks the other three tiles, they would win the hand.\nIf both have a bonus combination (Wong or Gong) or the scores are tied, and if the player and dealer each have an identical highest-ranking tile, then the dealer wins. For example, if the player held 2-2 and 1\u20136 (\"Bon\" and \"Tit\"), and the dealer held 2-2 and 3\u20134 (\"Bon\" and \"Chit\"), the dealer would win since the scores (1 each) and the highest-ranked tiles (2-2 \"Bon\") are the same. The lower-ranked tile in each hand is never used to break a tie.\nThere are two exceptions to the method described above. First, although the Gee Joon tiles form the highest-ranking pair when used together, when used as single tiles in a mixed hand, for tiebreaking purposes, they fall into the mixed-number ranks according to the number of pips. That is, the 2-4 ranks sequentially below the \"Chop Chit\" tiles (3-4 and 2-5), and the 1-2 ranks sequentially last overall, below the \"Chop Ng\" tiles (3-2 and 1-4). Second, any zero-zero tie is won by the dealer, regardless of the tiles in the two hands.\nStrategy.\nThe key element of pai gow strategy is to present the optimal front and rear hands based on the tiles dealt to the player. For any four random tiles, there are three ways to arrange them into two hands, assuming that a named pair cannot be formed. However, if there is at least one pair among the tiles, there are only two distinct ways to form two hands.\nThe player must decide which combination is most likely to give a set of front/rear hands that can beat the dealer, or at least break a tie in the player's favor. In some cases, a player with weaker tiles may deliberately attempt to attain a push so as to avoid losing the bet outright. Many players rely on superstition or tradition to choose tile pairings.\nIn popular culture.\nThe film \"Premium Rush\" (2012) features Pai Gow play as an integral plot element.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23567", "revid": "5717", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23567", "title": "Partition (mathematics)", "text": ""}
{"id": "23568", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23568", "title": "Proper subset", "text": ""}
{"id": "23569", "revid": "12336988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23569", "title": "Partial order", "text": ""}
{"id": "23572", "revid": "50444319", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23572", "title": "Partially ordered set", "text": "Mathematical set with an ordering\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Stack/styles.css\"/&gt;\nIn mathematics, especially order theory, a partial order on a set is an arrangement such that, for certain pairs of elements, one precedes the other. The word \"partial\" is used to indicate that not every pair of elements needs to be comparable; that is, there may be pairs for which neither element precedes the other. Partial orders thus generalize total orders, in which every pair is comparable.\nFormally, a partial order is a homogeneous binary relation that is reflexive, antisymmetric, and transitive. A partially ordered set (poset for short) is an ordered pair formula_1 consisting of a set formula_2 (called the \"ground set\" of formula_3) and a partial order formula_4 on formula_2. When the meaning is clear from context and there is no ambiguity about the partial order, the set formula_2 itself is sometimes called a poset.\nPartial order relations.\nThe term \"partial order\" usually refers to the reflexive partial order relations, referred to in this article as \"non-strict\" partial orders. However some authors use the term for the other common type of partial order relations, the irreflexive partial order relations, also called strict partial orders. Strict and non-strict partial orders can be put into a one-to-one correspondence, so for every strict partial order there is a unique corresponding non-strict partial order, and vice versa.\nPartial orders.\nA reflexive, weak, or &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Visible anchor/styles.css\" /&gt;non-strict partial order, commonly referred to simply as a partial order, is a homogeneous relation \u2264 on a set formula_3 that is reflexive, antisymmetric, and transitive. That is, for all formula_8 it must satisfy:\nA non-strict partial order is also known as an antisymmetric preorder.\nStrict partial orders.\nAn irreflexive, strong, or &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Visible anchor/styles.css\" /&gt;strict partial order is a homogeneous relation &lt; on a set formula_3 that is irreflexive, asymmetric and transitive; that is, it satisfies the following conditions for all formula_17\nA transitive relation is asymmetric if and only if it is irreflexive. So the definition is the same if it omits either irreflexivity or asymmetry (but not both).\nA strict partial order is also known as a strict preorder.\nCorrespondence of strict and non-strict partial order relations.\nStrict and non-strict partial orders on a set formula_3 are closely related. A non-strict partial order formula_4 may be converted to a strict partial order by removing all relationships of the form formula_26 that is, the strict partial order is the set formula_27 where formula_28 is the identity relation on formula_29 and formula_30 denotes set subtraction. Conversely, a strict partial order &lt; on formula_3 may be converted to a non-strict partial order by adjoining all relationships of that form; that is, formula_32 is a non-strict partial order. Thus, if formula_4 is a non-strict partial order, then the corresponding strict partial order &lt; is the irreflexive kernel given by\nformula_34\nConversely, if &lt; is a strict partial order, then the corresponding non-strict partial order formula_4 is the reflexive closure given by:\nformula_36\nDual orders.\nThe \"dual\" (or \"opposite\") formula_37 of a partial order relation formula_38 is defined by letting formula_37 be the converse relation of formula_38, i.e. formula_41 if and only if formula_42. The dual of a non-strict partial order is a non-strict partial order, and the dual of a strict partial order is a strict partial order. The dual of a dual of a relation is the original relation.\nNotation.\nGiven a set formula_3 and a partial order relation, typically the non-strict partial order formula_4, we may uniquely extend our notation to define four partial order relations formula_45 formula_46 formula_47 and formula_48, where formula_4 is a non-strict partial order relation on formula_3, formula_51 is the associated strict partial order relation on formula_3 (the irreflexive kernel of formula_4), formula_54 is the dual of formula_4, and formula_56 is the dual of formula_51. Strictly speaking, the term \"partially ordered set\" refers to a set with all of these relations defined appropriately. But practically, one need only consider a single relation, formula_58 or formula_59, or, in rare instances, the non-strict and strict relations together, formula_60. \nThe term \"ordered set\" is sometimes used as a shorthand for \"partially ordered set\", as long as it is clear from the context that no other kind of order is meant. In particular, totally ordered sets can also be referred to as \"ordered sets\", especially in areas where these structures are more common than posets. Some authors use different symbols than formula_4 such as formula_62 or formula_63 to distinguish partial orders from total orders.\nWhen referring to partial orders, formula_4 should not be taken as the complement of formula_56. The relation formula_56 is the converse of the irreflexive kernel of formula_4, which is always a subset of the complement of formula_4, but formula_56 is equal to the complement of formula_4 if, and only if, formula_4 is a total order.\nAlternative definitions.\nAnother way of defining a partial order, found in computer science, is via a notion of comparison. Specifically, given formula_72 as defined previously, it can be observed that two elements \"x\" and \"y\" may stand in any of four mutually exclusive relationships to each other: either \"x\" &lt; \"y\", or \"x\" = \"y\", or \"x\" &gt; \"y\", or \"x\" and \"y\" are \"incomparable\". This can be represented by a function formula_73 that returns one of four codes when given two elements. This definition is equivalent to a \"partial order on a setoid\", where equality is taken to be a defined equivalence relation rather than set equality.\nWallis defines a more general notion of a \"partial order relation\" as any homogeneous relation that is transitive and antisymmetric. This includes both reflexive and irreflexive partial orders as subtypes.\nA finite poset can be visualized through its Hasse diagram. Specifically, taking a strict partial order relation formula_59, a directed acyclic graph (DAG) may be constructed by taking each element of formula_3 to be a node and each element of formula_51 to be an edge. The transitive reduction of this DAG is then the Hasse diagram. Similarly this process can be reversed to construct strict partial orders from certain DAGs. In contrast, the graph associated to a non-strict partial order has self-loops at every node and therefore is not a DAG; when a non-strict order is said to be depicted by a Hasse diagram, actually the corresponding strict order is shown.\nExamples.\nStandard examples of posets arising in mathematics include:\nOne familiar example of a partially ordered set is a collection of people ordered by genealogical descendancy. Some pairs of people bear the descendant-ancestor relationship, but other pairs of people are incomparable, with neither being a descendant of the other.\nOrders on the Cartesian product of partially ordered sets.\nIn order of increasing strength, i.e., decreasing sets of pairs, three of the possible partial orders on the Cartesian product of two partially ordered sets are (see Fig.\u00a04):\nAll three can similarly be defined for the Cartesian product of more than two sets.\nApplied to ordered vector spaces over the same field, the result is in each case also an ordered vector space.\nSee also orders on the Cartesian product of totally ordered sets.\nSums of partially ordered sets.\nAnother way to combine two (disjoint) posets is the ordinal sum (or linear sum), \"Z\" = \"X\" \u2295 \"Y\", defined on the union of the underlying sets \"X\" and \"Y\" by the order \"a\" \u2264\"Z\" \"b\" if and only if:\nIf two posets are well-ordered, then so is their ordinal sum.\nSeries-parallel partial orders are formed from the ordinal sum operation (in this context called series composition) and another operation called parallel composition. Parallel composition is the disjoint union of two partially ordered sets, with no order relation between elements of one set and elements of the other set.\nDerived notions.\nThe examples use the poset formula_83 consisting of the set of all subsets of a three-element set formula_84 ordered by set inclusion (see Fig.\u00a01).\nExtrema.\nThere are several notions of \"greatest\" and \"least\" element in a poset formula_101 notably:\nAs another example, consider the positive integers, ordered by divisibility: 1 is a least element, as it divides all other elements; on the other hand this poset does not have a greatest element. This partially ordered set does not even have any maximal elements, since any \"g\" divides for instance 2\"g\", which is distinct from it, so \"g\" is not maximal. If the number 1 is excluded, while keeping divisibility as ordering on the elements greater than 1, then the resulting poset does not have a least element, but any prime number is a minimal element for it. In this poset, 60 is an upper bound (though not a least upper bound) of the subset formula_120 which does not have any lower bound (since 1 is not in the poset); on the other hand 2 is a lower bound of the subset of powers of 2, which does not have any upper bound. If the number 0 is included, this will be the greatest element, since this is a multiple of every integer (see Fig.\u00a06).\nMappings between partially ordered sets.\nGiven two partially ordered sets (\"S\", \u2264) and (\"T\", \u227c), a function formula_121 is called order-preserving, or monotone, or isotone, if for all formula_122 formula_123 implies \"f\"(\"x\") \u227c \"f\"(\"y\").\nIf (\"U\", \u2272) is also a partially ordered set, and both formula_121 and formula_125 are order-preserving, their composition formula_126 is order-preserving, too.\nA function formula_121 is called order-reflecting if for all formula_122 \"f\"(\"x\") \u227c \"f\"(\"y\") implies formula_129\nIf f is both order-preserving and order-reflecting, then it is called an order-embedding of (\"S\", \u2264) into (\"T\", \u227c).\nIn the latter case, f is necessarily injective, since formula_130 implies formula_131 and in turn formula_132 according to the antisymmetry of formula_133 If an order-embedding between two posets \"S\" and \"T\" exists, one says that \"S\" can be embedded into \"T\". If an order-embedding formula_121 is bijective, it is called an order isomorphism, and the partial orders (\"S\", \u2264) and (\"T\", \u227c) are said to be isomorphic. Isomorphic orders have structurally similar Hasse diagrams (see Fig.\u00a07a). It can be shown that if order-preserving maps formula_121 and formula_125 exist such that formula_137 and formula_138 yields the identity function on \"S\" and \"T\", respectively, then \"S\" and \"T\" are order-isomorphic.\nFor example, a mapping formula_139 from the set of natural numbers (ordered by divisibility) to the power set of natural numbers (ordered by set inclusion) can be defined by taking each number to the set of its prime divisors. It is order-preserving: if x divides y, then each prime divisor of x is also a prime divisor of y. However, it is neither injective (since it maps both 12 and 6 to formula_140) nor order-reflecting (since 12 does not divide 6). Taking instead each number to the set of its prime power divisors defines a map formula_141 that is order-preserving, order-reflecting, and hence an order-embedding. It is not an order-isomorphism (since it, for instance, does not map any number to the set formula_142), but it can be made one by restricting its codomain to formula_143 Fig.\u00a07b shows a subset of formula_144 and its isomorphic image under g. The construction of such an order-isomorphism into a power set can be generalized to a wide class of partial orders, called distributive lattices; see \"Birkhoff's representation theorem\".\nNumber of partial orders.\nSequence [ A001035] in OEIS gives the number of partial orders on a set of \"n\" labeled elements:\nNote that \"S\"(\"n\", \"k\") refers to Stirling numbers of the second kind.\nThe number of strict partial orders is the same as that of partial orders.\nIf the count is made only up to isomorphism, the sequence 1, 1, 2, 5, 16, 63, 318, ... (sequence in the OEIS) is obtained.\nSubposets.\nA poset formula_145 is called a subposet of another poset formula_146 provided that formula_147 is a subset of formula_2 and formula_149 is a subset of formula_4. The latter condition is equivalent to the requirement that for any formula_151 and formula_152 in formula_147 (and thus also in formula_2), if formula_155 then formula_123.\nIf formula_157 is a subposet of formula_3 and furthermore, for all formula_151 and formula_152 in formula_147, whenever formula_123 we also have formula_155, then we call formula_157 the subposet of formula_3 induced by formula_147, and write formula_167.\nLinear extension.\nA partial order formula_149 on a set formula_2 is called an extension of another partial order formula_4 on formula_2 provided that for all elements formula_172 whenever formula_173 it is also the case that formula_174 A linear extension is an extension that is also a linear (that is, total) order. As a classic example, the lexicographic order of totally ordered sets is a linear extension of their product order. Every partial order can be extended to a total order (order-extension principle).\nIn computer science, algorithms for finding linear extensions of partial orders (represented as the reachability orders of directed acyclic graphs) are called topological sorting.\nIn category theory.\nEvery poset (and every preordered set) may be considered as a category where, for objects formula_151 and formula_176 there is at most one morphism from formula_151 to formula_178 More explicitly, let hom(\"x\", \"y\") = {(\"x\", \"y\")} if \"x\" \u2264 \"y\" (and otherwise the empty set) and formula_179 Such categories are sometimes called \"posetal\".\nPosets are equivalent to one another if and only if they are isomorphic. In a poset, the smallest element, if it exists, is an initial object, and the largest element, if it exists, is a terminal object. Also, every preordered set is equivalent to a poset. Finally, every subcategory of a poset is isomorphism-closed.\nPartial orders in topological spaces.\nIf formula_3 is a partially ordered set that has also been given the structure of a topological space, then it is customary to assume that formula_181 is a closed subset of the topological product space formula_182 Under this assumption partial order relations are well behaved at limits in the sense that if formula_183 and formula_184 and for all formula_185 formula_186 then formula_187\nIntervals.\nA convex set in a poset \"P\" is a subset I of \"P\" with the property that, for any \"x\" and \"y\" in I and any \"z\" in \"P\", if \"x\" \u2264 \"z\" \u2264 \"y\", then \"z\" is also in I. This definition generalizes the definition of intervals of real numbers. When there is possible confusion with convex sets of geometry, one uses order-convex instead of \"convex\".\nA convex sublattice of a lattice \"L\" is a sublattice of \"L\" that is also a convex set of \"L\". Every nonempty convex sublattice can be uniquely represented as the intersection of a filter and an ideal of \"L\".\nAn interval in a poset \"P\" is a subset that can be defined with interval notation:\nWhenever \"a\" \u2264 \"b\" does not hold, all these intervals are empty. Every interval is a convex set, but the converse does not hold; for example, in the poset of divisors of 120, ordered by divisibility (see Fig.\u00a07b), the set {1, 2, 4, 5, 8} is convex, but not an interval.\nAn interval I is bounded if there exist elements formula_188 such that . Every interval that can be represented in interval notation is obviously bounded, but the converse is not true. For example, let \"P\" = (0, 1) \u222a (1, 2) \u222a (2, 3) as a subposet of the real numbers. The subset (1, 2) is a bounded interval, but it has no infimum or supremum in\u00a0\"P\", so it cannot be written in interval notation using elements of\u00a0\"P\".\nA poset is called locally finite if every bounded interval is finite. For example, the integers are locally finite under their natural ordering. The lexicographical order on the cartesian product formula_189 is not locally finite, since (1, 2) \u2264 (1, 3) \u2264 (1, 4) \u2264 (1, 5) \u2264 ... \u2264 (2, 1).\nUsing the interval notation, the property \"\"a\" is covered by \"b\"\" can be rephrased equivalently as formula_190\nThis concept of an interval in a partial order should not be confused with the particular class of partial orders known as the interval orders.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Sister-inline/styles.css\"/&gt; Media related to at Wikimedia Commons; each of which shows an example for a partial order\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23574", "revid": "45032371", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23574", "title": "Psyche", "text": "Psyche is the Ancient Greek term (\u03c8\u03c5\u03c7\u03ae) for 'soul'.\nPsyche may also refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "23575", "revid": "51007713", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23575", "title": "Parmenides", "text": "5th-century BC Greek philosopher\nParmenides of Elea (; ; fl. late sixth or early fifth century BC) was a pre-Socratic Greek philosopher from Elea in Magna Graecia (Southern Italy).\nParmenides was born in the Greek colony of Elea to a wealthy and illustrious family. The exact date of his birth is not known with certainty; on the one hand, according to the doxographer Diogenes La\u00ebrtius, Parmenides flourished in the period immediately preceding 500 BC, which would place his year of birth around 540 BC; on the other hand, in the dialogue \"Parmenides\" Plato portrays him as visiting Athens at the age of 65, when Socrates was a young man, c.\u2009450 BC, which, if true, suggests a potential year of birth of c.\u2009515 BC. Parmenides is thought to have been in his prime (or \"floruit\") around 475 BC.\nThe single known work by Parmenides is a philosophical poem in dactylic hexameter verse whose original title is unknown but which is often referred to as \"On Nature.\" Only fragments of it survive, but the integrity of the poem is remarkably higher than what has come down to us from the works of almost all other pre-Socratic philosophers, and therefore classicists can reconstruct the philosophical doctrines with greater precision. In his poem, Parmenides prescribes two views of reality. The first, the way of \"Aletheia\" or truth, describes how all reality is one, change is impossible, and existence is timeless and uniform. The second view, the way of \"Doxa\" or opinion, describes the world of appearances, in which one's sensory faculties lead to conceptions which are false and deceitful.\nParmenides has been considered the founder of ontology and has, through his influence on Plato, influenced the whole history of Western philosophy. He is also considered to be the founder of the Eleatic school of philosophy, which also included Zeno of Elea and Melissus of Samos. Zeno's paradoxes of motion were developed to defend Parmenides's views. In contemporary philosophy, Parmenides's work has remained relevant in debates about the philosophy of time.\nBiography.\nParmenides was born in Elea to an aristocratic family. Diogenes Laertius says that his father was Pires. Laertius transmits two divergent sources regarding the teacher of the philosopher. One, dependent on Sotion, indicates that he was first a student of Xenophanes, but did not follow him, and later became associated with a Pythagorean, Aminias, whom he preferred as his teacher. Another tradition, dependent on Theophrastus, indicates that he was a disciple of Anaximander.\nChronology.\nParmenides was one of the pre-Socratic philosophers. As with all pre-Socratic philosophers, the little known about his life and work comes from writings and quotations by later philosophers. Parmenides founded his school of thought in Elea. His ideas were followed by Melissus of Samos and Zeno of Elea, with the latter being a close friend of Parmenides.\nDate of birth.\nAll conjectures regarding Parmenides's date of birth are based on two ancient sources. One comes from Apollodorus and is transmitted to us by Diogenes Laertius: this source marks the Olympiad 69th (between 504 BC and 500 BC) as the moment of maturity, placing his birth 40 years earlier (544 BC \u2013 540 BC). The other is Plato, in his dialogue \"Parmenides\". There Plato composes a situation in which Parmenides, 65, and Zeno, 40, travel to Athens to attend the Panathenaic Games. On that occasion they meet Socrates, who was still very young according to the Platonic text.\nThe inaccuracy of the dating from Apollodorus is well known, who chooses the date of a historical event to make it coincide with the maturity (the \"floruit\") of a philosopher, a maturity that he invariably reached at forty years of age. He tries to always match the maturity of a philosopher with the birth of his alleged disciple. In this case Apollodorus, according to Burnet, based his date of the foundation of Elea (540 BC) to chronologically locate the maturity of Xenophanes and thus the birth of his supposed disciple, Parmenides. Knowing this, Burnet and later classicists like Cornford, Raven, Guthrie, and Schofield preferred to base the calculations on the Platonic dialogue. According to the latter, the fact that Plato adds so much detail regarding ages in his text is a sign that he writes with chronological precision. Plato says that Socrates was very young, and this is interpreted to mean that he was less than twenty years old. We know the year of Socrates's death (399 BC) and his age\u2014he was about seventy years old\u2014making the date of his birth 469 BC. The Panathenaic games were held every four years, and of those held during Socrates's youth (454, 450, 446), the most likely is that of 450 BC, when Socrates was nineteen years old. Thus, if at this meeting Parmenides was about sixty-five years old, his birth occurred around 515 BC.\nHowever, neither Raven nor Schofield, who follows the former, finds a dating based on a late Platonic dialogue entirely satisfactory. Other scholars directly prefer not to use the Platonic testimony and propose other dates. According to a scholar of the Platonic dialogues, R. Hirzel, indicates that the historical has no value for Plato. The fact that the meeting between Socrates and Parmenides is mentioned in the dialogues \"Theaetetus\" (183e) and \"Sophist\" (217c) only indicates that it is referring to the same fictional event, and this is possible because both the \"Theaetetus\" and the \"Sophist\" are considered after the \"Parmenides\". In \"Soph.\" 217c the dialectic procedure of Socrates is attributed to Parmenides, which would confirm that this is nothing more than a reference to the fictitious dramatic situation of the dialogue. Eggers Lan proposes a correction of the traditional date of the foundation of Elea. Based on Herodotus I, 163\u2013167, which indicates that the Phocians, after defeating the Carthaginians in naval battle, founded Elea, and adding the reference to Thucydides I, 13, where it is indicated that such a battle occurred in the time of Cambyses II, the foundation of Elea can be placed between 530 BC and 522 BC So Parmenides could not have been born before 530 BC or after 520 BC, given that it predates Empedocles. This last dating procedure is not infallible either, because it has been questioned that the fact that links the passages of Herodotus and Thucydides is the same. also rejects the chronology based on the Platonic text, and the historical reality of the encounter, in favor of the traditional date of Apollodorus. He follows the traditional datum of the founding of Elea in 545 BC, pointing to it not only as \"terminus post quem\", but as a possible date of Parmenides's birth, from which he concludes that his parents were part of the founding contingent of the city and that he was a contemporary of Heraclitus.\nTimeline relative to other Presocratics.\nParmenides would have been familiar with previous philosophers, such as the Milesians, as well as writers such as Homer and Hesiod. He may have known a Pythagorean philosopher, Ameinias, who introduced him to philosophy. Parmenides is sometimes described as beginning his study in the Milesian school under the tutelage of Anaximenes. He may alternatively have been a student of Xenophanes. Plato said that Parmenides traveled to Athens in 450 BCE, where he interacted with Socrates in the latter's youth.\nRather than attempt to estimate Parmenides' chronology from ancient testimony, some scholars have turned directly to passages in his work to determine which other presocratic philosophers he may have influenced, and which philosophers may have been reacting to his doctrines, and working backwards to get a better estimate of the time in which he lived, including allusions to the doctrine of Anaximenes and the Pythagoreans (fragment B 8, verse 24, and frag. B 4), and also against Heraclitus (frag .B 6, vv.8\u20139), while Empedocles and Anaxagoras frequently refer to Parmenides. The Atomist doctrines of are also seen as reactions to the doctrines of the later Eleatics who followed Parmenides. However, the philosopher whose potential influence has provoked the most discussion is Heraclitus of Ephesus.(frag .B 6, vv.8\u20139) \nThe potential references to Heraclitus in Parmenides work have been debated. Bernays's thesis that Parmenides attacks Heraclitus, to which Diels, Kranz, Gomperz, Burnet and others adhered. However, at the same time Karl Reinhardt postulates his thesis of chronological inversion: Heraclitus would be posterior to Parmenides, so the passage could not have objected to the doctrine of that one. Werner Jaeger followed suit on this point: he believes that the goddess's criticism is addressed to all mortals. Although Heraclitus criticized other philosophers such as Xenophanes and Pythagoras, he does not include Parmenides in this list. Guthrie finds it surprising that Heraclitus would not have censured Parmenides if he had known him. His conclusion, however, does not arise from this consideration, but points out that, due to the importance of his thought, Parmenides splits the history of pre-Socratic philosophy in two, therefore his position with respect to other thinkers it is easy to determine. And, from this point of view, the philosophy of Heraclitus seems to him pre-Parmenidean, while those of Empedocles, Anaxagoras and Democritus are post-Parmenidean. The evidence also suggests that Parmenides could not have written much after the death of Heraclitus. Regardless of the acceptance or rejection of the chronological inversion, Guthrie also leans by this interpretation, but with important nuances: the goddess refers, effectively, to all mortals. However, Heraclitus could be exceptionally representative of the \"judgmentless multitude\" (\u1f04\u03ba\u03c1\u03b9\u03c4\u03b1 \u03c6\u1fe6\u03bb\u03b1 v. 7), since the error that characterizes these is based on reliance on the eyes and ears (B 7, v. 4); and Heraclitus preferred the visible to the audible (22 B 55). He adds that the Heraclitean assertions \u201cwills and does not will\u201d (22 B 32), \u201con diverging converges\u201d (22 B 51), \u201con changing is at rest\u201d (22 B 84a) \u201cevidence of the quintessence of what Parmenides deplores here\u00bb. In light of this accumulation of evidence, he points out, it is for this reason that what many have seen as the only unequivocal reference to Heraclitus (22 B 51) in verse 9 of fr. 6. \u201cWhere no isolated sentence provides conviction, the cumulative effect may be of vital importance.\u201d\nAnecdotes.\nParmenides worked in government, as was common for pre-Socratic philosophers. Plutarch, Strabo and Diogenes\u2014following the testimony of Speusippus\u2014agree that Parmenides participated in the government of his city, organizing it and giving it a code of admirable laws.\nArchaeological discovery.\nIn 1969, the plinth of a statue dated to the 1st century AD was excavated in Velia. On the plinth were four words: \u03a0\u0391[\u03a1]\u039c\u0395\u039d\u0395\u0399\u0394\u0397\u03a3 \u03a0\u03a5\u03a1\u0397\u03a4\u039f\u03a3 \u039f\u03a5\u039b\u0399\u0391\u0394\u0397\u03a3 \u03a6\u03a5\u03a3\u0399\u039a\u039f\u03a3. The first two clearly read \"Parmenides, son of Pires.\" The fourth word \u03c6\u03c5\u03c3\u03b9\u03ba\u03cc\u03c2 (\"fysik\u00f3s\", \"physicist\") was commonly used to designate philosophers who devoted themselves to the observation of nature. On the other hand, there is no agreement on the meaning of the third (\u03bf\u1f50\u03bb\u03b9\u03ac\u03b4\u03b7\u03c2, \"ouliad\u0113s\"): it can simply mean \"a native of Elea\" (the name \"Velia\" is in Greek \u039f\u1f50\u03ad\u03bb\u03b9\u03b1), or \"belonging to the \u039f\u1f50\u03bb\u03b9\u03bf\u03c2\" (\"Ulios\"), that is, to a medical school (the patron of which was Apollo Ulius). If this last hypothesis were true, then Parmenides would be, in addition to being a legislator, a doctor. The hypothesis is reinforced by the ideas contained in fragment 18 of his poem, which contains anatomical and physiological observations. However, other specialists believe that the only certainty we can extract from the discovery is that of the social importance of Parmenides in the life of his city, already indicated by the testimonies that indicate his activity as a legislator.\nVisit to Athens.\nPlato, in his dialogue \"Parmenides\", relates that, accompanied by his disciple Zeno of Elea, Parmenides visited Athens when he was approximately sixty-five years old and that, on that occasion, Socrates, then a young man, conversed with him. Athenaeus of Naucratis had noted that, although the ages make a dialogue between Parmenides and Socrates hardly possible, the fact that Parmenides has sustained arguments similar to those sustained in the Platonic dialogue is something that seems impossible. Most modern classicists consider the visit to Athens and the meeting and conversation with Socrates to be fictitious. Allusions to this visit in other Platonic works are only references to the same fictitious dialogue and not to a historical fact.\nPhilosophy.\nEpistemology.\nParmenides depicted his philosophy as a divine truth, and rejected the evidence of the senses, believing that truth could only be found through reason. However, he considered both the divine and mortal understandings worth learning, as mortal understandings can still carry meaning.\nAs mortals think through their senses, Parmenides held that it is impossible for them to understand Being in its true form without distortion. By naming each concept, humans have distorted the uniform nature of Being and created concepts of things that are neither consistent Being nor non-Being. It is this simultaneous belief that forms the opinions of men. Being holds the same properties as and is indistinguishable from the concept of truth, as it is self-contained, unchanging, and eternal. Being is perceived in the mind, not through the senses. To apprehend something means that it must be something and not nothing and is therefore Being. Perceiving in the mind is distinct from thinking about something, as thinking pertains to specific objects that would divide Being.\nOntology.\nParmenides rejected the existence of non-Being, as something cannot be nothing. He defined all things that can be thought or spoken of as Being. Only the path of Being can be followed, because non-Being can not be thought or spoken about. To believe in the existence of both Being and non-Being is self-contradictory and makes knowledge impossible. His concept of eternal Being was of one that \"is\" without regard to time. As change cannot occur within Being, there are no intervals by which time can be measured. Being is consistent in its form throughout its existence, as the only alternative to its state of \"being\" is \"not being\". It is bound by its own form. If Being had come from non-Being, then it would have no reason or cause to come into existence as Being. Being must be eternal, as its origin would either be from non-Being, which cannot exist, or it would be from Being, which means it would have always existed. Being exists infinitely and is indivisible, as any space not occupied by being would be occupied by non-Being, which cannot exist. Being cannot move, as this would require there to be space that it does not already occupy. Parmenides rejected the existence of the Void, as it would necessarily be made of non-Being, which cannot exist.\nCosmology.\nParmenides developed a system defined by opposites, based on light and dark. Mortal perception of the world involves the shifting light and dark within a person, which creates subjective mortal opinions that can differ between individuals. This was the first philosophical model of how sensory perception relates to mental understanding. From the perspective of mortal opinions, each instance of opposites\u2014such as hot and cold or male and female\u2014are derived from the understanding of light and dark as distinct entities. Life and death are a shifting of one's soul from light to dark. In the mortal understanding, the exchange between light and dark is guided by a supreme power and blends the two to create different phenomena. The supreme power, personified by the Goddess, exists in the center of the universe. The existence of light and dark implies that Being and non-Being exist simultaneously. It is this contradiction that prevents mortals from understanding the true nature of Being. These mortal opinions allow the perception of time and change even though they do not exist under a divine understanding.\n\"On Nature\".\nSince antiquity, it has been believed Parmenides wrote only one work, later titled \"On Nature\", a didactic poem written in dactylic hexameter. This form has several uses: it facilitates the mnemonics and recitation of the poem, and allows games of poetic form, such as chiastic structure.\nApproximately 160 verses remain today from an original total that was probably near 800. The poem was originally divided into three parts: an introductory proem that contains an allegorical narrative which explains the purpose of the work, a former section known as \"The Way of Truth\" (\"aletheia\", \u1f00\u03bb\u03ae\u03b8\u03b5\u03b9\u03b1), and a latter section known as \"The Way of Appearance/Opinion\" (\"doxa\", \u03b4\u03cc\u03be\u03b1). Despite the poem's fragmentary nature, the general plan of both the proem and the first part, \"The Way of Truth\", have been ascertained by modern scholars, thanks to large excerpts made by Sextus Empiricus and Simplicius of Cilicia. Unfortunately, the second part, \"The Way of Opinion\", which is supposed to have been much longer than the first, only survives in small fragments and prose paraphrases.\nProem.\nThe introductory proem describes the narrator's journey to receive a revelation from an unnamed goddess on the nature of reality. It is composed from a rich symbology, which draws mainly from the epic tradition (both Homer and Hesiod), but also from Orphic symbology and other legends, and narrates an experience of a mystical-religious nature, to which scholars have drawn comparison to various mythological figures, including Etalides (Pherecydes, fragment 8 DK), Aristeas, Hermothymus and Epimenides. The latter ran into the goddesses Truth and Justice while his body was sleeping, which is very close to the story of the proem. The narrative of the poet's journey includes a variety of allegorical symbols, such as a speeding chariot with glowing axles, horses, the House of Night, Gates of the paths of Night and Day, and maidens who are \"the daughters of the Sun\" who escort the poet from the ordinary daytime world to a strange destination, outside our human paths. The allegorical themes in the poem have attracted a variety of different interpretations, including comparisons to Homer and Hesiod, and attempts to relate the journey towards either illumination or darkness, but there is little scholarly consensus about any interpretation, and the surviving evidence from the poem itself, as well as any other literary use of allegory from the same time period, may be too sparse to ever determine any of the intended symbolism with certainty. The remainder of the work is then presented as the spoken revelation of the goddess without any accompanying narrative.\nThe proem, begins with the description of a trip in a two-wheeled chariot (v. 7), pulled by a pair of mares, described as \u03c0\u03bf\u03bb\u03cd\u03c6\u03c1\u03b1\u03c3\u03c4\u03bf\u03b9 (\"pol\u00fdphrastoi\", v. 4), \"attentive\" or \"knowledgeable\". The image recalls the divine steeds of Achilles, sometimes even endowed with a voice. Pindar also gives us a similar image of draft beasts \"leading\" along a \"pure path\" or \"luminous\" There are so many common elements between the compositions that Bowra considers that either Pindar's mimics Parmenides's\u2014it is later, from 468 BC\u2014, or, what he considers more likely, that they have a common source from which they are both influenced. Everything seems to suggest that the chariot is directed by superior powers, and we must rule out, as Jaeger says, the platonizing interpretation of Sextus Empiricus, inspired by the myth of the \"winged chariot\" narrated in the \"Phaedrus\" (246 d 3 \u2013 248 d), in which the chariot symbolizes the human soul. Surely the composition has a closer relationship with the myth of the death of Phaethon, since both this and the charioteers of this Parmenidean chariot are children of the Sun, and the path that is traveled is that of Night and Day (v. 11). It is the same \"solar chariot.\"\nThis path leads from the \u201cdwelling of Night\u201d to the light (vv. 9\u201310). In verse 11 it is said that the way is \"of Night and Day.\" Hesiod had spoken of the \u00abhouse of Night\u00bb in \"Theogony\", house in which both Night and Day dwell, only that in an alternate way, for never does the mansion accommodate both at the same time. The ancient view of the alternation of Night and Day can be characterized as a transit performed by both along the same path, but in ever different positions. The path of Night and Day is, therefore, a unique path. Hesiod geographically locates the abode of Night at the center of the Earth, in the immediate vicinity of Tartarus. Instead, Parmenides situates his scene, according to the material of the opening of the gates (they are \"ethereal,\" v. 13), in the sky, like the gates of Mount Olympus, which Apollonius of Rhodes describes as ethereal and situated, of course, in the sky. Following Sextus Empiricus, some scholars have seen this as the experience of a transition from Night to Light means the transit of the ignorance to knowledge, while others dispute this, because the sage begins his journey in a flash of light, as is typical of one who \"knows\". It is certain that the author's intention is to give his work the character of a divine revelation, since the content is placed in the mouth of the goddess, analogous to the epic muse. And it is a revelation not available to ordinary men. that represents the abandonment of the world of everyday experience, where night and day alternate, a world replaced by a path of transcendent knowledge. Werner Jaeger understood this path as a way of salvation that Parmenides would have heard about in the mystery religions, a straight path that leads to knowledge.\nThe path on which he is led is interrupted by an immense stone gate, whose guardian is Dike. The daughters of the Sun persuade her, and she opens the door for the chariot to pass through (vv. 11\u201321). As in Homer, the gates of Olympus are guarded by the Horae, daughters of Zeus and Themis, the gate of the Parmenidean poem is curated by Dike, one of them. The Heliades persuade, with soft words, to the goddess to run the bolt, and she finally opens the door. Access to the truth is not, however, the merit of the \"man who knows\", since he is dragged by superior forces, the mares and the Heliades, his passage through the formidable barrier described in the poem is allowed by Dike and his journey he has from the first been in favor with Themis. Transit is in accordance with law. In Parmenides' poem, Dike is adjectiveized as \u03c0\u03bf\u03bb\u03cd\u03c0\u03bf\u03b9\u03bd\u03bf\u03c2 (\"pol\u00fdpoinos\", \"rich in punishments\" or \"avenger,\" v. 14). The expression \u0394\u03af\u03ba\u03b7 \u03c0\u03bf\u03bb\u03cd\u03c0\u03bf\u03b9\u03bd\u03bf\u03c2 (\"Dike pol\u00fdpoinos\") is present in an Orphic poem (fr. 158 Kern). This, plus the fact that Dike possesses the keys \"of alternate uses\" or \"of double use\" (\u1f00\u03bc\u03bf\u03b9\u03b2\u1f24, \"amoib\u00ea\", v. 14), another possible ritual element, made one think of a close relationship between Parmenides and the Orphic cults, so abundant in southern Italy. The turn \u03b5\u1f30\u03b4\u03cc\u03c4\u03b1 \u03c6\u1ff6\u03c4\u03b1 (\"eid\u00f3ta ph\u014dta\", \"man who knows\"), opposed to mortals and their ignorance, does no more than reinforce this link (see Orpheus, fr. 233 Kern).\nOnce the chariot passes the threshold, the \u201cknowing man\u201d is received by a goddess\u2014whose identity is not revealed\u2014with a typical gesture of welcome. Her speech, beginning at line 24, is the content of the rest of the poem. The narrator is greeted by a goddess, whose speech, Most scholars agree in showing the very close relationship between this nameless goddess (\u03b8\u03b5\u03ac, \"the\u00e1\") and the Muses of the epic: Homer invokes her with the same word in the first verse from the \"Iliad\": \u00abSing, goddess...\u00bb; the divinity is the one she sings about, by virtue of the fact that she knows \"all things\" (\"Il.\" II, 485). The Muses of Hesiod even specify something similar to what the Parmenidean goddess said about true and apparent speech: \u00abWe know how to tell many lies with appearances of truth; and we know, when we want, to proclaim the truth\u00bb (\"Thegony\", vv. 27ff). She tells him, in the first place, that he has not been sent by an evil destiny, but by law and justice (vv. 26-28). It is not, says the goddess, this fate that has led the protagonist along the route of Night and Day: the author seems to oppose here the fate of the \"man who knows\" and that of Phaethon, whose disastrous journey in the chariot of the Sol only ended with his death. \"Moira\" belongs to the set of divinities related to divine justice, such as Themis and Dike, who are the ones that have allowed the transit of a mortal through the route of the Sun. Themis personifies customary law; in the epic, it is the set of norms of social behavior, not formulated, but that no mortal can ignore. The good disposition shown by the goddesses associated with law means that the trip has been permitted or approved by the divinity. By virtue of this, he continues, it is necessary that he know all things, both \"the unshakable heart of persuasive truth\" and \"the opinions of mortals\", because, although in these \"there is no true conviction\", without yet they have enjoyed prestige (vv. 28\u201332). It is necessary for the narrator to also know the opinions of mortals (vv. 31\u201332) because what is a matter of opinion (\u03c4\u1f70 \u03b4\u03bf\u03ba\u03bf\u1fe6\u03bd\u03c4\u03b1, \"t\u00e0 doko\u00fbnta\") is all-encompassing, which means that opinions are all that mortals could know without considering the revelation of the Parmenidean goddess. They have necessarily enjoyed prestige and that is why they must be known. The passage is closely related to the end of Fragment 8, v. 60ss, where the goddess says that she expounds the probable discourse on the cosmic order so that no mortal opinion outweighs the receiver of the revelation.\n\"The Way of Truth\".\nIn the \"Way of Truth\", an estimated 90% of which has survived, Parmenides distinguishes between the unity of nature and its variety, insisting in the \"Way of Truth\" upon the reality of its unity, which is therefore the object of knowledge, and upon the unreality of its variety, which is therefore the object, not of knowledge, but of opinion.\nB2.\nProclus preserves, in his commentary on \"Timaeus\" I 345, 18\u201320, two lines of Parmenides's poem, which together with six lines transmitted by Simplicius, in his commentary on Aristotle's \"Physics\", 116, 28\u201332\u2013117, 1, form fragment 2 (28 B 2). There the goddess speaks of two \"paths of inquiry that there are for thinking (nous)\". The first is named as follows: \"which is, and also cannot be that it is not\" (v. 3); the second: \"which is not, and also, must not be\" (v. 5). The first way is \"of persuasion\", which \"accompanies the truth\" (v. 4), while the second is \"completely inscrutable\" or \"impracticable\", since \"what is not\" cannot be known, nor expressed (vv. 6\u20138).\nB3.\nFragment B3 is just a part of dactylic verse: . Following the order of the words and the literal meaning of each word, it could be translated (and understood) as follows: \"the same thing is to think and to be\". Plotinus, who cites the text, believes he finds in it support for his idea of the identification of being with thinking, a fundamental idea of Neoplatonism. However, some modern scholars have interpreted it as closer to \"the same is to be thought and to be\". For Jaeger, the semantic value of \u03bd\u03bf\u03b5\u1fd6\u03bd is not identical to that used later by Plato, who opposes it to sensible perception. Rather this is an \"awareness\" of an object in what it is. The \u03bd\u03bf\u03b5\u1fd6\u03bd is not really \u03bd\u03bf\u03b5\u1fd6\u03bd if it does not know the real. Guthrie adds that the action of the verb cannot suggest the image of something that does not exist. In Homer it has a similar meaning to \"see\" (\"Il\" XV, 422), rather it is the act by which someone receives the full meaning of a situation (\"Il\" III, 396), not through a process of reasoning, but a sudden illumination. Subsequently, \u03bd\u03bf\u1fe6\u03c2 (\"no\u00fbs\") is conceived as a faculty that cannot be subject to error, as Aristotle will later say in \"Posterior Analytics\", 100b5.\nB6.\nIn fragment B6, nine verses preserved by Simplicius, Parminides continues to speak of the ways of thought. The first three verses argue against the second way, presented in B 2, v. 5: Postulates that it is necessary to think and say that \"what is\" is, since it is possible that it is, while it is impossible for \"nothing\" to be. And this is the reason why the goddess removes the \"man who knows\" from the second way. Immediately, the goddess speaks of a third path that must be left aside: the one in which mortals wander, wandering since they are dragged by a wavering mind, which considers that being and not being are the same, and at the same time it is not the same. himself (vv. 4\u20139). It is the way of opinion, already presented in B 1, v. 30. Fragment 6 has been interpreted by some philologists as a reference to the thought of Heraclitus. There it speaks of the \"two-faced\" (\u03b4\u03af\u03ba\u03c1\u03b1\u03bd\u03bf\u03b9 v. 5), those who believe that \"being and not being is the same and not the same\" (vv. 8\u20139). This appears to be a criticism of the Heraclitean doctrine of the unity of opposites. Verse 9 \"from all things there is a retrograde way\" (\u03c0\u1f04\u03bd\u03c4\u03c9\u03bd \u03b4\u1f72 \u03c0\u03b1\u03bb\u03af\u03bd\u03c4\u03c1\u03bf\u03c0\u03cc\u03c2 \u1f10\u03c3\u03c4\u03b9 \u03ba\u03ad\u03bb\u03b5\u03c5\u03b8\u03bf\u03c2), seems to point directly to an idea present in a fragment of Heraclitus: (22 B 60): \"the up way and below is one and the same\u00bb; and to the same letter of another fragment (22 B 51): \"...harmony of that which turns back\u00bb (\u03c0\u03b1\u03bb\u03af\u03bd\u03c4\u03c1\u03bf\u03c0\u03bf\u03c2 \u1f01\u03c1\u03bc\u03bf\u03bd\u03af\u03b7).\nIn the Fragment 2, Parmenides presents two paths of inquiry, \u03b4\u03af\u03b6\u03b7\u03c3\u03b9\u03c2 (\"diz\u0113sis\", v. 2), mutually exclusive: one must be followed and the other is inscrutable. In fragment 6, however, a third path appears from which one must turn away (v. 4ff). The characterization of these paths has initiated a discussion about the amount of paths presented and on the nature of these. Werner Jaeger says that throughout the writing the meaning of \u00abpath\u00bb is that of \u00absalvation path\u00bb. That is why he compares this disjunction of the paths with those of the religious symbolism of later Pythagoreanism, which presented a straight path and a path of error, in the sense of morally good and bad paths. The choice of one of them is made by man as a moral agent. He also offers as background a passage from \"Works and Days\" (286ff) where Hesiod presents a flat path, that of wickedness, and a steep one, that of virtue. Either way, he accepts that there is in the poem a transfer from religious symbolism to intellectual processes. In this sense, compared to the two exclusionary paths of fragment 2 (he calls them that of \"being\" and that of \"not being\"), the third path of fragment 6 is not a different path, but rather an inadmissible combination of these two, followed by those who have not noticed their mutual exclusion. Raven points out that the third way is that of mortals, who wander \"two-headed\" (\u03b4\u03af\u03ba\u03c1\u03b1\u03bd\u03bf\u03b9, \"d\u00edkranoi\"), because they combine opposites, as Simplicius had noted. Schofield argues that this third way had not been shown in fr. 2, since there were coherent alternatives between which a researcher must decide, while this is a path that anyone who does not make this decision and does not use his critical faculties finds himself on (fr. 6, vv. 6 \u20137), following both contradictory paths at the same time. For Guthrie there are effectively three ways, the second is discarded and the third, which arises from the use of the senses and habit, includes the belief that \"things that are not are\" and \"that being and not being are the same and not the same\u201d (fr. 6, v. 8).\nB7.\nAnother fragment, B7 the next seven verses follow this reflection and concludes it: there is no way to prove \"what is what is not\" (v. 1). For this reason, the goddess indicates that it is necessary to deviate from this path of inquiry, going even against custom, which leads to the \"inattentive gaze\" and the \"rumbling ear and the tongue\", that is, to the senses (vv. 2 -4). Instead, she recommends following her controversial argument with reason (vv. 5\u20136). Part of line 6, and what remains of line 7, connects the theme of the paths of inquiry with fragment A8: only the path discourse dealing with 'what is' remains.\nB8.1-4: Signs about \"What is\".\nIn the longest surviving fragment, B8, the goddess (verses 1-4) describes a series of \"signs\" about \"what is\": \u201cunbegotten and indestructible\u201d (\u1f00\u03b3\u03ad\u03bd\u03b7\u03c4\u03bf\u03bd \u03ba\u03b1\u1f76 \u1f00\u03bd\u03ce\u03bb\u03b5\u03b8\u03c1\u03bf\u03bd, v. 5-21), \u201cwhole and unique\u201d (\u03bf\u1f54\u03bb\u03bf\u03b5 \u03bc\u03bf\u03ad\u03bf\u03bd, v. 22-25), \u201cimmovable\u201d (\u1f00\u03c4\u03c1\u03b5\u03bc\u03ae\u03c2, v. 26-33) and \u201cperfect\u201d (\u03c4\u03b5\u03bb\u03b5\u1fd6\u03bf\u03bd, v. 42-49), which are along the path and which come to be a set of attributes of \"what is\".\nThe program itself, however, concludes with an inexplicable \"endless (in time)\" (\u1f20\u03b4\u1fbd \u1f00\u03c4\u03ad\u03bb\u03b5\u03c3\u03c4\u03bf\u03bd) which would contradict verse 5, which indicates that \"what is\" is foreign to both the past and the future. Owen offers the following conjecture as a solution to this difficulty: the reading is a copyist's error, seduced by the reiteration of negative prefixes in the poem (\u1f00\u03b3\u03ad\u03bd\u03b7\u03c4\u03bf\u03bd... \u1f00\u03bd\u03ce\u03bb\u03b5\u03b8\u03c1\u03bf\u03bd... \u1f00\u03c4\u03c1\u03b5\u03bc\u03ad\u03c2) and by the influence of a Homeric clich\u00e9. and should read \u1f20\u03b4\u1f72 \u03c4\u03b5\u03bb\u03b5\u1fd6\u03bf\u03bd, \"perfect\". With this amendment, a complete correspondence between the program and the arguments is achieved. Guthrie nevertheless decides on the original reading (the only one attested in the manuscripts) and rejects Owen's emendation, understanding this \"infinity\" in a new sense, different from the Homeric use of the term, which precisely means \"incomplete\", \"unfinished\" and that contradicts the ideas presented in the poem about the attributes of perfection of the entity. Raven follows the reading of Diels, but Schofield follows Owen's conjecture.\nB8.5-21 \"What is\" cannot be begotten or destroyed.\nFrom verse 5 to 21 a lengthy argument is developed against generation and corruption. Verse 5 posits On the other hand, if nothing can be understood or said about \"what is not\", then there is no possibility of finding out from where it would have been generated, nor for what reason it would have been generated \"before\" or \"after\", emerging from nothing. (verses 6\u201310). It is necessary that it be completely, or that it not be at all, therefore it cannot be admitted that from what is not something arises that exists together with \"what is\" (vv. 11-12). Generation and corruption are prohibited by Justice, by virtue of a decision: \"it is or it is not\", and it has been decided to abandon this last path as inscrutable, and follow the first, the only true path (vv. 14-18) . Nor can the entity, being, be born. And if he was born, he is not. Nor can it be if it is going to be. Therefore the generation is extinct, and perishing cannot be known (vv. 19\u201321). The first sign that the goddess deals with is the one related to the entity's relationship with time, the generation and corruption. In verse 5 of fragment 8 she affirms that the entity was not in the past nor should it be in the future, but is entirely now (\u03bd\u1fe6\u03bd \u1f14\u03c3\u03c4\u03b9 \u1f41\u03bc\u03bf\u1fe6 \u03c0\u1fb6\u03bd). The past and the future have no meaning for the entity, it \"is\" in a perpetual present, without temporal distinction of any kind. What follows (vv. 6\u201311) is the argument against the birth or generation of what is. The first words (\u201cone\u201d, \u1f15\u03bd, and \u201ccontinuous\u201d, \u03c3\u03c5\u03bd\u03b5\u03c7\u03ad\u03c2) advance the content of another argument located later on unity and continuity (vv. 22\u201325). From there, she wonders what genesis would you look for? It denies the possibility that \"what is\" arises from \"what is not\", since one cannot think or say \u201cwhat is not\u201d (vv. 7\u20139) there would be no need for something \"that is\" to emerge from \"what is not\" (vv. 9-10). Schofield has interpreted Parmenides here as 'appealing to the principle of sufficient reason. He supposes that everything that comes to be must contain in itself a principle of development (\"necessity\", \u03c7\u03c1\u03ad\u03bf\u03c2) sufficient to explain its generation. But if something does not exist, how can it contain such a principle?\u00bb The meaning of lines 12\u201313 is ambiguous, due to the use of a pronoun (\u03b1\u1f50\u03c4\u03cc) that can be interpreted as referring to the object that has been spoken of for nine lines, \u201cwhat is\u201d, or as referring to the subject of the sentence in which it appears: \u00abwhat is not\u00bb. The first alternative and the final meaning of the sentence would be: from \"what is not\" something cannot arise that becomes together with \"what is\", that is, something other than \"what is\". This sentence would have the same content as that of verse 36\u201337: \"nothing can exist apart from what is.\" This interpretation has been followed by Raven, but rejected by Guthrie, because it introduces, according to him, elements alien to the argument about generation and corruption that dominates the section as a whole. He interprets as follows: 'what is not' can only be generated from 'what is not'. In this sense, it would be one of the first versions of the phrase \"ex nihilo nihil fit\", \"from nothing nothing arises\", which is also an axiom already accepted by the \"philosophers of nature', as Aristotle observes (\"Physics\" 187a34). Throughout the fragment there is no direct argument against corruption, but it can be deduced from postulating as exclusive the \"is\" and the \"is not\" (v. 16), and rejecting the \"is not\" (vv. 17\u2013 18): perishing involves accepting that \"what is\" might \"not be\" in the future. Likewise, the generation implies that \"what is\" has not been in the past (vv. 19\u201320). From the point of view of the history of thought, Parmenides achieves a true intellectual achievement by distinguishing here the \"enduring\" from the \"eternal\". What is \"enduring\" is in time: it is the same now as it was thousands of years ago, or in the future. This is how the ancients thought of the perdurability of the cosmos or physical universe, as distinct from the eternity of what it is (Plato, \"Timaeus\" 38c2, 37e\u201338a). While eternity was posited by the Ionians\u2014Anaximander said that their \u1f04\u03c0\u03b5\u03b9\u03c1\u03bf\u03bd was immortal, eternal, and ageless\u2014they had also thought that their respective principles were starting points of the world. Parmenides, on the other hand, shows that if it is accepted that what is is eternal, it must be one, and cannot be the beginning of a multiform world, of an order of plural elements. Much less of a world subject to becoming, as Aristotle also expresses as the opinion of the ancient philosophers: \"what is does not become, because it already is, and nothing could come to be from what it is not\" ('Physics' ' 191a30).\nB8.22-25: \"What is\" is whole.\nFrom verse 22 to 25, the poem deals with the condition of integrity of \"what is\". No parts can be distinguished in it, since it is uniform: there is no more and less in it, it is simply full of \"what is\", and is alone with itself. In this passage Parmenides denies two ideas present in the cosmogonies and in the speculations of thinkers before him: the gradation of being and the emptiness. Anaximenes had spoken of the condensation and rarefaction of his principle (13 A 7), actions that, in addition to generating movement (which has already been rejected by Parmenides), supposes assuming certain degrees of density, but strictly adhering to \"what is\" prevents this type of gradual differences of existence. In this cosmogony, for the cosmos to emerge from the beginning, it must have some unevenness of texture, lack of cohesion or balance. It also prevents differentiating things according to their nature, as Heraclitus had intended (22 B 1). Guthrie rejects the reference to Anaximenes exposed above. But above all he seems to reject here the idea of emptiness, which the Pythagoreans considered as necessary to separate the units, physical and arithmetical at the same time, from which the world was composed. Apart from these historical considerations, the passage has generated some controversy regarding the dimension that Parmenides mentioned when referring to continuity. Owen interpreted this continuity of being to refer exclusively to time, but Guthrie understands that the beginning of the passage (\"neither differentiable is...\", \u03bf\u1f50\u03b4\u03b5 \u03b4\u03b9\u03b1\u03c1\u03b5\u03c4\u03cc\u03bd \u1f10\u03c3\u03c4\u03b9\u03bd, v. 22) introduces a new and independent argument from the previous one, and that the predicate of the homogeneous (\"is a uniform whole\", \u03c0\u1fb6\u03bd \u1f14\u03c3\u03c4\u03b9\u03bd \u1f41\u03bc\u03bf\u1fd6\u03bf\u03bd, same verse), even based on what is said in verse 11: \"it must be completely, or not be at all\", that is, in a part of the argument against the generation, has a further consequence: in the present continuous of \"what is,\" he exists fully, and not in varying degrees. Schofield indicates that Parmenides thinks of a continuity of what is, in whatever dimension he occupies, and this quote also refers to a temporal continuity.\nB8.26-33 \"What is\" is motionless.\nImmobility is treated from verses 26 to 33. This is understood first as a denial of transit, as generation and corruption, which have already been repelled by true conviction (vv. 26-28). Then he says that \"what is\" remains in its place, in itself and by itself, compelled by necessity, which holds it \"with strong ties\" (vv. 29-31). An additional reason for his immobility is that he lacks nothing (v. 32), since, lacking something, he would lack everything (v. 33).\nB8.42-49: \"What is\" is perfect.\nIn verse 42, the discourse deals with the attribute of perfection: \"what is\" is similar to the mass of a well-rounded ball, it cannot be less somewhere and more somewhere else, all of it is equidistant from the center (vv. 43\u201344). Remaining identical to itself, it fulfills its own limits.(vv. 45\u201349).\nParmenides (v. 43) describes what is as a \"\u03c3\u03c6\u03b1\u03af\u03c1\u03b7\u03c2\" (sphaires), which in classical Greek means \"that which has a spherical shape\" which in antiquity led some commentators to claim that Parmenides believed in a \"spherical universe\" or a \"spherical god\" or even a statement about the roundness of the Earth. This interpretation has a parallel with the later geometrical model of the universe in Plato's \"Timaeus\", where the Demiurge makes the world spherical, because the sphere is that figure that contains all the others, the most perfect and similar to itself. However, both Plato and Parmenides distinguished between the \"sensible\" world and the \"intelligible\" world, and, considering the world of the senses unreal, so it is unlikely either of them was intending to make a statement about the shape of the material universe. Additionally, in the Homeric language used by Parmenides, \"\u03c3\u03c6\u03b1\u03af\u03c1\u03b1\" is nothing more than a ball, like the one they played with Nausicaa and her female servants upon reaching them Odysseus. The Parmenidean entity could be thought of as a sphere, but it is ultimately neither spherical nor spatial, taking into account that it is a reality not perceptible by the senses, it is timeless, it does not change its quality and it is immobile. The \"boundaries\" are not spatial, but a sign of invariance. The limits are also not temporary, since this would involve accepting generation and corruption. The comparison with the sphere is required because it represents a reality in which every point is the same distance from the center, and therefore no point is more \"true\" than another. It is an image of the continuity and uniformity of the entity.\nAlready Plato had understood that the Eleatics denied movement because the One lacked a place where it could move; this idea of the absence of a void was first expressed by Melissus of Samos. In this attribute of what is, the idea of limit (\u03c0\u03b5\u1fd6\u03c1\u03b1\u03c2) plays a fundamental role. It is associated with bonds or chains, such as those with which Odysseus was tied by his companions in \"Od.\" XII, 179. These uses maintain the idea of a certain deprivation of spatial mobility. The idea of limit is also related to \"what is established by the gods.\" Because, in the poem, one of the arguments in favor of immobility is the fact that \u201cwhat is\u201d cannot be incomplete, this would be \u201cillicit\u201d: \u03bf\u1f50\u03ba \u1f00\u03c4\u03b5\u03bb\u03b5\u03cd\u03c4\u03b7\u03c4\u03bf\u03bd \u03c4\u03cc \u1f10\u03cc\u03bd \u03b8\u1f14\u03bc\u03b9\u03c2 \u03b5\u1f36\u03bd\u03b1\u03b9 (v. 32). The term \u1f00\u03c4\u03b5\u03bb\u03b5\u03cd\u03c4\u03b7\u03c4\u03bf\u03bd is used in \"Il.\", I, 527: there Zeus says that what he assents to \u00abdoes not remain unfulfilled\u00bb. This is equivalent to Parmenides' \"is perfect\" (\u03c4\u03b5\u03c4\u03b5\u03bb\u03b5\u03c3\u03bc\u03ad\u03bd\u03bf\u03bd \u1f14\u03c3\u03c4\u03b9 v. 42). The use of \u00ablimit\u00bb linked to the sense of \u00abperfection\u00bb or \u00abconsummation\u00bb is also attested in \"Il\". XVIII, 501 and \"Od\" V, 289. The \"limit\" is, moreover, one of the fundamental principles of the Pythagoreans, and heads the left column of their Table of Opposites (58 B 4\u20135 = \"Met\". 986a23), column in which were also, among others, the One, the Still and the Good.\n\"The Way of Opinion\".\nIn the significantly longer, but far worse preserved latter section of the poem, \"Way of Opinion\", Parmenides propounds a theory of the world of appearance and its development, pointing out, however, that, in accordance with the principles already laid down, these cosmological speculations do not pretend to anything more than mere appearance. The structure of the cosmos is a fundamental binary principle that governs the manifestations of all the particulars: \"the Aether fire of flame\" (B 8.56), which is gentle, mild, soft, thin and clear, and self-identical, and the other is \"ignorant night\", body thick and heavy. Cosmology originally comprised the greater part of his poem, explaining the world's origins and operations. Some idea of the sphericity of the Earth also seems to have been known to Parmenides.\nB8.50-52, 34-41: The Fates.\nThe end of fragment 8, preserved by Simplicius, corresponds to an initial characterization of the opinion pathway. The goddess indicates that with the above considerations trustworthy speech ends, and a \"deceitful order of words\" begins: that of the opinions of mortals (vv. 50-52). The content of lines 34 to 36 is deeply related to fragment B3: it postulates that what must be intellectively known is that by which intellection is: intellective knowing itself (\"noein\") is revealed in \"what is\"; in fact, there is nothing more than \"what is\" Lines 34 to 36 and the first half of 37 are linked to the verse that constitutes fragment 3 and its meaning. And this is revealed by the parallelism of the construction \u03bd\u03bf\u03b5\u1fd6\u03bd \u1f14\u03c3\u03c4\u03b9\u03bd (fr. 3) / \u1f14\u03c3\u03c4\u03b9\u03bd \u03bd\u03bf\u03b5\u1fd6\u03bd (fr.8, v. 34). The Moirai keeps the entity whole and motionless (vv. 37\u201338); This forces us to think that everything that mortals have thought to be true is nothing more than a network of mere names that designate changes: to be born and to perish, to be and not to be, to vary in place and color (vv. 39\u201341). Guthrie notes that, in this passage, Parmenides elevates his diction to epic and religious solemnity, and gives an important role to the divinities Moiras and Ananke. The use of the word refers to the scene of Hector who, chained to his Destiny, has \"remained\" outside the walls of Troy (\" Il \". XXII, 1\u2013 6). Guthrie understands that Parmenides' reason for holding the idea of immobility is that \"what is\" is continuous and indistinguishable in parts, which prevents it from moving as a whole or changing internally.\nThe first line is interpretable in multiple ways. First of all, the interpretation depends on the determination of the subject. Thus, Guthrie, following Zeller, Fr\u00e4nkel and Kranz, understands that \u03bd\u03bf\u1fc6\u03bc\u03b1 is linked to the verb \u1f14\u03c3\u03c4\u03b9, so that the subject would be \u00abwhat what can be thought. The meaning of the first line would be: \"What can be thought and the thought that 'is' are the same.\" On the other hand, Diels, Von Fritz and Vlastos, among others, have thought that the subject is the infinitive Mood \u03bd\u03bf\u03b5\u1fd6\u03bd: that is \u201cthinking\u201d. Diels and Von Fritz, following the interpretation of Simplicius, they have also understood that \u03bf\u1f50\u03bd\u03b5\u03ba\u03ad\u03bd has a causal or consecutive value (Guthrie gives it the value of a mere conjunction), so the meaning of this verse would be: \"Thinking is the same as that which is the cause of thinking.\" Ultimately, there are two possible interpretations: 1) the one that maintains that what is said here is that thinking and being have a relationship of identity. 2) that the idea of fragment 3 is being repeated here. and that of verse 2 of fragment 2: That is, that thought only reveals itself and realizes itself in \"what is\". Vlastos argues that the thought he knows can hardly be denied existence. But if it exists, it must be part of what it is. But what is has no parts, but is homogeneous. Then thinking can only be the totality of what it is. What it is is intelligence. In this dispute, Cornford rightly points out that nowhere in the poem does Parmenides indicate that his One thinks, and that no Greek of his day would have held that 'if A exists, A thinks'. Rather he held that thought cannot exist without something existing. Owen points out that Plato, in \"Sophist\" 248d\u2013249a, hinted that Parmenides was not faced with the problem of whether the real possesses life, soul, and understanding. The only sure thing is that there is a close relationship between what is and knowing, which are faced by the actions of being born and perishing, being and not being, changing place or color, which strictly speaking \"are mere names\" which mortals have agreed to assign to things that are unreal, and then persuaded themselves of their reality. The whole of these names is the content of the way of opinion.\nB8.53-64: Primordial Elements.\nIn fragment 8, the elements that make up the opposition to which the world of appearance can be reduced have been presented: \u03c6\u03bb\u03bf\u03b3\u03cc\u03c2 \u03b1\u1f30\u03b8\u03ad\u03c1\u03b9\u03bf\u03bd \u03c0\u1fe6\u03c1 (\"phlog\u00f3s aitherion p\u0177r\", \u00abethereal fire of the flame\u00bb, v. 56) and \u03bd\u03cd\u03be (\"n\u00fdx\", \u00abnight\u00bb, v. 59). Mortals have distinguished two forms, \u03c0\u1fe6\u03c1 (\"p\u0177r\", \"fire\", v. 56) and \u03bd\u1fe6\u03be (\"n\u0177x\", \"night\", v. 59). In relation to these opposites, the goddess says that \"the mortals have erred\", however line 54, which contains the reason for the error, presents three possibilities of translation. She literally says \u03c4\u1ff6\u03bd \u03bc\u03af\u03b1\u03bd \u03bf\u1f50 \u03c7\u03c1\u03b5\u03ce\u03bd \u1f10\u03c3\u03c4\u03b9v. These three interpretations exhaust the possibilities of the text, and all have been supported by specialists.\nThese, the mortals, have given names to two forms, with which they have gone astray, because it is only lawful to name one (v. 54). They assigned these forms different properties, and considered them opposite: on the one hand, fire, soft, light and homogeneous; on the other, the night, compact and heavy (vv. 55\u201359). The goddess declares this speech no longer true, but plausible in appearance, and communicates it so that, in the order of opinions, the sage is not surpassed either (vv. 60-61). Simplicius, pointed out that in this passage Parmenides transits from the objects of reason to sensible objects. The goddess calls the content of this second part \u03b2\u03c1\u03bf\u03c4\u1ff6\u03bd \u03b4\u03cc\u03be\u03b1\u03c2 (\"brot\u00f4n d\u00f3xas\", \"opinions of mortals\", v. 51). Keep in mind that \u03b4\u03cc\u03be\u03b1 means \"what seems real\" or is presented to the senses; \"what seems true\" constituting the beliefs of all men; and \"what seems right\" to man. The speech does not pretend to be \"true\", since everything that could be said reliably has already been said. On the contrary, what he will present will be a \u03ba\u03cc\u03c3\u03bc\u03bf\u03c2 \u1f00\u03c0\u03b1\u03c4\u03b7\u03bb\u03cc\u03c2 (\"k\u00f3smos apat\u0113l\u00f3s\", \u00abdeceitful order\u00bb), since he presents beliefs as if they were presided over by an order.\nFr\u00e4nkel, even deciding on an intertextual interpretation that corresponds to the first exposed here: \u00abonly one should be named\u00bb, does so without this implying that one of the two forms is more real than the other. The Light must not be identified with the first way. Men name two forms, light and night, and this is the mistake, since one should be named, \"what is\". Guthrie, who makes a critical compilation of all the positions on the matter, does not find Cornford and Diels' objection to Zeller's translation convincing, since Parmenides' expression is irregular. Cornford's translation would also be better represented by the textual presence of a \u03bf\u1f50\u03b4\u1f72 \u03bc\u03af\u03b1\u03bd (\"ud\u00e9 m\u00edan\", \u00abnone\u00bb) and that of Simplicius and Raven by a \u03bc\u03af\u03b1\u03bd \u03bc\u03cc\u03bd\u03b7\u03bd (\"m\u00edan m\u00f3n\u0113n\", \u00abonly one\u00bb ). Guthrie argues that Parmenides thinks that it is illogical to accept, on the one hand, that the world contains a plurality of things, and on the other, that this plurality can arise from a single principle. The passage from the way of truth to the deceptive words of mortal opinions is a real problem for specialists. Even when the goddess tells the \"man who knows\" that she reveals this order to him as plausible, so that no mortal can outdo him (vv. 60\u201361), this reason has been interpreted in various ways. In antiquity, Aristotle conceived the first part of the poem as the consideration of the One \u03ba\u03b1\u03c4\u1f70 \u03c4\u1f78\u03bd \u03bb\u03cc\u03b3\u03bf\u03bd (\"kat\u00e1 t\u00f3n l\u00f3gon\", \u00abregarding the concept\u00bb or \"as to definition\" or \"as to reason\"), and the second as the consideration of the world according to the senses (\"Met\" 986b31 = A 24). Theophrastus followed him at this point, and Simplicius adds that, although the goddess calls the speech of the second part \"conjectural\" and \"misleading\", she does not consider it completely false (\"Physics\" 39, 10\u201312 = A 34). Jaeger, following Reinhardt, he thought that Parmenides was presented with the need to explain the origin of the deceptive appearance. And he had no other means than to narrate the origin of the world constituted by appearances, that is, to compose a cosmogony. Owen argues that the content of the second part is merely a dialectical device, and does not imply an ontological claim.\nB9: Day and Night.\nFragment 9 mentions again what was described in the final part of Fragment 8 as what mortals have conceived as the dual foundation of the world of appearance: the opposing principles \"light\" and \"night\", and says that everything is full of these opposites, and that nothing belongs exclusively to one of the two. In Fragment 9, Parmenides goes a step further, and states that the entire sensible realm can be reduced to manifestations of this pair of opposites, night and light (, v.1), and that both penetrate the whole of reality equally. These forms can be considered to head a list of opposites, which serve as qualities to sensible things.\nThe idea of grouping under the fundamental opposite pair all the attributes of it has its parallel in the table of opposites of Pythagoras. Of course, in the Parmenidean table, oppositions that are not sensible must be excluded. For Simplicius, it was clear that assigning fire the attribute of agent, which Alexander of Aphrodisias had done, was a mistake. The reliability of all such evidence dependent on Aristotle is now highly doubted, even when they reflect previous cosmogonic beliefs and it is not too risky to consider fire as active and earth as passive.\nThe fact that the goddess indicates (v.3-4) that everything is full of both night and light \"equally\" (\u1f34\u03c3\u03c9\u03bd \u1f00\u03bc\u03c6\u03bf\u03c4\u03ad\u03c1\u03c9\u03bd, \"\u00eds\u014dn amphot\u00e9r\u014dn\") is ambiguous; it could either mean \"of equal rank,\" which would agree with Aristotle's interpretation, according to which one form \"is\" and the other \"is not,\" or it could refer to an equality in quantity or extension, which would parallel a Pythagorean expression where in the cosmos, light and darkness are posited to equally cover (\u1f30\u03c3\u03cc\u03bc\u03bf\u03b9\u03c1\u03b1) the earth.\nB10-15: Cosmology.\nAlthough the second half of the poem is less well preserved, a rough outline of Parmenides' cosmology can still be tentatively reconstructed on the basis of the surviving fragments along with testimony of his philosophical theories from ancient doxographers, especially Aetius and Plutarch. Plutarch says in \"adv. Colotem\" 1114b (A10) that, from the original opposites, Parmenides elaborates an order in which the Earth, the heaven, the Sun, the Moon, the origin of man, and that he \"did not fail to discuss any of the important questions.\" Simplicius, says that Parmenides also dealt with the parts of animals. Plato places him alongside Hesiod as the creator of a theogony, and Cicero reports that the poem contained certain Hesiodic abstract divinities, such as Love, War and Discord.\nFragments 10 and 11, which are introductory to cosmology, confirm what is expressed by the testimonies, at least with regard to the Sun, the Moon, and the sky, although it also includes the aether, the stars, the constellations (n.b.: the word \u03c3\u03ae\u03bc\u03b1\u03c4\u03b1 used by Parmenides can mean both \"constellations\" and \"signs\") and the Milky Way, and mythical elements such as Mount Olympus. The Parmenidean goddess presents a cosmic order in fr. B12 and the summary of Aetius that is extremely difficult to reconstruct, due to the scarcity and obscurity of the fragments. The beginning of fragment 12 and the testimony of Aetius introduce into cosmology certain \"rings\") The existence of concentric rings of a diverse nature is postulated as the structure of the cosmos: some rings were of pure fire and others of a mixture of fire and darkness, the rings closer to the center participated more in fire, while those further from the center were more filled with night. There are also rarified and dense ones. Surrounding everything is a solid wall. The doctrine of the rings seems to be the influence of Anaximander and of Hesiod, who speaks of the \"crowned\" sky and the stars. At the center of the system, an unnamed daimon coordinates all the cosmological elements, both sensible opposites and Necessity, and presides over the mixture and attraction of the sexes, and the \"abhorrent\" birth. Plutarch calls her Aphrodite, before citing fragment 13 of her, which marks her as the mother of Eros, while Aetius identifies her with Ananke and also Dike, \u0394\u03af\u03ba\u03b7, present in the proem, here presiding over movement and birth. \nFragment 10 gives a predominant role to Ananke(\u1f08\u03bd\u03ac\u03b3\u03ba\u03b7, \"An\u00e1nk\u0113\"), the personification of Necessity, which obliges Heaven to keep the stars within its limits (\u03c0\u03b5\u1fd6\u03c1\u03b1\u03c4\u03b1). The role of Necessity in this system has been compared to the one Plato gives it in the Myth of Er. There Plato places it in the center of certain concentrically arranged turrets, each one representing the celestial spheres that support the fixed stars, the nearby heavenly bodies, the planets, the Moon and the Sun. Both this cosmology and the Myth of Er also have similarities with Pythagorean cosmology, where the center of the universe was generally identified with Hestia (in non-geocentric Pythagorean systems such as Philolaus) and with Mother Earth (in geocentric Pythagorean systems). Diogenes Laertius claims that to Parmenides was the first to state idea that the Earth has a spherical shape and that it is located in the center, but he also cites testimonies that affirm that it was Pythagoras and not Parmenides who held these ideas and also that it was Anaximander. Beyond the evident doubts that these contradictory affirmations generate, Guthrie believes that in this Parmenides followed Pythagoras in the general lines of the description of the physical world.\nVarious reconstructions of the concentric annular strata and their identification with the substantial elements of the cosmos have been attempted: \nFragments 14 and 15 refer to the Moon: alien light (\u1f00\u03bb\u03bb\u03cc\u03c4\u03c1\u03b9\u03bf\u03bd \u03c6\u03ce\u03c2) shining around the Earth\u00bb and always looking at the Sun, which has been interpreted as the observation that the Moon reflects the rays of the Sun. Aetius attributes this view Parmenides, but claims that Thales had already said it, and later Parmenides and Pythagoras added to this, On the other hand, Plato attributes the idea to Anaxagoras, and elsewhere Aetius says that Parmenides thought that the Moon was made of fire (A 43) \u2014implying that he thought he had his own light. In the Homeric poems, \"alien light\" simply means \"foreigner\", without reference to light.\nIn fragment 15a there is only one word: \u1f51\u03b4\u03b1\u03c4\u03cc\u03c1\u03b9\u03b6\u03bf\u03bd:(\"hydat\u00f3rizon\", \u201crooted in water\u201d) an adjective referring, according to its transmitter (Basil of Caesarea), to Earth. This idea has been compared to the Homeric tradition that conceived of Ocean as the origin of all things, as a more general allusion to the Homeric world, which located various rivers in Hades, to the roots of the Earth mentioned by Hesiod and Xenophanes, or to Thales of Miletus's view that the Earth floated on water.\nB16: Sense perception.\nParmenides also provided a theory of knowledge through sense perception, a description of which is preserved by Theophrastus. Theophrastus, in recording Parmenides' opinion on sensation, indicates that Parmenides holds that sense perception proceeds by resemblance between what feels and the thing felt. He reports Parmenides as saying that everything is composed of two elements, hot and cold, and their intelligence depends on this mixture, present in the limbs of humans. In fact, the nature of each limb or organ, what is preponderant in them, is what is perceived. That is why corpses, which have been abandoned by fire, light and heat, can only perceive the opposite, cold and silence. Everything that exists, he concludes, contains some knowledge. Just as Empedocles later said that \"we see earth with earth, water with water\" , he held, in accordance with his doctrine of sensible opposites, that mortal perception depends on the admixture of these opposites in the different parts of the body (\u03bc\u03ad\u03bb\u03b5\u03b1). But, following his teacher's interpretation of the Parmenidean opposites, he says that the thought that arises from the hot is purer. Fr\u00e4nkel therefore thought that this theory of knowledge was valid not only for sensory perception, but also for the thought of \"what is\". Vlastos maintains that the identity of the subject and the object of thought is valid both for the knowledge of what is (B3) and for sensible knowledge, although he accepts that \u00abwhat is\" is \"everything identical\" (B8, v. 22), while the structure of the body is a mixture of different elements, and that the preponderance of light does not physically justify the knowledge of \"what is\". The way to conceive a pure knowledge is not by imagining a situation in which the body has more light, but that it is made of pure light, and this is what Parmenides does in the journey recounted in the proem. Other commentators disagree with transposing this \"physical\" explanation to the plane of the path of truth. Guthrie and Schofield emphasize the exclusive belonging of this theory to the field of the sensible, of mortal opinion.\nB17-18: Embryology.\nParmenides cosmology also included medical theories: two testimonies indicate that Parmenides was interested in embryology, and two fragments, preserved by Galen (B17), and Caelius Aurelianus (B18) are from medical contexts.\nParmenides' theory of embryology claims that each of the sexes is conceived on a different side in the mother's womb: the sex of the embryo depends, on the one hand, on the side from which it is conceived in the womb, and on the other, on the side from which the father's seed comes. But the character and traits of the begotten being depend on the mixture of masculine and feminine potencies (B18). So that:\nThis medical theory exhibits similarities to the medical doctrine of Alcmaeon of Croton, which conceived an \"equal distribution\" (\u1f30\u03c3\u03bf\u03bd\u03bf\u03bc\u03af\u03b1) of forces between man and woman in determining the child's sex, and contrasts with the later theory of Anaxagoras, to whom Aristotle attributes the theory that only male seed determines sex.\nParmenides' association of boys with \"the right\" and girls with \"the left\" in Fragment B17, combined with the testimony of Aristotle (A52) and Aetius (A53) attribute to Parmenides the view that the masculine is associated with the cold and the dense, and the feminine with the hot and diffuse, upsets the general Greek conception, which associates right with light and warm, and left with dark and cold, but resembles a Pythagorean Table of opposites, leading some scholars to postulate that Parmenides probably carried out an outline of Pythagorean cosmology. However, on the other hand, many of the other opposites in the Pythagorean table are never mentioned by Parmenides, there are elements completely unrelated to Pythagoreanism, such as the \"rings\" in fragment 12, and no ancient commentators claimed to find any traces of Pythagorean doctrine in his poem, instead the Way of Opinion is unanimously considered to be Parmenides' own invention. Another possibility is that, unlike in cosmology, Parmenides did not see masculine and feminine as pure opposites in embryology, where observation and empirical guidance allowed for a greater variety of opinions on the role of males.\nB19: Conclusion.\nFragment B19, located at the conclusion of the Way of Opinion, reaffirms the concepts expressed before that the cosmos belongs to the Way of Opinion (v. 1), that the things with in the cosmos come to be and pass away (v. 1 and 2), and that these things are predicated on names assigned by mortals (v. 3).\nDating, style and transmission.\nIn the introduction to the poem, the goddess speaks to the recipient of the message, presumably Parmenides himself, calling him \u03ba\u03bf\u1fe6\u03c1\u03b5 (\"ko\u00fbre\", \"young man\"). It has been suggested that because this word refers to a man no older than thirty years and, taking into account Parmenides' date of birth, we can place the creation of the poem between 490 BC and the 475 BC But it has been objected that the word must be understood in its religious context: it indicates the relation of superiority of the goddess with respect to the man who receives the revelation from her. Guthrie supports this idea, supporting it with a quote (Aristophanes, \"The Birds\" 977) where the word precisely indicates not the age of a man (which otherwise he is not young), but rather his situation with respect to the interpreter of oracles by whom he is being questioned. His conclusion is that it is impossible to say at what age Parmenides wrote the poem.\nMuch has been said about the poetic form of his writing. Plutarch considered it to be just a way of avoiding prose, and criticized its versification. Proclus said that despite using metaphors and tropes, forced by the poetic form, his writing is more like prose than poetry. Simplicius, to whom we owe the preservation of most of the text that has come down to us, holds a similar opinion: one should not be surprised at the appearance of mythical motifs in his writing, due to the poetic form he uses. For Werner Jaeger, Parmenides' choice of the didactic epic poem form is a highly significant innovation. It involves, on the one hand, the rejection of the prose form introduced by Anaximander. On the other hand, it means a link with the form of the \"Theogony\" of Hesiod. But the link affects not only the form, but also certain elements of the content: in the second part of Parmenides' poem (fragments B 12 and 13) Hesiod's cosmogonic Eros appears (\"Theogony\" 120) along with a large number of allegorical deities such as War, Discord, Desire, whose origin in the \"Theogony\" cannot be doubted. However, putting these cosmogonic elements in the second part, dedicated to the world of appearance, also involves the rejection of this way of understanding the world, a way alien to the Truth for Parmenides. Hesiod had presented his theogonic poem as a revelation from divine beings. He had made the invocation of the muses \u2014already an epic convention\u2014 the story of a personal experience of initiation into a unique mission, that of revealing the origin of the gods. Parmenides in his poem presents his thought on the One and Immobile Entity as a divine revelation, as if to defeat Hesiod at his own game.\nParmenides's poem, as a complete work, is considered irretrievably lost. From its composition, it was copied many times, but the last reference to the complete work is made by Simplicius, in the 6th century: he writes that it had already become rare by then ('Physics' ', 144). What comes to us from the poem are fragmentary quotes, present in the works of various authors. In this Parmenides does not differ from the majority of the Pre-Socratic philosophers. The first one who cites it is Plato, then Aristotle, Plutarch, Sextus Empiricus and Simplicius, among others. Sometimes the same group of verses is cited by several of these authors, and although the text of the citations often coincide, other times they present differences. This gives rise to arguments and speculations about which quote is the most faithful to the original. There are also cases in which the citation is unique. The reconstruction of the text, starting from the reunion of all existing citations, began in the Renaissance and culminated in the work of Hermann Diels, \"Die Fragmente der Vorsokratiker\", in 1903, which established the texts of most of the philosophers prior to Plato. This work contains a total of 19 presumably original \"fragments\" of Parmenides, of which 18 are in Greek and one consists of a rhythmic translation in Latin. 160 verses of the poem have been preserved. According to Diels' estimates, these lines represent about nine-tenths of the first part (the \"way of truth\"), plus one-tenth of the second (the \"way of opinion\"). Diels' work was republished and modified by Walther Kranz in 1934. The edition had such an influence on studies that today Parmenides (as well as the other pre-Socratics) is cited according to the order of the authors and fragments of it. Parmenides occupies chapter 28 there, so he is usually cited with the abbreviation DK 28, then adding the type of fragment (A = ancient commentaries on life and doctrine; B = the fragments of the original poem) and finally the number. snippet (for example, \"DK 28 B 1\"). Even though this edition is considered canonical by philologists, numerous reissues have appeared that have proposed a new order of the fragments, and some specialists, such as Allan Hartley Coxon, have made collations on the manuscripts in which some of the quotations are preserved, and have questioned the reliability of the reading and establishment of Diels's text.\nLegacy and study.\nAs the first of the Eleatics, Parmenides is generally credited with being the philosopher who first defined ontology as a separate discipline distinct from theology. Parmenides was the first Western philosopher to consider the nature of existence itself, While previous philosophers like the Milesians developed theories of how things physically originated, Parmenides considered ontology, or how things are, solely as an idea without reference to a physical basis. He likely rejected the theories of the Milesian school, which described the world as being derived from specific elements, as Parmenides rejected that Being was derived from anything.\nThough his ideas preceded and influenced metaphysics, modern philosophers do not consider Parmenides to have studied metaphysics himself, as Being is not a distinct entity from the physical world. Some exceptions exist, such as Pierre Aubenque, who described Parmenides' work as \"the birth certificate of Western metaphysics\". Parmenides has been seen as the first Western philosopher to invoke what are now considered the basic principles of logic. His concepts of Being and non-Being are defined by the law of noncontradiction; since Being \"is\", it cannot \"not be\", and since non-Being \"is not\", it cannot \"be\". The law of excluded middle prevents the existence of something that neither \"is\" nor \"is not\". The principle of sufficient reason indicates that Being must \"be\" if it can be thought about, as a thought is something rather than nothing. Parmenides' conclusion is defined by the law of identity, as Being is \"to be\" and non-Being is \"to not be\". By combining these logical processes, Parmenides proves a tautology using a syllogism.\nParmenides understood the Moon's illumination to be the reflection of sunlight off of its spherical surface. He is sometimes described as the first philosopher to describe the Earth as spherical and to identify the morning star and the evening star were both manifestations of a single object, Venus.\nAncient philosophy.\nPre-Socratic philosophy.\nIn modern interpretations, Parmenides is often seen as presenting a theory of unchanging \"being\" that spurred debate about the nature of change among subsequent natural philosophers in Presocratic philosophy. However, there is no ancient testimony that supports this notion, and most interpreters of Parmenides in Antiquity appear to have read Parmenides as considering metaphysics and physics as two different aspects of the same reality. Parmenides was a contemporary of Heraclitus. The two broached many of the same ideas, such as a world made of two competing opposites, reliability of the senses, and the nature of plurality\u2014it is unclear if either influenced the other.\nParmenides' philosophy formed the basis of the Eleatic school, which was continued by Melissus of Samos and Zeno of Elea. Melissus built on Parmenides' ideas, proposing a continuous eternal Being instead of a constant existence of the present. Zeno created \"reductio ad absurdum\" arguments to defend Parmenides' ideas against their critics.\nIn his work \"On Non-Being\", Gorgias includes both Parmenides and Melissus as philosophers who held that reality is one. The pluralist theories of Empedocles and Anaxagoras and the atomists Leucippus and Democritus have also been seen as a potential response to Parmenides's arguments and conclusions.\nPlato.\nAlong with Socrates and the Pythagoreans, Parmenides was one of the greatest influences on Plato.\nIn different places, Aristotle attributes the same epistemological position to Parmenides that he does to Plato, that true knowledge must be grounded in an entity that is not subject to change. This position is also endorsed by Plato himself at the end of the 5th book of the Republic. For Plato, these are the forms from his own Theory of Forms. In his own \"Parmenides\", Plato presents a fictional dialogue between Socrates and Parmenides where Parmenides himself also endorses this doctrine, that knowledge must be built on something unchanging.\nPlato's understanding of Parmenides is further demonstrated by the second hypothesis in his \"Parmenides\" There, the One is shown to have different properties that parallel those laid about by Parmenides himself in Fragment 8: that the One is: in itself, the same as itself, at rest, like itself, and in contact with itself, both \"in virtue of its own nature\" and \"in relation to itself.\" Plato then has Parmenides show that and that the One is \"not\" those same set of attributes, but only \"contrary to its own nature\" and \"not in relation to itself,\" which parallels Parmenides own division of what is and what appears to be, that the \"Way of Truth\" corresponds to his own intelligible realm of forms, while the \"Way of Opinion\" corresponds to the sensible realm of matter. These two aspects of reality are also paralleled in Plato's \"Timaeus\" in the descriptions of the universe as a living creature perceived by reason and a cosmos modeled after it that is perceived by the senses. In \"the Sophist\", Plato gives a doxography of the Eleatics beginning not with Parmenides but with Xenophanes, another pre-Socratic philosopher after whom Parmenides followed after, who believed true knowledge was only possible for the gods and that all else was opinion, which provides further support to the idea that Plato saw the monism of Parmenides as not eliminating the possibility of statements about the \"Way of Opinion.\"\nAristotle.\nAristotle, in his \"Physics\", makes reference to unnamed philosophers who reject substantial change because they hold the view that no entity or substance comes into being, which superfically appears to resemble Parmenides own doctrine. However, he cannot be referring to Parmenides here, because in other places he distinguishes between Parmenides' account of \"first philosophy\" which is not subject to change, and Parmenides' account of natural philosophy, in which he admits the possibility of substantial change. When Aristotle introduces Parmenides own doctrines in the \"Physics\", alongside those of another Eleatic philosopher, Melissus of Samos, he distinguishes between the more strict monism of Melissus, which held that there can only be one substance that exists, and Parmenides' more permissive monism, which considered everything that exists to be substance in virtue of the fact that it exists, but allowed for different substances to exist.\nHellenistic and Roman philosophy.\nSome Ancient philosophers did view Parmenides as a strict monist like Melissus, though they represented a minority opinion. Writing in the late 1st century CE, the Middle Platonist philosopher Plutarch, in his treatise \"Against Colotes\" attributes this position to Colotes, an Epicurean philosopher from the Hellenistic period. Plutarch, who like many Platonists saw Parmenides as a forerunner of Plato, criticizes Colotes for misrepresenting Parmenides' position, stating that Parmenides distinction between what truly is and what things appear to be according to the senses should not be seen as a rejection of the latter, because, as Plutarch argues, one could not do that without rejecting the existence of the senses themselves.\nEusebius of Caesarea, quoting Aristocles of Messene, says that Parmenides was part of a line of skeptical philosophy that culminated in Pyrrhonism.\nFor Simplicus, a Neoplatonist philosopher writing in the 6th century, who preserves almost the entirety of our extant fragments of the treatise, the two accounts describes by the goddess in Parmenides poem correspond to two different levels of reality: the intelligible and eternal realm of forms, and the constantly changing sensible world.\nModern era.\nThe philosophy of Martin Heidegger revisited the concept of a Parmenidean eternal Being. He described Parmenides as the first to create a unified concept of Being and non-Being.\nIn \"On Nature\", Parmenides describes the truth as the path of \"that is\". The philologist Hermann Fr\u00e4nkel identified this use of an impersonal verb as an atypical grammatical construction in Ancient Greek. It is understood to refer to the concept of Being, described through postposition. The goddess's description of Being is effectively the affirmation of its existence. Aubenque commented that this is \"the thesis of Being itself\". Ernst Hoffman proposed that Being, discourse, and thought were all the same thing.\nFriedrich Nietzsche suggested that Parmenides believed his cosmology, even though he understood that it was only part of the seeming world. Karl Popper said that it was necessary for Parmenides to disprove his own cosmology to prove that the seeming world was not true. He likened this to modern physics, in which theories of physics do not necessarily correspond to what appears to be true.\nThe question of whether time and space are continuous or discrete is prominent in modern physics, where several mathematicians and physicists propose Parmenidean models. Albert Einstein developed a single model of spacetime to explain the universe. Hermann Weyl argued that time exists only subjectively. Karl Popper further described the ideas of Ludwig Boltzmann, Kurt G\u00f6del, Hermann Minkowski, and Erwin Schr\u00f6dinger as reminiscent of Parmenides. The Wheeler\u2013DeWitt equation suggests that time does not exist as its own distinct entity.\nAmong the historians of philosophy and philologists: William Keith Chambers Guthrie observes that the figure of Parmenides is a fundamental milestone that divides the course of Pre-Socratic philosophy in two, because it stopped the inquiry into the origin and constitution of the universe and reoriented the course of archaic thought. Coxon argues that Parmenides was the first genuine philosopher of the Greek world, the founder of European philosophy, and the first proper metaphysician, unlike the other pre-Socratics who discovered the principles of what is now known as science.\nNotes.\nFragments.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\nAncient testimony.\nIn the Diels\u2013Kranz numbering for testimony and fragments of Pre-Socratic philosophy, Parmenides is catalogued as number 28. The most recent edition of this catalogue is:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nLife and doctrines.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFragments.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nModern scholarship.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"Extensive bibliography (up to 2004) by http://; and annotated bibliography by https://\""}
{"id": "23576", "revid": "28422", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23576", "title": "Tetraodontidae", "text": "Family of pufferfish\nTetraodontidae is a family of marine and freshwater fish in the order Tetraodontiformes. The family includes many familiar species variously called pufferfish, puffers, balloonfish, blowfish, blowers, blowies, bubblefish, globefish, swellfish, toadfish, toadies, botetes, toadle, honey toads, sugar toads, and sea squab. They are morphologically similar to the closely related porcupinefish, which have large external spines (unlike the thinner, hidden spines of the Tetraodontidae, which are only visible when the fish have puffed up). The family name comes from Ancient Greek \u03c4\u03b5\u03c4\u03c1\u03b1- (\"tetra-\"), meaning \"four\", and \u1f40\u03b4\u03bf\u03cd\u03c2 (\"odo\u00fas\"), meaning \"tooth\", referring to the four teeth of the type genus \"Tetraodon\".\nThe majority of pufferfish species are toxic, with some among the most poisonous vertebrates in the world. In certain species, the internal organs, such as the liver, and sometimes the skin, contain mucus tetrodotoxin, and are highly toxic to most animals when eaten; nevertheless, the meat of some species is considered a delicacy in Japan (as , ), Korea (as , , or , ), and China (as , ) when prepared by specially trained chefs who know which part is safe to eat and in what quantity. Other pufferfish species with nontoxic flesh, such as the northern puffer, \"Sphoeroides maculatus\", of the Chesapeake Bay, are considered a delicacy elsewhere.\nThe species \"Torquigener albomaculosus\" was described by David Attenborough as \"the greatest artist of the animal kingdom\" due to the males' unique habit of wooing females by creating nests in sand composed of complex geometric designs.\nGenera.\nThe Tetraodontidae contains 193 to 206 species of puffers in 27 or 28 genera:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nFossil genera.\nThe following fossil genera are known:\nMorphology.\nPufferfish are typically small to medium in size, although a few species such as the Mbu pufferfish can reach lengths greater than .\nTetraodontiformes, or pufferfish, are most significantly characterized by their four beak-like teeth \u2013 hence the name combining the Greek terms \"tetra\" for four and \"odous\" for tooth. Each of the top and bottom arches is fused together with a visible midsagittal demarcation, which are used to break apart and consume small crustaceans. The lack of ribs, a pelvis, and pelvic fins are also unique to pufferfish. The notably missing bone and fin features are due to the pufferfish' specialized defense mechanism, expanding by sucking in water through an oral cavity.\nPufferfish can also have many varied structures of caltrop-like dermal spines, which account for the replacement of typical fish scales, and can range in coverage extent from the entire body, to leaving the frontal surface empty. Tetraodontidae typically have smaller spines than the sister family Diodontidae, with some spines not being visible until inflation.\nDistribution.\nThey are most diverse in the tropical zone, relatively uncommon in the temperate zone, and completely absent from cold waters.\nEcology and life history.\nMost pufferfish species live in marine or brackish waters, but several tropical genera, comprising about 35 species, spend their entire lifecycles in fresh water. These freshwater species are found in disjunct tropical regions of South America (\"Colomesus asellus\" and \"Colomesus tocantinensis\"), Africa (six \"Tetraodon\" species), and Southeast Asia (\"Auriglobus\", \"Carinotetraodon\", \"Dichotomyctere\", \"Leiodon\" and \"Pao\").\nNatural defenses.\nThe puffer's unique and distinctive natural defenses help compensate for its slow locomotion. It moves by combining pectoral, dorsal, anal, and caudal fin motions. This makes it highly maneuverable, but very slow, so a comparatively easy predation target. Its tail fin is mainly used as a rudder, but it can be used for a sudden evasive burst of speed that shows none of the care and precision of its usual movements. The puffer's excellent eyesight, combined with this speed burst, is the first and most important defense against predators.\nThe pufferfish's secondary defense mechanism, used if successfully pursued, is to fill its extremely elastic stomach with water (or air when outside the water) until it is much larger and almost spherical in shape. Even if they are not visible when the puffer is not inflated, all puffers have pointed spines, so a hungry predator may suddenly find itself facing an unpalatable, pointy ball rather than a slow, easy meal. Predators that do not heed this warning (or are \"lucky\" enough to catch the puffer suddenly, before or during inflation) may die from choking, and predators that do manage to swallow the puffer may find their stomachs full of tetrodotoxin (TTX), making puffers an unpleasant, possibly lethal, choice of prey. This neurotoxin is found primarily in the ovaries and liver, although smaller amounts exist in the intestines and skin, as well as trace amounts in muscle. It does not always have a lethal effect on large predators, such as sharks, but it can kill humans.\nLarval pufferfish are chemically defended by the presence of TTX on the surface of skin, which causes predators to spit them out.\nNot all puffers are necessarily poisonous; the flesh of the northern puffer is not toxic (a level of poison can be found in its viscera) and it is considered a delicacy in North America. Toxin level varies widely even in fish that are poisonous. A puffer's neurotoxin is not necessarily as toxic to other animals as it is to humans, and puffers are eaten routinely by some species of fish, such as lizardfish and sharks.\nPuffers are able to move their eyes independently, and many species can change the color or intensity of their patterns in response to environmental changes. In these respects, they are somewhat similar to the terrestrial chameleon. Although most puffers are drab, many have bright colors and distinctive markings, and make no attempt to hide from predators. This is likely an example of honestly signaled aposematism.\nDolphins have been filmed expertly handling pufferfish amongst themselves in an apparent attempt to get intoxicated or enter a trance-like state.\nReproduction.\nMany marine puffers have a pelagic, or open-ocean, life stage. Spawning occurs after males slowly push females to the water surface or join females already present. The eggs are spherical and buoyant. Hatching occurs after roughly four days. The fry are tiny, but under magnification have a shape usually reminiscent of a pufferfish. They have a functional mouth and eyes, and must eat within a few days. Brackish-water puffers may breed in bays in a manner similar to marine species, or may breed more similarly to the freshwater species, in cases where they have moved far enough upriver.\nReproduction in freshwater species varies quite a bit. The dwarf puffers court with males following females, possibly displaying the crests and keels unique to this subgroup of species. After the female accepts his advances, she will lead the male into plants or another form of cover, where she can release eggs for fertilization. The male may help her by rubbing against her side. This has been observed in captivity, and they are the only commonly captive-spawned puffer species.\nTarget-group puffers have also been spawned in aquaria, and follow a similar courting behavior, minus the crest/keel display. Eggs are laid, though, on a flat piece of slate or other smooth, hard material, to which they adhere. The male will guard them until they hatch, carefully blowing water over them regularly to keep the eggs healthy. His parenting is finished when the young hatch and the fry are on their own.\nIn 2012, males of the species \"Torquigener albomaculosus\" were documented while carving large and complex geometric, circular structures in the seabed sand in Amami \u014cshima, Japan. The structures serve to attract females and to provide a safe place for them to lay their eggs.\nInformation on breeding of specific species is very limited. \"T. nigroviridis\", the green-spotted puffer, has recently been spawned artificially under captive conditions. It is believed to spawn in bays in a similar manner to saltwater species, as their sperm was found to be motile only at full marine salinities, but wild breeding has never been observed. \"Xenopterus naritus\" has been reported to be the first bred artificially in Sarawak, Northwestern Borneo, in June 2016, and the main purpose was for development of aquaculture of the species.\nDiet.\nPufferfish diets can vary depending on their environment. Traditionally, their diet consists mostly of algae and small invertebrates. They can survive on a completely vegetarian diet if their environment is lacking resources, but prefer an omnivorous food selection. Larger species of pufferfish are able to use their beak-like front teeth to break open clams, mussels, and other shellfish. Some species of pufferfish have also been known to enact various hunting techniques ranging from ambush to open-water hunting.\nEvolution.\nThe tetraodontids have been estimated to have diverged from diodontids between 89 and 138 million years ago. The four major clades diverged during the Cretaceous between 80 and 101 million years ago. The oldest known pufferfish genus is \"Eotetraodon\", from the Lutetian epoch of Middle Eocene Europe, with fossils found in Monte Bolca and the Caucasus Mountains. The Monte Bolca species, \"E. pygmaeus\", coexisted with several other tetraodontiforms, including an extinct species of diodontid, primitive boxfish (\"Proaracana\" and \"Eolactoria\"), and other, totally extinct forms, such as \"Zignoichthys\" and the spinacanthids. The extinct genus, \"Archaeotetraodon\" is known from Miocene-aged fossils from Europe.\nPoisoning.\nPufferfish can be lethal if not served properly. Puffer poisoning usually results from consumption of incorrectly prepared puffer soup, \"fugu chiri\", or occasionally from raw puffer meat, \"sashimi fugu\". While \"chiri\" is much more likely to cause death, \"sashimi fugu\" often causes intoxication, light-headedness, and numbness of the lips. Pufferfish tetrodotoxin deadens the tongue and lips, and induces dizziness and vomiting, followed by numbness and prickling over the body, rapid heart rate, decreased blood pressure, and muscle paralysis. The toxin paralyzes the diaphragm muscle and stops the person who has ingested it from breathing. People who live longer than 24 hours typically survive, although possibly after a coma lasting several days.\nThe source of tetrodotoxin in puffers has been a matter of debate, but it is increasingly accepted that bacteria in the fish's intestinal tract are the source.\nSaxitoxin, the cause of paralytic shellfish poisoning and red tide, can also be found in certain puffers.\nPhilippines.\nIn September 2012, the Bureau of Fisheries and Aquatic Resources in the Philippines issued a warning not to eat pufferfish after local fishermen died after consuming pufferfish for dinner. The warning indicated that pufferfish toxin is 100 times more potent than cyanide. Fisheries Administrative Order No. 249 of 2014 bans the distribution of raw and processed pufferfish to mitigate poisoning incidents.\nThailand.\nPufferfish, called \"pakapao\" in Thailand, are usually consumed by mistake. They are often cheaper than other fish, and because they contain inconsistent levels of toxins between fish and season, there is little awareness or monitoring of the danger. Consumers are regularly hospitalized and some even die from the poisoning.\nUnited States.\nCases of neurological symptoms, including numbness and tingling of the lips and mouth, have been reported to rise after the consumption of puffers caught in the area of Titusville, Florida, US. The symptoms generally resolve within hours to days, although one affected individual required intubation for 72 hours. As a result, Florida banned the harvesting of puffers from certain bodies of water.\nTreatment.\nTreatment is mainly supportive and consists of intestinal decontamination with gastric lavage and activated charcoal, and life-support until the toxin is metabolized. Case reports suggest anticholinesterases such as edrophonium may be effective.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23577", "revid": "274535", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23577", "title": "Partial function", "text": "Function whose actual domain of definition may be smaller than its apparent domain\nIn mathematics, a partial function f from a set X to a set Y is a function from a subset S of X (possibly the whole X itself) to Y. The subset S, that is, the \"domain\" of f viewed as a function, is called the domain of definition or natural domain of f. If S equals X, that is, if f is defined on every element in X, then f is said to be a total function.\nIn other words, a partial function is a binary relation over two sets that associates to every element of the first set \"at most\" one element of the second set; it is thus a univalent relation. This generalizes the concept of a (total) function by not requiring \"every\" element of the first set to be associated to an element of the second set.\nA partial function is often used when its exact domain of definition is not known, or is difficult to specify. However, even when the exact domain of definition is known, partial functions are often used for simplicity or brevity. This is the case in calculus, where, for example, the quotient of two functions is a partial function whose domain of definition cannot contain the zeros of the denominator; in this context, a partial function is generally simply called a function.\nIn computability theory, a general recursive function is a partial function from the integers to the integers; no algorithm can exist for deciding whether an arbitrary such function is in fact total.\nWhen arrow notation is used for functions, a partial function formula_1 from formula_2 to formula_3 is sometimes written as formula_4 formula_5 or formula_6 However, there is no general convention, and the latter notation is more commonly used for inclusion maps or embeddings.\nSpecifically, for a partial function formula_4 and any formula_8 one has either:\nFor example, if formula_1 is the square root function restricted to the integers\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;\ndefined by:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;\nthen formula_12 is only defined if formula_13 is a perfect square (that is, formula_14). So formula_15 but formula_16 is undefined.\nBasic concepts.\nA partial function arises from the consideration of maps between two sets X and Y that may not be defined on the entire set X. A common example is the square root operation on the real numbers formula_17: because negative real numbers do not have real square roots, the operation can be viewed as a partial function from formula_17 to formula_19 The \"domain of definition\" of a partial function is the subset S of X on which the partial function is defined; in this case, the partial function may also be viewed as a function from S to Y. In the example of the square root operation, the set S consists of the nonnegative real numbers formula_20\nThe notion of partial function is particularly convenient when the exact domain of definition is unknown or even unknowable. For a computer-science example of the latter, see \"Halting problem\".\nIn case the domain of definition S is equal to the whole set X, the partial function is said to be \"total\". Thus, total partial functions from X to Y coincide with functions from X to Y.\nMany properties of functions can be extended in an appropriate sense of partial functions. A partial function is said to be injective, surjective, or bijective when the function given by the restriction of the partial function to its domain of definition is injective, surjective, or bijective, respectively.\nBecause a function is trivially surjective when restricted to its image, the term partial bijection denotes a partial function which is injective.\nAn injective partial function may be inverted to an injective partial function, and a partial function which is both injective and surjective has an injective function as inverse. Furthermore, a function which is injective may be inverted to a bijective partial function.\nThe notion of transformation can be generalized to partial functions as well. A partial transformation is a function formula_21 where both formula_22 and formula_23 are subsets of some set formula_24\nFunction spaces.\nFor convenience, denote the set of all partial functions formula_25 from a set formula_2 to a set formula_3 by formula_28 This set is the union of the sets of functions defined on subsets of formula_2 with same codomain formula_3:\n formula_31\nthe latter also written as formula_32 In finite case, its cardinality is\n formula_33\nbecause any partial function can be extended to a function by any fixed value formula_34 not contained in formula_35 so that the codomain is formula_36 an operation which is injective (unique and invertible by restriction).\nDiscussion and examples.\nThe first diagram at the top of the article represents a partial function that is not a function since the element 1 in the left-hand set is not associated with anything in the right-hand set. Whereas, the second diagram represents a function since every element on the left-hand set is associated with exactly one element in the right hand set.\nNatural logarithm.\nConsider the natural logarithm function mapping the real numbers to themselves. The logarithm of a non-positive real is not a real number, so the natural logarithm function doesn't associate any real number in the codomain with any non-positive real number in the domain. Therefore, the natural logarithm function is not a function when viewed as a function from the reals to themselves, but it is a partial function. If the domain is restricted to only include the positive reals (that is, if the natural logarithm function is viewed as a function from the positive reals to the reals), then the natural logarithm is a function.\nSubtraction of natural numbers.\nSubtraction of natural numbers (in which formula_37 is the non-negative integers) is a partial function:\n formula_38\n formula_39\nIt is defined only when formula_40\nBottom element.\nIn denotational semantics a partial function is considered as returning the bottom element when it is undefined.\nIn computer science a partial function corresponds to a subroutine that raises an exception or loops forever. The IEEE floating point standard defines a not-a-number value which is returned when a floating point operation is undefined and exceptions are suppressed, e.g. when the square root of a negative number is requested.\nIn a programming language where function parameters are statically typed, a function may be defined as a partial function because the language's type system cannot express the exact domain of the function, so the programmer instead gives it the smallest domain which is expressible as a type and contains the domain of definition of the function.\nIn category theory.\nIn category theory, when considering the operation of morphism composition in concrete categories, the composition operation formula_41 is a total function if and only if formula_42 has one element. The reason for this is that two morphisms formula_43 and formula_44 can only be composed as formula_45 if formula_46 that is, the codomain of formula_1 must equal the domain of formula_48\nThe category of sets and partial functions is equivalent to but not isomorphic with the category of pointed sets and point-preserving maps. One textbook notes that \"This formal completion of sets and partial maps by adding \u201cimproper,\u201d \u201cinfinite\u201d elements was reinvented many times, in particular, in topology (one-point compactification) and in theoretical computer science.\"\nThe category of sets and partial bijections is equivalent to its dual. It is the prototypical inverse category.\nIn abstract algebra.\nPartial algebra generalizes the notion of universal algebra to partial operations. An example would be a field, in which the multiplicative inversion is the only proper partial operation (because division by zero is not defined).\nThe set of all partial functions (partial transformations) on a given base set, formula_49 forms a regular semigroup called the semigroup of all partial transformations (or the partial transformation semigroup on formula_2), typically denoted by formula_51 The set of all partial bijections on formula_2 forms the symmetric inverse semigroup.\nCharts and atlases for manifolds and fiber bundles.\nCharts in the atlases which specify the structure of manifolds and fiber bundles are partial functions. In the case of manifolds, the domain is the point set of the manifold. In the case of fiber bundles, the domain is the space of the fiber bundle. In these applications, the most important construction is the transition map, which is the composite of one chart with the inverse of another. The initial classification of manifolds and fiber bundles is largely expressed in terms of constraints on these transition maps.\nThe reason for the use of partial functions instead of functions is to permit general global topologies to be represented by stitching together local patches to describe the global structure. The \"patches\" are the domains where the charts are defined.\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23578", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23578", "title": "Photo electric effect", "text": ""}
{"id": "23579", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23579", "title": "Photoelectric effect", "text": "Emission of electrons when electromagnetic radiation hits a material\nThe photoelectric effect is the emission of electrons from a material caused by electromagnetic radiation such as ultraviolet light. Electrons emitted in this manner are called photoelectrons. The phenomenon is studied in condensed matter physics, solid state, and quantum chemistry to draw inferences about the properties of atoms, molecules and solids. The effect has found use in electronic devices specialized for light detection and precisely timed electron emission.\nThe experimental results disagree with classical electromagnetism, which predicts that continuous light waves transfer energy to electrons, which would then be emitted when they accumulate enough energy. An alteration in the intensity of light would theoretically change the kinetic energy of the emitted electrons, with sufficiently dim light resulting in a delayed emission. The experimental results instead show that electrons are dislodged only when the light exceeds a certain frequency\u2014regardless of the light's intensity or duration of exposure. Because a low-frequency beam at a high intensity does not build up the energy required to produce photoelectrons, as would be the case if light's energy accumulated over time from a continuous wave, Albert Einstein proposed that a beam of light is not a wave propagating through space, but discrete energy packets, which were later popularised as photons by Gilbert N. Lewis.\nEmission of conduction electrons from typical metals requires a few electron-volt (eV) light quanta, corresponding to short-wavelength visible or ultraviolet light. In extreme cases, emissions are induced with photons approaching zero energy, like in systems with negative electron affinity and the emission from excited states, or a few hundred keV photons for core electrons in elements with a high atomic number. Study of the photoelectric effect led to important steps in understanding the quantum nature of light and electrons and influenced the formation of the concept of wave\u2013particle duality. Other phenomena where light affects the movement of electric charges include the photoconductive effect, the photovoltaic effect, and the photoelectrochemical effect.\nEmission mechanism.\nThe photons of a light beam have a characteristic energy, called photon energy, which is proportional to the frequency of the light. In the photoemission process, when an electron within some material absorbs the energy of a photon and acquires more energy than its binding energy, it is likely to be ejected. If the photon energy is too low, the electron is unable to escape the material. Since an increase in the intensity of low-frequency light will only increase the number of low-energy photons, this change in intensity will not create any single photon with enough energy to dislodge an electron. Moreover, the energy of the emitted electrons will not depend on the intensity of the incoming light of a given frequency, but only on the energy of the individual photons.\nWhile free electrons can absorb any energy when irradiated as long as this is followed by an immediate re-emission, like in the Compton effect, in quantum systems all of the energy from one photon is absorbed\u2014if the process is allowed by quantum mechanics\u2014or none at all. Part of the acquired energy is used to liberate the electron from its atomic binding, and the rest contributes to the electron's kinetic energy as a free particle. Because electrons in a material occupy many different quantum states with different binding energies, and because they can sustain energy losses on their way out of the material, the emitted electrons will have a range of kinetic energies. The electrons from the highest occupied states will have the highest kinetic energy. In metals, those electrons will be emitted from the Fermi level.\nWhen the photoelectron is emitted into a solid rather than into a vacuum, the term \"internal photoemission\" is often used, and emission into a vacuum is distinguished as \"external photoemission\".\nExperimental observation of photoelectric emission.\nEven though photoemission can occur from any material, it is most readily observed from metals and other conductors. This is because the process produces a charge imbalance which, if not neutralized by current flow, results in the increasing potential barrier until the emission completely ceases. The energy barrier to photoemission is usually increased by nonconductive oxide layers on metal surfaces, so most practical experiments and devices based on the photoelectric effect use clean metal surfaces in evacuated tubes. Vacuum also helps observing the electrons since it prevents gases from impeding their flow between the electrodes.\nSunlight is an inconsistent and variable source of ultraviolet light. Cloud cover, ozone concentration, altitude, and surface reflection all alter the amount of UV. Laboratory sources of UV are based on xenon arc lamps or, for more uniform but weaker light, fluorescent lamps.\nMore specialized sources include ultraviolet lasers and synchrotron radiation.\nThe classical setup to observe the photoelectric effect includes a light source, a set of filters to monochromatize the light, a vacuum tube transparent to ultraviolet light, an emitting electrode (E) exposed to the light, and a collector (C) whose voltage \"V\"C can be externally controlled.\nA positive external voltage is used to direct the photoemitted electrons onto the collector. If the frequency and the intensity of the incident radiation are fixed, the photoelectric current \"I\" increases with an increase in the positive voltage, as more and more electrons are directed onto the electrode. When no additional photoelectrons can be collected, the photoelectric current attains a saturation value. This current can only increase with the increase of the intensity of light.\nAn increasing negative voltage prevents all but the highest-energy electrons from reaching the collector. When no current is observed through the tube, the negative voltage has reached the value that is high enough to slow down and stop the most energetic photoelectrons of kinetic energy \"K\"max. This value of the retarding voltage is called the \"stopping potential\" or \"cut off\" potential \"V\"o. Since the work done by the retarding potential in stopping the electron of charge \"e\" is \"eV\"o, the following must hold \"eV\"o\u00a0=\u00a0\"K\"max.\nThe current-voltage curve is sigmoidal, but its exact shape depends on the experimental geometry and the electrode material properties.\nFor a given metal surface, there exists a certain minimum frequency of incident radiation below which no photoelectrons are emitted. This frequency is called the \"threshold frequency\". Increasing the frequency of the incident beam increases the maximum kinetic energy of the emitted photoelectrons, and the stopping voltage has to increase. The number of emitted electrons may also change because the probability that each photon results in an emitted electron is a function of photon energy.\nAn increase in the intensity of the same monochromatic light (so long as the intensity is not too high), which is proportional to the number of photons impinging on the surface in a given time, increases the rate at which electrons are ejected\u2014the photoelectric current \"I\u2014\"but the kinetic energy of the photoelectrons and the stopping voltage remain the same. For a given metal and frequency of incident radiation, the rate at which photoelectrons are ejected is directly proportional to the intensity of the incident light.\nThe time lag between the incidence of radiation and the emission of a photoelectron is very small, less than 10\u22129 second. Angular distribution of the photoelectrons is highly dependent on polarization (the direction of the electric field) of the incident light, as well as the emitting material's quantum properties such as atomic and molecular orbital symmetries and the electronic band structure of crystalline solids. In materials without macroscopic order, the distribution of electrons tends to peak in the direction of polarization of linearly polarized light. The experimental technique that can measure these distributions to infer the material's properties is angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy.\nTheoretical explanation.\nIn 1905, Einstein proposed a theory of the photoelectric effect using a concept that light consists of tiny packets of energy known as photons or light quanta. Each packet carries energy formula_1 that is proportional to the frequency formula_2 of the corresponding electromagnetic wave. The proportionality constant formula_3 has become known as the Planck constant. In the range of kinetic energies of the electrons that are removed from their varying atomic bindings by the absorption of a photon of energy formula_1, the highest kinetic energy formula_5 is\nformula_6\nHere, formula_7 is the minimum energy required to remove an electron from the surface of the material. It is called the work function of the surface and is sometimes denoted formula_8 or formula_9. If the work function is written as\nformula_10\nthe formula for the maximum kinetic energy of the ejected electrons becomes\nformula_11\nKinetic energy is positive, and formula_12 is required for the photoelectric effect to occur. The frequency formula_13 is the threshold frequency for the given material. Above that frequency, the maximum kinetic energy of the photoelectrons as well as the stopping voltage in the experiment formula_14 rise linearly with the frequency, and have no dependence on the number of photons and the intensity of the impinging monochromatic light. Einstein's formula, however simple, explained all the phenomenology of the photoelectric effect, and had far-reaching consequences in the development of quantum mechanics.\nPhotoemission from atoms, molecules and solids.\nElectrons that are bound in atoms, molecules and solids each occupy distinct states of well-defined binding energies. When light quanta deliver more than this amount of energy to an individual electron, the electron may be emitted into free space with excess (kinetic) energy that is formula_1 higher than the electron's binding energy. The distribution of kinetic energies thus reflects the distribution of the binding energies of the electrons in the atomic, molecular or crystalline system: an electron emitted from the state at binding energy formula_16 is found at kinetic energy formula_17. This distribution is one of the main characteristics of the quantum system, and can be used for further studies in quantum chemistry and quantum physics.\nModels of photoemission from solids.\nThe electronic properties of ordered, crystalline solids are determined by the distribution of the electronic states with respect to energy and momentum\u2014the electronic band structure of the solid. Theoretical models of photoemission from solids show that this distribution is, for the most part, preserved in the photoelectric effect. The phenomenological \"three-step model\" for ultraviolet and soft X-ray excitation decomposes the effect into these steps:\nThere are cases where the three-step model fails to explain peculiarities of the photoelectron intensity distributions. The more elaborate \"one-step model\" treats the effect as a coherent process of photoexcitation into the final state of a finite crystal for which the wave function is free-electron-like outside of the crystal, but has a decaying envelope inside.\nHistory.\n19th century.\nIn 1839, Alexandre Edmond Becquerel discovered the related photovoltaic effect while studying the effect of light on electrolytic cells. Though not equivalent to the photoelectric effect, his work on photovoltaics was instrumental in showing a strong relationship between light and electronic properties of materials. In 1873, Willoughby Smith discovered photoconductivity in selenium while testing the metal for its high resistance properties in conjunction with his work involving submarine telegraph cables.\nJohann Elster (1854\u20131920) and Hans Geitel (1855\u20131923), students in Heidelberg, investigated the effects produced by light on electrified bodies and developed the first practical photoelectric cells that could be used to measure the intensity of light. They arranged metals with respect to their power of discharging negative electricity: rubidium, potassium, alloy of potassium and sodium, sodium, lithium, magnesium, thallium and zinc; for copper, platinum, lead, iron, cadmium, carbon, and mercury the effects with ordinary light were too small to be measurable. The order of the metals for this effect was the same as in Volta's series for contact-electricity, the most electropositive metals giving the largest photo-electric effect.\nIn 1887, Heinrich Hertz observed the photoelectric effect and reported on the production and reception of electromagnetic waves. The receiver in his apparatus consisted of a coil with a spark gap, where a spark would be seen upon detection of electromagnetic waves. He placed the apparatus in a darkened box to see the spark better. However, he noticed that the maximum spark length was reduced when inside the box. A glass panel placed between the source of electromagnetic waves and the receiver absorbed ultraviolet radiation that assisted the electrons in jumping across the gap. When removed, the spark length would increase. He observed no decrease in spark length when he replaced the glass with quartz, as quartz does not absorb UV radiation.\nThe discoveries by Hertz led to a series of investigations by Wilhelm Hallwachs, Hoor, Augusto Righi and Aleksander Stoletov on the effect of light, and especially of ultraviolet light, on charged bodies. Hallwachs connected a zinc plate to an electroscope. He allowed ultraviolet light to fall on a freshly cleaned zinc plate and observed that the zinc plate became uncharged if initially negatively charged, positively charged if initially uncharged, and more positively charged if initially positively charged. From these observations he concluded that some negatively charged particles were emitted by the zinc plate when exposed to ultraviolet light. \nWith regard to the \"Hertz effect\", the researchers from the start showed the complexity of the phenomenon of photoelectric fatigue\u2014the progressive diminution of the effect observed upon fresh metallic surfaces. According to Hallwachs, ozone played an important part in the phenomenon, and the emission was influenced by oxidation, humidity, and the degree of polishing of the surface. It was at the time unclear whether fatigue is absent in a vacuum.\nIn the period from 1888 until 1891, a detailed analysis of the photoeffect was performed by Aleksandr Stoletov with results reported in six publications. Stoletov invented a new experimental setup which was more suitable for a quantitative analysis of the photoeffect. He discovered a direct proportionality between the intensity of light and the induced photoelectric current (the first law of photoeffect or Stoletov's law). He measured the dependence of the intensity of the photo electric current on the gas pressure, where he found the existence of an optimal gas pressure corresponding to a maximum photocurrent; this property was used for the creation of solar cells.\nMany substances besides metals discharge negative electricity under the action of ultraviolet light. G. C. Schmidt and O. Knoblauch compiled a list of these substances.\nIn 1897, J. J. Thomson investigated ultraviolet light in Crookes tubes. Thomson deduced that the ejected particles, which he called corpuscles, were of the same nature as cathode rays. These particles later became known as the electrons. Thomson enclosed a metal plate (a cathode) in a vacuum tube, and exposed it to high-frequency radiation. It was thought that the oscillating electromagnetic fields caused the atoms' field to resonate and, after reaching a certain amplitude, caused subatomic corpuscles to be emitted, and current to be detected. The amount of this current varied with the intensity and color of the radiation. Larger radiation intensity or frequency would produce more current.\nDuring the years 1886\u20131902, Wilhelm Hallwachs and Philipp Lenard investigated the phenomenon of photoelectric emission in detail. Lenard observed that a current flows through an evacuated glass tube enclosing two electrodes when ultraviolet radiation falls on one of them. As soon as ultraviolet radiation is stopped, the current also stops. This initiated the concept of photoelectric emission. The discovery of the ionization of gases by ultraviolet light was made by Philipp Lenard in 1900. As the effect was produced across several centimeters of air and yielded a greater number of positive ions than negative, it was natural to interpret the phenomenon, as J. J. Thomson did, as a \"Hertz effect\" upon the particles present in the gas.\n20th century.\nIn 1902, Lenard observed that the energy of individual emitted electrons was independent of the applied light intensity. This appeared to be at odds with Maxwell's wave theory of light, which predicted that the electron energy would be proportional to the intensity of the radiation.\nLenard observed the variation in electron energy with light frequency using a powerful electric arc lamp which enabled him to investigate large changes in intensity. However, Lenard's results were qualitative rather than quantitative because of the difficulty in performing the experiments: the experiments needed to be done on freshly cut metal so that the pure metal was observed, but it oxidized in a matter of minutes even in the partial vacuums he used. The current emitted by the surface was determined by the light's intensity, or brightness: doubling the intensity of the light doubled the number of electrons emitted from the surface.\nInitial investigation of the photoelectric effect in gasses by Lenard were followed up by J. J. Thomson and then more decisively by Frederic Palmer Jr. The gas photoemission was studied and showed very different characteristics than those at first attributed to it by Lenard.\nIn 1900, while studying black-body radiation, the German physicist Max Planck suggested in his \"On the Law of Distribution of Energy in the Normal Spectrum\" paper that the energy carried by electromagnetic waves could only be released in \"packets\" of energy. In 1905, Albert Einstein published a paper advancing the hypothesis that light energy is carried in discrete quantized packets to explain experimental data from the photoelectric effect. Einstein theorized that the energy in each quantum of light was equal to the frequency of light multiplied by a constant, later called the Planck constant. A photon above a threshold frequency has the required energy to eject a single electron, creating the observed effect. This was a step in the development of quantum mechanics. In 1914, Robert A. Millikan's highly accurate measurements of the Planck constant from the photoelectric effect supported Einstein's model, even though a corpuscular theory of light was for Millikan, at the time, \"quite unthinkable\". Einstein was awarded the 1921 Nobel Prize in Physics for \"his discovery of the law of the photoelectric effect\", and Millikan was awarded the Nobel Prize in 1923 for \"his work on the elementary charge of electricity and on the photoelectric effect\". In quantum perturbation theory of atoms and solids acted upon by electromagnetic radiation, the photoelectric effect is still commonly analyzed in terms of waves; the two approaches are equivalent because photon or wave absorption can only happen between quantized energy levels whose energy difference is that of the energy of photon.\nAlbert Einstein's mathematical description of how the photoelectric effect was caused by absorption of quanta of light was in one of his Annus Mirabilis papers, named \"On a Heuristic Viewpoint Concerning the Production and Transformation of Light\". The paper proposed a simple description of \"energy quanta\", and showed how they explained the blackbody radiation spectrum. His explanation in terms of absorption of discrete quanta of light agreed with experimental results. It explained why the energy of photoelectrons was not dependent on incident light \"intensity\". This was a theoretical leap, but the concept was strongly resisted at first because it contradicted the wave theory of light that followed naturally from James Clerk Maxwell's equations of electromagnetism, and more generally, the assumption of infinite divisibility of energy in physical systems.\nEinstein's work predicted that the energy of individual ejected electrons increases linearly with the frequency of the light. The precise relationship had not at that time been tested. By 1905 it was known that the energy of photoelectrons increases with increasing \"frequency\" of incident light and is independent of the \"intensity\" of the light. However, the manner of the increase was not experimentally determined until 1914 when Millikan showed that Einstein's prediction was correct.\nThe photoelectric effect helped to propel the then-emerging concept of wave\u2013particle duality in the nature of light. Light simultaneously possesses the characteristics of both waves and particles, each being manifested according to the circumstances. The effect was impossible to understand in terms of the classical wave description of light, as the energy of the emitted electrons did not depend on the intensity of the incident radiation. Classical theory predicted that the electrons would 'gather up' energy over a period of time, and then be emitted.\nThe quantum of light was given its modern name by Gilbert N. Lewis when he coined the term 'photon' in his letter \"The Conservation of Photons\" to \"Nature\" published in 18 December 1926.\n21st century.\nResearch in recent years on the photoelectric effect has been focused on measurements on emission time of photoelectrons. For long, it was believed that photoemission is an instantaneous process. However, a seminal role in this field was played by experimental techniques on attosecond generation of pulses of light for studies on electron dynamics, which was recognised through the 2023 Nobel Prize in physics to Pierre Agostini, Ferenc Krausz and Anne L'Huillier. For example, in 2010, it was discovered that electron emission takes 20 attoseconds and that photoemission is associated with complex multielectron correlations and is not a single-electron process. In a more recent work in the context of tungsten, measurements on photoelectron emission indicated that around 100 attoseconds are required to liberate an electron. In another research, the value was found to be 45 attoseconds. A broad consensus is emerging towards the fact that photoemission is not instantaneous and involves finite time.\nThe role of electric field in photoelectric effect has also been empirically studied and it was found that electromagnetic radiation with a specific orientation of electric field can excite electrons leading to enhanced emission in the Terahertz range.\nUses and effects.\nPhotomultipliers.\nThese are extremely light-sensitive vacuum tubes with a coated photocathode inside the envelope. The photo cathode contains combinations of materials such as cesium, rubidium, and antimony specially selected to provide a low work function, so when illuminated even by very low levels of light, the photocathode readily releases electrons. By means of a series of electrodes (dynodes) at ever-higher potentials, these electrons are accelerated and substantially increased in number through secondary emission to provide a readily detectable output current. Photomultipliers are still commonly used wherever low levels of light must be detected.\nImage sensors.\nVideo camera tubes in the early days of television used the photoelectric effect. For example, Philo Farnsworth's \"Image dissector\" used a screen charged by the photoelectric effect to transform an optical image into a scanned electronic signal.\nPhotoelectron spectroscopy.\nBecause the kinetic energy of the emitted electrons is exactly the energy of the incident photon minus the energy of the electron's binding within an atom, molecule or solid, the binding energy can be determined by shining a monochromatic X-ray or UV light of a known energy and measuring the kinetic energies of the photoelectrons. The distribution of electron energies is valuable for studying quantum properties of these systems. It can also be used to determine the elemental composition of the samples. For solids, the kinetic energy and emission angle distribution of the photoelectrons is measured for the complete determination of the electronic band structure in terms of the allowed binding energies and momenta of the electrons. Modern instruments for angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy are capable of measuring these quantities with a precision better than 1 meV and 0.1\u00b0.\nPhotoelectron spectroscopy measurements are usually performed in a high-vacuum environment, because the electrons would be scattered by gas molecules if they were present. However, some companies are now selling products that allow photoemission in air. The light source can be a laser, a discharge tube, or a synchrotron radiation source.\nThe concentric hemispherical analyzer is a typical electron energy analyzer. It uses an electric field between two hemispheres to change (disperse) the trajectories of incident electrons depending on their kinetic energies.\nNight vision devices.\nPhotons hitting a thin film of alkali metal or semiconductor material such as gallium arsenide in an image intensifier tube cause the ejection of photoelectrons due to the photoelectric effect. These are accelerated by an electrostatic field where they strike a phosphor coated screen, converting the electrons back into photons. Intensification of the signal is achieved either through acceleration of the electrons or by increasing the number of electrons through secondary emissions, such as with a micro-channel plate. Sometimes a combination of both methods is used. Additional kinetic energy is required to move an electron out of the conduction band and into the vacuum level. This is known as the electron affinity of the photocathode and is another barrier to photoemission other than the forbidden band, explained by the band gap model. Some materials such as gallium arsenide have an effective electron affinity that is below the level of the conduction band. In these materials, electrons that move to the conduction band all have sufficient energy to be emitted from the material, so the film that absorbs photons can be quite thick. These materials are known as negative electron affinity materials.\nSpacecraft.\nThe photoelectric effect will cause spacecraft exposed to sunlight to develop a positive charge. This can be a major problem, as other parts of the spacecraft are in shadow which will result in the spacecraft developing a negative charge from nearby plasmas. The imbalance can discharge through delicate electrical components. The static charge created by the photoelectric effect is self-limiting, because a higher charged object does not give up its electrons as easily as a lower charged object does.\nMoon dust.\nLight from the Sun hitting lunar dust causes it to become positively charged from the photoelectric effect. The charged dust then repels itself and lifts off the surface of the Moon by electrostatic levitation. This manifests itself almost like an \"atmosphere of dust\", visible as a thin haze and blurring of distant features, and visible as a dim glow after the sun has set. This was first photographed by the Surveyor program probes in the 1960s, and most recently the Chang'e 3 rover observed dust deposition on lunar rocks as high as about 28\u00a0cm. It is thought that the smallest particles are repelled kilometers from the surface and that the particles move in \"fountains\" as they charge and discharge.\nCompeting processes and photoemission cross section.\nWhen photon energies are as high as the electron rest energy of , yet another process, Compton scattering, may occur. Above twice this energy, at , pair production is also more likely. Compton scattering and pair production are examples of two other competing mechanisms.\nEven if the photoelectric effect is the favoured reaction for a particular interaction of a single photon with a bound electron, the result is also subject to quantum statistics and is not guaranteed. The probability of the photoelectric effect occurring is measured by the cross section of the interaction, \u03c3. This has been found to be a function of the atomic number of the target atom and photon energy. In a crude approximation, for photon energies above the highest atomic binding energy, the cross section is given by:\nformula_20\nHere \"Z\" is the atomic number and \"n\" is a number which varies between 4 and 5. The photoelectric effect rapidly decreases in significance in the gamma-ray region of the spectrum, with increasing photon energy. It is also more likely from elements with high atomic number. Consequently, high-\"Z\" materials make good gamma-ray shields, which is the principal reason why lead (\"Z\"\u00a0=\u00a082) is preferred and most widely used.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n\"Applets\""}
{"id": "23580", "revid": "50719310", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23580", "title": "Paleogene", "text": "First period of the Cenozoic Era\nThe Paleogene Period ( ; also spelled Palaeogene or Pal\u00e6ogene) is a geologic period and system that spans 43 million years from the end of the Cretaceous Period Ma (million years ago) to the beginning of the Neogene Period Ma. It is the first period of the Cenozoic Era, the tenth period of the Phanerozoic and is divided into the Paleocene, Eocene, and Oligocene epochs. The earlier term Tertiary Period was used to define the time now covered by the Paleogene Period and subsequent Neogene Period; despite no longer being recognized as a formal stratigraphic term, \"Tertiary\" still sometimes remains in informal use. Paleogene is often abbreviated \"Pg\", although the United States Geological Survey uses the abbreviation \"Pe\" for the Paleogene on the Survey's geologic maps. \nMuch of the world's modern vertebrate diversity originated in a rapid surge of diversification in the early Paleogene, as survivors of the Cretaceous\u2013Paleogene extinction event took advantage of empty ecological niches left behind by the extinction of the non-avian dinosaurs, pterosaurs, marine reptiles, and primitive fish groups. Mammals continued to diversify from relatively small, simple forms into a highly diverse group ranging from small-bodied forms to very large ones, radiating into multiple orders and colonizing the air and marine ecosystems by the Eocene. Birds, the only surviving group of dinosaurs, quickly diversified from the very few neognath and paleognath clades that survived the extinction event, also radiating into multiple orders, colonizing different ecosystems and achieving an extreme level of morphological diversity. Percomorph fish, the most diverse group of vertebrates today, first appeared near the end of the Cretaceous but saw a very rapid radiation into their modern order and family-level diversity during the Paleogene, achieving a diverse array of morphologies. \nThe Paleogene is marked by considerable changes in climate from the Paleocene\u2013Eocene Thermal Maximum, through global cooling during the Eocene to the first appearance of permanent ice sheets in the Antarctic at the beginning of the Oligocene.\nGeology.\nStratigraphy.\nThe Paleogene is divided into three series/epochs: the Paleocene, Eocene, and Oligocene. These stratigraphic units can be defined globally or regionally. For global stratigraphic correlation, the International Commission on Stratigraphy (ICS) ratify global stages based on a Global Boundary Stratotype Section and Point (GSSP) from a single formation (a stratotype) identifying the lower boundary of the stage.\nPaleocene.\nThe Paleocene is the first series/epoch of the Paleogene and lasted from 66.0 Ma to 56.0 Ma. It is divided into three stages: the Danian 66.0 - 61.6 Ma; Selandian 61.6 - 59.2 Ma; and, Thanetian 59.2 - 56.0 Ma. The GSSP for the base of the Cenozoic, Paleogene and Paleocene is at Oued Djerfane, west of El Kef, Tunisia. It is marked by an iridium anomaly produced by an asteroid impact, and is associated with the Cretaceous\u2013Paleogene extinction event. The boundary is defined as the rusty colored base of a 50 cm thick clay, which would have been deposited over only a few days. Similar layers are seen in marine and continental deposits worldwide. These layers include the iridium anomaly, microtektites, nickel-rich spinel crystals and shocked quartz, all indicators of a major extraterrestrial impact. The remains of the crater are found at Chicxulub on the Yucatan Peninsula in Mexico. The extinction of the non-avian dinosaurs, ammonites and dramatic changes in marine plankton and many other groups of organisms, are also used for correlation purposes.\nEocene.\nThe Eocene is the second series/epoch of the Paleogene, and lasted from 56.0 Ma to 33.9 Ma. It is divided into four stages: the Ypresian 56.0 Ma to 47.8 Ma; Lutetian 47.8 Ma to 41.2 Ma; Bartonian 41.2 Ma to 37.71 Ma; and, Priabonian 37.71 Ma to 33.9 Ma. The GSSP for the base of the Eocene is at Dababiya, near Luxor, Egypt and is marked by the start of a significant variation in global carbon isotope ratios, produced by a major period of global warming. The change in climate was due to a rapid release of frozen methane clathrates from seafloor sediments at the beginning of the Paleocene-Eocene thermal maximum (PETM).\nOligocene.\nThe Oligocene is the third and youngest series/epoch of the Paleogene, and lasted from 33.9 Ma to 23.03 Ma. It is divided into two stages: the Rupelian 33.9 Ma to 27.82 Ma; and, Chattian 27.82 - 23.03 Ma. The GSSP for the base of the Oligocene is at Massignano, near Ancona, Italy. The extinction of the \"hantkeninid\" planktonic foraminifera is the key marker for the Eocene-Oligocene boundary, which was a time of climate cooling that led to widespread changes in fauna and flora.\nPalaeogeography.\nThe final stages of the breakup of Pangaea occurred during the Paleogene as Atlantic Ocean rifting and seafloor spreading extended northwards, separating the North America and Eurasian plates, and Australia and South America rifted from Antarctica, opening the Southern Ocean. Africa and India collided with Eurasia forming the Alpine-Himalayan mountain chains and the western margin of the Pacific plate changed from a divergent to convergent plate boundary.\nAlpine\u2013Himalayan orogeny.\nAlpine orogeny.\nThe Alpine orogeny developed in response to the collision between the African and Eurasian plates during the closing of the Neotethys Ocean and the opening of the Central Atlantic Ocean. The result was a series of arcuate mountain ranges, from the Tell-Rif-Betic cordillera in the western Mediterranean through the Alps, Carpathians, Apennines, Dinarides and Hellenides to the Taurides in the east.\nFrom the Late Cretaceous into the early Paleocene, Africa began to converge with Eurasia. The irregular outlines of the continental margins, including the Adriatic promontory (Adria) that extended north from the African plate, led to the development of several short subduction zones, rather than one long system. In the western Mediterranean, the European plate was subducted southwards beneath the African plate, whilst in the eastern Mediterranean, Africa was subducted beneath Eurasia along a northward dipping subduction zone. Convergence between the Iberian and European plates led to the Pyrenean orogeny and, as Adria pushed northwards the Alps and Carpathian orogens began to develop.\nThe collision of Adria with Eurasia in the early Palaeocene was followed by a\u202fc.10 million year pause in the convergence of Africa and Eurasia, connected with the onset of the opening of the North Atlantic Ocean as Greenland rifted from the Eurasian plate in the Palaeocene. Convergence rates between Africa and Eurasia increased again in the early Eocene and the remaining oceanic basins between Adria and Europe closed.\nBetween about 40 and 30 Ma, subduction began along the western Mediterranean arc of the Tell, Rif, Betic and Apennine mountain chains. The rate of convergence was less than the subduction rate of the dense lithosphere of the western Mediterranean and roll-back of the subducting slab led to the arcuate structure of these mountain ranges.\nIn the eastern Mediterranean, c. 35 Ma, the Anatolide-Tauride platform (northern part of Adria) began to enter the trench leading to the development of the Dinarides, Hellenides and Tauride mountain chains as the passive margin sediments of Adria were scrapped off onto the Eurasia crust during subduction.\nZagros Mountains.\nThe Zagros mountain belt stretches for c. 2000\u2009km from the eastern border of Iraq to the Makran coast in southern Iran. It formed as a result of the convergence and collision of the Arabian and Eurasian plates as the Neotethys Ocean closed and is composed sediments scrapped from the descending Arabian Plate.\nFrom the Late Cretaceous, a volcanic arc developed on the Eurasia margin as the Neotethys crust was subducted beneath it. A separate intra-oceanic subduction zone in the Neotethys resulted in the obuction of ocean crust onto the Arabian margin in the Late Cretaceous to Paleocene, with break-off of the subducted oceanic plate close to the Arabian margin occurring during the Eocene. Continental collision began during the Eocene c. 35 Ma and continued into the Oligocene to c. 26 Ma.\nHimalayan orogeny.\nThe Indian continent rifted from Madagascar at c. 83 Ma and drifted rapidly (c. 18 cm/yr in the Paleocene) northwards towards the southern margin of Eurasia. A rapid decrease in velocity to c. 5 cm/yr in the early Eocene records the collision of the Tethyan (Tibetan) Himalayas, the leading edge of Greater India, with the Lhasa terrane of Tibet (southern Eurasian margin), along the Indus-Yarling-Zangbo suture zone. To the south of this zone, the Himalaya are composed of metasedimentary rocks scraped off the now subducted Indian continental crust and mantle lithosphere as the collision progressed.\nPalaeomagnetic data place the present day Indian continent further south at the time of collision and decrease in plate velocity, indicating the presence of a large region to the north of India that has now been subducted beneath the Eurasian plate or incorporated into the mountain belt. This region, known as Greater India, formed by extension along the northern margin of India during the opening of the Neotethys. The Tethyan Himalaya block lay along its northern edge, with the Neotethys Ocean lying between it and southern Eurasia.\nDebate about the amount of deformation seen in the geological record in the India\u2013Eurasia collision zone versus the size of Greater India, the timing and nature of the collision relative to the decrease in plate velocity, and explanations for the unusually high velocity of the Indian plate have led to several models for Greater India: 1) A Late Cretaceous to early Paleocene subduction zone may have lain between India and Eurasia in the Neotethys, dividing the region into two plates, subduction was followed by collision of India with Eurasia in the middle Eocene. In this model Greater India would have been less than 900 km wide; 2) Greater India may have formed a single plate, several thousand kilometres wide, with the Tethyan Himalaya microcontinent separated from the Indian continent by an oceanic basin. The microcontinent collided with southern Eurasia c. 58 Ma (late Paleocene), whilst the velocity of the plate did not decrease until c. 50 Ma when subduction rates dropped as young, oceanic crust entered the subduction zone; 3) This model assigns older dates to parts of Greater India, which changes its paleogeographic position relative to Eurasia and creates a Greater India formed of extended continental crust 2000\u20133000 km wide.\nSouth East Asia.\nThe Alpine-Himalayan Orogenic Belt in Southeast Asia extends from the Himalayas in India through Myanmar (West Burma block) Sumatra, Java to West Sulawesi.\nDuring the Late Cretaceous to Paleogene, the northward movement of the Indian plate led to the highly oblique subduction of the Neotethys along the edge of the West Burma block and the development of a major north-south transform fault along the margin of Southeast Asia to the south. Between c. 60 and 50 Ma, the leading northeastern edge of Greater India collided with the West Burma block resulting in deformation and metamorphism. During the middle Eocene, north-dipping subduction resumed along the southern edge of Southeast Asia, from west Sumatra to West Sulawesi, as the Australian plate drifted slowly northwards.\nCollision between India and the West Burma block was complete by the late Oligocene. As the India-Eurasia collision continued, movement of material away from the collision zone was accommodated along, and extended, the already existing major strike slip systems of the region.\nAtlantic Ocean.\nDuring the Paleocene, seafloor spreading along the Mid-Atlantic Ridge propagated from the Central Atlantic northwards between North America and Greenland in the Labrador Sea (c. 62 Ma) and Baffin Bay (c. 57 Ma), and, by the early Eocene (c. 54 Ma), into the northeastern Atlantic between Greenland and Eurasia. Extension between North America and Eurasia, also in the early Eocene, led to the opening of the Eurasian Basin across the Arctic, which was linked to the Baffin Bay Ridge and Mid-Atlantic Ridge to the south via major strike slip faults.\nFrom the Eocene and into the early Oligocene, Greenland acted as an independent plate moving northwards and rotating anticlockwise. This led to compression across the Canadian Arctic Archipelago, Svalbard and northern Greenland resulting in the Eureka orogeny. From c. 47 Ma, the eastern margin of Greenland was cut by the Reykjanes Ridge (the northeastern branch of the Mid-Atlantic Ridge) propagating northwards and splitting off the Jan Mayen microcontinent.\nAfter c. 33 Ma seafloor spreading in Labrador Sea and Baffin Bay gradually ceased and seafloor spreading focused along the northeast Atlantic. By the late Oligocene, the plate boundary between North America and Eurasia was established along the Mid-Atlantic Ridge, with Greenland attached to the North American plate again, and the Jan Mayen microcontinent part of the Eurasian plate, where its remains now lie to the east and possibly beneath the southeast of Iceland.\nNorth Atlantic Large Igneous Province.\nThe North Atlantic Igneous Province stretches across the Greenland and northwest European margins and is associated with the proto-Icelandic mantle plume, which rose beneath the Greenland lithosphere at c. 65 Ma. There were two main phases of volcanic activity with peaks at c. 60 Ma and c. 55\u202fMa. Magmatism in the British and Northwest Atlantic volcanic provinces occurred mainly in the early Palaeocene, the latter associated with an increased spreading rate in the Labrador Sea, whilst northeast Atlantic magmatism occurred mainly during the early Eocene and is associated with a change in the spreading direction in the Labrador Sea and the northward drift of Greenland. The locations of the magmatism coincide with the intersection of propagating the rifts and large-scale, pre-existing lithospheric structures, which acted as channels to the surface for the magma.\nThe arrival of the proto-Iceland plume has been considered the driving mechanism for rifting in the North Atlantic. However, that rifting and initial seafloor spreading occurred prior to the arrival of the plume, large scale magmatism occurred at a distance to rifting, and that rifting propagated towards, rather than away from the plume, has led to the suggestion the plume and associated magmatism may have been a result, rather than a cause, of the plate tectonic forces that led to the propagation of rifting from the Central to the North Atlantic.\nAmericas.\nNorth America.\nMountain building continued along the North America Cordillera in response to subduction of the Farallon plate beneath the North American Plate. Along the central section of the North American margin, crustal shortening of the Cretaceous to Paleocene Sevier orogen lessened and deformation moved eastward. The decreasing dip of the subducting Farallon plate led to a flat-slab segment that increased friction between this and the base of the North American Plate. The resulting Laramide orogeny, which began the development of the Rocky Mountains, was a broad zone of thick-skinned deformation, with faults extending to mid-crustal depths and the uplift of basement rocks that lay to the east of the Sevier belt, and more than 700km from the trench. With the Laramide uplift the Western Interior Seaway was divided and then retreated.\nDuring the mid to late Eocene (50\u201335 Ma), plate convergence rates decreased and the dip of the Farallon slab began to steepen. Uplift ceased and the region largely levelled by erosion. By the Oligocene, convergence gave way to extension, rifting and widespread volcanism across the Laramide belt.\nSouth America.\nOcean-continent convergence accommodated by east dipping subduction zone of the Farallon plate beneath the western edge of South America continued from the Mesozoic.\nOver the Paleogene, changes in plate motion and episodes of regional slab shallowing and steepening resulted in variations in the magnitude of crustal shortening and amounts of magmatism along the length of the Andes. In the Northern Andes, an oceanic plateau with volcanic arc was accreted during the latest Cretaceous and Paleocene, whilst the Central Andes were dominated by the subduction of oceanic crust and the Southern Andes were impacted by the subduction of the Farallon-East Antarctic ocean ridge.\nCaribbean.\nThe Caribbean plate is largely composed of oceanic crust of the Caribbean Large Igneous Province that formed during the Late Cretaceous. During the Late Cretaceous to Paleocene, subduction of Atlantic crust was established along its northern margin, whilst to the southwest, an island arc collided with the northern Andes forming an east dipping subduction zone where Caribbean lithosphere was subducted beneath the South American margin.\nDuring the Eocene (c. 45 Ma), subduction of the Farallon plate along the Central American subduction zone was (re)established. Subduction along the northern section of the Caribbean volcanic arc ceased as the Bahamas carbonate platform collided with Cuba and was replaced by strike-slip movements as a transform fault, extending from the Mid-Atlantic Ridge, connected with the northern boundary of the Caribbean Plate. Subduction now focused along the southern Caribbean arc (Lesser Antilles).\nBy the Oligocene, the intra-oceanic Central American volcanic arc began to collide with northwestern South American.\nPacific Ocean.\nAt the beginning of the Paleogene, the Pacific Ocean consisted of the Pacific, Farallon, Kula and Izanagi plates. The central Pacific plate grew by seafloor spreading as the other three plates were subducted and broken up. In the southern Pacific, seafloor spreading continued from the Late Cretaceous across the Pacific\u2013Antarctic, Pacific-Farallon and Farallon\u2013Antarctic mid ocean ridges.\nThe Izanagi-Pacific spreading ridge lay nearly parallel to the East Asian subduction zone and between 60\u201350 Ma the spreading ridge began to be subducted. By c. 50 Ma, the Pacific plate was no longer surrounded by spreading ridges, but had a subduction zone along its western edge. This changed the forces acting on the Pacific plate and led to a major reorganisation of plate motions across the entire Pacific region. The resulting changes in stress between the Pacific and Philippine Sea plates initiated subduction along the Izu-Bonin-Mariana and Tonga-Kermadec arcs.\nSubduction of the Farallon plate beneath the American plates continued from the Late Cretaceous. The Kula-Farallon spreading ridge lay to its north until the Eocene (c. 55 Ma), when the northern section of the plate split forming the Vancouver/Juan de Fuca plate. In the Oligocene (c. 28 Ma), the first segment of the Pacific\u2013Farallon spreading ridge entered the North American subduction zone near Baja California leading to major strike-slip movements and the formation of the San Andreas Fault. At the Paleogene-Neogene boundary, spreading ceased between the Pacific and Farallon plates and the Farallon plate split again forming the present date Nazca and Cocos plates.\nThe Kula plate lay between Pacific plate and North America. To the north and northwest it was being subducted beneath the Aleutian trench. Spreading between the Kula and Pacific and Farallon plates ceased c. 40 Ma and the Kula plate became part of the Pacific Plate.\nHawaii hotspot.\nThe Hawaiian-Emperor seamount chain formed above the Hawaiian hotspot. Originally thought to be stationary within the mantle, the hotspot is now considered to have drifted south during the Paleocene to early Eocene, as the Pacific plate moved north. At c. 47 Ma, movement of the hotspot ceased and the Pacific plate motion changed from northward to northwestward in response to the onset of subduction along its western margin. This resulted in a 60 degree bend in the seamount chain. Other seamount chains related to hotspots in the South Pacific show a similar change in orientation at this time.\nAntarctica.\nSlow seafloor spreading continued between Australia and East Antarctica. Shallow water channels probably developed south of Tasmania opening the Tasmanian Passage in the Eocene and deep ocean routes opening from the mid Oligocene. Rifting between the Antarctic Peninsula and the southern tip of South America formed the Drake Passage and opened the Southern Ocean also during this time, completing the breakup of Gondwana. The opening of these passages and the creation of the Southern Ocean established the Antarctic Circumpolar Current. Glaciers began to build across the Antarctica continent that now lay isolated in the south polar region and surrounded by cold ocean waters. These changes contributed to the fall in global temperatures and the beginning of icehouse conditions.\nRed Sea and East Africa.\nExtensional stresses from the subduction zone along the northern Neotethys resulted in rifting between Africa and Arabia, forming the Gulf of Aden in the late Eocene. To the west, in the early Oligocene, flood basalts erupted across Ethiopia, northeast Sudan and southwest Yemen as the Afar mantle plume began to impact the base of the African lithosphere. Rifting across the southern Red Sea began in the mid Oligocene, and across the central and northern Red Sea regions in the late Oligocene and early Miocene.\nClimate.\nClimatic conditions varied considerably during the Paleogene. After the disruption of the Chicxulub impact settled, a period of cool and dry conditions continued from the Late Cretaceous. At the Paleocene-Eocene boundary global temperatures rose rapidly with the onset of the Paleocene-Eocene Thermal Maximum (PETM). By the middle Eocene, temperatures began to drop again and by the late Eocene (c. 37 Ma) had decreased sufficiently for ice sheets to form in Antarctica. The global climate entered icehouse conditions at the Eocene-Oligocene boundary and the present day Late Cenozoic ice age began.\nThe Paleogene began with the brief but intense \"impact winter\" caused by the Chicxulub impact, which was followed by an abrupt period of warming. After temperatures stabilised, the steady cooling and drying of the Late Cretaceous-Early Paleogene Cool Interval that had spanned the last two ages of the Late Cretaceous continued, with only the brief interruption of the Latest Danian Event (c. 62.2 Ma) when global temperatures rose. There is no evidence for ice sheets at the poles during the Paleocene.\nThe relatively cool conditions were brought to an end by the Thanetian Thermal Event, and the beginning of the PETM. This was one of the warmest times of the Phanerozoic eon, during which global mean surface temperatures increased to 31.6 \u00b0C. According to a study published in 2018, from about 56 to 48 Ma, annual air temperatures over land and at mid-latitude averaged about 23\u201329\u00a0\u00b0C (\u00b1\u20094.7\u00a0\u00b0C). For comparison, this was 10 to 15\u00a0\u00b0C higher than the current annual mean temperatures in these areas. \nThis rapid rise in global temperatures and intense greenhouse conditions were due to a sudden increase in levels of atmospheric carbon dioxide (CO2) and other greenhouse gases. An accompanying rise in humidity is reflected in an increase in kaolinite in sediments, which forms by chemical weathering in hot, humid conditions. Tropical and subtropical forests flourished and extended into polar regions. Water vapour (a greenhouse gas) associated with these forests also contributed to the greenhouse conditions.\nThe initial rise in global temperatures was related to the intrusion of magmatic sills into organic-rich sediments during volcanic activity in the North Atlantic Igneous Province, between about 56 and 54 Ma, which rapidly released large amounts of greenhouse gases into the atmosphere. This warming led to melting of frozen methane hydrates on continental slopes adding further greenhouses gases. It also reduced the rate of burial of organic matter as higher temperatures accelerated the rate of bacterial decomposition which released CO2 back into the oceans.\nThe (relatively) sudden climatic changes associated with the PETM resulted in the extinction of some groups of fauna and flora and the rise of others. For example, with the warming of the Arctic Ocean, around 70% of deep sea foraminifera species went extinct, whilst on land many modern mammals, including primates, appeared. Fluctuating sea levels meant, during low stands, a land bridge formed across the Bering Straits between North America and Eurasia allowing the movement of land animals between the two continents.\nThe PETM was followed by the less severe Eocene Thermal Maximum 2 (c. 53.69 Ma), and the Eocene Thermal Maximum 3 (c. 53 Ma). The early Eocene warm conditions were brought to an end by the Azolla event. This change of climate at about 48.5 Ma, is believed to have been caused by a proliferation of aquatic ferns from the genus \"Azolla\", resulting in the sequestering of large amounts of CO2 from the atmosphere by the plants. From this time until about 34 Ma, there was a slow cooling trend known as the Middle-Late Eocene Cooling. As temperatures dropped at high latitudes the presence of cold water diatoms suggests sea ice was able to form in winter in the Arctic Ocean, and by the late Eocene (c. 37 Ma) there is evidence of glaciation in Antarctica. \nChanges in deep ocean currents, as Australia and South America moved away from Antarctica opening the Drake and Tasmanian passages, were responsible for the drop in global temperatures. The warm waters of the South Atlantic, Indian and South Pacific oceans extended southward into the opening Southern Ocean and became part of the cold circumpolar current. Dense polar waters sank into the deep oceans and moved northwards, reducing global ocean temperatures. This cooling may have occurred over less than 100,000 years and resulted in a widespread extinction in marine life. By the Eocene-Oligocene boundary, sediments deposited in the ocean from glaciers indicate the presence of an ice sheet in western Antarctica that extended to the ocean.\nThe development of the circumpolar current led to changes in the oceans, which in turn reduced atmospheric CO2 further. Increasing upwellings of cold water stimulated the productivity of phytoplankton, and the cooler waters reduced the rate of bacterial decay of organic matter and promoted the growth of methane hydrates in marine sediments. This created a positive feedback cycle where global cooling reduced atmospheric CO2 and this reduction in CO2 lead to changes which further lowered global temperatures. The decrease in evaporation from the cooler oceans also reduced moisture in the atmosphere and increased aridity. By the early Oligocene, the North American and Eurasian tropical and subtropical forests were replaced by dry woodlands and widespread grasslands.\nThe Early Oligocene Glacial Maximum lasted for about 200,000 years, and the global mean surface temperature continued to decrease gradually during the Rupelian. A drop in global sea levels during the mid Oligocene indicates major growth of the Antarctic glacial ice sheet. In the Late Oligocene, global temperatures began to warm slightly, though they continued to be significantly lower than during the previous epochs of the Paleogene and polar ice remained.\nFlora and fauna.\nTropical taxa diversified faster than those at higher latitudes after the Cretaceous\u2013Paleogene extinction event, resulting in the development of a significant latitudinal diversity gradient. \nMammals began a rapid diversification during this period. After the Cretaceous\u2013Paleogene extinction event, which saw the demise of the non-avian dinosaurs, mammals began to evolve from a few small and generalized forms into most of the modern varieties we see presently. Some of these mammals evolved into large forms that dominated the land, while others became capable of living in marine, specialized terrestrial, and airborne environments. Those that adapted to the oceans became modern cetaceans and sirenians, while those that adapted to trees became animals such as Sciuridaes or primates, the group to which humans belong. \nBirds, extant dinosaurs which were already well established by the end of the Cretaceous, also experienced adaptive radiation as they took over the skies left empty by the now extinct pterosaurs. Some flightless birds such as penguins, ratites, and terror birds also filled niches left by the hesperornithes and other extinct dinosaurs.\nMyctophids first appeared in the Late Palaeocene or Early Eocene, and during the Eocene and most of the Oligocene were restricted to shelf seas before expanding their range into the open ocean during the warm climatic interval at the end of the Oligocene.\nPronounced cooling in the Oligocene resulted in a massive floral shift, and many extant modern plants arose during this time. Grasses and herbs, such as \"Artemisia\", began to proliferate, at the expense of tropical plants, which began to decrease. Conifer forests developed in mountainous areas. This cooling trend continued, with major fluctuation, until the end of the Pleistocene period. This evidence for this floral shift is found in the palynological record.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23581", "revid": "25859633", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23581", "title": "Philosophers", "text": ""}
{"id": "23582", "revid": "17350134", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23582", "title": "Preorder", "text": "Reflexive and transitive binary relation\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Stack/styles.css\"/&gt;\nIn mathematics, especially in order theory, a preorder or quasiorder is a binary relation that is reflexive and transitive. The name preorder is meant to suggest that preorders are \"almost\" partial orders, but not quite, as they are not necessarily antisymmetric.\nA natural example of a preorder is the divides relation \"x divides y\" between integers. This relation is reflexive as every integer divides itself. It is also transitive. But it is not antisymmetric, because e.g. formula_1 divides formula_2 and formula_2 divides formula_1. It is to this preorder that \"least\" refers in the phrase \"least common multiple\" (in contrast, using the natural order on integers, e.g. formula_5 and formula_6 have the common multiples formula_7, formula_8, formula_9, formula_10, formula_11, ..., but no least one). \nPreorders are closely related to equivalence relations and (non-strict) partial orders. Both of these are special cases of a preorder: an antisymmetric preorder is a partial order, and a symmetric preorder is an equivalence relation. Moreover, a preorder on a set formula_12 can equivalently be defined as an equivalence relation on formula_12, together with a partial order on the set of equivalence class, cf. picture. Like partial orders and equivalence relations, preorders (on a nonempty set) are never asymmetric.\nA preorder can be visualized as a directed graph, with elements of the set corresponding to vertices, and the order relation between pairs of elements corresponding to the directed edges between vertices. The converse is not true: most directed graphs are neither reflexive nor transitive. A preorder that is antisymmetric no longer has cycles; it is a partial order, and corresponds to a directed acyclic graph. A preorder that is symmetric is an equivalence relation; it can be thought of as having lost the direction markers on the edges of the graph. In general, a preorder's corresponding directed graph may have many disconnected components.\nA preorder is often denoted formula_14 or formula_15.\nDefinition.\nA binary relation formula_14 on a set formula_12 is called a preorder or quasiorder if it is reflexive and transitive; that is, if it satisfies:\nA set that is equipped with a preorder is called a preordered set (or proset).\nPreorders as partial orders on partitions.\nGiven a preorder formula_14 on formula_12 one may define an equivalence relation formula_24 on formula_12 by \nformula_26 \nThe resulting relation formula_24 is reflexive since the preorder formula_14 is reflexive; transitive by applying the transitivity of formula_14 twice; and symmetric by definition. \nUsing this relation, it is possible to construct a partial order on the quotient set formula_30 of the equivalence, \nby defining formula_31 if formula_32 \nThat this is well-defined, meaning that it does not depend on the particular choice of representatives formula_33 and formula_34, follows from the definition of formula_24.\nConversely, from any partial order on a partition of a set formula_36 it is possible to construct a preorder on formula_12 itself. There is a one-to-one correspondence between preorders and pairs (partition, partial order).\nExample: Let formula_12 be the set of all (valid or invalid) sentences in some subfield of mathematics, like geometry. Define formula_39 if formula_40 is a logical consequence of formula_41. \nThen formula_42 is a preorder on formula_12: every sentence formula_40 can be proven from itself (reflexivity), and if formula_40 can be proven from formula_41, and formula_41 from formula_48, then formula_40 can also be proven from formula_48 (transitivity). \nThe corresponding equivalence relation is usually denoted formula_51, and defined as formula_39 and formula_53; in this case formula_40 and formula_41 are called \"logically equivalent\". The equivalence class of a sentence formula_40 is the set of all sentences formula_57 that are logically equivalent to formula_40; formally: formula_59. \nThe preordered set formula_60 is a directed set: given two sentences formula_61, their logical conjunction formula_62, pronounced \"both formula_40 and formula_41\", is a common upper bound of them, since formula_40 is a consequence of formula_62, and so is formula_41. The partially ordered set formula_68 is hence also a directed set. \nSee Lindenbaum\u2013Tarski algebra for a related example.\nRelationship to strict partial orders.\nIf reflexivity is replaced with irreflexivity (while keeping transitivity) then we get the definition of a strict partial order on formula_12. For this reason, the term strict preorder is sometimes used for a strict partial order. That is, this is a binary relation formula_70 on formula_12 that satisfies:\nStrict partial order induced by a preorder.\nAny preorder formula_14 gives rise to a strict partial order defined by formula_73 if and only if formula_74 and not formula_75.\nUsing the equivalence relation formula_24 introduced above, formula_73 if and only if formula_78 \nand so the following holds\nformula_79\nThe relation formula_70 is a strict partial order and every strict partial order can be constructed this way. \nIf the preorder formula_14 is antisymmetric (and thus a partial order) then the equivalence formula_24 is equality (that is, formula_83 if and only if formula_84) and so in this case, the definition of formula_70 can be restated as: \nformula_86\nBut importantly, this new condition is not used as (nor is it equivalent to) the general definition of the relation formula_70 (that is, formula_70 is not defined as: formula_73 if and only if formula_90) because if the preorder formula_14 is not antisymmetric then the resulting relation formula_70 would not be transitive (consider how equivalent non-equal elements relate). \nThis is the reason for using the symbol \"formula_93\" instead of the \"less than or equal to\" symbol \"formula_94\", which might cause confusion for a preorder that is not antisymmetric since it might misleadingly suggest that formula_95 implies formula_96 \nPreorders induced by a strict partial order.\nUsing the construction above, multiple non-strict preorders can produce the same strict preorder formula_97 so without more information about how formula_70 was constructed (such knowledge of the equivalence relation formula_24 for instance), it might not be possible to reconstruct the original non-strict preorder from formula_100 Possible (non-strict) preorders that induce the given strict preorder formula_70 include the following:\nIf formula_95 then formula_117 \nThe converse holds (that is, formula_118) if and only if whenever formula_119 then formula_73 or formula_121\nExamples.\nComputer science.\nIn computer science, one can find examples of the following preorders.\nOther.\nFurther examples:\nExample of a total preorder:\nConstructions.\nEvery binary relation formula_132 on a set formula_12 can be extended to a preorder on formula_12 by taking the transitive closure and reflexive closure, formula_135 The transitive closure indicates path connection in formula_136 if and only if there is an formula_132-path from formula_33 to formula_139 \nLeft residual preorder induced by a binary relation\nGiven a binary relation formula_140 the complemented composition formula_141 forms a preorder called the left residual, where formula_142 denotes the converse relation of formula_140 and formula_144 denotes the complement relation of formula_140 while formula_146 denotes relation composition.\nRelated definitions.\nIf a preorder is also antisymmetric, that is, formula_74 and formula_75 implies formula_149 then it is a partial order.\nOn the other hand, if it is symmetric, that is, if formula_74 implies formula_151 then it is an equivalence relation.\nA preorder is total if formula_74 or formula_75 for all formula_154\nA preordered class is a class equipped with a preorder. Every set is a class and so every preordered set is a preordered class.\nUses.\nPreorders play a pivotal role in several situations:\nNumber of preorders.\nNote that \"S\"(\"n\", \"k\") refers to Stirling numbers of the second kind.\nAs explained above, there is a 1-to-1 correspondence between preorders and pairs (partition, partial order). Thus the number of preorders is the sum of the number of partial orders on every partition. For example:\nInterval.\nFor formula_155 the interval formula_156 is the set of points \"x\" satisfying formula_157 and formula_158 also written formula_159 It contains at least the points \"a\" and \"b\". One may choose to extend the definition to all pairs formula_160 The extra intervals are all empty.\nUsing the corresponding strict relation \"formula_104\", one can also define the interval formula_160 as the set of points \"x\" satisfying formula_163 and formula_164 also written formula_165 An open interval may be empty even if formula_166\nAlso formula_167 and formula_168 can be defined similarly."}
{"id": "23584", "revid": "1022318873", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23584", "title": "Pre-Socratic", "text": ""}
{"id": "23585", "revid": "8524693", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23585", "title": "Psychoanalysis", "text": "Set of therapeutic techniques established by Sigmund Freud\nPsychoanalysis is a set of theories and techniques of research to discover unconscious processes and their influence on conscious thought, emotion and behavior. Based on dream interpretation, psychoanalysis is also a talk therapy method for treating mental disorders. Established in the early 1890s by Sigmund Freud, it takes into account Darwin's theory of evolution, neurology findings, ethnology reports, and, in some respects, the clinical research of his mentor Josef Breuer. Freud developed and refined the theory and practice of psychoanalysis until his death in 1939. In an encyclopedic article, he identified its four cornerstones: \"the assumption that there are unconscious mental processes, the recognition of the theory of repression and resistance, the appreciation of the importance of sexuality and of the Oedipus complex.\"\nFreud's earlier colleagues Alfred Adler and Carl Jung soon developed their own methods (individual and analytical psychology); he criticized these concepts, stating that they were not forms of psychoanalysis. After the author's death, neo-Freudian thinkers like Erich Fromm, Karen Horney and Harry Stack Sullivan created some subfields. Jacques Lacan, whose work is often referred to as Return to Freud, described his metapsychology as a technical elaboration of the three-instance model of the psyche and examined the language-like structure of the unconscious.\nPsychoanalysis has been a controversial discipline from the outset. While evidence suggests psychoanalysis, especially long-term psychoanalytic psychotherapy, can be effective for certain disorders, its overall efficacy remains contested. It may have benefits in the long term over other psychotherapies. Its influence on psychology and psychiatry is undisputed. Psychoanalytic concepts are also widely used outside the therapeutic field, for example in the interpretation of neurological findings, myths and fairy tales, philosophical perspectives such as Freudo-Marxism and in literary criticism.\nOverview.\nOne of Freud's central arguments is that the contents of the unconscious largely determine cognition and behavior, describing this as \"the third .\" While the first is said to consist of the \"'cosmic\"' scandal triggered by Copernicus, th\"e\" second as \"biological\" one by Darwin's realization that man evolved in line of all animals, the narcissistically affected ego now has to cope with the \"psychological\" affront that it is not even master of its own house.\nFreud found that many of the drives \u2013 which his structural model locates in the 'id' \u2013 are repressed into the unconscious as a result of traumatic experiences during childhood, so that attempts to integrate them into the conscious perception of the ego triggers resistance. These and other defense mechanisms 'want' to maintain the repression \u2013 not least with the means of censorship, internalized fear of punishment or mother-love withdrawal \u2013 while the affected instincts resist. All in all, an inner war rages between the id and the ego's conscious values, which manifests itself in more or less conspicuous mental disorders, whereby Freud did not equate the statistical normality of our society with 'healthy'. \"Health can only be described in metapsychological terms\" (assessment of each psychic process according to the coordinates of biological drive \"economy\", \"dynamics\" and \"topology\").\nHe discovered that the instinctive impulses are expressed most clearly \u2013 albeit still encoded \u2013 in the symbols of dreams as well as in the symptomatic detours of neuroticism and Freudian slips. Psychoanalysis was developed in order to clarify the causes of disorders and to restore mental health by enabling the ego to become aware of the id's needs and to find realistic, self-controlled ways to satisfy them. Freud summarized this goal of his therapy in the demand \"Where id was, ego shall became\", defining the underlying libido as driving energy of all innate needs and equating it with the Eros (universal desire) of Platonic philosophy.\nOedipus rising.\nFreud attached great importance to coherence of his structural model. The metapsychological specification of the functions and interlocking of the three instances was intended to ensure the full connectivity of this 'psychic apparatus' with biological sciences, in particular Darwin's theory of evolution of species, including mankind with his natural behavior, thinking ability and technological creativity. Such a model of health is indispensable for the diagnostic process (\"sickness\" can only be realized as a deviation from the optimal cooperation of all mental-organic functions), but Freud had to be modest. He came to the conclusion that he had to leave his metapsychological-based model of the soul in the unfinished state of a \"torso\" because \u2013 as he stated one last time in \"Moses and Monotheism\" \u2013 there was no well-founded primate research in the first half of 20th century. Without knowledge of the instinctively formed group structure of our genetically closest relatives in animal kingdom (instead of Freud's single 'super-strong primal father', they show highly social male teams, but despite their remarkable intelligence still no ability to form political inter-group organizations), his thesis of the \"Darwinian primordial horde\" as presented for discussion in \"Totem and Taboo\" cannot be tested and, where necessary, replaced by a realistic model.\nDarwin's horde life and its abolition through the introduction of monogamy (as a political agreement between the sons who murdered the horde's polygamous forefather) embodies the evolutionary and the cultural-historical core of psychoanalysis. The aspect of violent elimination of natural horde life is decisive for Freud's \"Unease in Culture\"; his assumption of the outbreak of the Oedipus complex in human history is based on it. It led to the formulation of rules of behavior such as the prohibition of adultery and incest, and thus to the beginning of totemic cultures. Manifested in this kind of customs, traditions and ritual education, some of them changed through intermediate stage of feudalism to modern nations, endowed with their monotheism (which centralized the diversity of totems in an abstract omnipotent singel deity), power-hierarchical structures of military, trade and politics (s. Group Psychology and the Analysis of the Ego).\nFreud's thesis of the violent introduction of monogamous cohabitation stands in contrast to the religiously enigmatic narrative about the origin of first human couples on earth as an expression of divine will, but closer to the ancient trap to pacify political conflicts among the groups of Neolithic mankind. Examples include Prometheus' uprising against Zeus, who created Pandora as a fatal wedding gift for Epimetheus to divide and rule this Titanic brothers; Plato's myth of the spherical people cut into isolated individuals for the same reason; and the similarly resolved revolt of inferior gods in the Flood epic Atra-Hasis. Nonetheless, without examination in the light of modern primate research, as demanded by Freud, his idea of an artificial origin of monogamy remains an unproven hypothesis of paleoanthropology, merely a \"\"just so story\" as a not unpleasant English critic wittily called it. But I mean it honours a hypothesis if it shows the capability of creating context and understanding in new areas.\"\nAccording to Freud, this hypothesis explains the present-day son's conflict with his father over his mother, naming this view after Sophocles' tragedy \"Oedipus\", and supplementing it with case studies such as the genital \"Phobia of a five-year-old boy\". However, the author not only discovered this complex and the 'oral fixatet' Syndrom of Narzissos' regress back into amniotic fluid (as far as possible given the state of science at the time), but also devised a hypothesis of healthy emotional development, which presupposes the natural relationships of Homo sapiens from birth and takes place in three successive stages: the oral, anal and genital phases. Whereby the sexual drive of the latter takes a no less genetically determined 'latency' break \u2013 the \"Sleeping Beauty\" \u2013 between the ages of about 7 and 12 for the benefit of social-intellectual growth.\nTraditional setting.\nPsychoanalysts place large emphasis on experiences of early childhood, and try to overcome infantile amnesia. In traditional Freudian setting, the patient lies on a couch, and the analyst sits just behind or somehow out of sight. The patient should express all his thoughts, all secrets and dreams, including free associations and fantasies. In addition to its task of strengthening the ego with its ability to think dialectical \u2013 Freud's \"primacy of the intellect\" \u2013, therapy also aims to induce transference. The patient thus projects onto the analyst the parental figures internalized in his superego during early childhood. As he once did as a baby and little child, he experiences again the feelings of helpless dependence, all the futile longing for love, anger, rage and urge for revenge on the failing parents, but now with the possibility of processing these contents that have shaped his persona.\nThe term \"countertransference\" means that the analyst himself projects such content onto his patient; then he has an own open problem and has to go to his own analyst if he is not yet able to help himself due to inexperience.\nFrom the sum of what is shown and communicated, the analyst deduces unconscious conflicts with imposed traumas that are causing the patient's symptoms, his persona and character problems, and works out a diagnosis. This explanation of the origin of loss of mental health and the analytical processes as a whole confronts the patients ego with the pathological defence mechanisms, makes him aware of them as well as the instinctive contents of the id that have been repressed by them, and thus helps him to better understand himself and the world in which he lives, was born and educated \u2013 according to Freud, the indispensable prerequisite for any consciously sought change in behavior that has therapeutically beneficial effects on interpersonal relationships.\nFreud recognized during his pre-psychoanalytic research that hypnosis does not contribute to patients' understanding of the causes of their disorders and has therefore proven ineffective.\nMetapsychology.\nSeparate from psychoanalysis itself (but not insignificant for understanding the connection between body and mind as aspects of the same 'soul') is the fact that its neurological branch, neuropsychoanalysis, has recently provided evidence that the brain stores experiences in specialized parts of its neural network and that the ego performs its highest focus of conscious thinking in frontal lobe. In some respects, Freud himself can be regarded as the founder of this field of modern research. Parallel to the consolidation of psychoanalysis, however, he turned away from it with the argument that \"consciousness\" is directly given \u2013 cannot be explained by insights into physiological connections. Essentially, only two things were known about the living soul: The brain with its nervous system extending over the entire organism, and the acts of consciousness. In Freud's view, therefore, any number of phenomena can be integrated between \"both endpoints of our knowledge\" (findings of modern neurology just as well as the position of our planet in the universe, for example), but this only contributes to the spatial \"localization of the acts of consciousness\", not to their understanding.\nWith reference to Descartes, contemporary neuropsychoanalysts explain this situation as mind\u2013body dichotomy, namely both as two total different kinds of 'stuff': the physical matter as the \"object\", and the mentally conscious ego as the \"subject\", which cannot objectify itself in itself (as 'pure spirit') but only via the 'reflective' diversions of its corporal matter. With regard to Freud's libido (which branches out into its \"mental\" and \"bodily\" areas in a complementary way) they call this dichotomy the \"dual-aspect monism\". It touches on the point of psychoanalysis that is most difficult to grasp with the means of empirically based sciences \u2013 in fact, only under Immanuel Kant's assumption that living systems always make judgements about the phenomena they perceive with regard to the satisfaction of their immanent needs. Freud therefore conceptualized the libido as a teleological element of his threefold model of the soul, as a desiring energy that links cause and \"purpose\", and not as a mere 'effect'. The libido, as universally desiring energy like Plato's Eros, embodies both the \"psychic\" drive source of all instinctual needs of living beings and the first cause of their \"physical\" development. In this way, sexual behavior realizes Darwin's law of natural selection by \"favoring\" the best-fitting and aesthetically well-proportioned body forms in reproduction. Freud was no less familiar with the energetic-economic aspect of evolution and psychological processes (cf. his definition of the three metapsychological coordinates) than with the transcendentally unified trinity of Plato's philosophy, according to which Truth expresses the Good and the Beauty in equal measure, anchored in the proportions of the golden ratio.\nLife and death drives.\nIn \"Beyond the Pleasure Principle\" (1920), Sigmund Freud draws on Plato's myth of the spherical humans to illustrate his view of the essentially conservative nature of the instincts. In Plato's tale, these spherical beings\u2014powerful, self-sufficient, and united\u2014are split into separate individuals by Zeus as punishment for their assault on the gods. The act of separation creates a weaker type of human whose members nonetheless seek to restore the lost original united state, pursuing this goal in two ways: through the exchange of physical pleasure; and through collective creative thinking, as depicted by the group of artists and philosophers around Socrates in Plato's \"Symposium\".\nFurthermore, Zeus's disruptive intervention and the human desire for reunification present aspects of the same libidinal energy: the death drive is rooted in forces, that break down and dissolve structures, striving to return life to an inorganic state, while the life drive strives to combine and organizate matter into ever more complex forms. Plato's concept of Eros\u2014described in his \"Symposium\" as a constantly hungry \"great hunter\"\u2014thus becomes a useful symbol for Freud's theory of libido as a dualistic drive energy.\nOne example to clarify the internal complementarity of libido is provided by nutrition through predation. This phenomenon entails both destruction and integration: the prey must ultimately be broken down into molecules before the hunter's organism can assimilate the useful components for regeneration and growth. Similarly, in reproduction, countless sperm cells perish in the competitive process before one unites with the egg, achieving new life through this selective synthesis. Ensuring territorial sovereignty, too, require both forces: the survival of a group may depend on neutralising or weakening hostile elements; therefore, attacks by foreign communities such as that of the Titanic brotherhood (Epimetheus and Prometheus) could have become a political motive for Zeus to separate them from each other (divide and rule through Pandora as a fatal wedding gift) while simultaneously strengthening social cohesion among the members of his own group. The same dual movement operates in the realm of thinking. Mental activity often begins with analysis\u2014disassembling complex phenomena like, for example, dreams or atoms into simpler elements to grasp their nature\u2014and proceeds to synthesis, recombining what has been learned into new ideas, models, or interpretations that should correspond as closely as possible to reality. From this perspective, the term \"psychoanalysis\" involves not only the analytical (separative) aspect but also the synthetic (reintegrative) one.\nFreud's dual drive theory explains libidinal energy as a constant interplay of dividing and unifying forces. Ultimately, this highly abstract view led him to assume that all psycho-biological dynamics are based on the unpleasant increase and pleasant decrease of energetic tensions (as in hunger and satiety). Through this approach to the \"dynamic\" of libido, he introduced the coordinate of \"economy\" into his metapsychology.\n\"The Question of Lay Analysis\".\nFreud's worldview, with dream interpretation as \"the royal road to the unconscious\", was not conceived as a source of income (\"money is not a child's desire\"), but as a method whose appropriation is open to everyone. In the \"Wednesday round\" of young psychoanalysis, academics and 'uneducated' worked together on an equal footing to rediscover the happiness lost in the Dark Continent of the human soul \u2013 not easy for some doctors to understand. To counter their attempt to prohibit non-academics from becoming psychoanalysts (while reserving for themselves the right to apply the concept without serious knowledge), he clearly sets out in his treatise \"The Question of Lay Analysis\" the only condition required to practice psychoanalysis: the methodical examination of one's own inner situation, ideally with the assistance of an experienced psychoanalyst.\nBecoming an experienced analyst requires extensive background knowledge of the processes of human biological development and intellectual history. Freud's method is therefore not limited to its classical therapeutic field of application but is also employed in research across many other areas \u2013 for example, in the interpretation of philosophical concepts such as Kant's a priori (replacing it with the conditions of the mental apparatus), as well as in the analysis of the cultural and civilizational achievements of humankind and its closest zoological relatives.\nHistory.\n1885\u20131899.\nIn 1885, Freud was given the opportunity to study at the Salp\u00eatri\u00e8re in Paris under the famous neurologist Jean-Martin Charcot. Charcot had specialized in the field of hysterical paralysis and established hypnosis as a research tool, the experimental application of which actually made it possible to eliminate symptoms of this kind. Paralysed people could suddenly walk again, and blind ones could see. Although this 'messianic' effect is not known to last long, as Freud soon realized through his own experiments, the phenomenon of hypnotic false-healing played a decisive role in reinforcing his idea of a purely psychological background to the complex neurotic clinical picture.\nA few years later (1887\u201388), he worked as a neurologist in a hospital (the Public Institute for Children's Diseases in Vienna), where some little patients suffered from neurotic symptoms. All attempts to develop a suitable neuronal treatment failed; in fact, the detailed examinations did not reveal any organic defects. In the monograph written on this cases, Freud documented his differential-diagnostically supported suspicion that neurotic symptoms probably would have psychological causes.\nFinishing the ineffective hypnosis, the idea of psychoanalysis began to receive serious attention; Freud initially called it \"free association\". His first attempt to explain neurotical symptoms on this path was presented in \"Studies on Hysteria\" (1895). Co-authored with Josef Breuer, this is generally seen as the birth of psychoanalysis. The work based on their partly joint treatment of Bertha Pappenheim, referred to by the pseudonym \"Anna O.\" Bertha herself had dubbed the treatment \"talking cure\". Breuer, a distinguished physician, was astonished but remained unspecific; while Freud formulated his hypothesis that Anna's hystera seemed to be caused by distressing but unconscious experiences related to sexuality, basing his assumption on corresponding free associations made by the young women. For example, she sometimes liked to jokingly rename her talking cure as \"chimney sweeping\", an association about the fairy tale through which part of a pregnant woman's house 'the stork' gives birth to the baby \u2013 or in Lacan's words: \"The more Anna provided signifers, the more she chattered on, the better it went.\" See also \"Jokes and Their Relation to the Unconscious\" (1905).\nAround the same time, Freud had started to develop a neurological hypothesis about mental phenomena such as memory, but soon abandoned this attempt and left it unpublished. Insights into neuronal-biochemical processes that store experiences in the brain \u2013 like engraving the proverbial tabula rasa with some code \u2013 belongs to the physiological branch of science and lead in a different direction of research than the psychological question of what the differences between consciousness and unconsciousness are. After some thought about a suitable term, Freud called his new instrument and field of research \"psychoanalysis\", introduced in his essay \"Inheritance and Etiology of Neuroses\", written in 1896.\nThe abuse thesis.\nIn 1896, Freud also published his \"seduction theory\", in which he confidently claimed to have uncovered repressed memories of sexual abuse in each of his few early patients. This type of sexual excitations of the child should therefore be understood as a prerequisite for the later development of hysterical and other neurotic symptoms. Later the same year, he became aware of an inconsistency: Freud was now working with a few additional patients, and most of them expressed their \"emphatic disbelief\" in respect of his abbuse thesis, explaining that they \"had no feeling of remembering the infantile sexual scenes\" he suggested. This contradiction and other findings in the course of further research forced him to doubt his thesis of an almost omnipresent child abuse in our society; the small group of his very first clients was simply not sufficiently representative to support the assumption of a general abuse.\nInitially, he expressed his suspicion of having made a mistake in private to his friend and colleague Wilhelm Fliess in 1898; but it took another 8 years before he had clarified the obscure connections sufficiently to publicly revoke his thesis, stating the reasons. Freud's final position on the origin of neurosis in general is summarized in his late work \"The Discomfort in Culture\". Accordingly, to this work, the causes of neurotic symptoms lie not in a general sexual abuse of children, but in the abolition of the natural horde life and the method by which each generation since then taught the next to adopt the rules of coexistence known as totemism and\u2013or morality. See also \"Moses and Monotheism\" and \"The Future of an Illusion\".\nThe secrecy mechanism.\nIn the mid-1890s, he was still upholding his hypothesis of sexual abuse. In this context, he reported on fantasies of several patients, which on the one hand would point to memories of scenes of infantile masturbation stored in the unconscious, while the more conscious parts on the other hand would aim to make these morally forbidden acts of childish pleasure unrecognizable, to cover them up. The interesting point for Freud here was not so much the secretiveness itself (a well-known behavior of Victorian era), but the following twofold realization: a) That children \u2013 at that time considered as \"innocent\" little angels \u2013 initiate pleasurable actions of their own accord; have 'drives' at all, as later assigned to the 'id'; and b) the presumably by moral aducation initiated emergence of a psychopathological mechanism, whose ability consists in being able to hide impulses of this kind from one's own consciousness. Moral education declares them to be forbidden, imposing a taboo which leads to a belief in guilt, even original sin. Shortly after, he assumed that these findings would have some evidence for a kind of Oedipal desires and suffering.\nFrom blood disgrace to self-castration.\nIn the tragedy \"Oedipus\", to which Freud refers, there occurs no sexual exploitation of a child by its parents or other adults. Sophocles' poetic treatment of this ancient Greek myth is about Oedipus' own sexual desire addressed to his mother Jocasta \u2013 admittedly as an already genitally mature man and without knowing about the close blood relationship, including an not less unconscious patricide \u2013 which the woman reciprocates just as unsuspectingly. Freud interprets the passage where Oedipus \u2013 after realising his serious violation of the moral-totemic incest taboo \u2013 pokes out his eyes with the golden needle clasp of his wife's and mother's nightdress (while Jocasta commits suicide) as a manifestation of the same 'cover-up' mechanism that he began to uncover in the above-mentioned fantasies. In his eyes, psychoanalysis works in the opposite direction to this mechanism of preconscious self-delusion, by bringing the due to incest taboo have been repressed desires (the 'id') back into the realm of inner perception, own conscious thinking. This raised the question for Freud of the origin of moral prohibitions. A field of research that led him deep into the evolutionary and cultural (pr\u00e4)history of mankind (see Darwin's primal horde; its abolition through patricide and introduction of monogamy in Totem and Taboo) and which, according to his own information, he had to leave unfinished as an untested hypothesis due to the lack of primate research.\nThe meaning of dreams.\nIn 1899, Freud's work had progressed far enough that he was able to publish \"The Interpretation of Dreams\". This, for him, was the most important of his writings, as it formulated the realization that every dream contains a symbolically disguised message that can be decoded with the help of the dreamer's free associations. The purpose of every dream is, therefore, to inform the dreamer about his complex inner situation: in essence, a conflict arising from the demands of innate needs and externally imposed behavioral rules that prohibit their satisfaction. Freud called the former the \"primary process\", taking place predominantly in the unconscious, and the latter the \"secondary process\" of predominantly conscious, more or less coherent thoughts.\nFreud summarized this view in his first model of the soul. Known as the \"topological model\", it divides the organism into three areas or systems: The unconscious, the preconscious and the conscious. Sexual needs belong to the unconscious and are forced to remain there if the contents of the conscious mind ward them off. This is the case in societies that generally consider all extra- and premarital sexual activity (including homoeroticism, that of biblical Onan and incest) to be a 'sin', passing this value on to the next generation through concrete or threatened punishments. Moral education creates fears of punitive violence or the deprivation of love in the child's soul. They are stored neuronally in the preconscious and influence consciousness in the sense of the imprinted rules of behavior. (Freud's second model of the soul, the three-instance or structural model, introduces here a clearer distinction. \"Topology\" is no longer the decisive factor, but the specific \"function\" of each of the three instances. This new model did not replace the first one: it integrated it.)\n\"The Interpretation of Dreams\" includes the first comprehensive conceptualization of Oedipus complex: The little boy admires his father because of the mental and physical advantages of the adult man and wants to become like him, but also comes into conflict with him over the women around, cause of the taboo of incest. This initiates \u2013 growing up from the id \u2013 anger that can escalate into a deadly urge for revenge against the father. Impulses that the little boy cannot act out (not least due to the child's deep dependence on his parents' love) and therefore are repressed into the unconscious. Symptomatically, this inner situation manifests itself as a feeling of inferiority, even a castration complex, genital phobia. The myth of Oedipus is about the attempt to liberate the 'amputated' potency of the id, but it fails because of the remaining unconscious motives. As the ego is overwhelmed by the punitive fear of the moral content of its 'preconscious' superego, it cuts off the instinctive desire for self-knowledge from itself (blinds itself).\nAttempts to find a female equivalent of the Oedipus complex have not yielded good results. According to Freud, girls, because of their anatomically different genitals, cannot identify with their father, nor develop a castration phobia as sons do, so this syndrome seems to be reserved for the opposite sex. Feminist psychoanalysts like debate whether the father of psychoanalysis might have been a victim of sexism in this case. To compensate for their supposed shortcoming, they postulate a \"Jocasta complex\" consisting of an incestuous desire of mothers for their infant sons; but other analysts criticize this naming (and attempt of generalization), since Sophocles' Jocasta in particular does not exhibit this behavior. (Instead, she gave her baby away to be killed, instigated by her husband and the oracle that a grown-up son would kill him.) The witch's special interest in little Hansel \u2013 while she merely abuses his sister as a kitchen slave \u2013 offers much better evidence here, although it's still unclear whether such \"Crunchy house syndrome\" can be as widespread in our form of society as the Oedipus itself. However, Christiane O. courageously confronted her own problems in her relationship with her son and husband.\nCritics of the abuse thesis and psychoanalysis in general.\nIn the later part of the 20th century, several Freud researchers questioned the author's report that his very first patients had informed him of childhood sexual abuse. Some of the researchers argued that Freud had imposed his preconceived view on his patients, while others raised the suspicion of conscious forgery.\nThese are two different arguments. The latter tries to prove that Freud deliberately lied in order to make the allegedly unfounded psychoanalysis appear as a legitimate science; the former assumes an unknowingly committed act (countertransference). Freud, aware of his retraction of the abuse thesis, replied at various places in his work in the same way to both types of argument: That natural science is a process based on trial and error. A slow but sure becoming, in which it is impossible to have precisely defined concepts from the outset, respectively phenomena that from now on have been clarified without any gaps and contradictions. \"Indeed, even physics would have missed out on its entire development if it had been forced to wait until its concepts of matter, energy, gravity and others reached the desirable clarity and precision.\"\nThe psychologist Frank Sulloway points out in his book \"Freud, Biologist of the Mind: Beyond the Psychoanalytic Legend\" that the theories and hypotheses of psychoanalysis are anchored in the findings of contemporary biology. He mentions the profound influence of Charles Darwin's theory of evolution on Freud and quotes this sense from the writings of Haeckel, Wilhelm Fliess, Krafft-Ebing and Havelock Ellis.\nFurthermore, attempts were made to label psychoanalysis as pseudoscience, since, according to Karl Popper, its central assumption of three interlinked metapsychological functions (instincts, consciousness, and memory) cannot be refuted. This type of unfalsifiability is especially directed against the explanation of acts of consciousness. Freud himself, however, never claimed that they are scientifically explainable by bodily conditions. Instead, he connected these \"two end points of our knowledge\" to the classical mind\u2013body problem.\n1900\u20131940s.\nIn 1905, Freud published \"Three Essays on the Theory of Sexuality\" in which he laid out his discovery of the \"psychosexual phases\", which categorized early childhood development into five stages depending on what sexual affinity a child possessed at the stage:\nHis early formulation included the idea that, because of societal restrictions, sexual wishes were repressed into an unconscious state, and that the energy of these unconscious wishes could result in anxiety or physical symptoms. Early treatment techniques, including hypnotism and abreaction, were designed to make the unconscious conscious in order to relieve the pressure and the apparently resulting symptoms. This method would later on be left aside by Freud, giving free association a bigger role.\nIn \"On Narcissism\" (1914), Freud turned his attention to the titular subject of narcissism. Freud characterized the difference between energy directed at the self versus energy directed at others using a system known as \"cathexis\". By 1917, in \"Mourning and Melancholia\", he suggested that certain depressions were caused by turning guilt-ridden anger on the self. In 1919, through \"A Child is Being Beaten\", he began to address the problems of self-destructive behavior and sexual masochism. Based on his experience with depressed and self-destructive patients, and pondering the carnage of World War I, Freud became dissatisfied with considering only oral and sexual motivations for behavior. By 1920, Freud addressed the power of identification (with the leader and with other members) in groups as a motivation for behavior in \"Group Psychology and the Analysis of the Ego\". In that same year, Freud suggested his dual drive theory of sexuality and aggression in \"Beyond the Pleasure Principle\", to try to begin to explain human destructiveness. Also, it was the first appearance of his \"structural theory\" consisting of three new concepts id, ego, and superego.\nThree years later, in 1923, he summarized the ideas of id, ego, and superego in \"The Ego and the Id\". In the book, he revised the whole theory of mental functioning, now considering that repression was only one of many defense mechanisms, and that it occurred to reduce anxiety. Hence, Freud characterized repression as both a cause and a result of anxiety. In 1926, in \"Inhibitions, Symptoms and Anxiety\", Freud described how intrapsychic conflict between the drives and the superego caused anxiety, and how that anxiety could lead to the inhibition of mental functions such as intellect and speech. In 1924, Otto Rank published \"The Trauma of Birth\", which analysed culture and philosophy in relation to separation anxiety which occurred before the development of an Oedipal complex. Freud's theories, however, characterized no such phase. According to Freud, the Oedipus complex was at the centre of neurosis, and was the foundational source of all art, myth, religion, philosophy, therapy\u2014indeed of all human culture and civilization. It was the first time that anyone in Freud's inner circle had characterized something other than the Oedipus complex as contributing to intrapsychic development, a notion that was rejected by Freud and his followers at the time.\nBy 1936 the \"Principle of Multiple Function\" was clarified by Robert Waelder. He widened the formulation that psychological symptoms were caused by and relieved conflict simultaneously. Moreover, symptoms (such as phobias and compulsions) each represented elements of some drive wish (sexual and/or aggressive), superego, anxiety, reality, and defenses. Also in 1936, Anna Freud, Sigmund's daughter, published her seminal book \"The Ego and the Mechanisms of Defense\" outlining numerous ways the mind could shut upsetting things out of consciousness.\n1940s\u2013present.\nWhen Hitler's power grew, the Freud family and many of their colleagues fled to London. Within a year, Sigmund Freud died. In the United States, also following the death of Freud, a new group of psychoanalysts began to explore the function of the ego. Led by Heinz Hartmann, the group built upon understandings of the \"synthetic\" function of the ego as a mediator in psychic functioning, distinguishing such from \"autonomous\" ego functions (e.g. memory and intellect). These \"ego psychologists\" of the 1950s paved the way to focus analytic work by attending to the defenses (mediated by the ego) before exploring the deeper roots of the unconscious conflicts.\nIn addition, there was growing interest in child psychoanalysis. Psychoanalysis has been used as a research tool in childhood development, and is still used to treat certain mental disturbances. In the 1960s, Freud's early thoughts on the childhood development of female sexuality were challenged; this challenge led to the development of a variety of understandings of female sexual development, many of which modified the timing and normality of several of Freud's theories. Several researchers followed Karen Horney's studies of societal pressures that influence the development of women.\nIn the first decade of the 21st century, there were approximately 35 training institutes for psychoanalysis in the United States accredited by the American Psychoanalytic Association (APsaA), which is a component organization of the International Psychoanalytical Association (IPA), and there are over 3000 graduated psychoanalysts practicing in the United States. The IPA accredits psychoanalytic training centers through such \"component organizations\" throughout the rest of the world, including countries such as Serbia, France, Germany, Austria, Italy, Switzerland, and many others, as well as about six institutes directly in the United States.\nPsychoanalysis as a movement.\nFreud founded the \"Psychological Wednesday Society\" in 1902, which Edward Shorter argues was the beginning of psychoanalysis as a movement. This society became the Vienna Psychoanalytic Society in 1908 in the same year as the first international congress of psychoanalysis held in Salzburg, Austria.110 Alfred Adler was one of the most active members in this society in its early years.584\nThe second congress of psychoanalysis took place in Nuremberg, Germany in 1910.110 At this congress, Ferenczi called for the creation of an International Psychoanalytic Association with Jung as president for life.15 A third congress was held in Weimar in 1911.110 The London Psychoanalytical Society was founded in 1913 by Ernest Jones.\nDevelopments of alternative forms of psychotherapy.\nCognitive behavioral therapy (CBT).\nIn the 1950s, psychoanalysis was the main modality of psychotherapy. Behavioral models of psychotherapy started to assume a more central role in psychotherapy in the 1960s. Aaron T. Beck, a psychiatrist trained in a psychoanalytic tradition, set out to test the psychoanalytic models of depression empirically and found that conscious ruminations of loss and personal failing were correlated with depression. He suggested that distorted and biased beliefs were a causal factor of depression, publishing an influential paper in 1967 after a decade of research using the construct of schemas to explain the depression. Beck developed this empirically supported hypothesis for the cause of depression into a talking therapy called cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) in the early 1970s.\nAttachment theory.\nAttachment theory was developed theoretically by John Bowlby and formalized empirically by Mary Ainsworth. Bowlby was trained psychoanalytically but was concerned about some properties of psychoanalysis; he was troubled by the dogmatism of psychoanalysis at the time, its arcane terminology, the lack of attention to environment in child behavior, and the concepts derived from talking therapy to child behavior. In response, he developed an alternative conceptualization of child behavior based on principles on ethology. Bowlby's theory of attachment rejects Freud's model of psychosexual development based on the Oedipal model. For his work, Bowlby was shunned from psychoanalytical circles who did not accept his theories. Nonetheless, his conceptualization was adopted widely by mother-infant research in the 1970s.\nTheories.\nThe predominant psychoanalytic theories can be organized into several theoretical schools. Although these perspectives differ, most of them emphasize the influence of unconscious elements on the conscious. There has also been considerable work done on consolidating elements of conflicting theories.\nThere are some persistent conflicts among psychoanalysts regarding specific causes of certain syndromes, and some disputes regarding the ideal treatment techniques. In the 21st century, psychoanalytic ideas have found influence in fields such as childcare, education, literary criticism, cultural studies, mental health, and particularly psychotherapy. Though most mainstream psychoanalysts subscribe to modern strains of psychoanalytical thought, there are groups that follow the precepts of a single psychoanalyst and their school of thought. Psychoanalytic ideas also play roles in some types of literary analysis, such as archetypal literary criticism.\nTopographic theory.\n\"Topographic theory\" was named and first described by Sigmund Freud in \"The Interpretation of Dreams\" (1899). The theory hypothesizes that the mental apparatus can be divided into the systems Conscious, Preconscious, and Unconscious. These systems are not anatomical structures of the brain but, rather, mental processes. Although Freud retained this theory throughout his life, he largely replaced it with the \"structural theory\".\nStructural theory.\nStructural theory divides the psyche into the id, the ego, and the super-ego. The id is present at birth as the repository of basic instincts, which Freud called \"Triebe\" (\"drives\"). Unorganized and unconscious, it operates merely on the 'pleasure principle', without realism or foresight. The ego develops slowly and gradually, being concerned with mediating between the urging of the id and the realities of the external world; it thus operates on the 'reality principle'. The super-ego is held to be the part of the ego in which self-observation, self-criticism and other reflective and judgmental faculties develop. The ego and the superego are both partly conscious and partly unconscious.\nNeuropsychoanalysis.\nIn the late 20th century, neuropsychoanalysis was introduced. The aim of this new field was to bridge the gap between psychoanalytic concepts and neuroscientific findings. Solms theorizes that for every cognition-based action, there is a neurological reason behind it. According to Daniela Mosri, neuropsychoanalysis was coined by Solms and is a continuation of the original model proposed by Freud in 1895. Neuropsychoanalysis is an interdisciplinary approach that focuses on how neurobiological mechanisms influence the psychological aspects of the human mind with emphasis on repression, the dynamics of dreams, therapeutic relationships. Neuroimaging is one of the methods used to empirically validate psychoanalytic concepts.\nEgo psychology.\nEgo psychology was initially suggested by Freud in \"Inhibitions, Symptoms and Anxiety\" (1926), while major steps forward would be made through Anna Freud's work on defense mechanisms, first published in her book \"The Ego and the Mechanisms of Defence\" (1936).\nThe theory was refined by Hartmann, Loewenstein, and Kris in a series of papers and books from 1939 through the late 1960s. Leo Bellak was a later contributor. This series of constructs, paralleling some of the later developments of cognitive theory, includes the notions of autonomous ego functions: mental functions not dependent, at least in origin, on intrapsychic conflict. Such functions include: sensory perception, motor control, symbolic thought, logical thought, speech, abstraction, integration (synthesis), orientation, concentration, judgment about danger, reality testing, adaptive ability, executive decision-making, hygiene, and self-preservation. Freud noted that inhibition is one method that the mind may utilize to interfere with any of these functions in order to avoid painful emotions. Hartmann (1950s) pointed out that there may be delays or deficits in such functions.\nFrosch (1964) described differences in those people who demonstrated damage to their relationship to reality, but who seemed able to test it.\nAccording to ego psychology, ego strengths, later described by Otto F. Kernberg (1975), include the capacities to control oral, sexual, and destructive impulses; to tolerate painful affects without falling apart; and to prevent the eruption into consciousness of bizarre symbolic fantasy. Synthetic functions, in contrast to autonomous functions, arise from the development of the ego and serve the purpose of managing conflict processes. Defenses are synthetic functions that protect the conscious mind from awareness of forbidden impulses and thoughts. One purpose of ego psychology has been to emphasize that some mental functions can be considered to be basic, rather than derivatives of wishes, affects, or defenses. However, autonomous ego functions can be secondarily affected because of unconscious conflict. For example, a patient may have an hysterical amnesia (memory being an autonomous function) because of intrapsychic conflict (wishing not to remember because it is too painful).\nTaken together, the above theories present a group of metapsychological assumptions. Therefore, the inclusive group of the different classical theories provides a cross-sectional view of human mental processes. There are six \"points of view\", five described by Freud and a sixth added by Hartmann. Unconscious processes can therefore be evaluated from each of these six points of view:\nModern conflict theory.\n\"Modern conflict theory\", a variation of ego psychology, is a revised version of structural theory, most notably different by altering concepts related to where repressed thoughts were stored. Modern conflict theory addresses emotional symptoms and character traits as complex solutions to mental conflict. It dispenses with the concepts of a fixed id, ego and superego, and instead posits conscious and unconscious conflict among wishes (dependent, controlling, sexual, and aggressive), guilt and shame, emotions (especially anxiety and depressive affect), and defensive operations that shut off from consciousness some aspect of the others. Moreover, healthy functioning (adaptive) is also determined, to a great extent, by resolutions of conflict.\nA major objective of modern conflict-theory psychoanalysis is to change the balance of conflict in a patient by making aspects of the less adaptive solutions (also called \"compromise formations\") conscious so that they can be rethought, and more adaptive solutions found. Current theoreticians who follow the work of Charles Brenner, especially \"The Mind in Conflict\" (1982), include Sandor Abend, Jacob Arlow, and Jerome Blackman.\nObject relations theory.\nObject relations theory attempts to explain human relationships through a study of how mental representations of the self and others are organized. The clinical symptoms that suggest object relations problems (typically developmental delays throughout life) include disturbances in an individual's capacity to feel: warmth, empathy, trust, sense of security, identity stability, consistent emotional closeness, and stability in relationships with significant others.\nKlein discusses the concept of introjection, creating a mental representation of external objects; and projection, applying this mental representation to reality. Wilfred Bion introduced the concept of \"containment\" of projections in the mother-child relationship where a mother understands an infants projections, modifies them and returns them to the child.\nConcepts regarding internal representation (aka 'introspect', 'self and object representation', or 'internalization of self and other'), although often attributed to Melanie Klein, were actually first mentioned by Sigmund Freud in his early concepts of drive theory (\"Three Essays on the Theory of Sexuality\", 1905). Freud's 1917 paper \"Mourning and Melancholia\", for example, hypothesized that unresolved grief was caused by the survivor's internalized image of the deceased becoming fused with that of the survivor, and then the survivor shifting unacceptable anger toward the deceased onto the now complex self-image.\nMelanie Klein's hypotheses regarding internalization during the first year of life, leading to paranoid and depressive positions, were later challenged by Ren\u00e9 Spitz (e.g., \"The First Year of Life\", 1965), who divided the first year of life into a coenesthetic phase of the first six months, and then a diacritic phase for the second six months. Mahler, Fine, and Bergman (1975) describe distinct phases and subphases of child development leading to \"separation-individuation\" during the first three years of life, stressing the importance of constancy of parental figures in the face of the child's destructive aggression, internalizations, stability of affect management, and ability to develop healthy autonomy.\nDuring adolescence, Erik Erikson (1950\u20131960s) described the 'identity crisis', that involves identity-diffusion anxiety. In order for an adult to be able to experience \"Warm-ETHICS: (warmth, Empathy, Trust, Holding environment, Identity, Closeness, and Stability) in relationships, the teenager must resolve the problems with identity and redevelop self and object constancy.\nRelational psychoanalysis.\n\"Relational psychoanalysis\" combines interpersonal psychoanalysis with object-relations theory and with inter-subjective theory as critical for mental health. It was introduced by Stephen Mitchell. Relational psychoanalysis stresses how the individual's personality is shaped by both real and imagined relationships with others, and how these relationship patterns are re-enacted in the interactions between analyst and patient. Relational psychoanalysts have propounded their view of the necessity of helping certain detached, isolated patients develop the capacity for \"mentalization\" associated with thinking about relationships and themselves\nSelf psychology.\n\"Self psychology\" emphasizes the development of a stable and integrated sense of self through empathic contacts with other humans, primary significant others conceived of as 'selfobjects'. \"Selfobjects\" meet the developing self's needs for mirroring, idealization, and twinship, and thereby strengthen the developing self. The process of treatment proceeds through \"transmuting internalization,\" in which the patient gradually internalizes the selfobject functions provided by the therapist.\nSelf psychology was proposed originally by Heinz Kohut, and has been further developed by Arnold Goldberg, Frank Lachmann, Paul and Anna Ornstein, Marian Tolpin, and others.\nLacanian psychoanalysis.\nLacanian psychoanalysis, which integrates psychoanalysis with structural linguistics and Hegelian philosophy, is especially popular in France and parts of Latin America. Lacanian psychoanalysis is a departure from the traditional British and American psychoanalysis. Jacques Lacan frequently used the phrase \"retourner \u00e0 Freud\" (\"return to Freud\") in his seminars and writings, as he claimed that his theories were an extension of Freud's own, contrary to those of Anna Freud, the Ego Psychology, object relations and \"self\" theories and also claims the necessity of reading Freud's complete works, not only a part of them. Lacan's concepts concern the \"mirror stage\", the \"Real\", the \"Imaginary\", and the \"Symbolic\", and the claim that \"the unconscious is structured as a language.\"\nThough a major influence on psychoanalysis in France and parts of Latin America, Lacan and his ideas have taken longer to be translated into English and he has thus had a lesser impact on psychoanalysis and psychotherapy in the English-speaking world. In the United Kingdom and the United States, his ideas are most widely used to analyze texts in literary theory. Due to his increasingly critical stance towards the deviation from Freud's thought, often singling out particular texts and readings from his colleagues, Lacan was excluded from acting as a training analyst in the IPA, thus leading him to create his own school in order to maintain an institutional structure for the many candidates who desired to continue their analysis with him.\nAdaptive paradigm.\nThe \"adaptive paradigm\" of psychotherapy develops out of the work of Robert Langs. The \"adaptive paradigm\" interprets psychic conflict primarily in terms of conscious and unconscious adaptation to reality. Langs' recent work in some measure returns to the earlier Freud, in that Langs prefers a modified version of the topographic model of the mind (conscious, preconscious, and unconscious) over the structural model (id, ego, and super-ego), including the former's emphasis on trauma (though Langs looks to death-related traumas rather than sexual traumas). At the same time, Langs' model of the mind differs from Freud's in that it understands the mind in terms of evolutionary biological principles.\nPsychopathology (mental disturbances).\nChildhood origins.\nFreudian theories hold that adult problems can be traced to unresolved conflicts from certain phases of childhood and adolescence, caused by fantasy, stemming from their own drives. Freud, based on the data gathered from his patients early in his career, suspected that neurotic disturbances occurred when children were sexually abused in childhood (i.e. \"seduction theory\"). Later, Freud came to believe that, although child abuse occurs, neurotic symptoms were not associated with this. He believed that neurotic people often had unconscious conflicts that involved incestuous fantasies deriving from different stages of development. He found the stage from about three to six years of age (preschool years, today called the \"first genital stage\") to be filled with fantasies of having romantic relationships with both parents. Arguments were quickly generated in early 20th-century Vienna about whether adult seduction of children, i.e. child sexual abuse, was the basis of neurotic illness. There still is no complete agreement, although nowadays professionals recognize the negative effects of child sexual abuse on mental health.\nThe theory on origins of pathologically dysfunctional relationships was further developed by the specialist in psychiatry J\u00fcrg Willi (* 16 March 1934 in Z\u00fcrich; \u2020 8 April 2019) into the Collusion (psychology) concept. The concept takes the observations of Sigmund Freud about the narcissistic, the oral, the anal and the phallic phases and translates them into a two-couples-relationship model, with respect to dysfunctions in the relationship resulting from childhood trauma.\nOedipal conflicts.\nMany psychoanalysts who work with children have studied the actual effects of child abuse, which include ego and object relations deficits and severe neurotic conflicts. Much research has been done on these types of trauma in childhood, and the adult sequelae of those. In studying the childhood factors that start neurotic symptom development, Freud found a constellation of factors that, for literary reasons, he termed the Oedipus complex, based on the play by Sophocles, \"Oedipus Rex\", in which the protagonist unwittingly kills his father and marries his mother. The validity of the \"Oedipus complex\" is now widely disputed and rejected.\nThe shorthand term, \"oedipal\"\u2014later explicated by Joseph J. Sandler in \"On the Concept Superego\" (1960) and modified by Charles Brenner in \"The Mind in Conflict\" (1982)\u2014refers to the powerful attachments that children make to their parents in the preschool years. These attachments involve fantasies of sexual relationships with either (or both) parent, and, therefore, competitive fantasies toward either (or both) parents. Humberto Nagera (1975) has been particularly helpful in clarifying many of the complexities of the child through these years.\n\"Positive\" and \"negative\" oedipal conflicts have been attached to the heterosexual and homosexual aspects, respectively. Both seem to occur in the development of most children. Eventually, the developing child's concessions to reality (that they will neither marry one parent nor eliminate the other) lead to identifications with parental values. These identifications generally create a new set of mental operations regarding values and guilt, subsumed under the term \"superego\". Besides superego development, children \"resolve\" their preschool oedipal conflicts through channeling wishes into something their parents approve of (\"sublimation\") and the development, during the school-age years (\"latency\") of age-appropriate obsessive-compulsive defensive maneuvers (rules, repetitive games).\nTreatment.\nUsing the various analytic and psychological techniques to assess mental problems, some believe that there are particular constellations of problems that are especially suited for analytic treatment whereas other problems might respond better to medicines and other interpersonal interventions. To be treated with psychoanalysis, whatever the presenting problem, the person requesting help must demonstrate a desire to start an analysis. The person wishing to start an analysis must have some capacity for speech and communication. As well, they need to be able to have or develop trust and insight within the psychoanalytic session. Potential patients must undergo a preliminary stage of treatment to assess their amenability to psychoanalysis at that time, and also to enable the analyst to form a working psychological model, which the analyst will use to direct the treatment. Psychoanalysts mainly work with neurosis and hysteria in particular; however, adapted forms of psychoanalysis are used in working with schizophrenia and other forms of psychosis or mental disorder. Finally, if a prospective patient is severely suicidal, a longer preliminary stage may be employed, sometimes with sessions which have a twenty-minute break in the middle. There are numerous modifications in technique under the heading of psychoanalysis due to the individualistic nature of personality in both analyst and patient.\nThe most common problems treatable with psychoanalysis include: phobias, conversions, compulsions, obsessions, anxiety attacks, depressions, sexual dysfunctions, a wide variety of relationship problems (such as dating and marital strife), and a wide variety of character problems (for example, painful shyness, meanness, obnoxiousness, workaholism, hyperseductiveness, hyperemotionality, hyperfastidiousness). The fact that many of such patients also demonstrate deficits above makes diagnosis and treatment selection difficult.\nAnalytical organizations such as the IPA, APsaA and the European Federation for Psychoanalytic Psychotherapy have established procedures and models for the indication and practice of psychoanalytical therapy for trainees in analysis. The match between the analyst and the patient can be viewed as another contributing factor for the indication and contraindication for psychoanalytic treatment. The analyst decides whether the patient is suitable for psychoanalysis. This decision made by the analyst, besides being made on the usual indications and pathology, is also based to a certain degree on the \"fit\" between analyst and patient. A person's suitability for analysis at any particular time is based on their desire to know something about where their illness has come from. Someone who is not suitable for analysis expresses no desire to know more about the root causes of their illness.\nAn evaluation may include one or more other analysts' independent opinions and will include discussion of the patient's financial situation and insurance.\nTechniques.\nThe foundation of psychoanalysis is an interpretation of the patient's unconscious conflicts that are interfering with current-day functioning \u2013 conflicts that are causing painful symptoms such as phobias, anxiety, depression, and compulsions. Strachey (1936) stressed that figuring out ways the patient distorted perceptions about the analyst led to understanding what may have been forgotten. In particular, unconscious hostile feelings toward the analyst could be found in symbolic, negative reactions to what Robert Langs later called the \"frame\" of the therapy\u2014the setup that included times of the sessions, payment of fees, and the necessity of talking. In patients who made mistakes, forgot, or showed other peculiarities regarding time, fees, and talking, the analyst can usually find various unconscious \"resistances\" to the flow of thoughts (aka free association).\nWhen the patient reclines on a couch with the analyst out of view, the patient tends to remember more experiences, more resistance and transference, and is able to reorganize thoughts after the development of insight through the interpretive work of the analyst. Although fantasy life can be understood through the examination of dreams, masturbation fantasies are also important. The analyst is interested in how the patient reacts to and avoids such fantasies. Various memories of early life are generally distorted\u2014what Freud called \"screen memories\"\u2014and in any case, very early experiences (before age two)\u2014cannot be remembered.\nVariations in technique.\nThere is what is known among psychoanalysts as \"classical technique\", although Freud, throughout his writings, deviated from this considerably, depending on the problems of any given patient.\n\"Classical technique\" was summarized by Allan Compton as comprising:\nAs well, the analyst can also use confrontation to bring an aspect of functioning, usually a defense, to the patient's attention. The analyst then uses a variety of interpretation methods, such as:\nAnalysts can also use reconstruction to estimate what may have happened in the past that created some current issue. These techniques are primarily based on \"conflict theory\". As \"object relations theory\" evolved, supplemented by the work of John Bowlby and Mary Ainsworth, techniques with patients who had more severe problems with basic trust (Erikson, 1950) and a history of maternal deprivation (see the works of Augusta Alpert) led to new techniques with adults. These have sometimes been called interpersonal, intersubjective (cf. Stolorow), relational, or corrective object relations techniques.\nEgo psychological concepts of deficit in functioning led to refinements in supportive therapy. These techniques are particularly applicable to psychotic and near-psychotic (cf. Eric Marcus, \"Psychosis and Near-psychosis\") patients. These supportive therapy techniques include discussions of reality; encouragement to stay alive (including hospitalization); psychotropic medicines to relieve overwhelming depressive affect or overwhelming fantasies (hallucinations and delusions); and advice about the meanings of things (to counter abstraction failures).\nThe notion of the \"silent analyst\" has been criticized. Actually, the analyst listens using Arlow's approach as set out in \"The Genesis of Interpretation\", using active intervention to interpret resistances, defenses, create pathology, and fantasies. Silence is not a technique of psychoanalysis (see also the studies and opinion papers of Owen Renik). \"Analytic neutrality\" is a concept that does not mean the analyst is silent. It refers to the analyst's position of not taking sides in the internal struggles of the patient. For example, if a patient feels guilty, the analyst might explore what the patient has been doing or thinking that causes the guilt, but not reassure the patient not to feel guilty. The analyst might also explore the identifications with parents and others that led to the guilt.\nInterpersonal\u2013relational psychoanalysts emphasize the notion that it is impossible to be neutral. Sullivan introduced the term \"participant-observer\" to indicate that the analyst inevitably interacts with the analysand, and suggested the detailed inquiry as an alternative to interpretation. The detailed inquiry involves noting where the analysand is leaving out important elements of an account and noting when the story is obfuscated, and asking careful questions to open up the dialogue.\nGroup therapy and play therapy.\nAlthough single-client sessions remain the norm, psychoanalytic theory has been used to develop other types of psychological treatment. Psychoanalytic group therapy was pioneered by Trigant Burrow, Joseph Pratt, Paul F. Schilder, Samuel R. Slavson, Harry Stack Sullivan, and Wolfe. Child-centered counseling for parents was instituted early in analytic history by Freud, and was later further developed by Irwin Marcus, Edith Schulhofer, and Gilbert Kliman. Psychoanalytically based couples therapy has been promulgated and explicated by Fred Sander. Techniques and tools developed in the first decade of the 21st century have made psychoanalysis available to patients who were not treatable by earlier techniques. This meant that the analytic situation was modified so that it would be more suitable and more likely to be helpful for these patients. Eagle (2007) believes that psychoanalysis cannot be a self-contained discipline but instead must be open to influence from and integration with findings and theory from other disciplines.\nPsychoanalytic constructs have been adapted for use with children with treatments such as play therapy, art therapy, and storytelling. Throughout her career, from the 1920s through the 1970s, Anna Freud adapted psychoanalysis for children through play. This is still used today for children, especially those who are preadolescent. Using toys and games, children are able to symbolically demonstrate their fears, fantasies, and defenses; although not identical, this technique, in children, is analogous to the aim of free association in adults. Psychoanalytic play therapy allows the child and analyst to understand children's conflicts, particularly defenses such as disobedience and withdrawal, that have been guarding against various unpleasant feelings and hostile wishes. In art therapy, the counselor may have a child draw a portrait and then tell a story about the portrait. The counselor watches for recurring themes\u2014regardless of whether it is with art or toys.\nCultural variations.\nPsychoanalysis can be adapted to different cultures, as long as the therapist or counselor understands the client's culture. For example, Tori and Blimes found that defense mechanisms were valid in a normative sample of 2,624 Thais. The use of certain defense mechanisms was related to cultural values. For example, Thais value calmness and collectiveness (because of Buddhist beliefs), so they were low on regressive emotionality. Psychoanalysis also applies because Freud used techniques that allowed him to get the subjective perceptions of his patients. He takes an objective approach by not facing his clients during his talk therapy sessions. He met with his patients wherever they were, such as when he used free association, where clients would say whatever came to mind without self-censorship. His treatments had little to no structure for most cultures, especially Asian cultures. Therefore, it is more likely that Freudian constructs will be used in structured therapy. In addition, Corey postulates that it will be necessary for a therapist to help clients develop a cultural identity as well as an ego identity.\nPsychodynamic therapy.\nAccording to the NIH, psychodynamic therapy focuses on how an individual's present behavior is affected by past experiences and the unconscious processes. The main goal associated with psychodynamic therapy is internal reflection; for the patient to be able to understand more about their current behaviors after self-reflection and a critical analyzation of their past with their therapist. In order for this method of treatment to be effective, there must be a strong foundation of trust between the patient and their therapist. Often, psychodynamic therapy requires a large time investment, taking many years for considerable improvement and is not considered a quick solution.\nCost and length of treatment.\nThe cost to the patient of psychoanalytic treatment ranges widely from place to place and between practitioners. Low-fee analysis is often available in a psychoanalytic training clinic and graduate schools. Otherwise, the fee set by each analyst varies with the analyst's training and experience. Since, in most locations in the United States, unlike in Ontario and Germany, classical analysis (which usually requires sessions three to five times per week) is not covered by health insurance, many analysts may negotiate their fees with patients whom they feel they can help, but who have financial difficulties. The modifications of analysis, which include psychodynamic therapy, brief therapies, and certain types of group therapy, are carried out on a less frequent basis\u2014usually once, twice, or three times a week \u2013 and usually the patient sits facing the therapist. As a result of the defense mechanisms and the lack of access to the unfathomable elements of the unconscious, psychoanalysis can be an expansive process that involves 2 to 5 sessions per week for several years. This type of therapy relies on the belief that reducing the symptoms will not actually help with the root causes or irrational drives. The analyst typically is a 'blank screen', disclosing very little about themselves in order that the client can use the space in the relationship to work on their unconscious without interference from outside.\nThe psychoanalyst uses various methods to help the patient become more self-aware, insightful and uncover the meanings of symptoms. Firstly, the psychoanalyst attempts to develop a safe and confidential atmosphere where the patient can report feelings, thoughts and fantasies. Analysands (as people in analysis are called) are asked to report whatever comes to mind without fear of reprisal. Freud called this the \"fundamental rule\". Analysands are asked to talk about their lives, including their early life, current life and hopes and aspirations for the future. They are encouraged to report their fantasies, \"flash thoughts\" and dreams. In fact, Freud believed that dreams were, \"the royal road to the unconscious\"; he devoted an entire volume to the interpretation of dreams. Freud had his patients lie on a couch in a dimly lit room and would sit out of sight, usually directly behind them, as to not influence the patient's thoughts by his gestures or expressions.\nThe psychoanalyst's task, in collaboration with the analysand, is to help deepen the analysand's understanding of those factors, outside of his awareness, that drive his behaviors. In the safe environment psychoanalysis offers, the analysand becomes attached to the analyst and pretty soon, he begins to experience the same conflicts with his analyst that he experiences with key figures in his life, such as his parents, his boss, his significant other, etc. It is the psychoanalyst's role to point out these conflicts and to interpret them. The transferring of these internal conflicts onto the analyst is called \"transference\".\nMany studies have also been done on briefer \"dynamic\" treatments; these are more expedient to measure and shed light on the therapeutic process to some extent. Brief Relational Therapy (BRT), Brief Psychodynamic Therapy (BPT), and Time-Limited Dynamic Therapy (TLDP) limit treatment to 20\u201330 sessions. On average, classical analysis may last 5.7 years, but for phobias and depressions uncomplicated by ego deficits or object relations deficits, analysis may run for a shorter period of time. Longer analyses are indicated for those with more serious disturbances in object relations, more symptoms, and more ingrained character pathology.\nTraining and research.\nPsychoanalysis continues to be practiced by psychiatrists, social workers, and other mental health professionals; however, its practice has declined. It has been largely replaced by the similar but broader psychodynamic psychotherapy in the mid-20th century. Psychoanalytic approaches continue to be listed by the UK National Health Service as possibly helpful for depression.\nUnited States.\nPsychoanalytic training in the United States tends to vary according to the program, but it involves a personal psychoanalysis for the trainee, approximately 300 to 600 hours of class instruction, with a standard curriculum, over a two to five-year period.\nTypically, this psychoanalysis must be conducted by a Supervising and Training Analyst. Most institutes (but not all) within the American Psychoanalytic Association require that Supervising and Training Analysts become certified by the American Board of Psychoanalysts. Certification entails a blind review in which the psychoanalyst's work is vetted by psychoanalysts outside of their local community. After earning certification, these psychoanalysts undergo another hurdle in which they are specially vetted by senior members of their own institute and held to the highest ethical and moral standards. Moreover, they are required to have extensive experience conducting psychoanalyses.\nCandidates generally have an hour of supervision each week per psychoanalytic case. The minimum number of cases varies between institutes. Candidates often have two to four cases; both male and female cases are required. Supervision extends for at least a few years on one or more cases. During supervision, the trainee presents material from the psychoanalytic work that week. With the supervisor, the trainee then explores the patient's unconscious conflicts with examination of transference-countertransference constellations.\nMany psychoanalytic training centers in the United States have been accredited by special committees of the APsaA or the IPA. Because of theoretical differences, there are independent institutes, usually founded by psychologists, who until 1987 were not permitted access to psychoanalytic training institutes of the APsaA. Currently, there are between 75 and 100 independent institutes in the United States. As well, other institutes are affiliated to other organizations such as the American Academy of Psychoanalysis and Dynamic Psychiatry, and the National Association for the Advancement of Psychoanalysis. At most psychoanalytic institutes in the United States, qualifications for entry include a terminal degree in a mental health field, such as Ph.D., Psy.D., M.S.W., or M.D. A few institutes restrict applicants to those already holding an M.D. or Ph.D., and most institutes in Southern California confer a Ph.D. or Psy.D. in psychoanalysis upon graduation, which involves completion of the necessary requirements for the state boards that confer that doctoral degree. The first training institute in America to educate non-medical psychoanalysts was The National Psychological Association for Psychoanalysis (1978) in New York City. It was founded by the analyst Theodor Reik. The Contemporary Freudian (originally the New York Freudian Society), an offshoot of the National Psychological Association, has a branch in Washington, DC. It is a component society/institute or the IPA.\nSome psychoanalytic training has been set up as a post-doctoral fellowship in university settings, such as at Duke University, Yale University, New York University, Adelphi University and Columbia University. Other psychoanalytic institutes may not be directly associated with universities, but the faculty at those institutes usually hold contemporaneous faculty positions with psychology Ph.D. programs and/or with medical school psychiatry residency programs.\nIn recent decades, some graduate schools and psychoanalytic institutions have developed programs leading to doctoral degrees in psychoanalysis. Several institutions in the United States have offered such degrees, such as the Boston Graduate School of Psychoanalysis (which awards the Doctor of Psychoanalysis or Psya.D. degree) and the Center for Psychoanalytic Study in Chicago, Illinois, (which awarded the D.Psa. degree). In addition, a number of psychoanalytic training institutes in California historically awarded doctoral degrees (including Ph.D. and Psy.D. degrees), including the Institute of Contemporary Psychoanalysis, the Los Angeles Psychoanalytic Society and Institute, the New Center for Psychoanalysis, the Newport Psychoanalytic Institute, the Psychoanalytic Center of California, and Psychoanalytic Institute of Northern California, and the Southern California Psychoanalytic Institute and Society. Internationally, several universities award doctoral degrees in psychoanalysis and psychoanalytic studies, including University College London and the University of Essex.\nThe IPA is the world's primary accrediting and regulatory body for psychoanalysis. Their mission is to assure the continued vigor and development of psychoanalysis for the benefit of psychoanalytic patients. It works in partnership with its 70 constituent organizations in 33 countries to support 11,500 members. In the US, there are 77 psychoanalytical organizations, institutes and associations, which are spread across the states. APsaA has 38 affiliated societies which have 10 or more active members who practice in a given geographical area. The aims of APsaA and other psychoanalytical organizations are: to provide ongoing educational opportunities for its members, stimulate the development and research of psychoanalysis, provide training, and organize conferences. There are eight affiliated study groups in the United States. A study group is the first level of integration of a psychoanalytical body within the IPA, followed by a provisional society and finally a member society.\nThe Division of Psychoanalysis (39) of the American Psychological Association (APA) was established in the early 1980s by several psychologists. Until the establishment of the Division of Psychoanalysis, psychologists who had trained in independent institutes had no national organization. The Division of Psychoanalysis now has approximately 4,000 members and approximately 30 local chapters in the United States. The Division of Psychoanalysis holds two annual meetings or conferences and offers continuing education in theory, research and clinical technique, as do their affiliated local chapters. The European Psychoanalytical Federation (EPF) is the organization which consolidates all European psychoanalytic societies. This organization is affiliated with the IPA. In 2002, there were approximately 3,900 individual members in 22 countries, speaking 18 different languages. There are also 25 psychoanalytic societies.\nThe American Association of Psychoanalysis in Clinical Social Work (AAPCSW) was established by Crayton Rowe in 1980 as a division of the Federation of Clinical Societies of Social Work and became an independent entity in 1990. Until 2007, it was known as the National Membership Committee on Psychoanalysis. The organization was founded because although social workers represented the largest number of people who were training to be psychoanalysts, they were underrepresented as supervisors and teachers at the institutes they attended. AAPCSW now has over 1000 members and has over 20 chapters. It holds a bi-annual national conference and numerous annual local conferences.\nExperiences of psychoanalysts and psychoanalytic psychotherapists and research into infant and child development have led to new insights. Theories have been further developed and the results of empirical research are now more integrated in the psychoanalytic theory.\nUnited Kingdom.\nThe London Psychoanalytical Society was founded by Ernest Jones in 1913. After World War I with the expansion of psychoanalysis in the United Kingdom, the Society was reconstituted and named the British Psychoanalytical Society in 1919. Soon after, the Institute of Psychoanalysis was established to administer the Society's activities. These include: the training of psychoanalysts, the development of the theory and practice of psychoanalysis, the provision of treatment through The London Clinic of Psychoanalysis, and the publication of books in The New Library of Psychoanalysis and Psychoanalytic Ideas. The Institute of Psychoanalysis also publishes \"The International Journal of Psychoanalysis\", maintains a library, furthers research, and holds public lectures. The society has a Code of Ethics and an Ethical Committee. The society, the institute and the clinic are all located at \"Byron House\" in West London.\nThe Society is a constituent society of the International Psychoanalytical Association (IPA), a body with members on all five continents which safeguards professional and ethical practice. The Society is a member of the British Psychoanalytic Council (BPC); the BPC publishes a register of British psychoanalysts and psychoanalytical psychotherapists. All members of the British Psychoanalytic Council are required to undertake continuing professional development, CPD. Members of the Society teach and hold posts on other approved psychoanalytic courses, e.g. British Psychotherapy Foundation, and in academic departments, e.g. University College London.\nMembers of the Society have included: Michael Balint, Wilfred Bion, John Bowlby, Ronald Fairbairn, Anna Freud, Harry Guntrip, Melanie Klein, Donald Meltzer, Joseph J. Sandler, Hanna Segal, J. D. Sutherland and Donald Winnicott.\nThe Institute of Psychoanalysis is the foremost publisher of psychoanalytic literature. The 24-volume \"Standard Edition of the Complete Psychological Works of Sigmund Freud\" was conceived, translated, and produced under the direction of the British Psychoanalytical Society. The Society, in conjunction with Random House, will soon publish a new, revised and expanded Standard Edition. With the New Library of Psychoanalysis, the Institute continues to publish the books of leading theorists and practitioners. \"The International Journal of Psychoanalysis\" is published by the Institute of Psychoanalysis. For over 100 years, it has one of the largest circulations of any psychoanalytic journal.\nPsychoanalytic psychotherapy.\nThere are different forms of psychoanalysis and psychotherapy in which psychoanalytic thinking is applied. In addition to classical psychoanalysis, there is for example psychoanalytic psychotherapy, an approach that expands \"the accessibility of psychoanalytic theory and clinical practices that had evolved over 100 plus years to a larger number of individuals.\" Other examples of well known therapies which also use insights of psychoanalysis are mentalization-based treatment (MBT), and transference focused psychotherapy (TFP). There is also a continuing influence of psychoanalytic thinking in mental health care and psychiatric care.\nResearch.\nOver a hundred years of case reports and studies in the journal \"Modern Psychoanalysis\", the \"Psychoanalytic Quarterly\", the \"International Journal of Psychoanalysis\" and the \"Journal of the American Psychoanalytic Association\" have analyzed the efficacy of analysis in cases of neurosis and character or problems. Psychoanalysis modified by object relations techniques has been shown to be effective in many cases of ingrained problems of intimacy and relationship (cf. the many books of Otto Kernberg). Psychoanalytic treatment, in other situations, may run from about a year to many years, depending on the severity and complexity of the pathology.\nPsychoanalytic theory has, from its inception, been the subject of criticism and controversy. Freud remarked on this early in his career, when other physicians in Vienna ostracized him for his findings that hysterical conversion symptoms were not limited to women. Challenges to analytic theory began with Otto Rank and Alfred Adler (turn of the 20th century), continued with behaviorists (e.g. Wolpe) into the 1940s and '50s, and have persisted (e.g. Miller). Criticisms come from those who object to the notion that there are mechanisms, thoughts or feelings in the mind that could be unconscious. Criticisms also have been leveled against the idea of \"infantile sexuality\" (the recognition that children between ages two and six imagine things about procreation). Criticisms of theory have led to variations in analytic theories, such as the work of Ronald Fairbairn, Michael Balint, and John Bowlby. In the past 30 years or so, the criticisms have centered on the issue of empirical verification; it is difficult to substantiate the efficacy of psychoanalytic treatments in a psychiatric context.\nPsychoanalysis has been used as a research tool in childhood development (cf. the journal \"The Psychoanalytic Study of the Child\"), and has developed into a flexible, effective treatment for certain mental disturbances. In the 1960s, Freud's early (1905) thoughts on the childhood development of female sexuality were challenged; this challenge led to major research in the 1970s and 80s, and then to a reformulation of female sexual development that corrected some of Freud's concepts. Also see the various works of Eleanor Galenson, Nancy Chodorow, Karen Horney, Fran\u00e7oise Dolto, Melanie Klein, Selma Fraiberg, and others. Most recently, psychoanalytic researchers who have integrated attachment theory into their work, including Alicia Lieberman and Daniel Schechter, have explored the role of parental traumatization in the development of young children's mental representations of self and others.\nEffectiveness.\nThe psychoanalytic profession has been resistant to researching efficacy. Evaluations of effectiveness based on the interpretation of the therapist alone cannot be proven.\nResearch results.\nNumerous studies have shown that the efficacy of therapy is primarily related to the quality of the therapeutic alliance.\nAn updated 2020 meta-analysis of long-term psychoanalytic psychotherapy (LTPP) for complex mental disorders found small but statistically significant benefits over other psychotherapies in most outcome domains, though results should be interpreted cautiously due to study heterogeneity and methodological limitations.\nMeta-analyses in 2019 found psychoanalytic and psychodynamic therapy effective at improving psychosocial wellbeing, reducing suicidality, as well as self-harm behavior in patients at a 6-month interval. There has also been evidence for psychoanalytic psychotherapy as an effective treatment for Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD) and Conduct Disorder when compared with behavioral management treatments with or without methylphenidate. Meta-analysis in 2012 and 2013 found support or evidence for the efficacy of psychoanalytic therapy. Other meta-analyses published in recent years showed psychoanalysis and psychodynamic therapy to be effective, with outcomes comparable to or greater than other kinds of psychotherapy or antidepressant drugs, but these meta-analyses have been subjected to various criticisms. In particular, the inclusion of pre-/post-studies (rather than randomized controlled trials) and the absence of adequate comparisons with control treatments pose a serious limitation in interpreting the results. A French 2004 report from INSERM concluded that psychoanalytic therapy is less effective than other psychotherapies (including cognitive behavioral therapy) for certain diseases.\nIn 2011, the American Psychological Association reviewed 103 RCT comparisons between psychodynamic treatment and a non-dynamic competitor, which had been published between 1974 and 2010, and among which 63 were deemed of adequate quality. Out of 39 comparisons with an active competitor, they found that 6 psychodynamic treatments were superior, 5 were inferior, and 28 showed no difference. The study found these results promising but emphasized the necessity of further good-quality trials replicating positive results on specific disorders.\nMeta-analyses of Short Term Psychodynamic Psychotherapy (STPP) have found effect sizes (Cohen's d) ranging from 0.34 to 0.71 compared to no treatment and were found to be slightly better than other therapies in follow-up. Other reviews have found an effect size of 0.78 to 0.91 for somatoform disorders compared to no treatment and 0.69 for treating depression. A 2012 \"Harvard Review of Psychiatry\" meta-analysis of Intensive Short-Term Dynamic Psychotherapy (ISTDP) found effect sizes ranging from 0.84 for interpersonal problems to 1.51 for depression. Overall ISTDP had an effect size of 1.18 compared to no treatment.\nA meta-analysis of Long Term Psychodynamic Psychotherapy (LTPP) in 2012 found an overall effect size of 0.33, which is modest. This study concluded the recovery rate following LTPP was equal to control treatments, including treatment as usual, and found the evidence for the effectiveness of LTPP to be limited and at best conflicting. Others have found effect sizes of 0.44\u20130.68.\nAccording to a 2004 French review conducted by INSERM, psychoanalysis was presumed or proven effective at treating panic disorder, post-traumatic stress, and personality disorders, but did not find evidence of its effectiveness in treating schizophrenia, obsessive compulsive disorder, specific phobia, bulimia and anorexia.\nA 2001 systematic review of the medical literature by the Cochrane Collaboration concluded that no data exist demonstrating that psychodynamic psychotherapy is effective in treating schizophrenia and severe mental illness, and cautioned that medication should always be used alongside any type of talk therapy in schizophrenia cases. A French review from 2004 found the same. The Schizophrenia Patient Outcomes Research Team advises against the use of psychodynamic therapy in cases of schizophrenia, arguing that more trials are necessary to verify its effectiveness.\nCriticism.\nBoth Freud and psychoanalysis have been criticized in extreme terms. Exchanges between critics and defenders of psychoanalysis have often been so heated that they have come to be characterized as the Freud Wars. Linguist Noam Chomsky has criticized psychoanalysis for lacking a scientific basis. Evolutionary biologist Stephen Jay Gould considered psychoanalysis influenced by pseudoscientific theories such as recapitulation theory. Psychologists Hans Eysenck, John F. Kihlstrom, and others have also criticized the field as pseudoscience.\nPsychoanalysis has also been described as being \"not even wrong\".\nDebate over status as scientific.\nThe theoretical foundations of psychoanalysis lie in the same philosophical currents that lead to interpretive phenomenology rather than in those that lead to scientific positivism, making the theory largely incompatible with positivist approaches to the study of the mind.\nEarly critics of psychoanalysis believed that its theories were based too little on quantitative and experimental research and too much on the clinical case study method. Philosopher Frank Cioffi cites false claims of a sound scientific verification of the theory and its elements as the strongest basis for classifying the work of Freud and his school as pseudoscience.\nKarl Popper argued that psychoanalysis is a pseudoscience because its claims are not testable and cannot be refuted; that is, they are not falsifiable:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;...those \"clinical observations\" which analysts naively believe confirm their theory cannot do this any more than the daily confirmations which astrologers find in their practice. And as for Freud's epic of the Ego, the Super-ego, and the Id, no substantially stronger claim to scientific status can be made for it than for Homer's collected stories from the Olympus.In addition, Imre Lakatos wrote that \"Freudians have been nonplussed by Popper's basic challenge concerning scientific honesty. Indeed, they have refused to specify experimental conditions under which they would give up their basic assumptions.\" In \"Sexual Desire\" (1986), philosopher Roger Scruton rejects Popper's arguments, pointing to the theory of repression as an example of a Freudian theory that does have testable consequences. Scruton nevertheless concluded that psychoanalysis is not genuinely scientific because it involves an unacceptable dependence on metaphor. The philosopher and physicist Mario Bunge argued that psychoanalysis is a pseudoscience because it violates the ontology and methodology inherent to science. According to Bunge, most psychoanalytic theories are either untestable or unsupported by evidence.\nCognitive scientists, in particular, have also weighed in. Martin Seligman, a prominent academic in positive psychology, wrote that:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Thirty years ago, the cognitive revolution in psychology overthrew both Freud and the behaviorists, at least in academia.\u2026 The imperialistic Freudian view claims that emotion always drives thought, while the imperialistic cognitive view claims that thought always drives emotion. The evidence, however, is that each drives the other at times.Adolf Gr\u00fcnbaum argues in \"Validation in the Clinical Theory of Psychoanalysis\" (1993) that psychoanalytic-based theories are falsifiable but that the causal claims of psychoanalysis are unsupported by the available clinical evidence.\nHistorian Henri Ellenberger, who researched the history of Freud, Jung, Adler, and Janet, while writing his book \"The Discovery of the Unconscious: The History and Evolution of Dynamic Psychiatry\", argued that psychoanalysis was not scientific on the grounds of both its methodology and social structure:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Psychoanalysis, is it a science? It does not meet the criteria (unified science, defined domain and methodology). It corresponds to the traits of a philosophical sect (closed organization, highly personal initiation, a doctrine which is changeable but defined by its official adoption, cult and legend of the founder).\u2014\u200a\nFreud.\nSome have accused Freud of fabrication, most famously in the case of Anna O. Others have speculated that patients had conditions that are now easily identifiable and unrelated to psychoanalysis; for instance, Anna O. is thought to have had an organic impairment such as tuberculous meningitis or temporal lobe epilepsy, rather than Freud's diagnosis of hysteria.\nHenri Ellenberger and Frank Sulloway argue that Freud and his followers created an inaccurate legend of Freud to popularize psychoanalysis. Mikkel Borch-Jacobsen and Sonu Shamdasani argue that this legend has been adapted to different times and situations. Isabelle Stengers states that psychoanalytic circles have tried to stop historians from accessing documents about the life of Freud.\nWitch doctors.\nRichard Feynman wrote off psychoanalysts as mere \"witch doctors\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;If you look at all of the complicated ideas that they have developed in an infinitesimal amount of time, if you compare to any other of the sciences how long it takes to get one idea after the other, if you consider all the structures and inventions and complicated things, the ids and the egos, the tensions and the forces, and the pushes and the pulls, I tell you they can't all be there. It's too much for one brain or a few brains to have cooked up in such a short time.\nLikewise, psychiatrist E. Fuller Torrey, in \"Witchdoctors and Psychiatrists\" (1986), agreed that psychoanalytic theories have no more scientific basis than the theories of traditional native healers, \"witchdoctors\" or modern \"cult\" alternatives such as EST. Psychologist Alice Miller charged psychoanalysis with being similar to the poisonous pedagogies, which she described in her book \"For Your Own Good\". She scrutinized and rejected the validity of Freud's drive theory, including the Oedipus complex, which, according to her and Jeffrey Masson, blames the child for the abusive sexual behavior of adults. Psychologist Joel Kupfersmid investigated the validity of the Oedipus complex, examining its nature and origins. He concluded that there is little evidence to support the existence of the Oedipus complex.\nCritical perspectives.\nContemporary philosophers Gilles Deleuze and F\u00e9lix Guattari asserted that the institution of psychoanalysis has become a center of power and that its confessional techniques resemble those included and utilized within the Christian religion. Their most in-depth criticism of the power structure of psychoanalysis and its connivance with capitalism are found in \"Anti-Oedipus\" (1972) and \"A Thousand Plateaus\" (1980), the two volumes of their theoretical work \"Capitalism and Schizophrenia\". In \"Anti-Oedipus\", Deleuze and Guattari take the cases of G\u00e9rard Mendel, Bela Grunberger, and Janine Chasseguet-Smirgel, prominent members of the most respected psychoanalytical associations (including the IPA), to suggest that, traditionally, psychoanalysis had always enthusiastically enjoyed and embraced a police state throughout its history.\nFrench psychoanalyst Jacques Lacan criticized the emphasis of some American and British psychoanalytical traditions on what he viewed as the suggestion of imaginary \"causes\" for symptoms and recommended the return to Freud.\nBelgian psycholinguist and psychoanalyst Luce Irigaray also criticized psychoanalysis, employing Jacques Derrida's concept of phallogocentrism to describe the exclusion of women from both Freudian and Lacanian psychoanalytical theories.\nFreudian theory.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nMany aspects of Freudian theory are indeed out of date, and they should be: Freud died in 1939, and he has been slow to undertake further revisions. His critics, however, are equally behind the times, attacking Freudian views of the 1920s as if they continue to have some currency in their original form. Psychodynamic theory and therapy have evolved considerably since 1939, when Freud's bearded countenance was last sighted in earnest. Contemporary psychoanalysts and psychodynamic therapists no longer write much about ids and egos, nor do they conceive of treatment for psychological disorders as an archaeological expedition in search of lost memories.\n\u2014Drew Westen, 1998\nA survey of scientific research suggested that while personality traits corresponding to Freud's oral, anal, Oedipal, and genital phases can be observed, they do not necessarily manifest as stages in the development of children. These studies also have not confirmed that such adult traits result from childhood experiences. However, these stages should not be considered crucial to modern psychoanalysis. The power of the unconscious and the transference phenomenon is vital to contemporary psychoanalytic theory and practice.\nThe idea of \"unconscious\" is contested because human behavior can be observed, while human mental activity has to be inferred. However, the unconscious is now a popular topic of study in the fields of experimental and social psychology (e.g., implicit attitude measures, fMRI, PET scans, and other indirect tests). The idea of unconscious and the transference phenomenon have been widely researched and, it is claimed, validated in the fields of cognitive psychology and social psychology, though the majority of cognitive psychologists does not hold a Freudian interpretation of unconscious mental activity. Recent developments in neuroscience have resulted in one side arguing that it has provided a biological basis for unconscious emotional processing in line with psychoanalytic theory (i.e., neuropsychoanalysis), while the other side argues that such findings make psychoanalytic theory obsolete and irrelevant.\nShlomo Kalo explains that the scientific materialism that flourished in the 19th century severely harmed religion and rejected whatever was called spiritual. The institution of the confession priest in particular was badly damaged. The empty void that the newborn psychoanalysis swiftly occupied this institution left behind. In his writings, Kalo claims that psychoanalysis's basic approach is erroneous. It represents the mainline wrong assumptions that happiness is unreachable and that the natural desire of a human being is to exploit his fellow men for his own pleasure and benefit.\nJacques Derrida incorporated aspects of psychoanalytic theory into his theory of deconstruction in order to question what he called the 'metaphysics of presence'. Derrida also turns some of these ideas against Freud to reveal tensions and contradictions in his work. For example, although Freud defines religion and metaphysics as displacements of the identification with the father in the resolution of the Oedipal complex, Derrida (1987) insists that the prominence of the father in Freud's own analysis is itself indebted to the prominence given to the father in Western metaphysics and theology since Plato.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAnalyses, discussions and critiques.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nResponses to critiques.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23587", "revid": "36422608", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23587", "title": "Peking (disambiguation)", "text": "Peking is an alternate and mostly obsolete romanization of Beijing, the capital city of the People's Republic of China. \nPeking may also refer to:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "23588", "revid": "48643156", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23588", "title": "Pinyin", "text": "Romanization scheme for Standard Chinese\nHanyu Pinyin, or simply pinyin (p\u012bny\u012bn), officially the Chinese Phonetic Alphabet, is the most common romanization system for Standard Chinese. \"Hanyu\" () literally means 'Han language'\u2014that is, the Chinese language\u2014while \"pinyin\" literally means 'spelled sounds'. Pinyin is the official romanization system used in China, Singapore, and Taiwan, and by the United Nations. Its use has become common when transliterating Standard Chinese mostly regardless of region, though it is less ubiquitous in Taiwan. It is used to teach Standard Chinese, normally written with Chinese characters, to students in mainland China and Singapore. Pinyin is also used by various input methods on computers and to categorize entries in some Chinese dictionaries.\nIn pinyin, each Chinese syllable is spelled in terms of an optional initial and a final, each of which is represented by one or more letters. Initials are initial consonants, whereas finals are all possible combinations of medials (semivowels coming before the vowel), a nucleus vowel, and coda (final vowel or consonant). Diacritics are used to indicate the four tones found in Standard Chinese, though these are often omitted in various contexts, such as when spelling Chinese names in non-Chinese texts.\nHanyu Pinyin was developed in the 1950s by a group of Chinese linguists including Wang Li, Lu Zhiwei, Li Jinxi, Luo Changpei and, particularly, Zhou Youguang, who has been called the \"father of pinyin\". They based their work in part on earlier romanization systems. The system was originally promulgated at the Fifth Session of the 1st National People's Congress in 1958, and has seen several rounds of revisions since. The International Organization for Standardization propagated Hanyu Pinyin as ISO 7098 in 1982, and the United Nations began using it in 1986. Taiwan adopted Hanyu Pinyin as its official romanization system in 2009, replacing Tongyong Pinyin.\nHistory.\nBackground.\nMatteo Ricci, a Jesuit missionary in China, wrote the first book that used the Latin alphabet to write Chinese, entitled \"Xizi Qiji\" (Hsi-tz\u016d Ch'i-chi; ) and published in Beijing in 1605. Twenty years later, fellow Jesuit Nicolas Trigault published ) in Hangzhou. Neither book had any influence among the contemporary Chinese literati, and the romanizations they introduced primarily were useful for Westerners.\nDuring the late Qing, the reformer Song Shu (1862\u20131910) proposed that China adopt a phonetic writing system. A student of the scholars Yu Yue and Zhang Taiyan, Song had observed the effect of the \"kana\" syllabaries and Western learning during his visits to Japan. While Song did not himself propose a transliteration system for Chinese, his discussion ultimately led to a proliferation of proposed schemes. The Wade\u2013Giles system was produced by Thomas Wade in 1859, and further improved by Herbert Giles, presented in \"Chinese\u2013English Dictionary\" (1892). It was popular, and was used in English-language publications outside China until 1979. In 1943, the US military tapped Yale University to develop another romanization system for Mandarin Chinese intended for pilots flying over China\u2014much more than previous systems, the result appears very similar to modern Hanyu Pinyin.\nDevelopment.\nHanyu Pinyin was designed by a group of mostly Chinese linguists, including Wang Li, Lu Zhiwei, Li Jinxi, Luo Changpei, as well as Zhou Youguang (1906\u20132017), an economist by trade, as part of a Chinese government project in the 1950s. Zhou, often called \"the father of pinyin\", worked as a banker in New York when he decided to return to China to help rebuild the country after the People's Republic was established. Earlier attempts to romanize Chinese writing were mostly abandoned in 1944. Zhou became an economics professor in Shanghai, and when the Ministry of Education created the Committee for the Reform of the Chinese Written Language in 1955, Premier Zhou Enlai assigned him the task of developing a new romanization system, despite the fact that he was not a linguist by trade.\nHanyu Pinyin incorporated different aspects from existing systems, including Gwoyeu Romatzyh (1928) Latinxua Sin Wenz (1931) and the diacritics from bopomofo (1918). \"I'm not the father of pinyin\", Zhou said years later; \"I'm the son of pinyin. It's [the result of] a long tradition from the later years of the Qing dynasty down to today. But we restudied the problem and revisited it and made it more perfect.\"\nAn initial draft was authored in January 1956 by Ye Laishi, Lu Zhiwei and Zhou Youguang. A revised Pinyin scheme was proposed by Wang Li, Lu Zhiwei and Li Jinxi, and became the main focus of discussion among the group of Chinese linguists in June 1956, forming the basis of Pinyin standard later after incorporating a wide range of feedback and further revisions. The first edition of Hanyu Pinyin was approved and officially adopted at the Fifth Session of the 1st National People's Congress on 11 February 1958. It was then introduced to primary schools as a way to teach Standard Chinese pronunciation and used to improve the literacy rate among adults.\nDespite its formal promulgation, pinyin did not become widely used until after the tumult of the Cultural Revolution.189 In the 1980s, students were trained in pinyin from an early age, learning it in tandem with characters or even before.200\nDuring the height of the Cold War the use of pinyin system over Wade\u2013Giles and Yale romanizations outside of China was regarded as a political statement or identification with the mainland Chinese government. Beginning in the early 1980s, Western publications addressing mainland China began using the Hanyu Pinyin romanization system instead of earlier romanization systems; this change followed the Joint Communiqu\u00e9 on the Establishment of Diplomatic Relations between the United States and China in 1979. In 2001, the Chinese government issued the \"National Common Language Law\", providing a legal basis for applying pinyin. The current specification of the orthography is GB/T 16159\u20132012.\nSyllables.\nChinese phonology is generally described in terms of initials () and finals (). This is distinct from the concept of consonant and vowel sounds as basic units in traditional (and most other phonetic systems used to describe the Chinese language). Every syllable in Standard Chinese can be described as a pair of one initial and one final, except for the special syllable \"er\" or when a trailing \"-r\" is considered part of a syllable (a phenomenon known as \"erhua\"). The latter case, though a common practice in some sub-dialects, is rarely used in official publications.\nWhile initials are usually a single consonant, finals are not always simple vowels, especially in compound finals (), i.e. when a \"medial\" is placed in front of the final. For example, the medials and are pronounced with such tight openings at the beginning of a final that some native Chinese speakers (especially when singing) pronounce , officially pronounced , as and , officially pronounced , as or . Often these medials are treated as separate from the finals rather than as part of them; this convention is followed in the chart of finals below.\nInitials.\nThe conventional lexicographical order derived from bopomofo is:\nIn each cell below, the pinyin letters assigned to each initial are accompanied by their phonetic realizations in brackets, notated according to the International Phonetic Alphabet.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFinals.\nStandard Chinese vowels (with IPA and Pinyin)\nIn each cell below, the first line indicates the International Phonetic Alphabet (IPA) transcription, the second indicates pinyin for a standalone (no-initial) form, and the third indicates pinyin for a combination with an initial. Other than finals modified by an \"-r\", which are omitted, the following is an exhaustive table of all possible finals.\nThe only syllable-final consonants in Standard Chinese are \"-n\", \"-ng\", and \"-r\", the last of which is attached as a grammatical suffix. A Chinese syllable ending with any other consonant either is from a non-Mandarin language (a southern Chinese language such as Cantonese, reflecting final consonants in Old Chinese), or indicates the use of a non-pinyin romanization system, such as one that uses final consonants to indicate tones. \nTechnically, \"i, u, \u00fc\" without a following vowel are finals, not medials, and therefore take the tone marks, but they are more concisely displayed as above. In addition, \"\u00ea\" () and syllabic nasals \"m\" (, ), \"n\" (, ), \"ng\" (, ) are used as interjections or in neologisms; for example, pinyin defines the names of several pinyin letters using \"-\u00ea\" finals.\nAccording to the \"Scheme for the Chinese Phonetic Alphabet\", \"ng\" can be abbreviated with the shorthand \"\u014b\". However, this shorthand is rarely used due to difficulty of entering it on computers.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe \u27e8\u00fc\u27e9 sound.\nAn umlaut is added to \u27e8\u27e9 when it occurs after the initials \u27e8\u27e9 and \u27e8\u27e9 when necessary in order to represent the sound . This is necessary in order to distinguish the front high rounded vowel in (e.g. ) from the back high rounded vowel in (e.g. ). Tonal markers are placed above the umlaut, as in .\nHowever, the \"\u00fc\" is \"not\" used in the other contexts where it could represent a front high rounded vowel, namely after the letters \"j\", \"q\", \"x\", and \"y\". For example, the sound of the word for is transcribed in pinyin simply as , not as *. This practice is opposed to Wade\u2013Giles, which always uses \"\u00fc\", and Tongyong Pinyin, which always uses \"yu\". Whereas Wade\u2013Giles needs the umlaut to distinguish between \"ch\u00fc\" (pinyin ) and \"chu\" (pinyin ), this ambiguity does not arise with pinyin, so the more convenient form \"ju\" is used instead of \"j\u00fc\". Genuine ambiguities only happen with \"nu\"/\"n\u00fc\" and \"lu\"/\"l\u00fc\", which are then distinguished by an umlaut.\nMany fonts or output methods do not support an umlaut for \"\u00fc\" or cannot place tone marks on top of \"\u00fc\". Likewise, using \"\u00fc\" in input methods is difficult because it is not present as a simple key on many keyboard layouts. For these reasons \"v\" is sometimes used instead by convention. For example, it is common for cellphones to use \"v\" instead of \"\u00fc\". Additionally, some stores in China use \"v\" instead of \"\u00fc\" in the transliteration of their names. The drawback is a lack of precomposed characters and limited font support for combining accents on the letter \"v\", ().\nThis also presents a problem in transcribing names for use on passports, affecting people with names that consist of the sound or , particularly people with the surname , a fairly common surname, particularly compared to the surnames , , and . Previously, the practice varied among different passport issuing offices, with some transcribing as \"LV\" and \"NV\" while others used \"LU\" and \"NU\". On 10 July 2012, the Ministry of Public Security standardized the practice to use \"LYU\" and \"NYU\" in passports.\nAlthough \"n\u00fce\" written as \"nue\", and \"l\u00fce\" written as \"lue\" are not ambiguous, \"nue\" or \"lue\" are not correct according to the rules; \"n\u00fce\" and \"l\u00fce\" should be used instead. However, some Chinese input methods support both \"nve\"/\"lve\" (typing \"v\" for \"\u00fc\") and \"nue\"/\"lue\".\nTones.\nThe pinyin system also uses four diacritics to mark the tones of Mandarin. In the pinyin system, four main tones of Mandarin are shown by diacritics: \u0101, \u00e1, \u01ce, and \u00e0. There is no symbol or diacritic for the neutral tone: a. The diacritic is placed over the letter that represents the syllable nucleus, unless that letter is missing. Tones are used in Hanyu Pinyin symbols, and they do not appear in Chinese characters.\nTones are written on the finals of Chinese pinyin. If the tone mark is written over an \"i\", then it replaces the tittle, as in .\nIn dictionaries, neutral tone may be indicated by a dot preceding the syllable\u2014e.g. . When a neutral tone syllable has an alternative pronunciation in another tone, a combination of tone marks may be used: may be pronounced either or .\nNumbers.\nBefore the advent of computers, many typewriter fonts did not contain vowels with macron or caron diacritics. Tones were thus represented by placing a tone number at the end of individual syllables. For example, is written . Each tone can be denoted with its numeral the order listed above. The neutral tone can either be denoted with no numeral, with 0, or with 5.\nPlacement and omission.\nBriefly, tone marks should always be placed in the order , with the only exception being where the tone mark is placed on the second vowel instead. Pinyin tone marks appear primarily above the syllable nucleus\u2014e.g. as in , where \"k\" is the initial, \"u\" the medial, \"a\" the nucleus, and \"i\" is the coda. There is an exception for syllabic nasals like , where the nucleus of the syllable is a consonant: there, the diacritic will be carried by a written dummy vowel.\nWhen the nucleus is (written \"e\" or \"o\"), and there is both a medial and a coda, the nucleus may be dropped from writing. In this case, when the coda is a consonant \"n\" or \"ng\", the only vowel left is the medial \"i, u\", or \"\u00fc\", and so this takes the diacritic. However, when the coda is a vowel, it is the coda rather than the medial which takes the diacritic in the absence of a written nucleus. This occurs with syllables ending in (from : \u2192 ) and in (from : \u2192 ). That is, in the absence of a written nucleus the finals have priority for receiving the tone marker, as long as they are vowels; if not, the medial takes the diacritic.\nAn algorithm to find the correct vowel letter (when there is more than one) is as follows:\nWorded differently,\nThe above can be summarized as the following table. The vowel letter taking the tone mark is indicated by the fourth-tone mark.\nTone sandhi.\nTone sandhi is not ordinarily reflected in pinyin spelling.\nSpacing, capitalization, and punctuation.\nStandard Chinese has many polysyllabic words. Like in other writing systems using the Latin alphabet, spacing in pinyin is officially based on word boundaries. However, there are often ambiguities in partitioning a word. \"The Basic Rules of the Chinese Phonetic Alphabet Orthography\" were put into effect in 1988 by the National Educational and National Language commissions. These rules became a GB recommendation in 1996, and were last updated in 2012.\nIn practice, however, published materials in China now often space pinyin syllable by syllable. According to Victor H. Mair, this practice became widespread after the Script Reform Committee, previously under direct control of the State Council, had its power greatly weakened in 1985 when it was renamed the State Language Commission and placed under the Ministry of Education. Mair claims that proponents of Chinese characters in the educational bureaucracy \"became alarmed that word-based pinyin was becoming a de facto alternative to Chinese characters as a script for writing Mandarin and demanded that all pinyin syllables be written separately.\"\nComparison with other orthographies.\nPinyin superseded older romanization systems such as Wade\u2013Giles and postal romanization, and replaced bopomofo as the method of Chinese phonetic instruction in mainland China. The ISO adopted pinyin as the standard romanization for modern Chinese in 1982 (ISO 7098:1982, superseded by ISO 7098:2015). The United Nations followed suit in 1986. It has also been accepted by the government of Singapore, the United States's Library of Congress, the American Library Association, and many other international institutions.\nCompared to Wade-Giles, pinyin more accurately reflects the aspiration distinction for English speakers, but assigns some Latin letters sound values which are quite different from those of most languages. This has drawn some criticism as it may lead to confusion when uninformed speakers apply either native or English assumed pronunciations to words. However, this problem is not limited to pinyin, since many languages that use the Latin alphabet natively also assign different values to the same letters. A 2014 overview of topics in Chinese writing and literacy claimed, \"By and large, pinyin represents the Chinese sounds better than the Wade\u2013Giles system, and does so with fewer extra marks.\".\nAs pinyin is a phonetic writing system for modern Standard Chinese, it is not designed to replace characters for writing Literary Chinese, the standard written language prior to the early 20th century. In particular, Chinese characters retain semantic cues that help distinguish differently pronounced words in the ancient classical language that are now homophones in Mandarin. Thus, Chinese characters remain indispensable for recording and transmitting the corpus of Chinese writing from the past.\nPinyin is not designed to transcribe varieties other than Standard Chinese, which is based on the phonological system of Beijing Mandarin. Other romanization schemes have been devised to transcribe those other Chinese varieties, such as Jyutping for Cantonese and Pe\u030dh-\u014de-j\u012b for Hokkien.\nTypography and encoding.\nBased on the \"Chinese Romanization\" section of ISO 7098:2015, pinyin tone marks should use the symbols from Combining Diacritical Marks, as opposed by the use of Spacing Modifier Letters in bopomofo. Lowercase letters with tone marks are included in GB 2312 and their uppercase counterparts are included in JIS X 0212; thus Unicode includes all the common accented characters from pinyin. Other punctuation mark and symbols in Chinese are to use the equivalent symbol in English noted in to GB 15834.\nAccording to GB 16159, all accented letters are required to have both uppercase and lowercase characters as per their normal counterparts.\nGBK has mapped two characters \u27e8\u1e3f\u27e9 and \u27e8\u01f9\u27e9 to Private Use Areas in Unicode respectively, thus some fonts (e.g. SimSun) that adhere to GBK include both characters in the Private Use Areas, and some input methods (e.g. Sogou Pinyin) also outputs the Private Use Areas code point instead of the original character. As the superset GB 18030 changed the mappings of \u27e8\u1e3f\u27e9 and \u27e8\u01f9\u27e9, this has caused an issue where the input methods and font files use different encoding standards, and thus the input and output of both characters are mixed up.\nOther symbols are used in pinyin are as follows:\nUsage.\nThe spelling of Chinese geographical or personal names in pinyin has become the most common way to transcribe them in English. Pinyin has also become the dominant Chinese input method in mainland China, in contrast to Taiwan, where bopomofo is most commonly used.\nFamilies outside of Taiwan who speak Mandarin as a mother tongue use pinyin to help children associate characters with spoken words which they already know. Children start to learn it in kindergarten, but pinyin disappears from textbooks after primary school. Chinese families outside of Taiwan who speak some other language as their mother tongue use the system to teach children Mandarin pronunciation when learning vocabulary in elementary school.\nSince 1958, pinyin has been actively used in adult education as well, making it easier for formerly illiterate people to continue with self-study after a short period of pinyin literacy instruction.\nPinyin has become a tool for many foreigners to learn Mandarin pronunciation, and is used to explain both the grammar and spoken Mandarin coupled with Chinese characters. Books containing both Chinese characters and pinyin are often used by foreign learners of Chinese. Pinyin's role in teaching pronunciation to foreigners and children is similar in some respects to \"furigana\"-based books with \"hiragana\" letters written alongside kanji (directly analogous to bopomofo) in Japanese, or fully vocalized texts in Arabic.\nThe tone-marking diacritics are commonly omitted in popular news stories and even in scholarly works, as well as in the traditional Mainland Chinese Braille system, which is similar to pinyin, but meant for blind readers. This results in some degree of ambiguity as to which words are being represented.\nComputer input.\nSimple computer systems, sometimes only able to use simple character systems for text, such as the 7-bit ASCII standard\u2014essentially the 26 Latin letters, 10 digits, and punctuation marks\u2014long provided a convincing argument for using unaccented pinyin instead of diacritical pinyin or Chinese characters. Today, however, most computer systems are able to display characters from Chinese and many other writing systems as well, and have them entered with a Latin keyboard using an input method editor. Alternatively, some touchscreen devices allow users to input characters graphically by writing with a stylus, with concurrent online handwriting recognition.\nPinyin with accents can be entered with the use of special keyboard layouts or various other utilities.\nSorting techniques.\nChinese text can be sorted by its pinyin representation, which is often useful for looking up words whose pronunciations are known, but not whose character forms are not known. Chinese characters and words can be sorted for convenient lookup by their Pinyin expressions alphabetically. Identical syllables are then further sorted by tone number, ascending, with neutral tones placed last.\nWords of multiple characters can be sorted in two different ways, either per character, as is used in the \"Xiandai Hanyu Cidian\", or by the whole word's string, which is only then sorted by tone. This method is used in the \"ABC Chinese\u2013English Dictionary\".\nBy region.\nTaiwan.\nBetween October 2002 and January 2009, Taiwan used Tongyong Pinyin, a domestic modification of Hanyu Pinyin, as its official romanization system. Thereafter, it began to promote the use of Hanyu Pinyin instead. Tongyong Pinyin was designed to romanize varieties spoken on the island in addition to Standard Chinese. The ruling Kuomintang (KMT) party resisted its adoption, preferring the system by then used in mainland China and internationally. Romanization preferences quickly became associated with issues of national identity. Preferences split along party lines: the KMT and its affiliated parties in the Pan-Blue Coalition supported the use of Hanyu Pinyin while the Democratic Progressive Party (DPP) and its allies in the Pan-Green Coalition favored the use of Tongyong Pinyin.\nToday, many street signs in Taiwan use Tongyong Pinyin or derived romanizations, but some use Hanyu Pinyin\u2013derived romanizations. It is not unusual to see spellings on street signs and buildings derived from the older Wade\u2013Giles, MPS2 and other systems. Attempts to make Hanyu Pinyin standard in Taiwan have had uneven success, with most place and proper names remaining unaffected, including all major cities. Personal names on Taiwanese passports honor the choices of Taiwanese citizens, who can choose Wade\u2013Giles, Hakka, Hoklo, Tongyong, aboriginal, or pinyin. Official use of pinyin is controversial, as when pinyin use for a metro line in 2017 provoked protests, despite government responses that \"The romanization used on road signs and at transportation stations is intended for foreigners... Every foreigner learning Mandarin learns Hanyu pinyin, because it is the international standard...The decision has nothing to do with the nation's self-determination or any ideologies, because the key point is to ensure that foreigners can read signs.\"\nSingapore.\nSingapore implemented Hanyu Pinyin as the official romanization system for Mandarin in the public sector starting in the 1980s, in conjunction with the Speak Mandarin Campaign. Hanyu Pinyin is also used as the romanization system to teach Mandarin Chinese at schools. While adoption has been mostly successful in government communication, placenames, and businesses established in the 1980s and onward, it continues to be unpopular in some areas, most notably for personal names and vocabulary borrowed from other varieties of Chinese already established in the local vernacular. In these situations, romanization continues to be based on the Chinese language variety it originated from, especially the three largest Chinese varieties traditionally spoken in Singapore: Hokkien, Teochew, and Cantonese.\nSpecial names.\nIn accordance to the \"Regulation of Phonetic Transcription in Hanyu Pinyin Letters of Place Names in Minority Nationality Languages\" () promulgated in 1976, place names in non-Han languages like Mongolian, Uyghur, and Tibetan are also officially transcribed using pinyin in a system adopted by the State Administration of Surveying and Mapping and Geographical Names Committee known as SASM/GNC romanization. The pinyin letters (26 Roman letters, plus \u27e8\u00fc\u27e9 and \u27e8\u00ea\u27e9) are used to approximate the non-Han language in question as closely as possible. This results in spellings that are different from both the customary spelling of the place name, and the pinyin spelling of the name in Chinese:\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWorks cited.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23589", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23589", "title": "Parable of the Pearl", "text": "Biblical story\nThe Parable of the Pearl (also called the Pearl of Great Price) is one of the parables of Jesus Christ. It appears in Matthew 13 and illustrates the great value of the Kingdom of Heaven.\nThis is the penultimate parable in Matthew 13, coming just before the Parable of the Dragnet. It immediately follows the Parable of the Hidden Treasure, which has a similar theme. It does not appear in the other synoptic gospels, but a version of this parable does appear in the non-canonical Gospel of Thomas, Saying 76. The parable has been depicted by artists such as Domenico Fetti.\nThe parable reads as follows:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Again, the kingdom of heaven is like unto a merchant man, seeking goodly pearls: Who, when he had found one pearl of great price, went and sold all that he had, and bought it.\u2014\u200a\nInterpretation.\nThis parable is generally interpreted as illustrating the great value of the Kingdom of Heaven. Theologian E. H. Plumptre, in Anglican bishop Charles Ellicott's \"Commentary\", notes that:\n\"the caprices of luxury in the Roman empire had given a prominence to pearls, as an article of commerce, which they had never had before, and have probably never had since. They, rather than emeralds and sapphires, were the typical instance of all costliest adornments. The story of Cleopatra and the fact that the opening of a new pearl market was one of the alleged motives which led the Emperor Claudius to invade Britain, are indications of the value that was then set on the 'goodly pearls' of the parable.\" \nTheologian John Nolland likewise notes that pearls at that time had a greater value than they do today, and it thus has a similar theme to its partner, the parable of the hidden treasure. Nolland comments that it shares with that parable the notions of \"good fortune and demanding action in attaining the kingdom of heaven\" but adds in this case the notion of \"diligent seeking\". The valuable pearl is the \"deal of a lifetime\" for the merchant in the story. However, those who do not believe in the kingdom of heaven enough to stake their whole future on it are unworthy of the kingdom.\nThis interpretation of the parable is the inspiration for a number of hymns, including the anonymous Swedish hymn \"Den Kostliga P\u00e4rlan\" (\"O That Pearl of Great Price!\"), which begins:\n&lt;poem&gt;\nO that Pearl of great price! have you found it?\nIs the Savior supreme in your love?\nO consider it well, ere you answer,\nAs you hope for a welcome above.\nHave you given up all for this Treasure?\nHave you counted past gains as but loss?\nHas your trust in yourself and your merits\nCome to naught before Christ and His cross?\n&lt;/poem&gt;\nA less common interpretation of the parable is that the merchant represents Jesus, and the pearl represents the Christian Church, though that definition is problematic as neither the Christian church nor Christianity existed until after Jesus' death. This interpretation would give the parable a similar theme to that of the Parable of the Lost Sheep, the Lost Coin, and the Prodigal Son. Pope Pius XII used the phrase to describe virginity. \nCommentary from the Church Fathers.\nJohn Chrysostom: \"The Gospel preaching not only offers manifold gain as a treasure, but is precious as a pearl; wherefore after the parable concerning the treasure, He gives that concerning the pearl. And in preaching, two things are required, namely, to be detached from the business of this life, and to be watchful, which are denoted by this merchantman. Truth moreover is one, and not manifold, and for this reason it is one pearl that is said to be found. And as one who is possessed of a pearl, himself indeed knows of his wealth, but is not known to others, ofttimes concealing it in his hand because of its small bulk, so it is in the preaching of the Gospel; they who possess it know that they are rich, the unbelievers, not knowing of this treasure, know not of our wealth.\"\nJerome: \"By the goodly pearls may be understood the Law and the Prophets. Hear then Marcion and Manich\u00e6us; the good pearls are the Law and the Prophets. One pearl, the most precious of all, is the knowledge of the Saviour and the sacrament of His passion and resurrection, which when the merchantman has found, like Paul the Apostle, he straightway despises all the mysteries of the Law and the Prophets and the old observances in which he had lived blameless, counting them as dung that he may win Christ (Phillipians 3:8.) Not that the finding of a new pearl is the condemnation of the old pearls, but that in comparison of that, all other pearls are worthless.\"\nGregory the Great: \"Or by the pearl of price is to be understood the sweetness of the heavenly kingdom, which, he that hath found it, selleth all and buyeth. For he that, as far as is permitted, has had perfect knowledge of the sweetness of the heavenly life, readily leaves all things that he has loved on earth; all that once pleased him among earthly possessions now appears to have lost its beauty, for the splendour of that precious pearl is alone seen in his mind.\"\nAugustine: \"Or, A man seeking goodly pearls has found one pearl of great price; that is, he who is seeking good men with whom he may live profitably, finds one alone, Christ Jesus, without sin; or, seeking precepts of life, by aid of which he may dwell righteously among men, finds love of his neighbour, in which one rule, the Apostle says, (Romans 13:9) are comprehended all things; or, seeking good thoughts, he finds that Word in which all things are contained, In the beginning was the Word (John 1:1) which is lustrous with the light of truth, stedfast with the strength of eternity, and throughout like to itself with the beauty of divinity, and when we have penetrated the shell of the flesh, will be confessed as God. But whichever of these three it may be, or if there be anything else that can occur to us, that can be signified under the figure of the one precious pearl, its preciousness is the possession of ourselves, who are not free to possess it unless we despise all things that can be possessed in this world. For having sold our possessions, we receive no other return greater than ourselves, (for while we were involved in such things we were not our own,) that we may again give ourselves for that pearl, not because we are of equal value to that, but because we cannot give anything more.\"\nGospel of Thomas.\nA version of the parable appears in the Gnostic Gospel of Thomas (Saying 76):\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Jesus said, \"The Father's kingdom is like a merchant who had a supply of merchandise and found a pearl. That merchant was prudent; he sold the merchandise and bought the single pearl for himself.\nSo also with you, seek his treasure that is unfailing, that is enduring, where no moth comes to eat and no worm destroys.\"\u2014\u200a\nThis work's version of the parable of the hidden treasure appears later (Saying 109), rather than immediately preceding, as in Matthew. However, the mention of a treasure in Saying 76 may reflect a source for the Gospel of Thomas in which the parables were adjacent, so that the original pair of parables has been \"broken apart, placed in separate contexts, and expanded in a manner characteristic of folklore.\" In Gnostic thought the pearl may represent Christ or the true self. In the Gnostic Acts of Peter and the Twelve, found with the Gospel of Thomas in the Nag Hammadi library, the travelling pearl merchant Lithargoel is eventually revealed to be Jesus.\nDepictions.\nThere have been several depictions of the New Testament parable in art, including works by Domenico Fetti, John Everett Millais and Jan Luyken.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
