{"id": "20391", "revid": "11689218", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20391", "title": "Economy of Myanmar", "text": "The economy of Myanmar is the seventh largest in Southeast Asia. After the return of civilian rule in 2011, the new government launched large-scale reforms, focused initially on the political system to restore peace and achieve national unity and moving quickly to an economic and social reform program. Current economic statistics were a huge decline from the economic statistics of Myanmar in the fiscal year of 2020, in which Myanmar's nominal GDP was $81.26 billion and its purchasing power adjusted GDP was $312.49 billion. Myanmar has faced an economic crisis since the 2021 coup d'\u00e9tat. According to the International Monetary Fund (IMF), Myanmar's GDP per capita in 2024 was $1,110.\nHistory.\nClassical era.\nBurma has been the main trade route between China and India since 100 BC. The Mon Kingdom of lower Burma served as important trading centre in the Bay of Bengal. The majority of the population was involved in rice production and other forms of agriculture. Burma used silver as the trade currency. All land was nominally owned by the Burmese monarch. Exports, along with oil wells, gem mining and teak production were controlled by the monarch. Burma was vitally involved in the Indian Ocean trade. Logged teak was a prized export that was used in European shipbuilding because of its durability, and became the focal point of Burmese exports from the 1700s to the 1800s.\nUnder the monarchy, the economy of Myanmar had been based on communal redistribution known in Myanmar as D\u0101na. The state set the prices of the most important commodities. Agrarian self-sufficiency was vital, while trade was only of secondary importance.\nBritish Burma (1885\u20131948).\nUnder the British administration, the people of Burma were at the bottom of social hierarchy, with Europeans at the top, Indians, Chinese, and Christianized minorities in the middle, and Buddhist Burmese at the bottom. Integrated into the world economy by force, economic growth in Burma was driven by the extractive industries and cash crop agriculture, and the country had the second-highest GDP per capita in Southeast Asia. However, much of the wealth was concentrated in the hands of Europeans. The country became the world's largest exporter of rice, mainly to European markets, while other colonies like India suffered mass starvation. The British followed the ideologies of Social Darwinism and the free market, and opened up the country to a large-scale immigration with Rangoon exceeding New York City as the greatest immigration port in the world in the 1920s. Historian Thant Myint-U states, \"This was out of a total population of only 13 million; it was equivalent to the United Kingdom today taking 2 million people a year.\" By then, in most of the largest cities in Burma, Rangoon, Akyab, Bassein and Moulmein, the Indian immigrants formed a majority of the population. The Burmese under British rule felt helpless, and reacted with a \"racism that combined feelings of superiority and fear\".\nCrude oil production, an indigenous industry of Yenangyaung, was taken over by the British and put under Burmah Oil monopoly. British Burma began exporting crude oil in 1853. It produced 75% of the world's teak. The wealth was however, mainly concentrated in the hands of Europeans. In the 1930s, agricultural production fell dramatically as international rice prices declined and did not recover for several decades.\nDuring the Japanese invasion of Burma in World War II, the British followed a scorched earth policy. They destroyed the major government buildings, oil wells and mines for tungsten, tin, lead and silver to keep them from the Japanese. Myanmar was bombed extensively by the Allies. After independence, the country was in ruins with its major infrastructure completely destroyed. With the loss of India, Burma lost relevance and obtained independence from the British. After a parliamentary government was formed in 1948, Prime Minister U Nu embarked upon a policy of nationalisation and the state was declared the owner of all land. The government tried to implement an eight-year plan partly financed by injecting money into the economy which caused some inflation.\nPost-independence and under U Nu and Ne Win (1948\u20131988).\nAfter a parliamentary government was formed in 1948, Prime Minister U Nu embarked upon a policy of nationalisation. He attempted to make Burma a welfare state by adopting central planning measures. By the 1950s, rice exports had decreased by two-thirds and mineral exports by over 96%. Plans were implemented in setting up light consumer industries by private sector. The 1962 Burmese coup d'\u00e9tat was followed by an economic scheme called the Burmese Way to Socialism, a plan to nationalise all industries, with the exception of agriculture. The catastrophic program turned Burma into one of the world's most impoverished countries. Burma was classified as a least developed country by the United Nations in 1987.\nRule of the generals (1988\u20132011).\nAfter 1988, the regime retreated from a command economy. It permitted modest expansion of the private sector, allowed some foreign investment, and received much needed foreign exchange. Than Shwe advocated for some deregulation economic policies, despite his relaxation of some restrictions on Burma's economy, his economic policies have been often criticized as ill-planned. Shwe relaxed some state control over the economy, and was a supporter of Burma's participation in the Association of South East Asian Nations (ASEAN). He also oversaw a large crackdown on corruption, which saw the sackings of a number of cabinet ministers and regional commanders in 1997. Shwe advocated for Crony capitalism. The economy was rated in 2009 as the least free in Asia (tied with North Korea). All basic market institutions are suppressed. Private enterprises were often co-owned or indirectly owned by state. The corruption watchdog organisation Transparency International in its 2007 Corruption Perceptions Index released on 26 September 2007 ranked Burma the most corrupt country in the world, tied with Somalia.\nThe national currency is the kyat. Burma currently has a dual exchange rate system similar to Cuba. The market rate was around two hundred times below the government-set rate in 2006. In 2011, the Burmese government enlisted the aid of the International Monetary Fund to evaluate options to reform the current exchange rate system, to stabilise the domestic foreign exchange trading market and reduce economic distortions. The dual exchange rate system allows for the government and state-owned enterprises to divert funds and revenues, while also giving the government more control over the local economy and making it possible to temporarily subdue inflation.\nInflation averaged 30.1% between 2005 and 2007. In April 2007, the National League for Democracy organised a two-day workshop on the economy. The workshop concluded that skyrocketing inflation was impeding economic growth. \"Basic commodity prices have increased from 30% to 60% since the military regime promoted a pay rise for government workers in April 2006,\" said Soe Win, the moderator of the workshop. \"Inflation is also correlated with corruption.\" Myint Thein, an NLD spokesperson, added: \"Inflation is the critical source of the current economic crisis.\"\nIn recent years, China and India attempted to strengthen ties with Myanmar for mutual benefit. The European Union and some nations including the United States and Canada imposed investment and trade sanctions on Burma. The United States banned all imports from Burma, though this restriction was since lifted. Foreign investment comes primarily from China, Singapore, South Korea, India, and Thailand.\nEconomic liberalisation (2011\u20132019).\nIn 2011, when new President Thein Sein's government came to power, Burma embarked on a major policy of reforms including anti-corruption, currency exchange rate regulation, foreign investment laws and taxation. Foreign investments increased from US$300 million in 2009\u201310 to a US$20 billion in 2010\u201311 by about 6567%. Large inflow of capital results in stronger Burmese currency, kyat by about 25%. In response, the government relaxed import restrictions and abolished export taxes. Despite current currency problems, Burmese economy is expected to grow by about 8.8% in 2011. After the completion of 58-billion dollar Dawei deep seaport, Burma is expected be at the hub of trade connecting Southeast Asia and the South China Sea, via the Andaman Sea, to the Indian Ocean receiving goods from countries in the Middle East, Europe and Africa, and spurring growth in the ASEAN region.\nIn 2012, the Asian Development Bank formally began re-engaging with the country, to finance infrastructure and development projects in the country. The $512 million loan is the first issued by the ADB to Myanmar in 30 years and will target banking services, ultimately leading to other major investments in road, energy, irrigation and education projects.\nIn March 2012, a draft foreign investment law emerged, the first in more than 2 decades. This law oversees the unprecedented liberalisation of the economy. It for example stipulates that foreigners no longer require a local partner to start a business in the country and can legally lease land. The draft law also stipulates that Burmese citizens must constitute at least 25% of the firm's skilled workforce, and with subsequent training, up to 50\u201375%.\nOn 28 January 2013, the government of Myanmar announced deals with international lenders to cancel or refinance nearly $6 billion of its debt, almost 60 per cent of what it owes to foreign lenders. Japan wrote off US$3 Billion, nations in the group of Paris Club wrote off US$2.2 Billion and Norway wrote off US$534 Million.\nMyanmar's inward foreign direct investment has steadily increased since its reform. The country approved US$4.4 billion worth of investment projects between January and November 2014.\nAccording to one report released on 30 May 2013, by the McKinsey Global Institute, Burma's future looks bright, with its economy expected to quadruple by 2030 if it invests in more high-tech industries. This however does assume that other factors (such as drug trade, the continuing war of the government with specific ethnic groups, etc.) do not interfere.\nAs of October 2017, less than 10% of Myanmar's population has a bank account. As of 2016\u201317 approximately 98 percent of the population has smartphones and mobile money schemes are being implemented without the use of banks similar to African countries.\nEconomic crisis (2020\u2013present).\nMyanmar's economy has been in economic crisis since the coup d'\u00e9tat in February 2021. On April 30, 2021, the United Nations Development Programme noted that the COVID-19 pandemic and the 2021 Myanmar coup d'\u00e9tat could reverse economic gains made over the last sixteen years. Overall, Myanmar's economy under SAC rule is defined by stagnation, inflation, capital flight, and fractured governance. With no political resolution in sight, prospects for recovery and inclusive growth remain bleak. The SAC's economic strategy prioritizes regime survival through resource extraction and coercive controls, such as forced currency conversions and price fixing. This erratic and reactionary governance has undermined investor confidence and distorted markets.\nUnder the military-led State Administration Council (SAC), Myanmar's economy has sharply declined, becoming the weakest in Southeast Asia. In fiscal year 2024-25, real GDP is projected to contract by 1%, continuing a prolonged downturn following an 18% collapse post-coup. Agriculture shrank by 4%, while industry and services showed no growth. As the formal economy contracts, informal and illicit sectors have expanded. Myanmar is now the world's largest opium producer and a major hub for synthetic drugs and online scam centers. Foreign investment has plummeted, with FDI approvals dropping from over $5 billion in fiscal year 2019-20 to $662 million in fiscal year 2023-24. International sanctions, financial blacklisting, and growing regulatory opacity have further discouraged engagement.\nPoverty has surged nationwide, with 77% of households now poor or near-poor, up from 58% in 2017. High inflation\u2014driven by extensive money printing\u2014peaked at 35% in 2022 and remains elevated, particularly for food and transport. Real wages have fallen across sectors, deepening household vulnerability. Labour shortages have worsened due to mass outmigration, particularly after the 2024 conscription law. An estimated one-fifth of the population has left their communities due to conflict or hardship, draining the workforce and reducing productivity. Trade declined in 2023 after a brief rebound, with exports down $4 billion and land border trade sharply reduced in 2024. The financial sector remains weak, with liquidity shortages, low public trust, and a shrinking microfinance industry.\nWhen the kyat fell by a third of its pre-coup value, the central bank then sold $600 million worth of foreign reserves (10% of the entire country's total) to prop up the kyat. By April 2022, reserves dwindled, foreign investment fell and remittances plummeted. This led the junta to impose capital controls and import restrictions which led to shortages of diabetes and cancer medicines.\nThe overall loss of skilled workers has contributed to a 9\u201311% GDP contraction since 2020. With the SAC prioritizing military aims over economic and human development, Myanmar faces a prolonged human resource crisis that could impact its economic recovery for decades.\nStill unresolved internal problems.\nIn a first ever countrywide study in 2013, the Myanmar government found that 37 per cent of the population were unemployed and 26 per cent lived in poverty.\nThe current state of the Burmese economy has also had a significant impact on the people of Burma, as economic hardship results in extreme delays of marriage and family building. The average age of marriage in Burma is 27.5 for men, 26.4 for women, almost unparalleled in the region, with the exception of developed countries like Singapore.\nBurma also has a low fertility rate of 2.07 children per woman (2010), especially as compared to other Southeast Asian countries of similar economic standing, like Cambodia (3.18) and Laos (4.41), representing a significant decline from 4.7 in 1983, despite the absence of a national population policy. This is at least partly attributed to the economic strain that additional children place on family income, and has resulted in the prevalence of illegal abortions in the country, as well as use of other forms of birth control.\nThe 2012 foreign investment law draft, included a proposal to transform the Myanmar Investment Commission from a government-appointed body into an independent board. This could bring greater transparency to the process of issuing investment licenses, according to the proposed reforms drafted by experts and senior officials. However, even with this draft, it will still remain a question on whether corruption in the government can be addressed (links have been shown between certain key individuals inside the government and the drug trade, as well as many industries that use forced labour -for example the mining industry-).\nMany regions (such as the Golden Triangle) remain off-limits for foreigners, and in some of these regions, the government is at war with the country's ethnic minorities and the opposition.\nIndustries.\nThe major agricultural product is rice which covers about 60% of the country's total cultivated land area. Rice accounts for 97% of total food grain production by weight. Through collaboration with the International Rice Research Institute (IRRI), 52 modern rice varieties were released in the country between 1966 and 1997, helping increase national rice production to 14 million tons in 1987 and to 19 million tons in 1996. By 1988, modern varieties were planted on half of the country's rice fields, including 98% of the irrigated areas. In 2011, Myanmar's total milled rice production accounted for 10.60 million tons, an increase from the 1.8 per cent back in 2010.\nIn northern Burma, opium bans have ended a century old tradition of growing poppy. Between 20,000 and 30,000 ex-poppy farmers left the Kokang region as a result of the ban in 2002.\nRubber plantations are being promoted in areas of high elevation like Mong Mao. Sugar is grown in the lowlands such as Mong Pawk District.\nThe lack of an educated workforce skilled in modern technology contributes to the country's economic problems.\nLately, the Myanmar lacks adequate infrastructure. Goods travel primarily across Thai and China borders and through the main port in Yangon.\nRailroads are old and dilapidated, with few repairs since their construction under British rule in the late nineteenth century. Presently China and Japan are providing aid to upgrade rail transport. Highways are normally paved, except in remote border regions. Energy shortages are common throughout the country including in Yangon. About 30 percent of the country's population does not have access to electricity, with 70 per cent of people living in rural areas. The civilian government has indicated that electricity will be imported from Laos to fulfil demand.\nOther industries include agricultural goods, textiles, wood products, construction materials, gems, metals, oil and natural gas.\nThe private sector dominates agriculture, light industry, and transport activities, while the government controls energy, heavy industry, and military industries.\nGarment production.\nThe garment industry is a major job creator in the Yangon area, with around 200,000 workers employed in total in mid-2015. The Myanmar Government has introduced minimum wage of MMK 4,800 (US$3.18) per day for the garment workers from March 2018.\nThe Myanmar garments sector has seen significant influx of foreign direct investment, if measured by the number of entries\nrather than their value. In March 2012, six of Thailand's largest garment manufacturers announced that they would move production to Myanmar, principally to the Yangon area, citing lower labour costs. In mid-2015, about 55% of officially registered garment firms in Myanmar were known to be fully or partly foreign-owned, with about 25% of the foreign firms from China and 17% from Hong Kong. Foreign-linked firms supply almost all garment exports, and these have risen rapidly in recent years, especially since EU sanctions were lifted in 2012. Myanmar exported $1.6 billion worth of garments and textiles in 2016.\nIllegal drug trade.\nBurma (Myanmar) is the largest producer of methamphetamines in the world, with the majority of \"ya ba\" found in Thailand produced in Burma, particularly in the Golden Triangle and Northeastern Shan State, which borders Thailand, Laos and China. Burmese-produced \"ya ba\" is typically trafficked to Thailand via Laos, before being transported through the northeastern Thai region of Isan.\nIn 2010, Burma trafficked 1 billion tablets to neighbouring Thailand. In 2009, the Chinese authorities seized over 40 million tablets that had been illegally trafficked from Burma. Ethnic militias and rebel groups (in particular the United Wa State Army) are responsible for much of this production; however, the Burmese military units are believed to be heavily involved in the trafficking of the drugs.\nBurma is also the second largest supplier of opium (following Afghanistan) in the world, with 95% of opium grown in Shan State. Illegal narcotics have generated $1 to US$2 billion in exports annually, with estimates of 40% of the country's foreign exchange coming from drugs. Efforts to eradicate opium cultivation have pushed many ethnic rebel groups, including the United Wa State Army and the Kokang to diversify into methamphetamine production.\nPrior to the 1980s, heroin was typically transported from Burma to Thailand, before being trafficked by sea to Hong Kong, which was and still remains the major transit point at which heroin enters the international market. Now, drug trafficking has shifted to southern China (from Yunnan, Guizhou, Guangxi, Guangdong) because of a growing market for drugs in China, before reaching Hong Kong.\nThe prominence of major drug traffickers have allowed them to penetrate other sectors of the Burmese economy, including the banking, airline, hotel and infrastructure industries. Their investment in infrastructure have allowed them to make more profits, facilitate drug trafficking and money laundering. The share of informal economy in Myanmar is one of the largest in the world that feeds into trade in illegal drugs.\nRenewable energy.\nMyanmar has rich solar power and hydropower potential. The country's technical solar power potential is the greatest among the countries of the Greater Mekong Subregion. Wind energy, biogas and biomass have limited potential and are weakly developed.\nFinancing geothermal projects in Myanmar use an estimated break even power cost of 5.3\u20138.6 U.S cents/kWh or in Myanmar Kyat 53\u201386K per kWh. This pegs a non-fluctuating $1=1000K, which is a main concern for power project funding. The main drawback with depreciation pressures, in the current FX market.\nBetween June 2012 and October 2015, the Myanmar Kyat depreciated by approximately 35%, from 850 down to 1300 against the US Dollar. Local businesses with foreign denominated loans from abroad suddenly found themselves rushing for a strategy to mitigate currency risks. Myanmar's current lack of available currency hedging solutions presents a real challenge for geothermal project financing.\nGemstones.\nMyanmar's economy depends heavily on sales of precious stones such as sapphires, pearls and jade. Rubies are the biggest earner; 90% of the world's rubies come from the country, whose red stones are prized for their purity and hue. Thailand buys the majority of the country's gems. Burma's \"Valley of Rubies\", the mountainous Mogok area, north of Mandalay, is noted for its rare pigeon's blood rubies and blue sapphires. Burma's gemstone industry is a cornerstone of the Burmese economy with exports topping $1 billion.\nIn 2007, following the crackdown on pro-democracy protests in Myanmar, human rights organisations, gem dealers, and US First Lady Laura Bush called for a boycott of a Myanmar gem auction held twice yearly, arguing that the sale of the stones profited the dictatorial regime in that country. Debbie Stothard of the Alternative ASEAN Network on Burma stated that mining operators used drugs on employees to improve productivity, with needles shared, raising the risk of HIV infection. Richard W. Hughes, a Bangkok-based gemologist makes the point that for every ruby sold through the junta, another gem that supports subsistence mining is smuggled over the Thai border.\nThe Chinese have also been the chief driving force behind Burma's gem mining industry and jade exports. The industry is completely under Chinese hands at every level, from the financiers, concession operators, all the way to the retail merchants that own scores of newly opened gem markets. One Chinese-owned jeweller reportedly controls 100 gem mines and produces over 2,000 kilograms of raw rubies annually. Since the privatization of the gem industry during the 1990s, Burmese jewelers and entrepreneurs of Chinese ancestry have transformed Burma's gem industry into new retail jewelry shops, selling coveted pieces of expensive jewelry to customers mainly hailing from Hong Kong and Taiwan.\nThe permits for new gem mines in Mogoke, Mineshu and Nanyar state will be issued by the ministry according to a statement issued by the ministry on 11 February. While many sanctions placed on the former regime were eased or lifted in 2012, the US has left restrictions on importing rubies and jade from Myanmar intact. According to recent amendments to the new Myanmar foreign investment law, there is no longer a minimum capital requirement for investments, except in mining ventures, which require substantial proof of capital and must be documented through a domestic bank. Another important clarification in the investment law is the dropping of foreign ownership restrictions in joint ventures, except in restricted sectors, such as mining, where FDI will be capped at 80 per cent.\nMyanmar is famed for its production of Golden South Sea Pearls. In recent years, the countries has auctioned its production in Hong Kong, first organized by Belpearl company in 2013 to critical acclaim and premium prices due to strong Chinese demand. Notable pearls include the New Dawn of Myanmar, a 19mm round golden pearl which sold to an anonymous buyer for undisclosed price.\nTourism.\nSince 1992, the government has encouraged tourism. Until 2008, fewer than 750,000 tourists entered the country annually, but there has been substantial growth over the past years. In 2012, 1.06 million tourists visited the country, and 1.8 million are expected to visit by the end of 2013.\nTourism is a growing sector of the economy of Burma. Burma has diverse and varied tourist attractions and is served internationally by numerous airlines via direct flights. Domestic and foreign airlines also operate flights within the country. Cruise ships also dock at Yangon. Overland entry with a border pass is permitted at several border checkpoints. The government requires a valid passport with an entry visa for all tourists and business people. As of May 2010, foreign business visitors from any country can apply for a visa on arrival when passing through Yangon and Mandalay international airports without having to make any prior arrangements with travel agencies. Both the tourist visa and business visa are valid for 28 days, renewable for an additional 14 days for tourism and three months for business. Seeing Burma through a personal tour guide is popular. Travellers can hire guides through travel agencies.\nAung San Suu Kyi has requested that international tourists not visit Burma. Moreoever, the junta's forced labour programmes were focused on tourist destinations; these designations have been heavily criticised for their human rights records. Even disregarding the obviously governmental fees, Burma's Minister of Hotels and Tourism Major-General Saw Lwin admitted that the government receives a significant percentage of the income of private sector tourism services. In addition, only a very small minority of impoverished people in Burma receive any money with any relation to tourism.\nBefore 2012, much of the country was completely off-limits to tourists, and the military tightly controlled interactions between foreigners and the people of Burma. Locals were not allowed to discuss politics with foreigners, under penalty of imprisonment, and in 2001, the Myanmar Tourism Promotion Board issued an order for local officials to protect tourists and limit \"unnecessary contact\" between foreigners and ordinary Burmese people. Since 2012, Burma has opened up to more tourism and foreign capital, synonymous with the country's transition to democracy.\nInfrastructure.\nThe Myanmar Infrastructure Summit 2018 noted that Myanmar has an urgent need to \"close its infrastructure gap\", with an anticipated expenditure of US$120 billion funding its infrastructural projects between now and 2030. More specifically, infrastructural development in Myanmar should address three major challenges over the upcoming years: 1) Road modernization and integration with neighboring roads and transportation networks; 2) Development of regional airports and expansion of existing airport capacity, and 3) Maintenance and consolidation of urban transport infrastructure, through instalments of innovative transportation tools including but not limited to water-taxis and air-conditioned buses. Myanmar needs to scale up its enabling infrastructure like transport, power supply and public utilities.\nChina's Belt and Road Initiative (BRI) infrastructure projects may affect 24 million people in Myanmar living in the BRI corridors, thus transforming the allocation of economic benefits and losses among economic actors in the country.\nMacro-economic trends.\nThis is a chart of trend of gross domestic product of Burma at market prices https:// by the International Monetary Fund and EconStats with figures in millions of Myanmar kyats.\nThe following table shows the main economic indicators in 1999\u20132024.\nAccording to the CIA World Factbook,\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Burma, a resource-rich country, suffers from pervasive government controls, inefficient economic policies, and rural poverty. The junta took steps in the early 1990s to liberalize the economy after decades of failure under the \"Burmese Way to Socialism,\" but those efforts stalled, and some of the liberalization measures were rescinded. Burma does not have monetary or fiscal stability, so the economy suffers from serious macroeconomic imbalances \u2013 including inflation, multiple official exchange rates that overvalue the Burmese kyat, and a distorted interest rate regime. Most overseas development assistance ceased after the junta began to suppress the democracy movement in 1988 and subsequently refused to honor the results of the 1990 legislative elections. In response to the government of Burma's attack in May 2003 on Aung San Suu Kyi and her convoy, the US imposed new economic sanctions against Burma \u2013 including a ban on imports of Burmese products and a ban on provision of financial services by US persons. A poor investment climate further slowed the inflow of foreign exchange. The most productive sectors will continue to be in extractive industries, especially oil and gas, mining, and timber. Other areas, such as manufacturing and services, are struggling with inadequate infrastructure, unpredictable import/export policies, deteriorating health and education systems, and corruption. A major banking crisis in 2003 shuttered the country's 20 private banks and disrupted the economy. As of December 2005, the largest private banks operate under tight restrictions limiting the private sector's access to formal credit. Official statistics are inaccurate. Published statistics on foreign trade are greatly understated because of the size of the black market and unofficial border trade \u2013 often estimated to be as large as the official economy. Burma's trade with Thailand, China, and India is rising. Though the Burmese government has good economic relations with its neighbors, better investment and business climates and an improved political situation are needed to promote foreign investment, exports, and tourism. The economy saw continuous real GDP growth of at least 5% from 2009 onwards.\nForeign investment.\nThough foreign investment has been encouraged, it has so far met with only moderate success. The United States has placed trade sanctions on Burma. The European Union has placed embargoes on arms, non-humanitarian aid, visa bans on military regime leaders, and limited investment bans. Both the European Union and the US have placed sanctions on grounds of human rights violations in the country. Many nations in Asia, particularly India, Thailand and China have actively traded with Burma. However, on April 22, 2013, the EU suspended economic and political sanctions against Burma.\nThe public sector enterprises remain highly inefficient and also privatisation efforts have stalled. The estimates of Burmese foreign trade are highly ambiguous because of the great volume of black market trading. A major ongoing problem is the failure to achieve monetary and fiscal stability. One government initiative was to utilise Burma's large natural gas deposits. Currently, Burma has attracted investment from Thai, Malaysian, Filipino, Russian, Australian, Indian, and Singaporean companies. Trade with the US amounted to $243.56 million as of February 2013, accounting for 15 projects and just 0.58 per cent of the total, according to government statistics.\nAsian investment.\n\"The Economist\"'s special report on Burma points to increased economic activity resulting from Burma's political transformation and influx of foreign direct investment from Asian neighbours. Near the Mingaladon Industrial Park, for example, Japanese-owned factories have risen from the \"debris\" caused by \"decades of sanctions and economic mismanagement.\" Japanese Prime Minister Shinz\u014d Abe has identified Burma as an economically attractive market that will help stimulate the Japanese economy. Among its various enterprises, Japan is helping build the Thilawa Port, which is part of the Thilawa Special Economic Zone, and helping fix the electricity supply in Yangon.\nJapan is not the largest investor in Myanmar. \"Thailand, for instance, the second biggest investor in Myanmar after China, is forging ahead with a bigger version of Thilawa at Dawei, on Myanmar's Tenasserim Coast\u00a0... Thai rulers have for centuries been toying with the idea of building a canal across the Kra Isthmus, linking the Gulf of Thailand directly to the Andaman Sea and the Indian Ocean to avoid the journey round peninsular Malaysia through the Strait of Malacca.\" Dawei would give Thailand that connection.\nChinese investment.\nChina, by far the biggest investor in Burma, has focused on constructing oil and gas pipelines that \"crisscross the country, starting from a new terminus at Kyaukphyu, just below Sittwe, up to Mandalay and on to the Chinese border town of Ruili and then Kunming, the capital of Yunnan province\". This would prevent China from \"having to funnel oil from Africa and the Middle East through the bottleneck around Singapore\".\nSince the Myanmar's military junta took power as the State Peace and Development Council junta in 1988, the ties between China's People's Liberation Army and Myanmar's military forces developed and formalised key ties between the two states. China became Myanmar's key source of aid, loans and other financial assistance. China remained Myanmar's biggest foreign investor in 2013 even after the economy opened up to other providers like Japan and India. Chinese monetary assistance allowed China to gain structural power of Myanmar and a dominant position within the natural resource sector. During this period, an underdeveloped Burmese industrial sector was driven in part by Chinese investment and consumption of a few key extractive sectors such as mining, driving domestic production away from consumer goods sectors like textiles and electronics.\nLegal two-way trade between Burma and mainland China reached US$1.5 billion annually by 1988 and additional Chinese trade, investment, economic, and military aid was sought to invigorate and jumpstart the re-emerging Burmese economy. An influx of foreign capital investment from mainland China, Germany, and France has led to the development of new potential construction projects across Burma. Many of these infrastructure projects are in the hands of Chinese construction contractors and civil engineers with various projects such as irrigation dams, highways, bridges, ground satellite stations, and an international airport for Mandalay. Burmese entrepreneurs of Chinese ancestry have also established numerous joint ventures and corporate partnerships with mainland Chinese State-owned enterprises to facilitate the construction of oil pipelines that potentially could create thousands of jobs throughout the country. Private Chinese companies rely on the established overseas Chinese bamboo network as a conduit between mainland China and Burmese Chinese businesses to navigate the local economic landscape and facilitate trade between the two countries. Mainland China is now Burma's most important source of foreign goods and services as well as one of the most important sources of capital for foreign direct investment (FDI) in the country. In the fiscal year 2013, Chin accounted for 61 percent of all foreign direct investment. Between 2007 and 2015, Chinese FDI increased from US$775 million to US$21.867 billion accounting for 40 percent of all FDI in the country. Much of this investment went into Burma's energy and mining industries. Chinese private firms account for 87% percent of total legal cross-border trade at Ruili and have a considerable amount of structural power over the illicit economy of Myanmar. Chinese structural power over Burma's structure of finance also allows China to maintain a dominant position within the country's natural resource sector, primarily Burma's latent oil, gas, and uranium sectors. China's position as the country's primary investor also allows it to be its largest consumer of its extractive industries. Many Chinese state-owned enterprises have set their sights on Burma's high-value natural resource industries such as raw jade stones, teak and timber, rice, and marine fisheries.\nForeign aid.\nThe level of international aid to Burma ranks amongst the lowest in the world (and the lowest in the Southeast Asian region)\u2014Burma receives $4 per capita in development assistance, as compared to the average of $42.30 per capita.\nIn April 2007, the US Government Accountability Office (GAO) identified the financial and other restrictions that the military government places on international humanitarian assistance in the Southeast Asian country. The GAO report, entitled \"Assistance Programs Constrained in Burma,\" outlines the specific efforts of the Burmese government to hinder the humanitarian work of international organisations, including by restricting the free movement of international staff within the country. The report notes that the regime has tightened its control over assistance work since former Prime Minister Khin Nyunt was purged in October 2004.\nFurthermore, the reports states that the military government passed guidelines in February 2006, which formalised Burma's restrictive policies. According to the report, the guidelines require that programs run by humanitarian groups \"enhance and safeguard the national interest\" and that international organisations co-ordinate with state agents and select their Burmese staff from government-prepared lists of individuals. United Nations officials have declared these restrictions unacceptable.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The shameful behavior of Burma's military regime in tying the hand of humanitarian organizations is laid out in these pages for all to see, and it must come to an end,\" said U.S. Representative Tom Lantos (D-CA). \"In eastern Burma, where the military regime has burned or otherwise destroyed over 3,000 villages, humanitarian relief has been decimated. At least one million people have fled their homes and many are simply being left to die in the jungle.\"\nUS Representative Ileana Ros-Lehtinen (R-FL) said that the report \"underscores the need for democratic change in Burma, whose military regime arbitrarily arrests, tortures, rapes and executes its own people, ruthlessly persecutes ethnic minorities, and bizarrely builds itself a new capital city while failing to address the increasingly urgent challenges of refugee flows, illicit narcotics and human trafficking, and the spread of HIV/AIDS and other communicable diseases.\"\nOther statistics.\nElectricity \u2013 production:\n17,866.99\u00a0GWh (2016 est.)\nElectricity \u2013 consumption:\n7,572.60 GWh Residential, 4,650.90 GWh Industrial, 3,023.27 GWh Commercial, 2,384.89 GWh Loss (2016 est.)\nElectricity \u2013 exports:\n2,381.34 kWh (2016)\nElectricity \u2013 imports:\n0 kWh (2006)\nAgriculture \u2013 products:\nrice, pulses, beans, sesame, groundnuts, watermelon, avocado sugarcane; hardwood; fish and fish products\nCurrency:\n1 kyat (K) = 100 pyas\nExchange rates:\nkyats per US dollar \u2013 1,205 (2008 est.), 1,296 (2007), 1,280 (2006), 5.82 (2005), 5.7459 (2004), 6.0764 (2003)\nnote: unofficial exchange rates ranged in 2004 from 815 kyat/US dollar to nearly 970 kyat/US dollar, and by year end 2005, the unofficial exchange rate was 1,075 kyat/US dollar; data shown for 2003\u201305 are official exchange rates\nForeign Direct Investment\nIn the first eight months, Myanmar has received investment of US$5.7 billion. Singapore has remained as the top source of foreign direct investments into Myanmar in the financial year of 2019-2020 with 20 Singapore-listed enterprises bringing in US$1.85 billion into Myanmar in the financial year 2019-2020. Hong Kong stood as the second-largest investors with an estimated capital of US$1.42 billion from 46 enterprises, followed by Japan investing $760 million in Myanmar.\nForeign Trade\nTotal foreign trade reached over US$24.5 billion in the first eight months of the fiscal year (FY) 2019-2020 .\nInternet Usage\nIn January 2024, there were 24.11 million internet users \nin Myanmar. This means 44.0% of the total population used the internet.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20392", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20392", "title": "Telecommunications in Myanmar", "text": " \nMyanmar began liberalization of its telecommunications market in 2013.\nTelecommunication networks.\nPreviously, Myanma Post and Telecommunication (MPT) had a monopoly in the country. In 2013, the government started taking steps to open up the telecommunications market, issuing licenses to new service providers. Consulting firm Roland Berger supported the government in the liberalization and tendering process. In 2014, Qatar-based Ooredoo and Norwegian Telenor through their local subsidiaries \u2013 respectively Ooredoo Myanmar and Telenor Myanmar \u2013 entered the market, resulting in the reduction of consumer prices, rapid growth in the number of subscribers, as well as the expansion of the country's infrastructure. In November 2015, Ericsson named Myanmar the world's fourth fastest-growing mobile market. As of June 2015, Myanmar has a mobile phone penetration rate of 54.6%, up from less than 10% in 2012. On 12 January 2017, Mytel (Telecom International Myanmar Co., Ltd.) received a license for the provision of telecommunication services, officially becoming the 4th operator in Myanmar.\nTelephone system.\nBids were offered for two fresh telecom licenses by the Myanmar government. The deadline was set to be 8 February 2013. The licenses were expected to be issued in June and carry a contract duration of up to 20 years. Two more licenses were expected to be offered following this round of bidding.\nAccording to government statistics, 5.4 million of Myanmar's 60 million population had a mobile phone subscription at the end of 2012, giving the country a mobile penetration of 9 per cent.\nAccording to official figures released in mid-2012, Myanmar had 857 base transceiver stations (BTS) for 1,654,667 local GSM mobile users, 188 BTSs for 225,617 local WCDMA mobile users, 366 BTSs for 633,569 local CDMA-450 mobile users, and 193 BTSs for 341,687 CDMA-800 mobile users. Huawei who has built 40 percent of the towers and ZTE has built 60 percent in Myanmar, which amounts to 1500 across the country, said it has built the towers mostly in Yangon, Mandalay, and Naypyidaw.\nThe Myanmar Telecommunications Operator Tender Evaluation and Selection Committee selected Norwegian Telenor Group and Ooredoo of Qatar as winners of the bidding, for the two telecom licenses issued by the government of Myanmar. The licenses allow the operators to build and operate a nationwide wireless network for 15 years. Ooredoo began selling low-price SIM cards at a price of US$1.5 in Yangon, Mandalay, and Naypyidaw in August 2014. Prior to 2012, during military rule, SIM cards cost USD 1,500.\nMytel is the fourth telecom firm in Myanmar. It is a joint venture between Myanmar Army-backed Star High Public Co Ltd, which holds 48 percent, Vietnam's Ministry of Defence owned Viettel Group, which holds 28 percent, and Myanmar National Telecom Holding Public Ltd, a group of 11 local companies with a combined 23-percent stake. Commander-in-chief Senior General Min Aung Hlaing stated at the opening ceremony of Mytel on 11 February 2018 that it will cover 93 percent of the 2G networks and 60 percent of the 4G networks of Myanmar after installing towers and stations across the country.\nMedia.\nPress\nTelevision\nBroadcasts 7 Free Digital Channel available in Naypyidaw, Yangon &amp; Mandalay.\nProviding Free to air Channels, Local &amp; International Pay TV Channels, and High Definition Channels. 4TV Has Only Broadcasts 2 Way With DTH and DVB-T2 In Myanmar.\nRadio\nNews agency\nInternet.\nThe government allowed unrestricted access to the Internet for some years following the telecoms liberalization. Many people were using the internet freely, often with widely available smart phones.\nMyanmar Teleport (formerly Bagan Cybertech), Information Technology Central Services (ITCS), and the state-owned Myanmar Post and Telecommunication (MPT) are two of the Internet service providers in Myanmar. Internet caf\u00e9s are common in the larger cities of the country. Satellite (VSAT) internet connection is also available from Skynet, a satellite television provider, and another (VSAT) Operator Com &amp; Com.\nAccording to MPT's official statistics as of July 2010, the country had over 400,000 Internet users (0.8% of the population) with the vast majority of the users located in the two largest cities, Yangon and Mandalay. More recent figures are hard to find, but the widespread use of smart phones and tablets with cellular modems on the 3G and 4G networks means that internet usage is likely to be far higher than the figures from 2010 indicate.\nAlthough the internet appears largely unrestricted, Myanmar experience internet shut downs during politically sensitive times. In 2007, the military government shutdown the internet during the Saffron Revolution for a few days to restrict information from within the country to be disseminated to international media. In 2019 June to February 2020, a few townships from Rakkhine and Chin State are facing internet shut downs as ordered by the Ministry of Transport and Communications.\nOn 3 February 2021, 3G and 4G data network was restored in Rakhine and Chin States.\nStarting from dawn of 1 February 2021, there're re-restrictions and outage to access to the internet by the Military Government because of 2021 Myanmar coup d'\u00e9tat. The government banned and blocked social media, including Facebook, Twitter, Instagram and WhatsApp, western news agency websites and also Wikipedia.\nStarting from 16 February 2021, the internet was shut down from 1 a.m. to 9 a.m. in nationwide.\nOn 22 February 2021, the internet was shut down only in Yangon from 12 a.m. to 12 p.m. while other states and regions were only from 1 a.m. to 9 a.m.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20393", "revid": "20611691", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20393", "title": "Transport in Myanmar", "text": " \nTransport in Myanmar is characterized by a strong reliance on road transport for both passenger and freight movement. Other modes such as railways, inland waterways, and air transport play secondary roles.\nRoad.\nIn long-distance passenger transport, defined as trips greater than 100 kilometers, buses and coaches are the most widely used mode. Buses accounted for the majority of long-distance passenger trips, representing well over half of total passenger movements and nearly two-thirds of passenger-kilometers traveled. Private cars formed the second largest share, carrying about one-quarter of all long-distance passengers. Freight transport is also more concentrated in road-based modes, trucks carried close to ninety percent of the total freight tonnage and an almost identical share of freight ton-kilometers.\nThe condition of Myanmar's roads is generally poor. According to statistics from the Ministry of Construction in 2015, among expressways, national highways, regional and state roads, and highways in border regions, only about 20% are paved with asphalt or concrete. The remainder consists of gravel or unpaved roads, or even simple trails.\nThe construction of Myanmar's highways relies heavily on the Build-Operate-Transfer (BOT) model. Statistics show that 4,752 kilometers of roads nationwide have adopted the BOT model, including key routes such as the Yangon-Meiktila-Mandalay Highway and the Mandalay\u2013Muse Highway.\nUrban.\nYangon's urban transport was relied on a largely bus system, supported by a radial road network, narrow secondary streets, and a small, outdated 50 km railway serving only 1% of trips. Buses, regulated by nonprofit committees and operated alongside two major companies, efficiently provided low-cost transport without subsidies. However, vehicle numbers doubled from 160,000 in 2011 to 320,000 in 2015, and motorcycles are banned in Yangon, spreading congestion beyond peak hours and reducing average speeds from 30 km/h to 10\u201315 km/h.\nMandalay has transitioned from a city of bicycles to one dominated by motorcycles, which now account for approximately 70% of trips, while buses serve less than 3% and operate with low efficiency. The city's dense grid and wide roads remain largely uncongested, except in the small central area where mixed use of motorcycles, public transport, and delivery vehicles creates localized congestion and operational stress. Motorcycles provide cost-effective, flexible mobility for individuals but exacerbate air and noise pollution, increase accidents, and threaten long-term urban sustainability.\nRail.\nAs of 2014[ [update]], Myanmar had of railways in train routes, all gauge, and there are currently no rail links to adjacent countries. Much of Myanma Railways' rolling stock is obsolete, with a large share of locomotives, wagons, and coaches over 30-40 years old, leading to frequent breakdowns, low availability, high fuel consumption, and difficulty sourcing spare parts, leaving many units unsuitable for rehabilitation.\nDespite its extensive network, MR carries only about one in ten passengers and around 5-6% of freight, mainly due to poor service quality: most passenger trips are short and uncompetitive with buses or private cars, trains are slow, crowded, uncomfortable, and frequently delayed. Freight services suffer from a lack of traction power, diversion of locomotives to passenger use, and the absence of container train operations, though steps are now being taken to establish a Yangon\u2013Mandalay container service.\nWater.\nMyanmar's inland water transport once central to Myanmar's transport system, now has experienced a significant decline in recent decades. As of 2015, it accounted for only 6% of long-distance freight and 1.5% of passenger transport, a sharp contrast to its historical prominence. The sector's challenges include outdated infrastructure, limited navigability, and competition from road transport. Despite these issues, the Irrawaddy River remains a viable option for transporting low-value freight between Yangon and Mandalay, with potential cost reductions achievable through improvements in navigation channels and terminals.\nMerchant marine.\n\"Total:\"\n24 ships (with a volume of \u00a0gross tonnage\u00a0(GT) or over) totalling \u00a0GT/\u00a0tonnes deadweight (DWT)\n&lt;br&gt;\"Ships by type:\"\nbulk carrier 1, cargo ship 17, passenger ship 2, passenger/cargo 3, specialised tanker 1 (2008)\n&lt;br&gt;\"note:\"\na flag of convenience registry; includes ships of 3 countries: Cyprus 1, Germany 1, Japan 1\nAir.\nCivil aviation contributed a very small share, approximately two to three percent, but remained significant for specific groups of travelers, particularly business passengers and international tourists.\nAirports.\nDue to the long-term civil war, many airports in Myanmar have been closed due to unstable situation, or converted into military airports due to military needs. Most of the remaining airports are also small in scale, only Yangon International, Mandalay International and Naypyidaw International had adequate facilities to handle larger jets.\nAirlines.\nMyanmar's aviation sector is relatively small and still developing, with a mix of state-owned and private airlines. The national carrier, Myanmar National Airlines, operates both domestic and limited international routes, competing the largest private airlines Myanmar Airways International, which mainly focus on connecting major cities and tourist destinations within the country, with a few regional flights abroad.\nMost carriers operate small fleets, often with aging aircraft, and the industry faces challenges related to safety standards, infrastructure, and financial sustainability. Political instability in recent years have further constrained growth, though tourism remains a key driver for the sector's gradual recovery.\nRegulation.\nThe government of Myanmar has several ministries controlling transportation, including the Ministry of Construction, the Ministry of Border Affairs, the Ministry of Transport, the Ministry of Rail Transport, and etc.\nMyanmar's road network is generally managed by several government bodies, primarily Ministry of Construction and Ministry of Border Affairs, with Ministry of Transport responsible for road transport operations.\nAccording to the Roads Law of Myanmar, the Ministry of Construction oversees most matters concerning national highways, which plays the most important role in the country's road administration. Local road departments carry out tasks assigned by the Ministry of Construction and manage road affairs within their respective regions. The Ministry of Border Affairs coordinates road affairs in areas controlled by ethnic armed groups, such as Wa State. Additionally, City Development Committees are responsible for road construction and management within urban areas.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20394", "revid": "49139127", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20394", "title": "Tatmadaw", "text": "Combined military forces of Myanmar\nThe Tatmadaw, also known as the Sit-Tat, is the armed forces of Myanmar (formerly Burma). It is administered by the Ministry of Defence and composed of the Myanmar Army, the Myanmar Navy and the Myanmar Air Force. Auxiliary services include the Myanmar Police Force, the Border Guard Forces, the Myanmar Coast Guard, and the People's Militia Units. Since independence in 1948, the Tatmadaw has faced significant ethnic insurgencies, especially in Chin, Kachin, Kayin, Kayah, and Shan states. General Ne Win took control of the country in a 1962 coup d'\u00e9tat, attempting to build an autarkic society called the Burmese Way to Socialism. Following the violent repression of nationwide protests in 1988, the military agreed to free elections in 1990, but ignored the resulting victory of the National League for Democracy and imprisoned its leader Aung San Suu Kyi. The 1990s also saw the escalation of the conflict involving Buddhists and Rohingya Muslims in Rakhine State due to RSO attacks on the Tatmadaw forces, which saw the Rohingya minority facing oppression and, starting in 2017, genocide.\nIn 2008, the Tatmadaw again rewrote Myanmar's constitution, installing the pro-junta Union Solidarity and Development Party (USDP) in the 2010 elections, which were boycotted by most opposition groups. Political reforms over the next half-decade culminated in a sweeping NLD victory in the 2015 election; after the USDP lost another election in 2020, the Tatmadaw annulled the election and deposed the civilian government. The Tatmadaw has been widely accused by international organizations of human rights violation and crimes against humanity; including ethnic cleansing, political repression, torture, sexual assault, war crimes, extrajudicial punishments (including summary executions) and massacre of civilians involved in peaceful political demonstrations. The Tatmadaw has long operated as a state within a state.\nAccording to the Constitution of Myanmar, the Tatmadaw is led by the commander-in-chief of Defence Services. Some actions of the Tatmadaw require the approval of the National Defence and Security Council, an eleven-member national security council responsible for security and defence affairs in Myanmar. The president of Myanmar has no command role over the Tatmadaw, though he may work with the NDSC in authorizing military action.\nName.\nThe name \"Tatmadaw\" literally means \"Royal Armed Forces\" in the Burmese language. Since Burma has not been a monarchy since the era prior to British colonial rule, the word \"royal\" in this usage is understood to mean \"glorious\". This name has become controversial in Myanmar, especially since 2021, as many people in Myanmar have opposed the military during the country's renewed civil war and object to the usage of the complimentary term \"royal\" to describe it. As a result, many Burmese people have taken to using an alternative name \"Sit-Tat\", which simply means \"military\" with no positive or negative connotations.\nHistory.\nBurmese monarchy.\nThe Royal Armed Forces was the armed forces of the Burmese monarchy from the 9th to 19th centuries. It refers to the military forces of the Pagan dynasty, the Ava Kingdom, the Toungoo dynasty and the Konbaung dynasty in chronological order. The army was one of the major armed forces of Southeast Asia until it was defeated by the British over a six-decade span in the 19th century.\nThe army was organised into a small standing army of a few thousands, which defended the capital and the palace, and a much larger conscription-based wartime army. Conscription was based on the ahmudan system, which required local chiefs to supply their predetermined quota of men from their jurisdiction on the basis of population in times of war. The wartime army also consisted of elephantry, cavalry, artillery and naval units.\nFirearms, first introduced from China in the late 14th century, became integrated into strategy only gradually over many centuries. The first special musket and artillery units, equipped with Portuguese matchlocks and cannon, were formed in the 16th century. Outside the special firearm units, there was no formal training program for the regular conscripts, who were expected to have a basic knowledge of self-defence, and how to operate the musket on their own. As the technological gap between European powers widened in the 18th century, the army was dependent on Europeans' willingness to sell more sophisticated weaponry.\nWhile the army had held its own against the armies of the kingdom's neighbours, its performance against more technologically advanced European armies deteriorated over time. While it defeated the Portuguese and French intrusions in the 17th and 18th centuries respectively, the army proved unable to match the military strength of the British Empire in the 19th century, losing the First, Second and Third Anglo-Burmese Wars. On 1 January 1886, the Royal Burmese Army was formally disbanded by the British government.\nBritish Burma (1885\u20131948).\nUnder British rule, the colonial government in Burma abstained from recruiting Burmese soldiers into the East India Company forces (and later the British Indian Army), instead relying on pre-existing Indian sepoys and Nepalese Gurkhas to garrison the nascent colony. Due to mistrust of the Burmese population, the colonial government maintained this ban for decades, instead looking to the indigenous Karens, Kachins and Chins to form new military units in the colony. In 1937, the colonial government overturned the ban, and Burmese troops started to enlist in small numbers in the British Indian Army.\nAt the beginning of World War I, the only Burmese military regiment in the British Indian Army, the 70th Burma Rifles, consisted of three battalions, made up of Karens, Kachins and Chins. During the conflict, the demands of war led to the colonial government relaxing the ban, raising a Burmese battalion in the 70th Burma Rifles, a Burmese company in the \"85th Burma Rifles\", and seven Burmese Mechanical Transport companies. In addition, three companies (combat units) of \"Burma Sappers and Miners\", made up of mostly Burmese, and a company of Labour Corps, made up of Chins and Burmese, were also raised. All these units began their overseas assignment in 1917. The 70th Burma Rifles served in Egypt for garrison duties while the Burmese Labour Corps served in France. One company of Burma Sappers and Miners distinguished themselves in Mesopotamia at the crossing the Tigris.\nAfter World War I, the colonial government stopped recruiting Burmese soldiers, and discharged all but one Burmese companies, which had been abolished by 1925. The last Burmese company of Burma Sappers and Miners too was disbanded in 1929. Instead, Indian soldiers and other ethnic minorities were used as the primary colonial force in Burma, which was used to suppress ethnic Burmese rebellions such as the one led by Saya San from 1930 to 1931. On 1 April 1937, Burma was made a separate colony, and Burmese were now eligible to join the army. But few Burmese bothered to join. Before World War II began, the British Burma Army consisted of Karen (27.8%), Chin (22.6%), Kachin (22.9%), and Burmese 12.3%, without counting their British officer corps.\nCompton Mackenzie wrote in \"Eastern Epic\" that after the separation of India and Burma:\nThese military forces were expanded between 1939 and the end of 1941, but the additional strength was impaired by defects inherent in the organisation as it stood before separation. The small and independent military command now set up had been carved out of the experienced Indian organisation with its comparatively large resources; adequate though this may have been for peacetime conditions it was quite inadequate to deal with the expansion im-\nposed by a great war. The officers were drawn from the British service and the Indian Army with little hope of reinforcement in time of war except for the untrained resources of Burma. Before the outbreak of war with Japan and for some time afterwards Burma Army Headquarters was simultaneously a War Office, a G.H.Q., a Corps H.Q. and an [Lines of Communication] Area H.Q. Matters of detail could have been worked out more quickly and efficiently by G.H.Q. in India if the Army in Burma had been placed for command and general administration under [it]. As it was, up to November 1940 Burma was directly under the War Office at home; it was then placed under Far Eastern Command at Singapore. Neither arrangement even bordered upon common sense, but although three times in 1940 and 1941 successive commanders-in-chief urged the authorities in the United Kingdom to place Burma [under India], it was not done until December 15th by which time it was too late.\"\nIn December 1941, a group of Burmese independence activists founded the Burma Independence Army (BIA) with Japanese help. The Burma Independence Army led by Aung San (the father of Aung San Suu Kyi) fought in the Burma Campaign on the side of the Imperial Japanese Army. Thousands of young men joined its ranks\u2014reliable estimates range from 15,000 to 23,000. The great majority of the recruits were Burmese, with little ethnic minority representation. Many of the fresh recruits lacked discipline. At Myaungmya in the Irrawaddy Delta, an ethnic war broke out between Burmese BIA men and Karens, with both sides responsible for massacres. The Burma Independence Army was soon replaced with the Burma Defence Army, founded on 26 August 1942 with three thousand BIA veterans. The army became the Burma National Army with General Ne Win as its commander on 1 August 1943 when Burma achieved nominal independence. In late 1944, it had a strength of approximately 15,000. Disillusioned by the Japanese occupation, the Burma National Army switched sides and joined the allied forces on 27 March 1945.\nPost-independence.\nAt the time of Myanmar's independence in 1948, the Tatmadaw was weak, small and disunited. Cracks appeared along the lines of ethnic background, political affiliation, organisational origin and different services. The most serious problem was the tension between Karen Officers, coming from the British Burma Army and Burmese officers, coming from the Patriotic Burmese Force (PBF).\nIn accordance with the agreement reached at the Kandy Conference in September 1945, the \"Tatmadaw\" was reorganised by incorporating the British Burma Army and the Patriotic Burmese Force. The officer corps shared by ex-PBF officers and officers from the British Burma Army and Army of Burma Reserve Organisation (ABRO). The colonial government also decided to form what were known as \"Class Battalions\" based on ethnicity. There were a total of 15 rifle battalions at the time of independence and four of them were made up of former members of PBF. None of the influential positions within the War Office and commands were manned with former PBF Officers. All services including military engineers, supply and transport, ordnance and medical services, Navy and Air Force were commanded by former Officers from ABRO.\nThe War Office was officially opened on 8 May 1948 under the Ministry of Defence and managed by a War Office Council chaired by the Minister of Defence. At the head of War Office was Chief of Staff, Vice Chief of Staff, Chief of Naval Staff, Chief of Air Staff, Adjutant General and Quartermaster General. Vice Chief of Staff, who was also Chief of Army Staff and the head of General Staff Office. VCS oversee General Staff matters and there were three branch offices: GS-1 Operation and Training, GS-2 Staff Duty and Planning; GS-3 Intelligence. Signal Corps and Field Engineering Corps are also under the command of General Staff Office.\nAccording to the war establishment adopted on 14 April 1948, Chief of Staff was under the War Office with the rank of major general. It was subsequently upgraded to a lieutenant general. Vice Chief of Staff was a brigadier general. The Chief of Staff was staffed with GSO-I with the rank of lieutenant colonel, three GSO-II with the rank of major, four GSO-III with the rank of captain for operation, training, planning and intelligence, and one Intelligence Officer (IO). The Chief of Staff office also had one GSO-II and one GSO-III for field engineering, and the Chief Signal Officer and a GSO-II for signal. Directorate of Signal and Directorate Field Engineering are also under General Staff Office.\nUnder Adjutant General Office were Judge Advocate General, Military Secretary, and Vice Adjutant General. The Adjutant General (AG) was a brigadier general whereas the Judge Advocate General (JAG), Military Secretary (MS) and Vice Adjutant General (VAG) were colonels. VAG handles adjutant staff matters and there were also three branch offices; AG-1 planning, recruitment and transfer; AG-2 discipline, moral, welfare, and education; AG-3 salary, pension, and other financial matters. The Medical Corps and the Provost Marshal Office were under the Adjutant General Office.\nThe Quarter Master General office also had three branch offices: QG-1 planning, procurement, and budget; QG-2 maintenance, construction, and cantonment; and QG-3 transportation. Under the QMG office were Garrison Engineering Corps, Electrical and Mechanical Engineering Corps, Military Ordnance Corps, and the Supply and Transport Corps.\nBoth AG and QMG office similar structure to the General Staff Office, but they only had three ASO-III and three QSO-III respectively.\nThe Navy and Air Force were separate services under the War office but under the chief of staff.\nReorganisation in 1956.\nAs per War Office order No. (9) 1955 on 28 September 1955, the Chief of Staff became the Commander in Chief, the Chief of Army Staff became the Vice Chief of Staff (Army), the Chief of Naval Staff become Vice Chief of Staff (Navy) and the Chief of Air Staff became the Vice Chief of Staff (Air).\nOn 1 January 1956, the War Office was officially renamed as the Ministry of Defence. General Ne Win became the first Chief of Staff of the Tatmadaw (Myanmar Armed Forces) to command all three services \u2013 Army, Navy and Air Force \u2013 under a single unified command for the first time.\nBrigadier General Aung Gyi was given the post of Vice Chief of Staff (Army). Brigadier General D. A Blake became commander of South Burma Subdistrict Command (SBSD) and Brigadier General Kyaw Zaw, a member of the Thirty Comrades, became Commander of North Burma Subdistrict Command (NBSD).\nCaretaker government.\nDue to deteroriating political situations in 1957, the then Prime Minister of Burma, U Nu invited General Ne Win to form a \"Caretaker Government\" and handed over power on 28 October 1958. Under the stewardship of the Military Caretaker Government, parliamentary elections were held in February 1960. Several high-ranking and senior officers were dismissed due to their involvement and supporting various political parties.\n1962 coup d'\u00e9tat.\nThe elections of 1960 had put U Nu back as the Prime Minister and Pyidaungsu Party (Union Party) led civilian government resume control of the country.\nOn 2 March 1962, the then Chief of Staff of Armed Forces, General Ne Win staged a coup d'\u00e9tat and formed the \"Union Revolutionary Council\". Around midnight the troops began to move into Yangon to take up strategic position. Prime Minister U Nu and his cabinet ministers were taken into protective custody. At 8:50 am, General Ne Win announced the coup over the radio. He said \"I have to inform you, citizens of the Union that Armed Forces have taken over the responsibility and the task of keeping the country's safety, owing to the greatly deteriorating conditions of the Union.\" \nThe country would be ruled by the military for the next 12 years. The Burma Socialist Programme Party became the sole political party and the majority of its full members were military. Government servants underwent military training and the Military Intelligence Service functioned as the secret police of the state.\n1988 coup d'\u00e9tat.\nAt the height of the Four Eights Uprising against the socialist government, Former General Ne Win, who at the time was chairman of the ruling Burma Socialist Programme Party (BSPP), issued a warning against potential protestors during a televised speech. He stated that if the \"disturbances\" continued the \"Army would have to be called and I would like to make it clear that if the Army shoots, it has no tradition of shooting into the Air, it would shoot straight to hit\".\nSubsequently, the 22 Light Infantry Division, 33 Light Infantry Division and the 44 Light Infantry Division were redeployed to Yangon from front line fighting against ethnic insurgents in the Karen states. Battalions from three Light Infantry Divisions, augmented by infantry battalions under Yangon Regional Military Command and supporting units from Directorate of Artillery and Armour Corps were deployed during the suppression of protests in and around the then capital city of Yangon.\nInitially, these troops were deployed in support of the then People's Police Force (now known as Myanmar Police Force) security battalions and to patrol the streets of the capital and to guard government offices and building. However, at midnight of 8 August 1988 troops from 22 Light Infantry Division guarding Yangon City Hall opened fire on unarmed protesters as the crackdown against the protests began.\nThe armed forces under General Saw Maung formed a State Law and Order Restoration Council, repealed the constitution and declared martial law on 18 September 1988. By late September the military had complete control of the country.\nPolitical reforms (2008\u20132020).\nIn 2008, the current constitution was released by the military government for a public referendum. The SPDC claimed that the referendum was a success, with an approval rate of 93.82%; however, there has been widespread criticism of the veracity of these claims, partially because Cyclone Nargis hit Myanmar a few days before the referendum, and the government did not allow postponement of the referendum. Under the 2008 Constitution, the Tatmadaw is guaranteed 25% of the seats in the parliament, making it difficult to pass meaningful reforms that the Tatmadaw does not approve of.\nIn 2010, conscription legislation was passed that compelled able-bodied men and women between 18\u201345 and 18\u201335 respectively to serve up to three years in the military, or face significant jail sentences.\nFollowing Myanmar's political reforms, Myanmar has made substantial shifts in its relations with major powers China, Russia and the United States. In 2014, Lieutenant-General Anthony Crutchfield, the deputy commander of the United States Pacific Command (USPACOM), was invited to address his counterparts at the Myanmar National Defence College in Naypyidaw, which trains colonels and other high-ranking military officers. In May 2016, Myanmar's Union Parliament approved a military cooperation agreement with Russia following a proposal by Deputy Minister of Defence. In June 2016, Myanmar and Russia signed a defence cooperation agreement. The agreement will envisage exchanging information on international security issues, including the fight against terrorism, cooperation in the cultural sphere and leisure of servicemen and their families, along with exchanging experience in peacekeeping activities.\nMoreover, in response to Naypyidaw's post-2011 political and economic reforms, Australia re-established a \u2018normal\u2019 bilateral relationship with Myanmar to support democratisation and reform. In June 2016, the Australian Federal Police signed a new Memorandum of Understanding with its Myanmar counterparts aimed at enhancing transnational crime cooperation and intelligence sharing. In December 2017, the US imposed sanctions on General Maung Maung Soe, a general of Western Myanmar Command who oversaw the military's crackdown in Rakhine State. The Tatmadaw had sentenced seven soldiers to 10-year prison terms for killing 10 Rohingya men in Rakhine in September 2017. A 2019 UN report revealed the degree to which the country's military uses its own businesses, foreign companies and arms deals to support, away from the public eye, a \u201cbrutal operations\u201d against ethnic groups that constitute \u201cserious crimes under international law\u201d, bypassing civilian oversight and evading accountability. In June 2020, the Tatmadaw accused China for arming rebel groups in the country's frontier areas.\n2021 coup d'\u00e9tat and aftermath.\nIn February 2021, the Tatmadaw detained Aung San Suu Kyi and other high-ranking politicians after a contested election with disputed results. A state of emergency had been declared for one year. The State Administration Council was established by Min Aung Hlaing on 2 February 2021 as the current government in power. On 1 August 2021, the State Administration Council was re-formed as a caretaker government, which appointed Min Aung Hlaing as Prime Minister. The same day, Min Aung Hlaing announced that the country's state of emergency had been extended by an additional two years.\nAs the Myanmar Civil War has progressed, the Tatmadaw has become more reliant on military aid from Russia and China. As of 2023, analysts suggested that the Tatmadaw has sustained significant losses due to both combat against the pro-democracy insurgents as well as desertions within the rank and file soldiers. The United States Institute for Peace estimates that the Tatamadaw has sustained at least 13,000 combat losses and 8,000 losses due to desertion. The Tatmadaw itself has acknowledged that it does not have control over 132 of Myanmar\u2019s 330 townships, or 42 percent of the country's towns.\nOn 10 February 2024, the State Administration Council activated conscription under the 2010 SPDC \"People's Military Service Law\" in response to anti-junta ethnic militias and pro-democracy rebels capturing massive swathes of territory.\nBudget.\nAccording to an analysis of budgetary data between FY 2011\u201312 and 2018\u201319, approximately 13% to 14% of the national budget is devoted to the Burmese military. However, the military budget remains opaque and subject to limited civilian scrutiny, and a 2011 Special Funds Law has enabled the Burmese military to circumvent parliamentary oversight to access supplemental funding. Defence budgets were publicly shared for the first time in 2015, and in recent years, parliamentary lawmakers have demanded greater transparency in military spending.\nThe military also generates substantial revenue through 2 conglomerates, the Myanma Economic Holdings Limited (MEHL) and the Myanmar Economic Corporation (MEC). Revenues generated from these business interests have strengthened the Burmese military's autonomy from civilian oversight, and have contributed to the military's financial operations in \"a wide array of international human rights and humanitarian law violations.\" Revenues from MEHL and MEC are kept \"off-book,\" enabling the military to autonomously finance military affairs with limited civilian oversight.\nBetween 1990 and 2020, Myanmar's military officers received US$ in dividends from MEHL, whose entire board is made up of senior military officials.\nIn the FY 2019\u201320 national budget, the military was allocated 3,385 billion kyats (approximately US$2.4 billion). In May 2020, the Burmese parliament reduced the military's supplementary budgetary request by $7.55 million. On 28 October 2014, the Minister for Defence Wai Lwin revealed at a Parliament session that 46.2% of the budget is spent on personnel cost, 32.89% on operation and procurement, 14.49% on construction related projects and 2.76% on health and education.\nDoctrine.\nPost-independence/civil war era (1948\u20131958).\nThe initial development of Burmese military doctrine post-independence was developed in the early 1950s to cope with external threats from more powerful enemies with a strategy of Strategic Denial under conventional warfare. The perception of threats to state security was more external than internal threats. The internal threat to state security was managed through the use of a mixture of force and political persuasion. Lieutenant Colonel Maung Maung drew up defence doctrine based on conventional warfare concepts, with large infantry divisions, armoured brigades, tanks and motorised war with mass mobilisation for the war effort being the important element of the doctrine.\nThe objective was to contain the offensive of the invading forces at the border for at least three months, while waiting for the arrival of international forces, similar to the police action by international intervention forces under the directive of United Nations during the war on Korean peninsula. However, the conventional strategy under the concept of total war was undermined by the lack of appropriate command and control system, proper logistical support structure, sound economic bases and efficient civil defence organisations.\nKuomintang invasion/Burma Socialist Programme Party era (1958\u20131988).\nAt the beginning of the 1950s, while the Tatmadaw was able to reassert its control over most part of the country, Kuomintang (KMT) troops under General Li Mi, with support from the United States, invaded Burma and used the country's frontier as a springboard for attack against China, which in turn became the external threat to state security and sovereignty of Burma. The first phase of the doctrine was tested for the first time in Operation \"Naga Naing\" in February 1953 against invading KMT forces. The doctrine did not take into account logistic and political support for KMT from the United States and as a result it failed to deliver its objectives and ended in a humiliating defeat for the Tatmadaw.\nThe Tatmadaw leadership then argued that the excessive media coverage was partly to blame for the failure of Operation \"Naga Naing\". For example, Brigadier General Maung Maung pointed out that newspapers, such as the \"Nation\", carried reports detailing the training and troops positioning, even went as far to the name and social background of the commanders who are leading the operation thus losing the element of surprise. Colonel Saw Myint, who was second in command for the operation, also complained about the long lines of communications and the excessive pressure imposed upon the units for public relations activities to prove that the support of the people was behind the operation.\nDespite failure, the Tatmadaw continued to rely on this doctrine until the mid-1960s. The doctrine was under constant review and modifications throughout KMT invasion and gained success in anti-KMT operations in the mid and late 1950s. However, this strategy became increasingly irrelevant and unsuitable in the late 1950s as the insurgents and KMT changed their positional warfare strategy to hit and run guerrilla warfare.\nAt the 1958 the Tatmadaw's annual Commanding Officers (COs) conference, Colonel Kyi Win submitted a report outlining the requirement for new military doctrine and strategy. He stated that the 'Tatmadaw did not have a clear strategy to cope with insurgents', even though most of Tatmadaw's commanders were guerrilla fighters during the anti-British and anti-Japanese campaigns during the Second World War, they had very little knowledge of anti-guerrilla or counterinsurgency warfare. Based upon Colonel Kyi Win's report, the Tatmadaw began developing an appropriate military doctrine and strategy to meet the requirements of counterinsurgency warfare.\nThis second phase of the doctrine was to suppress insurgency with people's war and the perception of threats to state security was more of internal threats. During this phase, external linkage of internal problems and direct external threats were minimised by the foreign policy based on isolation. It was common view of the commanders that unless insurgency was suppressed, foreign interference would be highly probable, therefore counterinsurgency became the core of the new military doctrine and strategy. Beginning in 1961, the Directorate of Military Training took charge the research for national defence planning, military doctrine and strategy for both internal and external threats. This included reviews of international and domestic political situations, studies of the potential sources of conflicts, collection of information for strategic planning and defining the possible routes of foreign invasion.\nIn 1962, as part of new military doctrine planning, principles of anti-guerrilla warfare were outlined and counterinsurgency-training courses were delivered at the training schools. The new doctrine laid out three potential enemies and they are internal insurgents, historical enemies with roughly an equal strength (i.e. Thailand), and enemies with greater strength. It states that in suppressing insurgencies, the Tatmadaw must be trained to conduct long-range penetration with a tactic of continuous search and destroy. Reconnaissance, Ambush and all weather day and night offensive and attack capabilities along with winning the hearts and minds of people are important parts of anti-guerrilla warfare. For countering an historical enemy with equal strength, the Tatmadaw should fight a conventional warfare under total war strategy, without giving up an inch of its territory to the enemy. For powerful enemy and foreign invaders, the Tatmadaw should engage in total people's war, with a special focus on guerrilla strategy.\nTo prepare for the transition to the new doctrine, Brigadier General San Yu, the then Vice Chief of Staff (Army), sent a delegation led by Lieutenant Colonel Thura Tun Tin was sent to Switzerland, Yugoslavia, Czechoslovakia and East Germany in July 1964 to study organisation structure, armaments, training, territorial organisation and strategy of people's militias. A research team was also formed at General Staff Office within the War Office to study defence capabilities and militia formations of neighbouring countries.\nThe new doctrine of total people's war, and the strategy of anti-guerrilla warfare for counterinsurgency and guerrilla warfare for foreign invasion, were designed to be appropriate for Burma. The doctrine flowed from the country's independent and active foreign policy, total people's defence policy, the nature of perceived threats, its geography and the regional environment, the size of its population in comparison with those of its neighbours, the relatively underdeveloped nature of its economy and its historical and political experiences.\nThe doctrine was based upon 'three totalities': population, time and space () and 'four strengths': manpower, material, time and morale (). The doctrine did not develop concepts of strategic denial or counter-offensive capabilities. It relied almost totally on irregular low-intensity warfare, such as its guerrilla strategy to counter any form of foreign invasion. The overall counterinsurgency strategy included not only elimination of insurgents and their support bases with the 'four cuts' strategy, but also the building and designation of 'white area' and 'black area' as well.\nIn April 1968, the Tatmadaw introduced special warfare training programmes at \"Command Training Centres\" at various regional commands. Anti-Guerrilla warfare tactics were taught at combat forces schools and other training establishments with special emphasis on ambush and counter-ambush, counterinsurgency weapons and tactics, individual battle initiative for tactical independence, commando tactics, and reconnaissance. Battalion size operations were also practised in the Southwest Regional Military Command area. The new military doctrine was formally endorsed and adopted at the first party congress of the BSPP in 1971. BSPP laid down directives for \"complete annihilation of the insurgents as one of the tasks for national defence and state security\" and called for \"liquidation of insurgents through the strength of the working people as the immediate objective\". This doctrine ensures the role of Tatmadaw at the heart of national policy making.\nThroughout the BSPP era, the total people's war doctrine was solely applied in counterinsurgency operations, since Burma did not face any direct foreign invasion throughout the period. In 1985, the then Lieutenant General Saw Maung, Vice-Chief of Staff of Tatmadaw reminded his commanders during his speech at the Command and General Staff College:\nIn Myanmar, out of nearly 35 million people, the combined armed forces (army, navy and air force) are about two hundred thousand. In terms of percentage, that is about 0.01%. It is simply impossible to defend a country the size of ours with only this handful of troops... therefore, what we have to do in the case of foreign invasion is to mobilise people in accordance with the \"total people's war\" doctrine. To defend our country from aggressors, the entire population must be involved in the war effort as the support of people dictate the outcome of the war.\nSLORC/SPDC era (1988\u20132010).\nThe third phase of doctrinal development of the Myanmar Armed Forces came after the military take over and formation of the State Law and Order Restoration Council (SLORC) in September 1988 as part of the armed forces modernisation programme. The development was the reflection of sensitivity towards direct foreign invasion or invasion by proxy state during the turbulent years of the late 1980s and early 1990s, for example: the unauthorised presence of a US aircraft carrier Battle Group in Myanmar's territorial waters during the 1988 political uprising as evidence of an infringement of Myanmar's sovereignty. Also, the leadership was concerned that foreign powers might arm the insurgents on the border to exploit the political situation and tensions in the country. This new threat perception, previously insignificant under the nation's isolationist foreign policy, led leaders to review the defence capability and doctrine of the .\nThe third phase was to face the lower level external threats with a strategy of strategic denial under total people's defence concept. Current military leadership has successfully dealt with 17 major insurgent groups, whose 'return to legal fold' in the past decade has remarkably decreased the internal threats to state security, at least for the short and medium terms, even though threat perception of the possibility of external linkage to internal problems, perceived as being motivated by the continuing human rights violations, religious suppression and ethnic cleansing, remains high.\nWithin the policy, the role of the Tatmadaw was defined as a `modern, strong and highly capable fighting force'. Since the day of independence, the Tatmadaw has been involved in restoring and maintaining internal security and suppressing insurgency. It was with this background that the Tatmadaw's \"multifaceted\" defence policy was formulated and its military doctrine and strategy could be interpreted as defence-in-depth. It was influenced by a number of factors such as history, geography, culture, economy and sense of threats.\nThe Tatmadaw has developed an 'active defence' strategy based on guerrilla warfare with limited conventional military capabilities, designed to cope with low intensity conflicts from external and internal foes, which threatens the security of the state. This strategy, revealed in joint services exercises, is built on a system of total people's defence, where the armed forces provide the first line of defence and the training and leadership of the nation in the matter of national defence.\nIt is designed to deter potential aggressors by the knowledge that defeat of the Tatmadaw's regular forces in conventional warfare would be followed by persistent guerrilla warfare in the occupied areas by people militias and dispersed regular troops which would eventually wear down the invading forces, both physically and psychologically, and leave it vulnerable to a counter-offensive. If the conventional strategy of strategic denial fails, then the Tatmadaw and its auxiliary forces will follow Mao's strategic concepts of 'strategic defensive', 'strategic stalemate' and 'strategic offensive'.\nOver the past decade, through a series of modernisation programs, the Tatmadaw has developed and invested in better Command, Control, Communication and Intelligence system; real-time intelligence; formidable air defence system; and early warning systems for its 'strategic denial' and 'total people's defence' doctrine.\nOrganisational, command and control structure.\nBefore 1988.\nOverall command of the Tatmadaw (armed forces) rested with the country's highest-ranking military officer, a general, who acted concurrently as Defence Minister and Chief of Staff of Defence Services. He thus exercised supreme operational control over all three services, under the direction of the President, State Council and Council of Ministers. There was also a National Security Council which acted in advisory capacity. The Defence Minister cum Chief-of-Staff of Defence Services exercised day-to-day control of the armed forces and assisted by three Vice-Chiefs of Staff, one each for the army, navy and air force. These officers also acted as Deputy Ministers of Defence and commanders of their respective Services. They were all based at Ministry of Defence () in Rangoon/Yangon. It served as a government ministry as well as joint military operations headquarters.\nThe Joint Staff within the Ministry of Defence consisted of three major branches, one each for Army, Navy and Air Force, along with a number of independent departments. The Army Office had three major departments; the General (G) Staff to oversee operations, the Adjutant General's (A) Staff administration and the Quartermaster General's (Q) Staff to handle logistics. The General Staff consisted two Bureaus of Special Operations (BSO), which were created in April 1978 and June 1979 respectively.\nThese BSO are similar to \"Army Groups\" in Western armies, high level staff units formed to manage different theatres of military operations. They were responsible for the overall direction and co-ordination of the Regional Military Commands (RMC) with BSO-1 covering Northern Command (NC), North Eastern Command (NEC), North Western Command (NWC), Western Command (WC) and Eastern Command (EC). BSO-2 responsible for South Eastern Command (SEC), South Western Command (SWC), Western Command (WC) and Central Command (CC).\nThe Army's elite mobile Light Infantry Divisions (LID) were managed separately under a staff colonel. Under G Staff, there were also a number of directorates which corresponded to the Army's functional corps, such as Intelligence, Signals, Training, Armour and Artillery. The A Staff was responsible for the Adjutant General, Directorate of Medical Services and the Provost Marshal's Office. The Q Staff included the Directorates of Supply and Transport, Ordnance Services, Electrical and Mechanical Engineering, and Military Engineers.\nThe Navy and Air Force Offices within the Ministry were headed by the Vice Chiefs of Staff for those Services. Each was supported by a staff officer at full colonel level. All these officers were responsible for the overall management of the various naval and air bases around the country, and the broader administrative functions such as recruitment and training.\nOperational Command in the field was exercised through a framework of Regional Military Commands (RMC), the boundaries of which corresponded with the country's Seven States and Seven Divisions. The Regional Military Commanders, all senior army officers, usually of Brigadier General rank, were responsible for the conduct of military operations in their respective RMC areas. Depending on the size of RMC and its operational requirements, Regional Military Commanders have at their disposal 10 or more infantry battalions ().\n1988 to 2005.\nThe Tatmadaw's organisational and command structure dramatically changed after the military coup in 1988. In 1990, the country's most senior army officer become a Senior general (equivalent to Field marshal rank in Western armies) and held the positions of chairman of State Law and Order Restoration Council (SLORC), Prime Minister and Defence Minister, as well as being appointed Commander-in-Chief of the Defence Services. He thus exercised both political and operational control over the entire country and armed forces.\nFrom 1989, each service has had its own Commander-in-Chief and Chief of Staff. The Army Commander in Chief is now elevated to full general () rank and also acted as deputy commander in Chief of the Defence Services. The C-in-C of the Air Force and Navy hold the equivalent of lieutenant general rank, while all three Service Chiefs of Staff were raised to major general level. Chiefs of Bureau of Special Operations (BSO), the heads of Q and A Staffs and the Director of Defence Services Intelligence (DDSI) were also elevated to lieutenant general rank. The reorganisation of the armed forces after 1988 resulted in the upgrading by two ranks of most of the senior positions.\nA new command structure was introduced at the Ministry of Defence level in 2002. The most important position created is the Joint Chief of Staff (Army, Navy, Air Force) that commands commanders-in-chief of the Navy and the Air Force.\nThe Office of Strategic Studies (OSS, or ) was formed around 1994 and charged with formulating defence policies, and planning and doctrine of the Tatmadaw. The OSS was commanded by Lieutenant General Khin Nyunt, who is also the Director of Defence Service Intelligence (DDSI). Regional Military Commands (RMC) and Light Infantry Divisions (LID) were also reorganised, and LIDs are now directly answerable to Commander in Chief of the Army.\nA number of new subordinate command headquarters were formed in response to the growth and reorganisation of the Army. These include Regional Operation Commands (ROC, or Da Ka Sa), which are subordinate to RMCs, and Military Operations Commands (MOC, or Sa Ka Kha), which are equivalent to Western infantry divisions.\nThe Chief of Staff (Army) retained control of the Directorates of Signals, Directorate of Armour Corps, Directorate of Artillery Corps, Defence Industries, Security Printing, Public Relations and Psychological Warfare, and Military Engineering (field section), People's Militias and Border Troops, Directorate of Defence Services Computers (DDSC), the Defence Services Museum and Historical Research Institute.\nUnder the Adjutant General Office, there are three directorates: Medical Services, Resettlement, and Provost Martial. Under the Quartermaster General Office are the directorates of Military Engineering (garrison section), Supply and Transport, Ordnance Services, and Electricaland Mechanical Engineering.\nOther independent department within the Ministry of Defence are Judge Advocate General, Inspector General, Military Appointment General, Directorate of Procurement, Record Office, Central Military Accounting, and Camp Commandant.\nAll RMC Commander positions were raised to the level of major general and also serve as appointed chairmen of the state- and division-level Law and Order Restoration Committees. They were formally responsible for both military and civil administrative functions for their command areas. Also, three additional regional military commands were created. In early 1990, a new RMC was formed in Burma's north west, facing India. In 1996, the Eastern Command in Shan State was split into two RMCs, and South Eastern Command was divided to create a new RMC in country's far south coastal regions.\nIn 1997, the State Law and Order Restoration Council (SLORC) was abolished and the military government created the State Peace and Development Council (SPDC). The council includes all senior military officers and commanders of the RMCs. A new Ministry of Military Affairs was established and headed by a lieutenant general. This new ministry was abolished after its minister Lieutenant General Tin Hla was sacked in 2001.\n2005 to 2010.\nOn 18 October 2004, the OSS and DDSI were abolished during the purge of General Khin Nyunt and military intelligence units. OSS ordered 4 regiment to raid in DDSI Headquarter in Yangon. At the same time, all of the MIU in the whole country were raided and arrested by OSS corps. Nearly two thirds of MIU officers were detained for years. A new military intelligence unit called Military Affairs Security (MAS) was formed to take over the functions of the DDSI, but MAS units were much fewer than DDSI's and MAS was under control by local Division commander.\nIn early 2006, a new Regional Military Command (RMC) was created at the newly formed administrative capital, Naypyidaw.\nService branches.\nMyanmar Army ().\nThe Myanmar Army has always been by far the largest service and has always received the lion's share of Burma's defence budget. It has played the most prominent part in Burma's struggle against the 40 or more insurgent groups since 1948 and acquired a reputation as a tough and resourceful military force. In 1981, it was described as \"probably the best army in Southeast Asia, apart from Vietnam's\". This judgment was echoed in 1983, when another observer noted that \"Myanmar's infantry is generally rated as one of the toughest, most combat seasoned in Southeast Asia\".\nMyanmar Air Force ().\nPersonnel: 23,000 \nThe Myanmar Air Force was formed on 16 January 1947, while Myanmar (also known as Burma) was under British colonial rule. By 1948, the new air force fleet included 40 Airspeed Oxfords, 16 de Havilland Tiger Moths, 4 Austers and 3 Supermarine Spitfires transferred from Royal Air Force with a few hundred personnel. The primary mission of Myanmar Air Force since its inception has been to provide transport, logistical, and close air support to Myanmar Army in counter-insurgency operations.\nMyanmar Navy ().\nThe Myanmar Navy is the naval branch of the armed forces of Burma with estimated 19,000 men and women. The Myanmar Navy was formed in 1940 and, although very small, played an active part in Allied operations against the Japanese during the Second World War. The Myanmar Navy currently operates more than 122 vessels. Before 1988, the Myanmar Navy was small and its role in the many counterinsurgency operations was much less conspicuous than those of the army and air force. Yet the navy has always been, and remains, an important factor in Burma's security and it was dramatically expanded in recent years to a provide blue water capability and external threat defence role in Burma's territorial waters. Its personnel number 19,000 (including two naval infantry battalions).\nMyanmar Police Force ().\nThe Myanmar Police Force, formally known as The People's Police Force (, MLCTS: ), was established in 1964 as independent department under the Ministry of Home Affairs. It was reorganised on 1 October 1995 and informally become part of the Tatmadaw. Current director general of Myanmar Police Force is Brigadier General Kyaw Kyaw Tun with its headquarters at Naypyidaw. Its command structure is based on established civil jurisdictions. Each of Burma's seven states and seven divisions has their own Police Forces with headquarters in the respective capital cities. Israel and Australia often provide specialists to enhance the training of Burma's police. Personnel: 72,000 (including 4,500 Combat/SWAT Police)\nAir Defence.\nThe Myanmar Air Defense Forces () is one of the major branches of the Tatmadaw. It was established as the Air Defence Command in 1997 but was not fully operational until late 1999. It was renamed the Bureau of Air Defence in the early 2000s. In early 2000s, the Tatmadaw established the Myanmar Integrated Air Defence System (MIADS) () with help from Russia, Ukraine and China. It is a tri-service bureau with units from all three branches of the armed forces. All air defence assets except anti-aircraft artillery are integrated into MIADS.\nMilitary intelligence.\nThe Office of the Chief of Military Security Affairs (OCMSA), commonly referred to by its Burmese acronym (), is a branch of the Myanmar's Armed Forces tasked with intelligence gathering. It was created to replace the Directorate of Defence Services Intelligence (DDSI), which was disbanded in 2004.\nDefence industries.\nThe Myanmar Directorate of Defence Industries (DI) consists of 25 major factories throughout the country that produce approximately 70 major products for Army, Navy and Air Force. The main products include automatic rifles, machine guns, sub-machine guns, anti-aircraft guns, complete range of mortar and artillery ammunition, aircraft and anti-aircraft ammunition, tank and anti-tank ammunition, bombs, grenades, anti-tank mines, anti-personnel mines such as the M14 pyrotechnics, commercial explosives and commercial products, and rockets and so forth. DI have produced new assault rifles and light machine-guns for the infantry. The MA series of weapons were designed to replace the old German-designed but locally manufactured Heckler &amp; Koch G3s and G4s that equipped Burma's army since the 1960s.\nPolitical representation in Myanmar's legislature.\n25% of the seats in both houses of the Pyidaungsu Hluttaw, Myanmar's legislature, are reserved for military appointees.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20395", "revid": "44313162", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20395", "title": "Foreign relations of Myanmar", "text": " \nMyanmar (formerly Burma) has full diplomatic relations with 126 countries out of 192 United Nation Members States. The country has generally maintained warmer relations with near states and is a member of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations.\nDiplomatic relations.\nList of countries which Myanmar maintains diplomatic relations with:\nEurope and America.\nThe United States has placed broad sanctions on Myanmar because of the military crackdown in 1988 and the military regime's refusal to honour the election results of the 1990 People's Assembly election. Similarly, the European Union has placed embargoes on Myanmar, including an arms embargo, cessation of trade preferences, and suspension of all aid with the exception of humanitarian aid.\nUS and European government sanctions against the military government, alongside boycotts and other types of direct pressure on corporations by western supporters of the Burmese democracy movement, have resulted in the withdrawal from Myanmar of most US and many European companies. However, several Western companies remain due to loopholes in the sanctions. Asian corporations have generally remained willing to continue investing in Myanmar and to initiate new investments, particularly in natural resource extraction.\nThe French oil company TotalEnergies is able to operate the Yadana natural gas pipeline from Myanmar to Thailand despite the European Union's sanctions on Myanmar. TotalEnergies is currently the subject of a lawsuit in French and Belgian courts for the condoning and use of Burman civilian slavery to construct the named pipeline. Experts say that the human rights abuses along the gas pipeline are the direct responsibility of TotalEnergies and its American partner Chevron Corporation with aid and implementation by the Tatmadaw. Prior to its acquisition by Chevron, Unocal settled a similar human rights lawsuit for a reported multimillion-dollar amount. There remains active debate as to the extent to which the American-led sanctions have had adverse effects on the civilian population or on the military rulers.\nArmenia.\nBoth countries established diplomatic relations on 31 January 2013.\nBelarus.\nBelarus and Myanmar established diplomatic relations on 22 September 1999. In December 2011, prime minister of Belarus Mikhail Myasnikovich made on official visit to Myanmar.\nIn 2021, Belarus was the only country to vote against UN General Assembly resolution calling Myanmar military to stop violence, release arrested protesters and restore democracy. It was assumed that Belarusian support for Myanmar military junta was caused by long history of arms trade with Myanmar Army.\nDenmark.\nMyanmar is represented in Denmark through its embassy in the United Kingdom, and Denmark is represented in Myanmar through its embassy in Thailand. Diplomatic relations were established in 1955. Relations between the two countries are friendly, but economically, Denmark has the \"worst\" trade with Myanmar in the European Union. \nDevelopment assistance to Myanmar is a top priority of the Danish International Development Agency's engagement in Southeast Asia. 93 million DKK was given to education and healthcare projects. Danish development assistance has focused on promoting democracy and human rights. Denmark was one of the first countries to respond to cyclone Nargis by providing humanitarian assistance to Myanmar. Three Diseases Fund was founded in 2006, and Denmark joined in 2009. Three Diseases Fund helps Myanmar fight HIV and AIDS, and has assisted with 73 million dollars.\nBurmese Consul incident.\nIn 1996, the consul in Myanmar for Denmark, James Leander Nichols, was sentenced to three years in jail. The sentence was for illegal possession of two facsimile machines and a telephone switchboard. Two months later, he died in prison. Despite Danish insistence, Burmese authorities refused to allow an independent autopsy. Soon after, the European Union, with Canada, called for a United Nations gathering on the democratisation process.\nHungary.\nIn June 2019, Aung San Suu Kyi visited Hungary and meet with the Prime Minister Viktor Orb\u00e1n. \"The two leaders highlighted that one of the greatest challenges at present for both countries and their respective regions \u2013 south-east Asia and Europe \u2013 is migration\", read a statement released after their meeting. it also said \"They noted that both regions have seen the emergence of the issue of co-existence with continuously growing Muslim populations\".\nIreland.\nThe Government of Ireland established diplomatic relations with Myanmar on a non-resident basis on 10 February 2004. The Irish Government was still concerned about the arbitrary detention of the opposition leader Aung San Suu Kyi. Burma Action Ireland is a pro-democracy group that freely operates in the Republic of Ireland.\nIreland supported a UN commission of inquiry and international level monitoring of Myanmar after 2008, as part of their efforts to support democracy and human rights movements in Myanmar. This became public knowledge after official papers were leaked in September 2010.\nFrance.\nFranco-Burmese relations go back to the early 18th century, as the French East India Company attempted to extend its influence into Southeast Asia. French involvement started in 1729 when it built a shipyard in the city of Syriam. The 1740 revolt of the Mon against Burmese rule, however, forced the French to depart in 1742. They were able to return to Siam in 1751 when the Mon requested French assistance against the Burmese. A French envoy, Sieur de Bruno was sent to evaluate the situation and help in the defence against the Burmese. French warships were sent to support the Mon rebellion, but in vain. In 1756, the Burmese under Alaungpaya vanquished the Mon. Many French were captured and incorporated into the Burmese Army as an elite gunner corps, under Chevalier Milard. In 1769, official contacts resumed when a trade treaty was signed between King Hsinbyushin and the French East India Company.\nSoon after, however, France was convulsed by the French Revolution and Napoleonic Wars, thus allowing overwhelming British influence in Burma. French contacts with Burma, effectively a British colony, became almost non-existent. Instead, from the second half of the 19th century, France concentrated on the establishment of French Indochina and the conflicts with China leading to the Sino-French War. Following the end of World War II, ambassador-level diplomatic relationships between France and Burma were established in 1948, soon after the Burmese nation became an independent republic on 4 January 1948, as \"Union of Burma\", with Sao Shwe Thaik as its first President and U Nu as its first Prime Minister.\nUnited Kingdom.\nMyanmar established diplomatic relations with the United Kingdom on 7 July 1947.\nThe UK governed Myanmar from 1824 to 1942 and 1945 until 1948, when Myanmar achieved full independence.\nBoth countries share common membership of the United Nations, and the World Trade Organization. Bilaterally the two countries have a Development Partnership, and a Double Taxation Agreement.\nUnited States.\nThe political relations between the United States of America and Myanmar began to face major problems following the 1988 military coup and the junta's outbursts of repression against pro-democracy activists. Subsequent repression, including that of protestors in 2007 and 2021, further strain the relationship. In the 2010s, following signs of democratisation and economic liberalisation, the United States lifted sanctions calling for the mending of US relations with Myanmar. The US also re-established ambassador-level relations with Myanmar in 2012 for the first time since 1990. However, the US re-imposed targeted sanctions following the 2017 Rohingya genocide and the 2021 myanmar coup d'\u00e9tat, focusing on individuals and companies involved in atrocities and human rights violations.\nHistorical relations.\nIn 1988, the United States downgraded its level of representation in Myanmar from Ambassador to Charg\u00e9 d'Affaires after the Burmese government's lethal crackdown on the 8888 Uprising and its failure to honor the results of the 1990 election. The United States remains one of a few countries to still not recognize the 1989 name change from Burma to Myanmar arguing that the change was made without the consent of the people by the illegitimate 1989 government. The US upgraded its representation back in 2012, appointing Derek Mitchel as Ambassador.\nMassachusetts attempted to place sanctions against Burma on its own in 1996 but the concept proved to be contradictory to the US Constitution.\nThe US government imposed broad sanctions on Myanmar including the 2003 Burma Freedom and Democracy Act, which banned all imports and export of financial services with Myanmar, froze certain Burmese financial institutions' access and increased visa restrictions for Burmese officials. In 2007, the US imposed additional sanctions, including freezing assets of 25 high-ranking officials Burmese government officials through Executive Orders.\nIn 2011, US Secretary of State, Hillary Clinton, visited Myanmar, the first by a Secretary of State since 1955. Clinton met with President Thein Sein and with then-democracy activist Aung San Suu Kyi In 2012, the Clinton announced the US will exchange ambassadors with Myanmar, after a landmark Burmese political prisoner amnesty. President Barack Obama nominated Derek Mitchell to serve as US Ambassador to Myanmar.\nIn July 2012 the United States formally reduced sanctions against Myanmar. and \"targeted easing\" of sanctions allowing minor US investment.\nIn 2013, Thein Sein visited the US White House to discuss Myanmar's reforms with President Obama. The two countries later signed a bilateral trade and investment framework agreement.\nRecent relations.\nIn October 2017 the United States withdrew military aid to Myanmar units responsible for the displacement of Rohingya in the Rohingya crisis. The US later imposed a blacklist on Maung Maung Soe, chief of the Myanmar army's Western Command responsible for the violence, and commanders directly involved. The United States also provided humanitarian aid to displaced Rohingya refugees. In 2022, the United States formally recognized the Rohingya genocide.\nIn February 2021, a military coup led by Min Aung Hlaing overthrew Aung San Suu Kyi in Myanmar. The United States condemned the coup and imposed sanctions on Myanmar military leaders and their business associates.\nIn July 2022, the new junta of Myanmar executed four political prisoners, which was met with condemnation from the G7 nations, including the United States. The State Department further pressed China to influence the situation.\nIn August 2021, as the protests escalated into greater conflict, two Myanmar citizens in the United States were arrested over an alleged plot to hire hitmen to assassinate Kyaw Moe Tun, Myanmar's representative to the United Nations in New York.\nIn December 2022, The BURMA Act was passed in Congress authorising sanctions on individuals involved in the coup d'\u00e9tat, providing support to civil society and humanitarian assistance as well as creating a position within the State Department dedicated to democracy in Burma.\nUS activities in Myanmar.\nOn 10 September 2007, the Burmese Government accused the CIA of assassinating a rebel Karen commander from the Karen National Union who wanted to negotiate with the military government.\nIn 2011, \"The Guardian\" newspaper published leaked diplomatic cables information that revealed that the US funded some civil society groups in Myanmar who eventually forced the government to suspend the controversial Chinese Myitsone Dam on the Irrawaddy river.\nAccording to media reports in 2010, the Embassy of the United States in Yangon is the site of an electronic surveillance facility used to monitor telephones and communications networks jointly run by the Special Collection Service.\nDiplomatic missions.\nThe US Embassy in Myanmar is located in Yangon, whilst the Burmese diplomatic representation to America is based in Washington, D.C.\nMajor officials of the US Embassy in Yangon.\nSource:\nRussia.\nBilateral relations with the Russian Federation are among the strongest enjoyed by a largely isolated Burma. Russia had established diplomatic relations with Myanmar at independence and these continued after the fall of the Soviet Union. China and Russia once vetoed a U.N. Security Council resolution condemning the Burmese government. Today Russia, along with China, remains part of the UN Security Council, which occasionally shields Myanmar from global pressure and criticism, and remains a strong Tatmadaw ally.\nRussia maintains an embassy in Yangon whilst Myanmar maintains one in Moscow.\nNuclear centre deal.\nIn 2007 Russia and Myanmar engaged in a deal regarding Myanmar's nuclear programme. According to the press release, Russia and Myanmar shall construct a nuclear research centre that 'will comprise a 10\u00a0MW light-water reactor working on 20%-enriched uranium-235, an activation analysis laboratory, a medical isotope production laboratory, silicon doping system, nuclear waste treatment and burial facilities'.\nAssociation of Southeast Asian Nations.\nMyanmar is a member of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) and part of ASEAN+3 and the East Asia Summit. Myanmar agreed to relinquish its turn to hold the rotating ASEAN presidency in 2006 due to others member states' concern of its previous democratic situation.\nASEAN has announced that it shall not provide defence for Myanmar at any international forum regarding the authoritarian junta's refusal to restore democracy. In April 2007, the Malaysian Foreign Ministry parliamentary secretary Ahmad Shabery Cheek said that Malaysia and other ASEAN members had decided not to defend Myanmar if the country was raised for discussion at any international conference. \"Now Myanmar has to defend itself if it was bombarded at any international forum,\" he said when winding up a debate at committee stage for the Foreign Ministry. He was replying to queries from Opposition Leader Lim Kit Siang on the next course of action to be taken by Malaysia and Asean with the Burmese military junta. Lim had said Malaysia must play a proactive role in pursuing regional initiatives to bring about a change in Myanmar and support efforts to bring the situation in Myanmar to the UN Security Council's attention. Recently, ASEAN did take a stronger tone with Burma, particularly regards to the detention of now-released Aung San Suu Kyi.\nBrunei.\nBrunei has an embassy in Yangon, and Myanmar has an embassy in Gadong. The relations have been established since 21 September 1993.\nMalaysia.\nThe relations between the two countries were established on 1 March 1957 and the first Myanmar mission at the legation level was set up in Kuala Lumpur in June 1959 and later raised to the embassy level.\nThailand.\nRelations between Myanmar and Thailand focus mainly on economic issues and trade. There is sporadic conflict with Thailand over the alignment of the border. Recently, Prime Minister Abhisit Vejjajiva made it clear that dialogue encouraging political change is a priority for Thailand, but not through economic sanctions. He also publicised intentions to help reconstruct temples damaged in the aftermath of Cyclone Nargis. However, there were tensions over detained opposition leader Aung San Suu Kyi, with Thailand calling for her release. She was released in 2010. In the Thaksin Shinawatra administration, relations have been characterised by conflicts and confrontations. Border disputes are now coming more prominent and Thailand as disturbed by the imprisonment of Myanmar's dissident Aung San Suu Kyi.\nMyanmar has diplomatic offices in Bangkok whilst Thailand maintains an embassy in Yangon.\nPhilippines.\nPhilippines established relations with Myanmar in 1956 and recognised its political name Myanmar. In 2012, Myanmar ranked 3rd to the lowest among the Philippines' trading partners in ASEAN. It only fared better than Cambodia and Laos. The Philippines and Myanmar traded only $47.07 million in 2012. The Philippines grant Burmese citizens visa-free access for 30 days. Myanmar on the other hand signed the visa exemption for Filipinos on 5 December 2013 effective 4 January 2014. The agreement allows Filipinos to stay in Myanmar up to 14 days visa-free.\nCambodia.\nBurma accorded de jure recognition to the newly sovereign state of Cambodia on August 16, 1954. On January 10, 1955, Burma and Cambodia agreed to establish diplomatic relations, which were maintained with the Lon Nol government after the deposition of Norodom Sihanouk in March 1970. Diplomatic recognition was later transferred to Democratic Kampuchea when Lon Nol's Khmer Republic was overthrown in April 1975.\nIndonesia.\nBurma recognized the Republic of Indonesia as de jure sovereign power of the archipelago on December 27, 1949. A five-year treaty of friendship was signed in Rangoon on March 31, 1951. Indonesian President Sukarno paid his first visit to Rangoon on his way home from a journey to India and Pakistan in 1950.\nSingapore.\nSingapore established diplomatic relations with the Union of Burma in 1966. However, it was only in May 1984 that the Embassy was opened in Yangon.\nSingapore is one of Myanmar's top investors and trading partners. In the past, Singapore faced scrutiny from Burmese democracy activists, exacerbated by Lee Kuan Yew's comments in 1996. After the 2021 Myanmar coup, Singapore adopted stronger stances against the military regime and pressuring the regime to cooperate with ASEAN's peace plan. However, Singapore continues to be a major source of equipment for the junta's weapons factories.\nEast Asia.\nChina.\nThe People's Republic of China had poor relations with Myanmar until the late 1980s. Between 1967 and 1970, Burma broke relations with Beijing because of the latter's support for the Communist Party of Burma (CPB). Deng Xiaoping visited Yangon in 1978 and withdrew support for the long running insurgency of the Communist Party of Burma. However, in the early 1950s Burma enjoyed a hot-and-cold relationship with China. Burma's Ba U and U Nu lobbied for China's entry as a permanent member into the UN Security Council, but denounced the invasion of Tibet.\nChina and Burma have had many border disputes, dating long before the British annexation of Burma. The last border dispute occurred in 1956, when the People's Liberation Army occupied disputed areas in northern Burma, but both sides agreed to resolve the issue through negotiations. A border agreement was reached in 1960.\nIn the late 1960s, due to Ne Win's propaganda that the PRC was to blame for crop failures, and the increasing number of ethnic Chinese students supporting Chairman Mao Zedong, by carrying the Quotatians from his books, anti-Chinese riots broke out in June 1967. At the same time, many Sino-Burmese were influenced by the Cultural Revolution in China and began to wear Mao badges. Shops and homes were ransacked and burned. The Chinese government heavily berated the Burmese government and started a war of words, but no other actions were taken. The anti-Chinese riots continued till the early 1970s.\nHowever, after 1986, China withdrew support for the CPB and began supplying the military junta with the majority of its arms in exchange for increased access to Burmese markets and a rumoured naval base on Coco Islands in the Andaman Sea. China is supposed to have an intelligence gathering station on the Great Coco Island to monitor Indian naval activity and ISRO &amp; DRDO missile and space launch activities. The influx of Chinese arms turned the tide in Myanmar against the ethnic insurgencies, many of which had relied indirectly on Chinese complicity. As a result, the military junta of Myanmar is highly reliant on the Chinese for their currently high level of power.\nMyanmar maintains diplomatic offices in Beijing and consular offices in Kunming and Hong Kong, whilst the PRC has a diplomatic mission in Yangon and a consulate in Mandalay.\nAfter 2015, China increased considerably its scope of engagement with Myanmar by playing a more active role in the peace process, developing large infrastructure projects and promoting the Belt and Road Initiative (BRI) in the country.\nIn July 2019, UN ambassadors from 50 countries, including Myanmar, have signed a joint letter to the UNHRC defending China's treatment of Uyghurs and other Muslim minority groups in the Xinjiang region.\nNorth Korea.\n and North Korea has an embassy in Yangon.\nHistory.\nSince they both achieved independence in 1948, Burma and North Korea have enjoyed a chequered relationship. Burma expressed diplomatic support for the UN forces during the Korean War, but after the signing of the 1953 armistice it established good working relations with the two Koreas. Consular links with both states were established in 1961 and full diplomatic relations followed in 1975. During the 1960s and 1970s, General Ne Win's government made efforts to balance the competing demands of North Korea and South Korea for recognition, diplomatic support and trade. However, during the late 1970s the relationship with Pyongyang became slightly stronger than that with Seoul, as Ne Win and the Burma Socialist Programme Party forged fraternal ties with Kim Il Sung and the Workers' Party of Korea.\nThe assassination attempt in 1983.\nThe bilateral relationship with North Korea dramatically collapsed in 1983, after Pyongyang allegedly sent three agents to Yangon to assassinate South Korean President Chun Doo Hwan, who was making a state visit to Burma. Due to a last minute, unannounced change to his schedule, Chun survived the massive bomb attack at the Martyrs' Mausoleum, but 17 South Korean and four Burmese officials, including four Korean Cabinet ministers, were killed. Forty-six others were injured.\nThere was probably at least one bilateral agreement as early as 2000, but the relationship seemed to reach a major turning point around 2003. In July that year, it was reported that between 15 and 20 North Korean technicians were working at the Monkey Point naval base in Yangon. A UN report released on 1 February 2018 cited North Korean ballistic missile transfers to the Myanmar army.\nSouth Korea.\nThe Republic of Korea and Burma generally enjoy good relations. Burma has an embassy in Seoul and South Korea has an embassy in Yangon.\nTaiwan.\nAlthough Myanmar officially recognises the PRC and not the Republic of China (Taiwan), there is much interaction between the two countries. Many Taiwanese nationals own businesses in Myanmar. There are direct air flights to Taipei. In the absence of diplomatic relations, Myanmar was represented by the Myanmar Trade Office in Taipei, and Taiwan remains represented by the Taipei Economic and Cultural Office in Yangon.\nSouth Asia.\nIndia.\nBilateral relations between Myanmar and the Republic of India have improved considerably since 1993, overcoming disagreements related to drug trafficking, the suppression of democracy and the rule of the military junta in Myanmar. Myanmar is situated to the south of the states of Mizoram, Manipur, Nagaland and Arunachal Pradesh in Northeast India. The proximity of the People's Republic of China give strategic importance to Indo-Burmese relations. The Indo-Burmese border stretches over 1,600\u00a0kilometers. India is generally friendly with Myanmar, but is concerned by the flow of tribal refugees and the arrest of Aung San Suu Kyi.\nAs a result of increased Chinese influence in Myanmar as well as the safe haven and arms trafficking occurring along the Indo-Burmese border, India has sought in recent years to refurbish ties with the Union of Burma. Numerous economic arrangements have been established including a roadway connecting the isolated provinces of Northeastern India with Mandalay which opens up trade with China, Myanmar, and gives access to the Burmese ports. Relations between India and Myanmar have been strained in the past however due to India's continuing support for the pro-democracy movement in Myanmar.\nIn an interview on the BBC, George Fernandes, former Indian Defence Minister and prominent Myanmar critic, said that Coco Island was part of India until it was donated to Myanmar by former Prime Minister of India Jawaharlal Nehru. Coco Island is located at 18\u00a0km from the Indian Nicobar Islands.\nMyanmar has a fully operating embassy based in New Delhi and India has one in Yangon, the former capital of Myanmar. Like the PRC, the Republic of India maintains a Consulate-General in Mandalay.\nThe relationship between Myanmar and India has been complicated by allegations that India\u2019s intelligence agency, the Research and Analysis Wing (RAW), has engaged in covert operations to influence Myanmar's internal politics. Reports suggest that RAW has established ties with various ethnic insurgent groups in Myanmar, particularly in the northeastern states bordering India. This has raised concerns that India might be conducting a proxy war to exert control over Myanmar's government and counterbalance Chinese influence in the region. By supporting these insurgent groups, India aims to secure its own border and prevent the spillover of conflict into its northeastern states. However, this strategy has led to accusations of interference in Myanmar\u2019s sovereignty. The military junta in Myanmar views such actions as destabilizing, leading to further strain in diplomatic relations. These covert operations have created a complex web of alliances and enmities, as India navigates its interests while attempting to maintain a semblance of cooperative relations with the Myanmar government. Consequently, the use of proxy forces has not only complicated India's relationship with Myanmar but has also heightened tensions within the region, raising questions about long-term stability and governance in Myanmar itself.\nEconomic relations.\nIndia is the largest market for Burmese exports, buying about US$220 million worth of goods in 2000; India's exports to Myanmar stood at US$75.36 million. India is Myanmar's 4th largest trading partner after Thailand, the PRC and Singapore, and second largest export market after Thailand, absorbing 25 percent of its total exports. India is also the seventh most important source of Myanmar's imports. The governments of India and Myanmar had set a target of achieving $1 billion and bilateral trade reached US$650 million by 2006. The Indian government has worked to extend air, land and sea routes to strengthen trade links with Myanmar and establish a gas pipeline. While the involvement of India's private sector has been low and growing at a slow pace, both governments are proceeding to enhance co-operation in agriculture, telecommunications, information technology, steel, oil, natural gas, hydrocarbons and food processing. The bilateral border trade agreement of 1994 provides for border trade to be carried out from three designated border points, one each in Manipur, Mizoram and Nagaland.\nOn 13 February 2001 India and Myanmar inaugurated a major 160 kilometre highway, called the Indo-Myanmar Friendship Road, built mainly by the Indian Army's Border Roads Organisation and aimed to provide a major strategic and commercial transport route connecting North-East India, and South Asia as a whole, to Southeast Asia.\nIndia and Myanmar have agreed to a four-lane, 3200\u00a0km triangular highway connecting India, Myanmar and Thailand. The route, which is expected to be completed by sometime during 2018, will run from India's northeastern states into Myanmar, where over 1,600\u00a0km of roads will be built or improved. The first phase connecting Guwahati to Mandalay is set to complete by 2016. This will eventually be extended to Cambodia and Vietnam. This is aimed at creating a new economic zone ranging from Kolkata on the Bay of Bengal to Ho Chi Minh City on the South China Sea.\nOperation Leech.\nOperation \"Leech\" is the name given to an armed operation on the Indo-Burmese border in 1998. India has sought to install friendly governments in the Southeast Asia region. To these ends, India's external intelligence agency, R&amp;AW, cultivated Burmese rebel groups and pro-democracy coalitions, especially the Kachin Independence Army (KIA). India allowed the KIA to carry a limited trade in jade and precious stones using Indian territory and even supplied them with weapons.\nHowever, with increasing bonhomie between the Indian government and the Burmese junta, the KIA became the main source of training and weapons for all northeastern rebel groups in India. Thus, R&amp;AW initiated Operation \"Leech\", with the help of Indian Army and paramilitary forces, to assassinate the leaders of the Burmese rebels as an example to other groups.\nBangladesh.\nHistorical relations between Myanmar and Bangladesh include centuries of trade, cultural interactions and migration between the kingdoms and empires of Bengal and the kingdoms of Burma, particularly Arakan. Most prominently this is visible in the Indic Buddhist culture of Burma that was transmitted often through Bengal resulting in the imprint of Indian (inclusive of Bengali) culture and civilization currently found in Myanmar. The two nations also share a heritage of colonial commerce during the British Empire. The Bengali community in Myanmar is present in Yangon and the Rakhine. In Bangladesh, a large population of Burmese ancestry resides in Chittagong and southeastern hill districts, including Rakhines and Bohmong, as well as Burmese-Bengalis. After the Bangladesh Liberation War in 1971, Burma became one of the first countries to recognise the independence of Bangladesh.\nHowever, the relationship between two countries deteriorated under Ziaur Rahman of Bangladesh. In April 1978, a large number of Rohingya refugees suddenly started arriving in Bangladesh. About 200,000 refugees arrived and took shelter during the month of June. In May 1979, Burmese president Ne Win visited Bangladesh. During his visit, the demarcation agreement between the two countries was signed on May 23. Towards the end of Rahman's presidency, Win and Rahman visited back and forth.\nThe presence of 270,000 Burmese Muslim refugees (Rohingya people) in southern Bangladesh have often caused irritants in bilateral relations, which are generally cordial. A 40-year maritime boundary dispute in the Bay of Bengal was resolved by the two countries at a UN tribunal in March 2012.\nBangladesh has sought transit rights through Myanmar, to establish connectivity with China and ASEAN through projects such as the proposed Chittagong-Mandalay-Kunming highway. The governments of both countries are also in discussions on the possible export of Burmese gas to Bangladesh, as well as setting up a joint hydroelectric power plant in Rakhine State.\nThe political class and civil society of Bangladesh often voiced support for Myanmar's pro-democracy struggle. In 2006 a petition by 500 Bangladeshi politicians and intellectuals, including Sheikh Hasina and Kamal Hossain, expressed support for Aung San Suu Kyi and called for the release of all political prisoners in Myanmar. After winning elections in 2008, Sheikh Hasina reiterated her position on Burma's pro-democracy struggle, calling for an end to the detention of Suu Kyi and Burmese political prisoners. The Democratic Voice of Burma radio station operates bureaus in Dhaka and Chittagong.\nDespite border (both territorial and nautical) tensions and the forced migration of 270,000 Rohingya Muslims from Buddhist Burma in 1978, relations with Bangladesh have generally been cordial, albeit somewhat tense at times.\nMany Rohingya refugees, not recognised as a sanctioned ethnic group and allegedly suffering abuse from the Burmese authorities, remain in Bangladesh, and have been threatened with forced repatriation to Myanmar. There are about 28,000 documented refugees remaining in camps in southern Bangladesh.\nAt the 2008 ASEAN Regional forum summit in Singapore, Bangladesh and Myanmar have pledged to solve their maritime boundary disputes as quickly as possible especially that a UN deadline in claiming maritime territories will expire in three years time. However, in late 2008, Myanmar sent in ships into disputed waters in the Bay of Bengal for the exploration of oil and natural gas. Bangladesh responded by sending in three warships to the area and diplomatically pursued efforts to pressure the Burmese junta to withdraw their own ships. During the crisis Myanmar deployed thousands of troops on its border with Bangladesh. However, following the Bangladeshi deployment, within a week the ships withdrew and the crisis ended.\nMyanmar has an embassy in Dhaka, whilst Bangladesh has an embassy in Yangon and a consular office in Sittwe. Bangladesh is also one of the first countries to begin constructing a diplomatic mission in Nay Pyi Taw.\nSri Lanka.\nHistory.\nThe early exchange of Theravada Buddhism between Sri Lanka and Myanmar built the two's first bilateral links and continues to be emphasized today. The generally held belief within Myanmar is that a \"Bhikkhu\" (monk) named Shin Arahan from Thaton introduced Theravada Buddhism to the Bagan Kingdom. Anawrahta invited monks from Sri Lanka, among others, after banishing Ari priests in an attempt to revitalize a more orthodox form of Buddhism. Vijayabahu I of Polonnaruwa sent a copy of the \"Tripitaka\" to Anawrahta.\nIn the 1150s, the Burmese king Sithu I visited the court of Parakramabahu I in Sri Lanka appointing an ambassador. According to the Sri Lankan chronicle \"C\u016b\u1e37ava\u1e43sa\", that Sithu caught sight of a letter addressed to the King of Cambodia. He attempted to stop Sri Lanka's elephant trade with Cambodia and later captured a lesser Sinhalese princess on her way to be married to a prince of Cambodia, sparking a war between the two kingdoms in 1180.\nThe influence of Burmese architecture on Sri Lanka's religious building in Polonnaruwa is also evident. The Satmahalprasada, a setup with an unusual pyramid like form in several levels or storeys in Polonnnaruwa is the best example.\nKing Dhammazedi of the Hanthawaddy kingdom sent all the monks in Lower Burma to be re-ordained on the in Sri Lanka making Sri Lankan Theravada Buddhism the dominant form of Buddhism in Myanmar. In the late 18th century, King Bodawpaya of the Konbaung Dynasty re-introduced the \"upasampad\u0101\" ordination system to Sri Lanka, establishing the Amarapura Nikaya. The establishment of the Amarapura Nikaya was also significant as a monastic lineage was established through collective action rather than the patronage of a king.\nModern Relations.\nIn 1949, soon after the independence of both countries, resident embassies were quickly established. The two countries continued their history of religious exchange during the Sixth Buddhist Council, hosted by Burma. The Sri Lankan delegation played a leading role in the deliberations of the council of 2500 monks.\nDuring Myanmar's economic liberalisation of the 2010s, Myanmar and Sri Lanka furthered trade ties, signing joint trade agreements and cooperating on many development issues through BIMSTEC. Sri Lankan President Maithripala Sirisena emphasized the two countries' similarities as Theravada Buddhist countries with an agricultural economy stating that Sri Lanka was a true friend of Myanmar ready to provide assistance in international forums.\nToday, the two maintain good relations with Sri Lanka presenting diplomatic credentials to Myanmar's State Administration Council (SAC_ despite international condemnation against the SAC for its war.\nOther Asian countries.\nPakistan.\nPakistan and Myanmar have cordial relations with each other, with embassies in each other's capitals. Pakistan International Airlines has flown to Yangon in the past and still operates Hajj charter flights on behalf of the Burmese government.\nPakistan has a diplomatic mission in Yangon, whilst Myanmar maintains a diplomatic office in Islamabad.\nMaldives.\nIn September 2017, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Maldives announced that it was ceasing all trade ties with Myanmar in response to the government's treatment of the Rohingya people in Rakhine State.\nOceania.\nNew Zealand.\nIn February 2021, New Zealand suspended high-level bilateral relations with Myanmar following the 2021 Myanmar coup d'\u00e9tat and joined other Western governments in rejecting the new military-led government and has called for the restoration of civilian-led rule. In addition, aid projects were diverted away from the Tatmadaw and a travel ban was imposed on Myanmar's military leaders.\nIn April 2024, the New Zealand Government permitted mid-level members of the military junta to participate in the ASEAN-New Zealand Dialogue meetings in Wellington. Prime Minister Christopher Luxon justified the invitation, citing ASEAN's policy of allowing non-political Myanmar officials to participate in official ASEAN functions. This was a reversal of the previous Labour Government's policy of blocking Myanmar officials from participating in two ASEAN study tours of New Zealand.\nTimeline of diplomatic representation.\nBy the end of the Union Solidarity and Development Party tenure in January 2016, Myanmar had 36 ambassadors, 3 consuls general and a permanent representative at the UN in New York. The country had established official relations with 114 independent states.\nUnited Nations.\nIn 1961, U Thant, then Burma's Permanent Representative to the United Nations and former Secretary to the Prime Minister, was elected Secretary-General of the United Nations; he was the first non-Westerner to head any international organisation and would serve as UN Secretary-General for ten years. Among the Burmese to work at the UN when he was Secretary-General was the young Aung San Suu Kyi.\nUntil 2005, the United Nations General Assembly annually adopted a detailed resolution about the situation in Myanmar by consensus. But in 2006 a divided United Nations General Assembly voted through a resolution that strongly called upon the government of Myanmar to end its systematic violations of human rights.\nIn January 2007, Russia and China vetoed a draft resolution before the United Nations Security Council calling on the government of Myanmar to respect human rights and begin a democratic transition. South Africa also voted against the resolution, arguing that since there were no peace and security concerns raised by its neighbours, the question did not belong in the Security Council when there were other more appropriate bodies to represent it, adding, \"Ironically, should the Security Council adopt [this resolution] ... the Human Rights Council would not be able to address the situation in Myanmar while the Council remains seized with the matter.\" The issue had been forced onto the agenda against the votes of Russia and the China by the United States (veto power applies only to resolutions) claiming that the outflow from Myanmar of refugees, drugs, HIV-AIDS, and other diseases threatened international peace and security.\nThe following September after the uprisings began and the human rights situation deteriorated, the Secretary-General dispatched his special envoy for the region, Ibrahim Gambari, to meet with the government. After seeing most parties involved, he returned to New York and briefed the Security Council about his visit. During this meeting, the ambassador said that the country \"indeed [has experienced] a daunting challenge. However, we have been able to restore stability. The situation has now returned to normalcy. Currently, people all over the country are holding peaceful rallies within the bounds of the law to welcome the successful conclusion of the national convention, which has laid down the fundamental principles for a new constitution, and to demonstrate their aversion to recent provocative demonstrations.\nOn 11 October the Security Council met and issued a statement and reaffirmed its \"strong and unwavering support for the Secretary-General's good offices mission\", especially the work by Ibrahim Gambari (During a briefing to the Security Council in November, Gambari admitted that no timeframe had been set by the Government for any of the moves that he had been negotiating for.)\nThroughout this period the World Food Program has continued to organise shipments from the Mandalay Division to the famine-struck areas to the north.\nIn December 2008, the United Nations General Assembly voted for a resolution condemning Myanmar's human rights record; it was supported by 80 countries, with 25 voting against and 45 abstaining.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20396", "revid": "39747830", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20396", "title": "Michael Schumacher", "text": "German racing driver (born 1969)\nMichael Schumacher ( , , ; born 3 January 1969) is a German former racing driver who competed in Formula One from to and from to . Schumacher won a record-setting seven Formula One World Drivers' Championship titles, tied by Lewis Hamilton in 2020, and\u2014at the time of his retirement\u2014held the records for most wins (91), pole positions (68), and podium finishes (155), while he maintains the record for most fastest laps (77), among others.\nBorn in H\u00fcrth to a working-class family, Schumacher began competitive kart racing aged four in a pedal kart built from discarded parts. After a successful karting career\u2014culminating in his victory at the direct-drive Karting European Championship in 1987\u2014Schumacher graduated to junior formulae. He dominated Formula K\u00f6nig in his debut season, before graduating to German Formula Three in 1989, where he finished third. He won the title the following season, also claiming the Macau Grand Prix and becoming a race-winner in the World Sportscar Championship with Sauber Mercedes. Schumacher made his debut Formula One appearance with Jordan at the Belgian Grand Prix in ; his qualifying performance saw Benetton sign him for the remainder of the season. In , he achieved his maiden victory in Belgium amongst several podiums, which he repeated at the Portuguese Grand Prix in . Schumacher won his maiden World Drivers' Championship with eight victories in , following a collision with his rival, Damon Hill, at the last race of the season. He won a further nine Grands Prix as he defended his title in .\nSchumacher moved to the struggling Ferrari for his campaign, where he took several victories and finished third overall. He was involved in title battles in and , being disqualified from the former for a collision with Jacques Villeneuve and finishing runner-up to Mika H\u00e4kkinen in the latter. His rivalry with H\u00e4kkinen continued into , when Schumacher broke his leg following a brake failure whilst second in the championship. He returned to beat H\u00e4kkinen to his first title with Ferrari in , their first in 21 years, which he successfully defended in . His campaign\u2014during which he won a then-record 11 Grands Prix\u2014saw him claim a record-equalling fifth title with an unparalleled perfect podium rate. He then claimed his unprecedented sixth and seventh titles, holding off Kimi R\u00e4ikk\u00f6nen and Juan Pablo Montoya in the former before winning 13 of 18 Grands Prix during the latter, breaking several further records. After dropping to third in and narrowly finishing runner-up to Fernando Alonso in , Schumacher announced his retirement from Formula One. He later returned with the resurrected Mercedes from to , claiming his final podium at the latter European Grand Prix, and has been credited with elevating the project to championship-winning form.\nSchumacher was noted for pushing his machinery to the limit for sustained periods, as well as his pioneering fitness regimen, win-at-all-costs mentality, and ability to galvanise teams around him. Appointed a UNESCO Champion for Sport in 2002, Schumacher has been involved in several humanitarian projects and has donated over million to various charities. In December 2013, Schumacher suffered a traumatic brain injury in a skiing accident and was placed in an induced coma for six months. He received further rehabilitation in Lausanne before being relocated to receive private treatment at his home in September 2014; he has not appeared publicly since.\nEarly life and career.\nMichael Schumacher was born in the West German town of H\u00fcrth, North Rhine-Westphalia, on 3 January 1969, to working-class parents Rolf\u2014a bricklayer who later ran the local kart track\u2014and Elisabeth Schumacher, who operated the track's canteen.\nKarting.\nWhen Schumacher was four, his father modified his pedal kart by adding a small motorcycle engine. After he crashed it into a lamp post in Kerpen, his parents took him to the karting track at Kerpen-Horrem, where he became the youngest member of the karting club. His father built him a kart from discarded parts; at the age of six, Schumacher won his first club championship. To support his racing, Schumacher's father took on a second job renting and repairing karts, while his mother worked at the track's canteen. When Schumacher needed a new engine costing 800 DM, his parents were unable to afford it; he was able to continue racing with support from local businessmen.\nRegulations in Germany require a driver to be at least 14 years old to obtain a kart license. To circumvent this, Schumacher obtained a license in Luxembourg at the age of 12. In 1983, he obtained his German license, a year after he won the German Junior Kart Championship. Schumacher joined Eurokart dealer Adolf Neubert in 1985, and by 1987 was the German and European kart champion, then he quit school and began working as a mechanic. Upon clinching his second World Drivers' Championship, Schumacher returned to top-level karting in 1996, winning both the Monaco Kart Cup in Formula A and the Masters of Paris-Bercy.\nLower formulae and sportscar racing.\nIn 1988, he moved into single-seat car racing by participating in the German Formula Ford and Formula K\u00f6nig series, winning the latter. In 1989, Schumacher signed with Willi Weber's WTS Formula Three team. Funded by Weber, he competed in the German Formula Three Championship, winning the 1990 German Formula Three Championship. He also won the 1990 Macau Grand Prix under controversial circumstances. He placed second behind Mika H\u00e4kkinen in the first heat, three seconds behind. When the second heat began, he passed H\u00e4kkinen, who needed to finish within three seconds of Schumacher to win the race overall. In the closing laps, Schumacher made a mistake, allowing H\u00e4kkinen to attempt to overtake. As soon as Schumacher changed his line, H\u00e4kkinen followed suit, attempting to pass him, and then crashed into the rear of Schumacher's car. While H\u00e4kkinen's race was ended, Schumacher drove to victory without a rear wing. Schumacher gave the prize money from winning the race to his family as they had debts.\nDuring 1990, along with his Formula Three rivals Heinz-Harald Frentzen and Karl Wendlinger, Schumacher joined the Mercedes-Benz junior racing programme in the World Sportscar Championship. This was unusual for a young driver, as most of Schumacher's contemporaries competed in Formula 3000 on the way to Formula One. Weber advised Schumacher that being exposed to professional press conferences and driving powerful cars in long-distance races would help his career. In the 1990 World Sportscar Championship season, Schumacher won the season finale at the Aut\u00f3dromo Hermanos Rodr\u00edguez in a Sauber\u2013Mercedes C11, and finished fifth in the Drivers' Championship despite only driving in three of the nine races. He continued with the team in the 1991 World Sportscar Championship season, winning again at the final race of the season at Autopolis in Japan with a Sauber\u2013Mercedes-Benz C291, leading to a ninth-place finish in the Drivers' Championship. He also competed at the 1991 24 Hours of Le Mans, finishing fifth in a car shared with Wendlinger and Fritz Kreutzpointner. He further competed in one race in the 1991 Japanese Formula 3000 Championship, finishing second.\nDuring the 1991 430\u00a0km of N\u00fcrburgring, Schumacher was involved in an incident with Derek Warwick. Schumacher lost time in qualifying after encountering Warwick's Jaguar XJR-14 on a slow lap while attempting to set his flying lap. As retaliation for Warwick impeding him, Schumacher swerved his Sauber into the Jaguar, hitting the front wheel and nose. Enraged by Schumacher's attitude, Warwick drove to the pits and chased Schumacher on foot. He eventually caught up with Schumacher, and his teammate Jochen Mass and several mechanics intervened to prevent Warwick from physically assaulting Schumacher.\nFormula One career.\nJordan (1991).\nSchumacher made his Formula One debut with the Irish Jordan-Ford team at the Belgian Grand Prix, driving car number 32 as a replacement for the imprisoned Bertrand Gachot. Schumacher, still a contracted Mercedes driver, was signed by Eddie Jordan after Mercedes paid Jordan $150,000 for his debut.\nThe week before the race, Schumacher impressed Jordan designer Gary Anderson and team manager Trevor Foster during a test drive at the Silverstone circuit. Despite having only spectated the challenging Spa-Francorchamps track, Schumacher's manager Weber reassured Jordan that Schumacher knew it well. During the race weekend, teammate Andrea de Cesaris could not show Schumacher the circuit because he was delayed by contract negotiations. Schumacher then rode a foldable bike around the track to become familiar with it on his own.\nSchumacher impressed the paddock in his debut, qualifying seventh in the midfield Jordan 191 car, which he tested for half a day, at a circuit where he had never raced. This also matched the team's season-best grid position, and Schumacher outqualified de Cesaris. \"Motor Sport\" journalist Joe Saward reported that, after qualifying, \"clumps of German journalists were talking about 'the best talent since Stefan Bellof'\". Schumacher retired on the race's first lap with clutch problems.\nBenetton (1991\u20131995).\nFollowing his Belgian Grand Prix debut, despite an agreement in principle between Jordan and Schumacher's Mercedes management that would see the German race for the Irish team for the remainder of the season, Schumacher was engaged by Benetton-Ford for the next race. Jordan applied for an injunction in the British courts to prevent Schumacher driving for Benetton but lost the case as they had not yet signed a final contract.\n1991\u20131993: Maiden points, podiums and wins.\nSchumacher finished the season with four points out of six races. His best finish was fifth in his second race, the Italian Grand Prix, in which he finished ahead of his teammate and three-time World Champion Nelson Piquet. He also outqualified Piquet four times out of five in the season run-in, scoring only half a point less than him during their time together.\nAt the start of the season the Sauber team, planning their Formula One debut with Mercedes backing for the following year, invoked a clause in Schumacher's contract that stated that if Mercedes entered Formula One, Schumacher would drive for them. It was eventually agreed that Schumacher would stay with Benetton; Peter Sauber stated that \"[Schumacher] didn't want to drive for us. Why would I have forced him?\" The year was dominated by the Williams FW14B of Nigel Mansell and Riccardo Patrese, featuring powerful Renault engines, semi-automatic gearboxes, and active suspension to control the car's ride height. In the conventional Benetton B192, Schumacher finished third in the Mexican Grand Prix, his first podium finish. Through what has been described as a tactical masterstroke, he went on to take his first victory at the Belgian Grand Prix, in a wet race at the Spa-Francorchamps circuit, which by 2003 he would call \"far and away my favourite track\". That also marked as the last Formula One car to win a Grand Prix while sporting a H-pattern manual gearbox.\nFrom the 1992 Portuguese Grand Prix to the 1998 Monaco Grand Prix, Schumacher was not beaten by his teammate when both cars finished. 1992 was also the first of many times that Schumacher beat his teammate through a full season, and Martin Brundle was fired as a result. Benetton team boss Flavio Briatore later regretted this decision, saying that he had underestimated the ability of both his drivers. Schumacher finished third in the Drivers' Championship in 1992 with 53 points, three points behind runner-up Patrese and three in front of the Brazilian Ayrton Senna. According to Jo Ram\u00edrez, a close friend of Senna, the Brazilian considered Schumacher \"the next big threat, way ahead of all the other drivers around at the time\".\nThe Williams FW15C of Damon Hill and Alain Prost dominated the season as well. Benetton introduced their own active suspension and traction control early in the season, last of the frontrunning teams to do so. Schumacher won one race, the Portuguese Grand Prix where he beat Prost, and had nine podium finishes; he retired in seven of the other 16 races. He finished the season in fourth, with 52 points, beating Patrese as teammate, so much so that Briatore and his team thought that Patrese was washed up and that they had no problem with their car.\n1994\u20131995: Back-to-back World Championships.\nSchumacher won his first Drivers' Championship in . Driving the Benetton B194, which has been called the worst car to have won a Formula One World Championship and was difficult to drive, so much so that Schumacher had three different teammates (JJ Lehto, Jos Verstappen, and Johnny Herbert) due to crashes, Schumacher won the first four races and finished the season with eight wins. He won six of the first seven races, including the Brazilian Grand Prix in which he lapped the entire field, and was leading the Spanish Grand Prix, before a gearbox failure left him stuck in fifth gear for most of the race. Schumacher made two pit stops without stalling and finished the race in second place. Benetton boss Flavio Briatore stated that Schumacher's drive was one of the best he had ever seen.\nThe 1994 season was marred by the death of Ayrton Senna, which was witnessed by Schumacher who was directly behind Senna, and that of Roland Ratzenberger during the San Marino Grand Prix; there were also allegations of cheating during the 1994 Formula One season involving several teams, most particularly Schumacher's Benetton, having allegedly broken the sport's technical regulations. Following the San Marino Grand Prix, the Benetton, Ferrari, and McLaren teams were investigated on suspicion of breaking the FIA-imposed ban on electronic aids. Benetton and McLaren initially refused to hand over their source code for investigation. When they did so, the FIA discovered hidden functionality in both teams' software but no evidence that it had been used in a race. Both teams were fined $100,000 for their initial refusal to cooperate. The McLaren software, which was a gearbox program that allowed automatic shifts, was deemed legal. By contrast, the Benetton software was deemed to be a form of launch control that would have allowed Schumacher to make perfect starts, which was explicitly outlawed by the regulations; Benetton and Willem Toet, a Formula One aerodynamicist for over thirty years who worked at Benetton until 1994, stated that traction control was legally achieved through rotational inertia. There was no evidence to suggest the software was used.\nAt the British Grand Prix, Schumacher was penalised for overtaking Hill on the formation lap. He and Benetton then ignored the penalty and the subsequent black flag, which indicates that the driver must immediately return to the pits, for which he was disqualified and later given a two-race ban. Benetton blamed the incident on a communication error between the stewards and the team. Schumacher was also disqualified after winning the Belgian Grand Prix, after his car was found to have illegal wear on its skid block, a measure used after the accidents at Imola to limit downforce and hence cornering speed. Benetton protested that the skid block had been damaged when Schumacher spun over a kerb; the FIA rejected their appeal because of the pattern of wear and damage visible on the block. The two-race ban punishment was seen by many observers as petty and insignificant, and that it was a result of Benetton's feud with the FIA, with Schumacher being a victim and the FIA trying to deny him his first World Championship. These incidents helped Hill close the points gap, and Schumacher led by a single point going into the final race at the Australian Grand Prix. On lap 36, Schumacher hit the guardrail on the outside of the track while leading. Hill attempted to pass but as Schumacher's car returned to the track there was a collision on the corner causing them both to retire. As a result, Schumacher won the Drivers' Championship, the first German to do so\u2014Jochen Rindt (the only posthumous Drivers' Champion) was German but raced under the Austrian flag, and whose domination in was later equalled by Schumacher. The race stewards judged it as a racing accident and took no action against either driver. Although the Drivers' Championship had been decided in a similar manner in 1989 and 1990, public opinion was divided over the incident, and Schumacher was vilified in the British media. At the FIA conference after the race, Schumacher dedicated his title to Senna.\nIn , Schumacher successfully defended his title with Benetton, which now had the same Renault engine as Williams; according to \"Motor Sport\" magazine, Benetton had the better team, while Williams had the superior car. Schumacher accumulated 33 more points than second-placed Hill. With Herbert as teammate, he took Benetton to its first Constructors' Championship, breaking the dominance of McLaren and Williams, and became the youngest two-time World Champion in Formula One history. The season was marred by several collisions with Hill, in particular an overtaking manoeuvre by Hill took them both out of the British Grand Prix on lap 45, and again on lap 23 of the Italian Grand Prix; it also saw one of his career's best overtakes, with the one over Jean Alesi giving him the win at the European Grand Prix, after he reduced the half a minute gap in the final dozen laps. Schumacher won 9 of the 17 races, including the French Grand Prix, and finished on the podium 11 times. It was only once that he qualify worse than fourth; at the Belgian Grand Prix, he qualified 16th but nevertheless went on to win the wet-dry race, finishing 16 seconds ahead of Hill, with whom he had ferocious wheel-to-wheel racing and involved some crucial strategic calls. His bad qualifying was a result of a crash he had in the final free practice, and by the time his car was rebuilt, it had started to rain; this ended his 56-race streak of outqualifiyng his teammates that started in 1992, after he missed a gear in qualifying in Adelaide in 1991 and was outqualified by Piquet.\nFerrari (1996\u20132006).\nIn , Schumacher joined Ferrari, a team that had last won the Drivers' Championship in and the Constructors' Championship in , for a salary of $60 million over two years. He left Benetton a year before his contract with them expired; he later cited the team's damaging actions in 1994 as his reason for opting out of his deal. In 1997, Schumacher lured Benetton employees Rory Byrne (designer) and Ross Brawn (technical director) to Ferrari. Ferrari had previously come close to the championship in and . The team had suffered a disastrous downturn in the early 1990s, partially as its famous V12 engine was no longer competitive against the smaller, lighter, and more fuel-efficient V10s of its competitors. Various drivers, notably Prost, had given the vehicles disparaging labels, such as \"truck\", \"pig\", and \"accident waiting to happen\". Furthermore, the poor performance of the Ferrari pit crews was considered a running joke. At the end of 1995, although the team had improved into a solid competitor, it was still considered inferior to front-running teams like Benetton and Williams. Schumacher declared the Ferrari F310 good enough to win a championship, although afterwards his teammate Eddie Irvine labelled the F310 \"an awful car\", a \"piece of junk\", and \"almost undriveable\", while designer John Barnard admitted that the car \"wasn't very good\". Irvine also later commented: \"The '96 [Ferrari] car was a disaster and was nearly undriveable. Only someone of Michael Schumacher's ability\u2014and maybe Senna\u2014could have driven it.\"\nDuring winter testing, Schumacher first drove a Ferrari, their 1995 Ferrari 412 T2, and was two seconds faster than former regulars Alesi and Gerhard Berger had been. Alesi and Berger were allowed to drive Schumacher's Benetton B195 with which he won the World Championship in 1995, and they could not believe how Schumacher had won with it, calling it \"the ugly ducking\" for being so ugly to drive and having many crashes. In a 1999 interview with his 1994 and 1995 World Championship rival Hill, Schumacher recalled: You remember when I left Benetton, and [Jean] Alesi and [Gerhard] Berger took their first steps in that Benetton? You remember how many crashes they had? ... I mean, that car was really unbelievable. Really difficult to drive. It was so edgy. But it was fast when you just drove it exactly on that edge. Now, though, there have been a lot of aerodynamic improvements to the cars and so the cars I have driven have been a lot more stable. And that applies to most of the cars today.\n1996\u20131999: World Championship challenges and injury.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"It was not a race. It was a demonstration of brilliance.\"\nStirling Moss about Schumacher at the 1996 Spanish Grand Prix\nIn 1996, Schumacher finished third in the Drivers' Championship and helped Ferrari to second place in the Constructors' Championship ahead of his old team Benetton. During the season, the car had reliability problems; Schumacher did not finish in 7 of the 16 races. At the French Grand Prix, Schumacher took pole position but suffered engine failure on the formation lap. He won three races, more than the team's total tally for the period from 1991 to 1995, despite a poor chassis. He took his first win for Ferrari at the Spanish Grand Prix, where he lapped the entire field up to third place in the wet. After a bad start, which saw him dropping from third to sixth place, before taking the lead on lap 19, he consistently lapped five seconds faster than the rest of the field in the difficult conditions. At the Belgian Grand Prix, he used well-timed pit stops to fend off Williams' Jacques Villeneuve. He also won in front of the \"tifosi\" (Ferrari fans) at the Italian Grand Prix.\nSchumacher and Villeneuve competed for the title in , despite never sharing a podium and almost never battling directly on the track, in what has been described as the sport's most dramatic and controversial season finale. Villeneuve, driving the superior Williams FW19, led the championship in the early part of the season. Schumacher's first win of the season came at the wet Monaco Grand Prix, in which he took a six-second lead after one lap. By mid-season, despite possibly driving not even the second-fastest car on the grid, Schumacher had taken the championship lead, winning five races, and entered the season's finale (the European Grand Prix at the Jerez circuit) with a one-point advantage. In qualifying, Schumacher set the same fastest lap as Villeneuve and Frentzen. He started in second position as Villeneuve set his fastest lap first but was able to jump him at the start. Towards the end of the race, Schumacher's Ferrari developed a coolant leak and loss of performance indicating he might not finish the race. As Villeneuve approached to pass his rival on lap 48, Schumacher turned in on him but retired from the race. Villeneuve went on and scored four points to take the championship. Despite public outcry, the race stewards did not initially award any penalty, as they had deemed it a racing incident; two weeks after the race, in an unprecedented move, Schumacher was disqualified from the entire 1997 Drivers' Championship after an FIA disciplinary hearing found that his \"manoeuvre was an instinctive reaction and although deliberate not made with malice or premeditation, it was a serious error.\" Initially feeling wronged, Schumacher accepted the decision and admitted having made a mistake, upon seeing the footage when he got out of the car and adrenaline had worn off. His actions were widely condemned in British, German, and Italian newspapers. Another view is that Villeneuve went into the corner too fast; without Schumacher turning into him, he would have overshot the turn and ended up in the gravel. In later years, Villeneuve himself admitted that he \"would never have made that corner without [Schumacher's] push\", and Schumacher stated in 2009 that if he could have his career over again, he would \"do some things differently\", citing Jerez 1997 as something that he would have changed in his career.\nIn , Finnish driver Mika H\u00e4kkinen became Schumacher's main title rival. Driving the superior McLaren MP4/13, H\u00e4kkinen won the first two races of the season, gaining a 16-point advantage over Schumacher, who then won the Argentine Grand Prix. With the Ferrari improving significantly in the second half of the season, Schumacher took six victories and had five other podium finishes. One of his victories was at the Hungarian Grand Prix, a track where overtaking is difficult and that favoured McLaren; Schumacher drove 19 consecutive qualifying-like laps to make Brawn's alternative three-stop strategy work and to go from third to first place. Brawn had told him: \"Michael, you have 19 laps to pull out 25 seconds. We need 19 qualifying laps from you.\" Schumacher ultimately came nine seconds ahead of David Coulthard. H\u00e4kkinen, who started on pole, achieved only a point due to reliability issues. Ferrari took a 1\u20132 finish at the French Grand Prix, the first Ferrari 1\u20132 finish since 1990, and at the Italian Grand Prix, which tied Schumacher with H\u00e4kkinen for the lead of the Drivers' Championship with 80 points.\nThere were two controversies during the 1998 season. At the British Grand Prix, Schumacher was leading on the last lap when he turned into the pit lane, crossed the start-finish line, and stopped to serve his ten-second stop-go penalty, which was a result of overtaking the lapped car of Alexander Wurz during a safety car period. There was some doubt whether this counted as serving the penalty; because he had crossed the finish line when he came into the pit lane, the win was valid. The FIA rescinded the penalty due to taking 31 minutes, rather than within the 25 minutes limit, and rejected McLaren's protest. At the Belgian Grand Prix, Schumacher was leading the race by 40 seconds in heavy spray but collided with Coulthard's McLaren when the Scot, a lap down, slowed on the racing line in poor visibility to let Schumacher past. His Ferrari lost a wheel but could return to the pits, although he was forced to retire. Schumacher leaped out of his car and headed to McLaren's garage in an infuriated manner and accused Coulthard of \"trying to kill\" him. Coulthard admitted five years later that the accident had been his mistake. From a possible three-point lead, Schumacher was still seven points behind H\u00e4kkinen. Heading into the final race, the Japanese Grand Prix, H\u00e4kkinen held a four-point advantage over Schumacher, who started on pole but stalled and caused the start to be aborted, which meant he had to start from the back of the field. He made a comeback up to third but retired after hitting debris from an accident. H\u00e4kkinen won the Drivers' Championship by winning the final two races despite Schumacher being the polesitter both times, continuing Ferrari's longest World Championship drought.\nIn , Schumacher's efforts helped Ferrari win the Constructors' Championship, the team's first title since 1983. He lost his chance to win the Drivers' Championship at the British Grand Prix at the high-speed Stowe Corner; his car's rear brake failed, sending him off the track into the barriers and resulting in a broken leg. During his 98-day absence, he was replaced by Finnish driver Mika Salo. About his return, Schumacher's teammate Irvine recalled: \"It was amazing. I remember me and Mika Salo were testing at Mugello, which is one of the hardest circuits in the world\u2014and he [Schumacher] hadn't driven for eight months. He got in the car and within a lap he was a tenth or two tenths slower than I was. How do you do that? And then of course a couple of laps later he's half a second quicker and\u2014it's just impossible. It's really really annoying, but it was an honour to be able to see his telemetry and see the things he could do with a car.\" After missing six races, he made his return at the inaugural Malaysian Grand Prix, qualifying in pole position with his career's greatest pole margin, with his time faster than Irvine by almost a second. He then assumed the role of second driver, helping Irvine to victory and assisting his teammate's bid to win the Drivers' Championship for Ferrari, with Irvine leading the championship by one point. About Schumacher's role, Irvine stated: \"He is not only the best driver in the world, he is also the best number two in the world.\" In the last race of the season, the Japanese Grand Prix, H\u00e4kkinen won his second consecutive title after he beat him off the line. Schumacher later said that H\u00e4kkinen was \"the best opponent I've had\" and the one he respected the most.\n2000\u20132004: Five consecutive World Championships.\nIn , Schumacher won his third Drivers' Championship, his first with Ferrari, after a year-long battle with H\u00e4kkinen. Schumacher won the first three races of the season and five of the first eight. Midway through the year, Schumacher's chances suffered with three consecutive non-finishes, allowing H\u00e4kkinen to close the gap in the standings. At the German Grand Prix qualifying session, which was largely decided in the opening 10 minutes of semi-dry weather, Schumacher was able to improve his time in the final seconds and qualified second. In the race, he retired after crashing out at the start, as his new teammate Rubens Barrichello took his maiden win from 18th. H\u00e4kkinen then took another two victories, before Schumacher won at the Italian Grand Prix, his 41st career win. At the post-race press conference, after equalling the number of wins won by his idol Ayrton Senna, Schumacher broke into tears. The championship fight came down to the penultimate race of the season, the Japanese Grand Prix. Starting from pole position, Schumacher lost the lead to H\u00e4kkinen at the start. After his second pit stop, Schumacher came out ahead of H\u00e4kkinen and went on to win the race and the Drivers' Championship; he later described it as the fight of his life. Although Schumacher won more than twice as many Grands Prix as H\u00e4kkinen, BBC Sport journalist Andrew Benson stated that \"the challenge from Mika Hakkinen and McLaren-Mercedes was far stronger than the raw statistics suggest\" and that the Adrian Newey-designed McLaren was \"the fastest car in F1 for the third straight year\". Benson also hailed Schumacher as \"unquestionably the greatest driver of his era\".\nIn , Schumacher took his fourth Drivers' title. Four other drivers won races but none sustained a season-long challenge for the championship. Schumacher scored a record-tying nine wins and clinched the World Championship with four races yet to run. He finished the championship with 123 points, 58 ahead of runner-up Coulthard. Season highlights included the Spanish Grand Prix, where he won after H\u00e4kkinen retired on the last lap due to his car's clutch failing leading Schumacher to say he was sorry for him and that they had been \"bloody lucky\"; Canadian Grand Prix, where Schumacher finished second to his brother Ralf, thus scoring the first-ever 1\u20132 finish by brothers in Formula One; and the Belgian Grand Prix, in which Schumacher scored his 52nd career win, breaking Prost's record for most career wins that had stood since 1993.\nIn , Schumacher retained his Drivers' Championship. In winning the Drivers' Championship, he equalled the record set by Juan Manuel Fangio of five World Championships. Ferrari won 15 out of 17 races, and Schumacher won the title with six races remaining in the season, which is still the earliest point in the season for a driver to be crowned World Champion. Schumacher broke his own record, shared with Mansell, of nine race wins in a season, by winning 11 times and finishing every race on the podium, the latter feat unmatched in the history of Formula One. He finished with 144 points, a record-breaking 67 points ahead of the runner-up, his teammate Barrichello. This pair finished nine of the 17 races in the first two places.\nDuring the 2002 season, there was some controversy at the Austrian Grand Prix, where Barrichello was leading but in the final metres of the race, under team orders, slowed down to allow Schumacher to win the race. Although the switching of positions did not break any actual sporting or technical regulation, as Ferrari did the same at the Austrian Grand Prix the previous year where Schumacher finished second and Barrichello third, it angered fans and it was claimed that the team's actions showed a lack of sportsmanship and respect to the spectators. Many argued that Schumacher did not need to be given wins in only the sixth race of the season, which he would have won anyway, a view also shared by Jean Todt and Brawn in retrospect, particularly given that he had already won four of the previous five Grands Prix, and that Barrichello had dominated the race weekend up to that point. At the podium ceremony, Schumacher pushed Barrichello onto the top step, and the Ferrari team incurred a $1 million fine for this disturbance. Schumacher vowed to pay back Barrichello, and later that same year returned the favour in several races to help him finish second in the standings. At the United States Grand Prix, Schumacher returned the favour, by giving Barrichello the win by 0.011 seconds, the second-closest margin on the finishing line in Formula One history in a failed dead heat finish. In an unplanned finish, Schumacher's explanation varied between it being him \"returning the favour\" for Austria, or trying to engineer a formation finish\u2014a feat derided as near-impossible in a sport where timings are taken to within a thousandth of a second. After the end of the season, the FIA banned \"team orders which interfere with the race result\"; the ban was lifted for the 2011 season because the ruling was difficult to enforce.\nSchumacher broke Fangio's 46-year record of five Drivers' Championships by winning the drivers' title for the sixth time in , after a closely contested battle with his main rivals, which was also a result of lobbying regarding the Michelin tyres. Before the season started, the FIA introduced new regulations and a new points system to make the championship more open. The biggest competition came from the McLaren-Mercedes and Williams-BMW teams. In the first race, Schumacher was run off track, and he was involved in collisions in the following two. He fell 16 points behind McLaren's Kimi R\u00e4ikk\u00f6nen. Despite the death of his mother Elisabeth just hours before the race, Schumacher won the San Marino Grand Prix despite losing the first position going into turn one. He also won the next two races and closed within two points of R\u00e4ikk\u00f6nen. Aside from Schumacher's victory at the Canadian Grand Prix and Barrichello's victory at the British Grand Prix, the mid-season was dominated by Williams drivers Ralf Schumacher and Juan Pablo Montoya, who each claimed two victories. After the Hungarian Grand Prix, Schumacher led Montoya and R\u00e4ikk\u00f6nen by only one and two points, respectively. Ahead of the next race, the FIA announced changes to the way tyre widths were to be measured: this forced Michelin, supplier to Williams and McLaren among others, to rapidly redesign their tyres before the Italian Grand Prix. Schumacher, running on Bridgestone tyres, won the next two races. After Montoya was penalised in the United States Grand Prix, only Schumacher and R\u00e4ikk\u00f6nen remained in contention for the title. At the final round, the Japanese Grand Prix, Schumacher needed only one point whilst R\u00e4ikk\u00f6nen needed to win. By finishing the race in eighth place, Schumacher took one point and assured his sixth Drivers' title, ending the season two points ahead of R\u00e4ikk\u00f6nen.\nIn , Schumacher won a record 12 of the first 13 races of the season, including the inaugural Bahrain Grand Prix and the Japanese Grand Prix, only failing to finish in Monaco after an accident with Montoya during a safety car period. In August 2004, Schumacher's win at the Hungarian Grand Prix contributed to Ferrari's sixth consecutive Constructors' Championship, and he later clinched a seventh Drivers' Championship at the Belgian Grand Prix. Earlier in July at the French Grand Prix, Schumacher beat polesitter Fernando Alonso with a four-stop strategy. He finished the season with a record 148 points, 34 points ahead of the runner-up Barrichello, and set a new record of 13 race wins out of a possible 18, surpassing his previous best of 11 wins from the 2002 season. Between 2000 and 2004, Schumacher achieved five Drivers' Championships, 48 wins, and almost all Formula One records. With his fifth Drivers' Championship in a row, he also broke Fangio's record of consecutive titles that had stood for nearly fifty years.\n2005\u20132006: Regulation changes and first retirement.\nRule changes for the season required tyres to last an entire race, tipping the overall advantage to teams using Michelins over teams like Ferrari that relied on Bridgestone tyres. The rule changes were partly in an effort to dent Ferrari's dominance and make the series more interesting. The most notable moment of the early season for Schumacher was his battle with Renault R25 driver Fernando Alonso at the San Marino Grand Prix, where he started 13th and finished only 0.2 seconds behind Alonso. Less than halfway through the season, Schumacher stated: \"I don't think I can count myself in this battle any more. It was like trying to fight with a blunted weapon. If your weapons are weak you don't have a chance.\" Schumacher's sole win in 2005 came at the United States Grand Prix in a 1\u20132 finish with Barrichello. Before that race, the Michelin tyres were found to have significant safety issues. When no compromise between the teams and the FIA could be reached, all but the three teams using Bridgestone tyres dropped out of the race after the formation lap, leaving only six drivers on the grid. Schumacher retired in 6 of the 19 races, and finished the season in third with 62 points, fewer than half the points of World Champion Alonso.\n became the last season of Schumacher's Ferrari career. After three races, Schumacher had just 11 points and was already 17 points behind Alonso. He won the following two races; his pole position at San Marino Grand Prix was his 66th, breaking Senna's 12-year-old record, which was described as perhaps the greatest record that stood in the sport, and was a reversal of the 2005 race. Schumacher was stripped of pole position at the Monaco Grand Prix and started the race at the back of the grid, as he stopped his car and blocked part of the circuit while Alonso was on his qualifying lap; he still managed to work his way up to fifth place on the notoriously cramped Monaco circuit. Before the Turkish Grand Prix, the fourteenth race of the season, the FIA banned Renault's mass damper, with the superior Renault R26 suddenly no longer as competitive. By the Canadian Grand Prix, the ninth race of the season, Schumacher was 25 points behind Alonso; he then won the following three races, including at Hockenheim, to reduce his disadvantage to 11, and to 10 by Turkey. Since Canada, Ferrari won six out of seven races, including at Monza, with Schumacher winning in five of them. After further victories at the Italian Grand Prix, where he announced his retirement at the end of the season, and at the Chinese Grand Prix, in what would be his 91st and final career win, Schumacher led in the championship standings for the first time during the season. After his win in Italy, Ferrari issued a press release stating that Schumacher would retire from racing at the end of the 2006 season but would continue working for the team. The \"tifosi\" and the Italian press, who did not always take to Schumacher's relatively cold public persona, displayed an affectionate response after he announced his retirement.\nAfter qualifying second, Schumacher led the Japanese Grand Prix in what could have seen him heading into the season finale with two points ahead of Alonso. With only 16 laps to go, his car suffered an engine failure for the first time since the French Grand Prix, ending a 58-race sequence without a mechanical retirement, handing Alonso the victory. He also conceded the title; to win the Drivers' Championship, Schumacher would have had to win the final race and Alonso had to fail to score any point, and he did not wish to win the title like that. A fuel pressure problem prevented Schumacher from completing a single lap during the third qualifying session, forcing him to start the race in tenth position. Early in the race, Schumacher moved up to sixth place but suffered a puncture caused by the front wing of Giancarlo Fisichella's Renault. Schumacher fell to 19th place, 70 seconds behind teammate and race leader Felipe Massa. Schumacher recovered and overtook both Fisichella and R\u00e4ikk\u00f6nen, his successor at Ferrari following his retirement, to secure fourth place. His performance was praised, as he had the pace to win the race by a lap, and was variously classified in the press as \"heroic\", an \"utterly breath-taking drive\", and a \"performance that ... sums up his career\".\nDuring the following weeks, Schumacher, Brawn, Byrne, and Todt were credited for turning the struggling Ferrari team into the most successful team in Formula One history, with Schumacher winning 72 Grands Prix and five consecutive Drivers' titles there. At the end of 2006, Schumacher's 91 wins were 40 more than his nearest rival Prost. Schumacher held at least 31 records, including for most championship titles (7), consecutive titles (5), race victories (91), consecutive wins 7 (2004), wins with one team (72, Ferrari), wins at same Grand Prix (8, France), wins at different Grands Prix (20), time between first and last wins (14 years, 1 month, and 2 days), second places (43), podiums (154), consecutive podium finishes (19, 2001\u20132002), points finishes (190), laps leading (4.741, or 22,155\u00a0km), pole positions (68), front row starts (115), fastest laps (76), doubles (pole and win, 40), hat-tricks (pole, fastest lap, and win, 22), championship points (1,369), consecutive race finishes (24, 2001\u20132003), consecutive points finishes (24), points in a season for the runner-up (121 out of 180, 2006), wins in a season for the runner-up (7, 2006), races for same car and engine builder (180, Ferrari), wins at Indianapolis (5), wins at Monza (5), wins in a season (13, 2004), fastest laps in a season (10, 2004), points scored in a season (148, 2004), podium finishes in a season (17, 2002), championship won with most races left (6, 2002), and consecutive years with a win (15).\n2007\u20132009: New roles at Ferrari, motorcycle racing and injury.\nDuring the season, Schumacher acted as Ferrari's adviser and Jean Todt's super assistant. Schumacher also helped Ferrari with their development programme at the Jerez circuit. He focused on testing electronics and tyres for the season. During 2008, Schumacher also competed in motorcycle racing in the IDM Superbike series. At a Superbike cup race at the Pann\u00f3nia-Ring, Schumacher finished third out of twenty-seven\u2014behind professional motorcycle racers Martin Bauer and Andreas Meklau\u2014riding a Honda CBR1000RR.\nAt the Hungarian Grand Prix on 25 July 2009, Ferrari's Felipe Massa was seriously injured after being struck by a suspension spring during qualifying. Ferrari announced that they planned to draft in Schumacher for the European Grand Prix and subsequent Grands Prix until Massa was able to race again. Schumacher tested a modified Ferrari F2007 to prepare himself as he had been unable to test the Ferrari F60 due to testing restrictions. Ferrari appealed for special permission for Schumacher to test in a season spec car; Williams, Red Bull, and Toro Rosso were against this test. In the end, Schumacher was forced to call off his return due to the severity of the neck injury he had received in a motorcycle accident earlier in the year. Instead, Massa's place was first filled by Luca Badoer and later on by Fisichella. Schumacher described this aborted return to Formula One as his \"toughest moment\".\nMercedes (2010\u20132012).\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"He played a crucial role when we re-joined F1 and was one of the people who laid the foundation for our future success. We're extremely grateful for everything he did for us.\"\nMercedes' team principal Toto Wolff about Schumacher's influence on the Mercedes team\nIn December 2009, Schumacher announced his return to Formula One for the season alongside fellow German driver and 24-year-old Nico Rosberg in the new Mercedes GP team. The season had ended with Brawn GP (taking over from Honda) winning both titles, after winning six of the first seven races. For the 2010 season, Mercedes returned to the sport as a constructor for the first time since 1955, and Schumacher rejoined team principal Ross Brawn, who was behind all of his seven World Championships. Schumacher stated that his preparations to replace the injured Massa had initiated a renewed interest in Formula One, which, combined with the opportunity to fulfil a long-held ambition to drive for Mercedes and to be working again with Brawn, led Schumacher to accept the offer once he was passed fit. Speaking to the BBC, Schumacher said: \"I want to have fun out there and I feel as fresh as ever. I've recharged myself after a three-year break. The challenge is what I look for\u2014I want to know it.\"\nSchumacher signed a three-year contract, reportedly worth \u00a320 million. Schumacher's comeback was the most high profile in Formula One since Niki Lauda came out of a two-year retirement for the season to race for McLaren and went on to win a third world title in . He turned 41 in 2010, the same age Mansell won the 1994 Australian Grand Prix after having stepped in as a substitute following Senna's death, and his prospects with Mercedes were compared with Mansell, who had won a title at 39 and last competed aged 41; Hill, who competed his final season at 39; and Fangio, Formula One's oldest champion who was 46 when he won his fifth title.\n2010: Return from retirement.\nAfter having impressed in the free practices, Schumacher finished sixth in the first race of the season at the Bahrain Grand Prix, 1,239 days after his previous Formula One race. He finished behind teammate Rosberg in each of the first four qualifying sessions and races; former driver Stirling Moss suggested that Schumacher might be \"past it\". Several other former Formula One drivers thought otherwise, including Hill, who warned \"you should never write Schumacher off\". GrandPrix.com identified the inherent understeer of the Mercedes car, exacerbated by the narrower front tyres introduced for the 2010 season, as contributing to Schumacher's difficulties. Jenson Button would later claim that Mercedes's car was designed for him, as he would initially drive for the team, and that their differing driving styles may have contributed to Schumacher's difficulties.\nMercedes upgraded their car for the Spanish Grand Prix where Schumacher finished fourth. At the Monaco Grand Prix, Schumacher finished sixth after passing Ferrari's Fernando Alonso on the final corner before the finish line when the safety car returned to the pits. Mercedes held that \"the combination of the race control messages 'Safety Car in this lap' and 'Track Clear' and the green flags and lights shown by the marshals after safety car line one indicated that the race was not finishing under the safety car and all drivers were free to race.\" An FIA investigation found Schumacher guilty of breaching safety car regulations and awarded him a 20-second penalty, dropping him to 12th. In doing so, the FIA sought to clarify the regulations post-race, as the new and old rules appeared to be in conflict.\nAt the Turkish Grand Prix, Schumacher qualified fifth and finished fourth in the race, both his best results since his return. At the European Grand Prix in Valencia, Schumacher finished 15th, the lowest recorded finish in his career. At the Hungarian Grand Prix, Barrichello attempted to pass Schumacher down the inside on the main straight. Schumacher closed the inside line to force Barrichello onto the outside; Barrichello persisted on the inside at despite the close proximity of a concrete wall and Schumacher leaving him only inches to spare. Schumacher, who finished 12th, was found guilty of dangerous driving and was demoted ten places on the grid for the following race, the Belgian Grand Prix, where he finished seventh despite starting 21st after his grid penalty. At the Abu Dhabi Grand Prix, Schumacher was involved in a major accident on the first lap, after Vitantonio Liuzzi's car collided with Schumacher's, barely missing his head. Schumacher finished the season in ninth place with 72 points. For the first time since 1991, Schumacher finished a year without a win, pole position, podium, or fastest lap.\n2011\u20132012: Final podium and second retirement.\nAfter starting the season with a retirement, Schumacher's first points were scored at the Malaysian Grand Prix where he finished ninth; Schumacher later came sixth in Spain, and he took fourth place at the Canadian Grand Prix, after running as high as second in a wet race; his Canadian race was seen at the time as his most convincing performance since he came out of retirement. Despite starting last at the Belgian Grand Prix, twenty years after his debut, Schumacher finished fifth. The Japanese Grand Prix saw Schumacher lead three laps during the race, marking the first time he had led a race since 2006. In doing so, he became the oldest driver to lead a race since Jack Brabham in 1970. Schumacher finished the season in eighth place in the Drivers' Championship, with 76 points.\nSchumacher was again partnered by Rosberg at Mercedes for the season. After qualifying fourth in what was his best qualifying since his return, he retired from the season's inaugural Australian Grand Prix, and scored a point in the second round at the Malaysian Grand Prix with intermittent rain, after qualifying third. At the Chinese Grand Prix, Schumacher started on the front row but retired due to a loose wheel after a mechanic's error during a pit stop. After causing a collision with Bruno Senna at the Spanish Grand Prix, Schumacher received a five-place grid penalty for the Monaco Grand Prix. Twenty-one years into his career, Schumacher was fastest in qualifying in Monaco but started sixth owing to his penalty. He later retired from seventh place in the race. At the European Grand Prix, Schumacher finished third, his only podium finish since his return to Formula One. At 43 years and 173 days, he became the oldest driver to achieve a podium since 1970, when Brabham finished second at the British Grand Prix. At the German Grand Prix, Schumacher set the fastest lap for the 77th time in his career. At the Belgian Grand Prix, Schumacher became the second driver in history (after Barrichello) to race in 300 Grands Prix; he took seventh place after starting 13th.\nSchumacher's indecision over his future plans led to him being replaced by Lewis Hamilton at Mercedes for the season. In October 2012, days before the Japanese Grand Prix, Schumacher announced he would retire for a second time, stating: \"There were times in the past few months in which I didn't want to deal with Formula One or prepare for the next Grand Prix.\" Schumacher finished seventh at the Brazilian Grand Prix, his 308th and final entry and 306th race start, to end his season. This was also the starting position for his debut Formula One race. During the race, he symbolically pulled over for fellow German Sebastian Vettel en route to his then third Drivers' Championship. Schumacher finished 13th in the 2012 Drivers' Championship. During his comeback, he led three laps but never won a race, finishing no higher than eighth in the overall Formula One standings. He closed his career with 91 wins, 155 podiums, and 68 pole positions, which at the time were all records. Before Hamilton surpassed it in 2020, Schumacher's 91 wins were one fewer of Senna and Prost's combined total.\nDespite a difficult three years, which included adaptation to significant different regulations and new Pirelli tyres, as well as rust, and being bested by his teammate, he had improved in the last two years where he arguably outraced Rosberg but bad luck and mechanical failures did not reflect it at the standings. It has been argued that it was his 2009 motorcycle accident why the comeback had not been successful. In the words of Mark Hughes, \"I believe his motorcycle accident, and the damaged neurons from a neck injury that in 90 per cent of cases is fatal, was probably more responsible for his lack of form second time around than age or length of absence.\"\nFrom 2014 to , Mercedes went on to win a record-breaking (of Schumacher's Ferrari from 1999 to 2004) eight Constructors' Championships under Hamilton, Rosberg, and Valtteri Bottas. Brawn said that \"Michael's contribution to our development and the future of our team has been significant\", and observed: \"In my opinion, he is the greatest Formula One driver, and the records which he holds in our sport speak volumes for his success and commitment.\" Brawn also stated that had Schumacher not retired in 2012 and not suffered a ski injury in 2013, he would have had a chance at winning his eighth World Championship in . In 2023, Williams team principal James Vowles, who was Mercedes chief strategist during Schumacher's time at the team between 2010 and 2012 and was instrumental in the team's success in the mid-to-late 2010s, said that Schumacher brought Mercedes together. Vowles added: \"[Schumacher] also knew his performance was perhaps not quite at the same level, but he made up for it in terms of the amount of work and dedication he put in. From that, Nico learned a lot and conversely, Lewis learned a lot from Nico.\"\nDriver profile and legacy.\nProfile.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"No one will ever be greater than Schumi. Michael has shaped a generation like no other, he is iconic.\"\nToto Wolff about Schumacher\nSchumacher was noted throughout his career for his speed and racecraft, and his ability to produce fast laps at crucial moments in a race and to push his car to the very limit for sustained periods. He was also noted for his work ethic, pioneering fitness regimen, and ability to galvanise teams around him. In 2004, \"Slate\" magazine described Schumacher as \"the ultimate driving machine\" and \"the most dominant athlete in the world\" due to him having become \"quicker, stronger, and fitter than the competition by outworking them in the weight room\". The magazine also stated that Schumacher changed the sport as he set a new benchmark for other drivers and built the team and technologies around him. Schumacher exercised four hours a day, mostly to strengthen his neck muscles to better withstand G-forces during races. After his gym session, he would often head to the race track for testing. In 2003, Deutsche Welle highlighted Schumacher's \"natural talent\" for racing and his \"discipline and leadership\". In 2023, Fisichella observed that Schumacher \"did not even seem to have sweated\" during races, adding that Schumacher is the greatest Formula One driver of all time and \"rewrote the history of Formula One\".\nIn 2003, \"F1 Racing\" magazine analysed Schumacher's driving style using telemetry data. It was observed that Schumacher was very sensitive and flexible on the gas and brakes. Compared with his Ferrari teammate Barrichello, who often either braked or accelerated in a corner, Schumacher usually braked later into a corner and stabilised his car by accelerating slightly, often using both the brake and accelerator pedals at the same time. Exiting a corner, Schumacher accelerated considerably and balanced his car by braking lightly. Martin Brundle talked about being in awe upon seeing Schumacher's telemetry showing he took turn one on full throttle at the Suzuka circuit. With his driving style, Schumacher also went 25\u00a0km/h faster through the hairpin corner of Suzuka compared to Barrichello, who lost 0.3 seconds to Schumacher in this corner. It was also observed that when needed, such as when the brakes started to overheat, Schumacher adapted his driving style to protect the brakes.\n\"Motor Sport\" author Christopher Hilton observed in 2003 that a \"measure of a driver's capabilities is his performance in wet races, because the most delicate car control and sensitivity are needed\", and commented that, like other great drivers, Schumacher's record in wet conditions shows very few mistakes; up to the end of 2003, Schumacher won 17 of the 30 races in wet conditions he contested. Some of Schumacher's best performances occurred in such conditions, earning him the nicknames \"Regenk\u00f6nig\" (\"Rain King\"), or \"Regenmeister\" (\"Rain Master\"), even in the non-German-language media. He is further known as \"the Red Baron\" because of his red Ferrari and in reference to the German Manfred von Richthofen, the famous flying ace of the First World War. Schumacher's nicknames also include \"Schumi\", \"Schuey\", and \"Schu\".\nSchumacher was noted for beating all his teammates during his Formula One career, except for his not-fully debut season against three-time World Champion n Piquet, once for 1999 World Championship runner-up Irvine due to missing six races after a leg injury, and future 2016 World Champion Rosberg when he was in his 40s. Schumacher was also noted for outperforming his cars and for his ability to operate at his peak on every lap, having won significant more races than he had either pole positions or fastest laps. Apart from dominating the 1995, 2001, 2002, and 2004 World Championships (with 2002 and 2004 being the sole years where he drove the clear-cut fastest car as Barrichello was the runner-up both years), he won the competitive 2003 World Championship and either won (three times) or narrowly missed (two times) World Championships despite arguably driving an inferior car (1994, 1995, 1997, 1998, and 2000), and arguably would have won in 1999 had it been for the injury, as the performance gap from McLaren was far smaller than in 1998. Since Senna's death in 1994, Schumacher was widely regarded as Formula One's fastest driver and the most dominant driver of his era. During his long career, Schumacher was also involved in several controversies, most notably the 1994 and 1997 World Championship seasons finals and the 2006 Monaco qualifying. These episodes have been seen as a result of Schumacher's will-to-win mentality. In 2020 Brundle commented: The make-up of a champion is one of such inner self-belief that occasionally it shows up as flaws. The majority of the sporting greats I've met drive themselves forwards because they are always dissatisfied. But look at what Michael achieved, the speed at which he achieved it, and what he accomplished at two different teams. It's so hard to get to F1, to stay in it, to score podiums, and win races. And that guy won 91 of them, some of them in a class of one.\nIn a 2006 FIA survey, Schumacher was voted the most popular driver of the season among Formula One fans. Schumacher was subject to anti-German prejudices throughout his career, however, especially from the British media. About his collision with Schumacher in 1994, Hill wrote: \"There are two things that set Michael apart from the rest of the drivers in Formula One \u2212 his sheer talent and his attitude. I am full of admiration for the former, but the latter leaves me cold.\" According to Brawn, Schumacher was a \"pretty misunderstood character\", adding that \"nobody I know who ever worked with Michael ever had a bad opinion about him because of his integrity, his commitment, his human side\".\nIn addition to Hill, Schumacher also had rivalries with H\u00e4kkinen, whom he beat for his first World Championship at Ferrari and the team's first Drivers' Championship since the season, and Alonso, who ended Schumacher's five-consecutive titles in the 2000s. Despite only facing him during Schumacher's brief comeback in the 2010s, Hamilton is also seen a rival due to their similar achievements and driving styles, and cited Schumacher as an inspiration.\nHelmet.\nSchumacher, in conjunction with Schuberth, helped develop the first lightweight carbon fibre reinforced polymer helmet. In 2004, a prototype was publicly tested by being driven over by a tank; it survived intact. The helmet kept the driver cool by funneling directed airflow through 50 holes. Schumacher's original helmet sported the colours of the German flag and his sponsor's decals. On the top was a blue circle with white astroids. From the 2000 Monaco Grand Prix, in order to differentiate his colours from his new teammate Barrichello\u2014whose helmet was predominantly white with a blue circle on top and a red ellipsis surrounding the visor\u2014Schumacher changed the upper blue colour and some of the white areas to red. For the 2006 Brazilian Grand Prix, he wore an all-red helmet bearing the names of his 91 Grand Prix victories. Schumacher wore a special gold-leafed helmet for the 2011 Belgian Grand Prix, which marked the 20th anniversary of his Formula One debut as well as the seasons of his seven Drivers' titles. For his 300th Grand Prix appearance, the 2012 Belgian Grand Prix, he wore a platinum-leafed helmet with a message of the achievement.\nLegacy.\nSchumacher's three-decade career had a profound effect on motorsport in general and Formula One in particular, and his influence went beyond his own racing career; in 2020, he was voted the most influential person in Formula One history. Andrea Stella, performance engineer at Ferrari during the 2000s, said that Schumacher's influence is \"felt in the DNA of Formula One. How we plan, how we analyse, how we work \u2014 it all started with him.\"\nDuring a large part of his Formula One career, Schumacher was the president of the Grand Prix Drivers' Association, a representative body originally set up in 1961 that had been disbanded in 1982 and Schumacher had helped to relaunch in 1994. Schumacher has also often been credited with popularising Formula One worldwide, especially in Germany, where it was formerly considered a fringe sport. When Schumacher first retired in 2006, three of the top ten drivers in that year's Drivers' standings were German, more than any other nationality. Younger German drivers, such as Vettel, felt Schumacher was key in them becoming Formula One drivers. Schumacher was also credited for turning Ferrari into Formula One's most successful team; multi-time World Champion Jackie Stewart believed the transformation of the Ferrari team was Schumacher's greatest feat.\nBy the time of his first retirement in 2006 and his final retirement in 2012, Schumacher was widely considered among the greatest Formula One drivers, a trend that continued into the 2020s. Several commentators and drivers, including among others multi-time World Champions Lauda and Vettel, former drivers Coulthard, Fisichella, and Mercedes team bosses Ross Brawn and Toto Wolff, have at times described him as the greatest of all time. Schumacher has been described as statistically the most successful driver in Formula One history and the most complete Formula One driver ever. Objective mathematical models, such as Eichenberger and Stadelmann (2009, 3rd), original F1metrics (2014, 4th), Bell \"et al.\" (2015, 3rd), \"FiveThirtyEight\" (2018, 2nd), and updated F1metrics (2019, 1st), put Schumacher consistenly among the top 5 greatest Formula One drivers ever. By 2004, Schumacher came to hold most major Formula One records, and by 2006, his name was inscribed in almost all of Formula One's record books, including for most World Championships (7), most wins (91), most podiums (155), most pole positions (68), and most fastest laps (77), the latter a record he still holds. Although several of his records were later equalled or beaten, such as the most wins in a season at 13 (a record he first broke in 1995 and then equalled in 2000 and 2001, and further improved in 2002 and 2004), others remain his, such as his 100% podium finish in 2002 (17), which included eleven wins, five second places, and one third place.\nIn 2006, Schumacher had made the most starts with the same engine manufacturer and constructor (both Ferrari, 180 starts). As teammates, he and Barrichello had the most starts (102, 2000\u20132005) and most 1\u20132 finishes (24 during the same time frame). Schumacher tied Senna for the most pole positions at the same track (eight, with Schumacher at Suzuka and Senna at Imola), and in 2004, tied Mansell for the most wins at the start of a season. He has won at least one race in 15 consecutive seasons, a record he shares with Hamilton. He also holds the records for most victories at the same track (eight, at the Magny-Cours circuit in France) and the most victories in the same Grand Prix (eight, France). He set the record for the fastest-ever race winning average speed of at the 2003 Italian Grand Prix. By 2006, he had led 141 races and spent a record 5,108 laps in the lead. In addition, he had the most consecutive points-finishing races (24, from 2001 to 2003), the most front-row starts (115), the most points (1,369 before the point system was overhauled in 2010, and the record for the most consecutive fastest laps at the same track (7). In 2002, he became World Champion with six rounds to spare\u2014earlier than anyone before him (21 July).\nSchumacher, who dominated the sport in the 1990s and early 2000s becoming in 1995 the youngest back-to-back World Champion at the time, was noted for his ability in the rain, winning many of the wet races he took part in, most notably Spain in 1996, and for his race pace, being able to set consecutive qualifying fastest laps; due to refuelling, he missed out several pole positions, having set his race strategy through more fuel on board (from his debut in 1991 through to the end of 2002 before the introduction of race-fuel qualifying from 2003 onwards, Schumacher was only outqualified 13 times in 178 race entries), and won 23% more races than getting pole positions. He also, respectively, won 51 and 24 times without starting first or from the front row, and had 48 wins with fastest lap, all three being more than any other driver, and converted 40 of his pole positions to wins at 58%t, a record number that was later beaten by Hamilton. By the time he first retired in 2006, with 91 wins in 248 starts out of 250 entries (only behind Patrese), Schumacher had a win ratio of 36% of starts, ahead of Senna and Prost, both of them at 25% t of starts. He also had 27% of pole positions, 30% of fastest laps, and the most victories from pole with fastest lap (22). He also could have won even more races had he joined the dominant teams of the 1990s (Williams and McLaren) and not joined Ferrari in 1996, a view echoed by his former teammate Irvine, and could have become the first driver to win 100 races were it not for some situations outside his control, such as reliability issues causing him to finish lower than first in 1994, one revoked win in 1994, two collisions with Coulthard and Montoya in 1998 and 2004, the two wins he gave to Irvine and Barrichello in 1999 and 2002, and retirements at the 1993 Monaco Grand Prix, the 2006 Japanese Grand Prix, and the 2012 Monaco Grand Prix.\nPersonal life.\nIn August 1995, Schumacher married Corinna Betsch. They have two children, a daughter Gina-Maria (b. 1997) and a son, Mick (b. 1999). Schumacher has always been very protective of his private life and is known to dislike the celebrity spotlight. From 1992 to early 1996, Schumacher resided in the Fontvieille district in Monaco before moving to Vufflens le-Chateau, Switzerland. The family moved to a newly built mansion near Gland, Switzerland, in 2007, covering an area of with a private beach on Lake Geneva and featuring an underground garage and petrol station, with a vintage Shell fuel pump. Schumacher and his wife own horse ranches in Texas and Switzerland. Schumacher's younger brother Ralf, his son Mick, his nephew David and step-brother Sebastian Stahl have also been racing drivers. Ralf Schumacher competed in Formula One for ten years, starting from 1997 until the end of 2007. Mick became the third Schumacher to race in Formula One, having made his debut with Haas F1 Team in the season.\nBefore his skiing accident in 2013, Schumacher's main hobbies included horse riding, motorcycle racing, sky diving, and playing football for his local team FC Echichens. Schumacher appeared in several charity football games, and organised games between Formula One drivers. In 2008, Schumacher declined an offer from Sammarinese football club SS Murata to join their squad for their upcoming UEFA Champions League qualifying matches. He is a supporter of 1. FC K\u00f6ln, the local football club when he grew up.\nHe is a Roman Catholic. In 2005, Schumacher, Barrichello and other Ferrari employees met John Paul II. They gave him a miniature replica of the Ferrari F2004, the car in which Schumacher won his seventh world title. Months later, Pope Benedict XVI was presented with the steering wheel of the F2004, which was autographed by Schumacher. Archbishop Georg G\u00e4nswein visited Schumacher in mid-2018.\nIn 2006, Schumacher voiced a Ferrari F430 in the Disney/Pixar film \"Cars,\" and cameoed as a chariot driver in the French film \"Asterix at the Olympic Games\". In 2009, he appeared on the BBC motoring programme \"Top Gear\" as the Stig. Presenter Jeremy Clarkson hinted later in the programme that Schumacher was not the regular Stig, which the BBC subsequently confirmed. Schumacher was present because Ferrari did not let anyone else drive the unique black Ferrari FXX shown in the programme. He is the subject of the 2021 Netflix documentary film \"Schumacher\".\nFinance and sponsorship.\nIn 1999 and 2000, \"Forbes\" magazine listed him as the highest paid athlete in the world. In 2005, \"EuroBusiness\" magazine identified Schumacher as the world's first billionaire athlete. In 2005, \"Forbes\" ranked him 17th in its \"The World's Most Powerful Celebrities\" list. A significant share of his income came from advertising; Deutsche Verm\u00f6gensberatung paid him $8 million over three years from 1999 for wearing a 10 by 8 centimetre advertisement on his post-race cap. In 2010, his personal fortune was estimated at \u00a3515 million. In 2017, \"Forbes\" designated Schumacher as the athlete with the fifth highest career earnings of all-time.\nPhilanthropy.\nSchumacher was a special ambassador to UNESCO and has donated \u20ac1.5 million to the organisation. Additionally, he paid for the construction of a school for poor children and for area improvements in Dakar, Senegal. He supported a hospital for child victims of the siege in Sarajevo, which specialises in caring for amputees. In Lima, Peru, he funded the Palace for the Poor, a centre for helping homeless children obtain an education, clothing, food, medical attention, and shelter. Schumacher told \"F1 Magazine\": \"It's great if you can use your fame and the power your fame gives you to draw attention to things that really matter.\" For the 2002 European floods, Schumacher donated \u20ac1 million; years later, Schumacher did the same when he donated \u20ac500,000 after the 2013 European floods. He donated $10 million for aid after the 2004 Indian Ocean earthquake, which surpassed that of any other sports person, most sports leagues, many worldwide corporations and even some countries. From 2002 to 2006, he donated at least $50 million to various charities. In 2008, he donated between $5 million and $10 million to the Clinton Foundation.\nSince his participation in an FIA European road safety campaign, as part of his punishment after the collision at the 1997 European Grand Prix, Schumacher continued to support other campaigns, such as Make Roads Safe, which is led by the FIA Foundation and calls on G8 countries and the United Nations to recognise global road deaths as a major global health issue. In 2008, Schumacher was the figurehead of an advertising campaign by Bacardi to raise awareness about responsible drinking through television, cinema and online media, supported by consumer engagements, public relations and digital media across the world.\n2013 skiing accident.\nOn 29 December 2013, Schumacher was skiing with his 14-year-old son Mick, descending the Combe de Saulire below the Dent de Burgin above M\u00e9ribel in the French Alps. An experienced skier, while crossing an unsecured off-piste area between Piste Chamois and Piste Mauduit, he fell and hit his head on a rock, sustaining a serious head injury despite wearing a ski helmet. According to his physicians, he would most likely have died had he not been wearing a helmet. He was airlifted to Grenoble Hospital where he underwent two surgical interventions. He was put into a medically induced coma because of traumatic brain injury. In early April 2014, he was showing moments of consciousness as he was gradually withdrawn from the medically induced coma.\nIn June 2014, he left Grenoble Hospital for further rehabilitation at the Lausanne University Hospital, Switzerland. In September 2014, he was brought home for further rehabilitation. Since his accident, there has been little public information about his condition, with his family asking for privacy. In November 2014, it was reported that he was \"paralysed and in a wheelchair\", and that he \"cannot speak and has memory problems\". In May 2015, Schumacher's manager Sabine Kehm stated that his condition was slowly improving \"considering the severeness of the injury he had\".\nIn September 2016, Felix Damm, lawyer for Schumacher, told a German court that his client \"cannot walk\", in response to reports from December 2015 in German publication \"Die Bunte\" that he could walk again. In July 2019, former Ferrari manager Jean Todt stated that Schumacher was making \"good progress\" but also \"struggles to communicate\". Todt also said that Schumacher was able to watch Formula One races on television at his home. In September 2019, \"Le Parisien\" reported that Schumacher had been admitted to the H\u00f4pital Europ\u00e9en Georges-Pompidou in Paris for treatment by cardiovascular surgeon Philippe Menasch\u00e9, described as a \"pioneer in cell surgery\". Following the treatment, which involved him receiving an anti-inflammatory stem cell perfusion, medical staff stated that he was \"conscious\".\nHis family has maintained strict privacy about his condition since his accident in 2013. In April 2023, \"Die Aktuelle\" published without permission what it advertised as a \"first interview\" with him, including quotes from him about his health and family; it stated, only at the end, that these responses had been fabricated using generative artificial intelligence (AI). Schumacher's family said that they would sue the magazine, which fired the editor responsible, but ultimately reached a settlement, with the magazine's owner paying the Schumacher family \u20ac200,000.\nIn February 2025, Schumacher's former bodyguard was given a two-year suspended sentence for stealing images, videos and medical records and passing them to Yilmaz Tozturkan, who threatened to \"upload them on to the dark web\" unless the Schumacher family paid money. Tozturkan, a nightclub bouncer, was sentenced to three years in prison, and his son was given a six-month suspended sentence.\nHonours and achievements.\nSchumacher has been honoured many times. In 1992, 1994, 1995 and 2002, the German Motor Sport Federation awarded him the ONS Cup, German motorsport's highest accolade. In 1993, he won a Bambi Award (Sports) and was the first racing driver to receive the Golden Steering Wheel. In 1994 and from 2001 to 2003, Schumacher was voted European Sportsperson of the Year by the International Sports Press Association. He was voted by Polish Press Agency the European Sportsperson of the Year from 2001 to 2003. In 1995 and from 2000 to 2002, he was named Autosport International Racing Driver of the Year. Schumacher was voted German Sportspersonality of the Year in 1995 and 2004. During the latter year, he was voted Germany's greatest sportsperson of the 20th century, beating Birgit Fischer and Steffi Graf to the accolade. For his sports achievements and his commitment to road safety, Schumacher was awarded Germany's highest sporting accolade, the Silbernes Lorbeerblatt, in 1997. In 2002, for his contributions to sport and his contributions in raising awareness of child education, Schumacher was named as one of the UNESCO Champions for Sport.\nSchumacher won the Laureus World Sportsman of the Year in 2002 and 2004, received the Marca Leylenda award in 2001, was named L'\u00c9quipe Champion of Champions three times (from 2001 to 2003), won the Gazzetta World Sports Award twice (2001 and 2002), and won the 2003 Lorenzo Bandini Trophy. In honour of Schumacher's racing career and his efforts to improve road safety and the sport, he was awarded an FIA Gold Medal for Motor Sport in 2006. The same year, ahead of his final race for Ferrari in Brazil on 22 October, football player Pel\u00e9 presented a \"Lifetime Achievement Award\" to Schumacher. In 2007, he received the Prince of Asturias Award for Sport for his sporting prowess and his humanitarian record. Together with Vettel, Schumacher won the Race of Champions Nations' Cup six times in a row for Germany, from 2007 to 2012. In 2017, Schumacher was inducted into the FIA Hall of Fame and Germany's Sports Hall of Fame. In 2020, Todt honoured Schumacher with the FIA President Award, in recognition of Schumacher's seven World Championships and the \"inspiration his sporting and personal commitments brought to the world\".\nThe Assembly of the Sarajevo Canton renamed a major city street after Schumacher, and earlier a group of artists painted a large street mural in Dobrinja. Maranello, Modena, Spa, and Sarajevo, granted honorary citizenship. He was appointed Chevalier de la L\u00e9gion d'honneur, made a Commander of the Order of Merit of the Italian Republic, and was appointed an ambassador of San Marino. In 2008, the Swiss Football Association appointed Schumacher as the country's ambassador for UEFA Euro 2008, hosted by Switzerland and Austria. In recognition of his contribution to Formula One, the N\u00fcrburgring circuit renamed turns 9 and 10 as the Schumacher S in 2007. In 2014, the first corner of the Bahrain International Circuit was renamed in honour of Schumacher. He was awarded the State Prize of North Rhine-Westphalia in 2022.\nRacing record.\nComplete Formula One results.\n\u2021 Schumacher was disqualified from the 1997 World Drivers' Championship due to dangerous driving in the European Grand Prix, where he caused an avoidable accident with Jacques Villeneuve. His points tally would have placed him in second place in that year's standings.\n\u2020 Driver did not finish the Grand Prix but was classified as he completed over 90% of the race distance.\nFormula One records.\nSchumacher holds the following Formula One records:\nFootnotes\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nSpecific\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nGeneral\nExternal links.\nrole=\"presentation\" class=\"wikitable succession-box noprint\" style=\"margin:0.5em auto; font-size:small;clear:both;\""}
{"id": "20398", "revid": "12331483", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20398", "title": "Muonium", "text": "Type of atom\nMuonium () is an exotic atom made up of an antimuon and an electron, which was discovered in 1960 by Vernon W. Hughes and is given the chemical symbol Mu. During the muon's lifetime, muonium can undergo chemical reactions. \nDescription.\nBecause, like a proton, the antimuon's mass is much larger than that of the electron, muonium () is more similar to atomic hydrogen () than positronium (). Its Bohr radius and ionization energy are within 0.5% of hydrogen, deuterium, and tritium, and thus it can usefully be considered as an exotic light isotope of hydrogen.\nProperties.\nAlthough muonium is short-lived, physical chemists study it using muon spin spectroscopy (\u03bcSR), a magnetic resonance technique analogous to nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) or electron spin resonance (ESR) spectroscopy. Like ESR, \u03bcSR is useful for the analysis of chemical transformations and the structure of compounds with novel or potentially valuable electronic properties. Muonium is usually studied by muon spin rotation, in which the muonium atom's spin precesses in a magnetic field applied transverse to the muon spin direction (since muons are typically produced in a spin-polarized state from the decay of pions), and by avoided level crossing (ALC), which is also called level crossing resonance (LCR). The latter employs a magnetic field applied longitudinally to the polarization direction, and monitors the relaxation of muon spins caused by \"flip/flop\" transitions with other magnetic nuclei.\nBecause the muon is a lepton, the atomic energy levels of muonium can be calculated with great precision from quantum electrodynamics (QED), unlike in the case of hydrogen, where the precision is limited by uncertainties related to the internal structure of the proton. For this reason, muonium is an ideal system for studying bound-state QED and also for searching for physics beyond the Standard Model.\nNomenclature.\nNormally in the nomenclature of particle physics, an atom composed of a positively charged particle bound to an electron is named after the positive particle with \"-ium\" replacing an \"-on\" suffix, in this case \"muium\". Replacing \"-on\" with (or otherwise appending) \"-onium\" is mostly used for bound states of a particle with its own antiparticle. The exotic atom consisting of a muon and an antimuon (which is yet to be observed) is known as true muonium.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20399", "revid": "11292982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20399", "title": "Medicine Man", "text": ""}
{"id": "20401", "revid": "41849648", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20401", "title": "Medicine man (Native American)", "text": "Native American traditional healer and spiritual practitioner\nA medicine man or medicine woman is a traditional healer and spiritual leader who serves a community of Indigenous people of the Americas. Each culture has its own name in its language for spiritual healers and ceremonial leaders.\nCultural context.\nIn the ceremonial context of Indigenous North American communities, \"medicine\" usually refers to spiritual healing. Medicine people use many practices, including specialized knowledge of Native American ethnobotany. Herbal healing is a common practice in many Indigenous households of the Americas; however, medicine people often have more in-depth knowledge of using plants for healing or other purposes.\nThe terms \"medicine people\" or \"ceremonial people\" are sometimes used in Native American and First Nations communities, for example, when Arwen Nuttall (Cherokee) of the National Museum of the American Indian writes, \"The knowledge possessed by medicine people is privileged, and it often remains in particular families.\"\nNative Americans tend to be quite reluctant to discuss issues about medicine or medicine people with non-Indians. In some cultures, the people will not even discuss these matters with American Indians from other tribes. In most tribes, medicine elders are prohibited from advertising or introducing themselves as such. As Nuttall writes, \"An inquiry to a Native person about religious beliefs or ceremonies is often viewed with suspicion.\" One example of this is the Apache medicine cord or whose purpose and use by Apache medicine elders was a mystery to nineteenth century ethnologists because \"the Apache look upon these cords as so sacred that strangers are not allowed to see them, much less handle them or talk about them.\"\nThe term \"medicine man/woman\", like the term \"shaman\", has been criticized by Native Americans, as well as other specialists in the fields of religion and anthropology.\nWhile non-Native anthropologists often use the term \"shaman\" for Indigenous healers worldwide, including the Americas, \"shaman\" is the specific name for a spiritual mediator from the Tungusic peoples of Siberia, which has been adopted by some Inuit communities but is not preferred by Native American or First Nations communities.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20403", "revid": "9720874", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20403", "title": "Malay Peninsula", "text": "Peninsula in Southeast Asia\nThe Malay Peninsula is located in Mainland Southeast Asia. The landmass runs approximately north\u2013south, and at its terminus, it is the southernmost point of the Asian continental mainland. The area contains Peninsular Malaysia, Southern Thailand, and the southernmost tip of Myanmar (Kawthaung). The island country of Singapore also has historical and cultural ties with the region. \nThe Titiwangsa Mountains are part of the Tenasserim Hills system and form the backbone of the peninsula and the southernmost section of the central cordillera, which runs from Tibet through the Kra Isthmus, the peninsula's narrowest point, into the Malay Peninsula. The Strait of Malacca separates the Malay Peninsula from the Indonesian island of Sumatra, and the south coast is separated from the island of Singapore by the Straits of Johor.\nEtymology.\nThe Malay term \"Tanah Melayu\" is derived from the word \"Tanah\" (land) and \"Melayu\" (Malays), thus it means \"the Malay land\". The term can be found in various Malay texts, of which the oldest dating back to the early 17th century. It is frequently mentioned in the \"Hikayat Hang Tuah\", a well-known classic tale associated with the legendary heroes of Malacca Sultanate. \"Tanah Melayu\" in the text is consistently employed to refer to the area under Malaccan dominance. In the \"Negarakertagama\" manuscript written in 1365, this area is called \"Hujung Medini\".\nIn the early 16th century, Tom\u00e9 Pires, a Portuguese apothecary who stayed in Malacca from 1512 to 1515, uses an almost identical term, \"Terra de Tana Malaio\", with which he referred to the southeastern part of Sumatra, where the deposed sultan of Malacca, Mahmud Shah, established his exiled government. The 17th century's account of Portuguese historian, Emanuel Godinho de Er\u00e9dia, noted on the region of \"Malaios\" surrounded by the Andaman Sea in the north, the entire Strait of Malacca in the centre, a part of Sunda Strait in the south, and the western part of South China Sea in the east.\nPrior to the foundation of Malacca, ancient and medieval references to a Malay peninsula exist in various foreign sources. According to several Indian and Western scholars, the word \"Malayadvipa\" (\"mountain-insular continent\"), mentioned in the ancient Indian text, \"Vayu Purana\", may possibly refer to the Malay Peninsula. Another Indian source, an inscription on the south wall of the Brihadeeswarar Temple, recorded the word \"Malaiur\", referring to a kingdom in the Malay Peninsula that had \"a strong mountain for its rampart\". Ptolemy's \"Geographia\" named a geographical region of the \"Golden Chersonese\" as \"Maleu-kolon\", a term thought to derive from Sanskrit \"malayakolam\" or \"malaikurram\". Tabula Rogeriana completed by an Arab geographer Muhammad al-Idrisi, reflects the Malay peninsula as a long island and called it Malai, bordering the Qmer (Khmer) and lying 12 days sail from Sanf (Champa). While the Chinese chronicle of the Yuan dynasty mentioned the word \"Ma-li-yu-er\", referring to a nation of the Malay Peninsula that was threatened by the southward expansion of the Sukhothai Kingdom under King Ram Khamhaeng. During the same era, Marco Polo made a reference to \"Malauir\" in his travelogue, as a kingdom located in the Malay Peninsula, possibly similar to the one mentioned in the Yuan chronicle. The Malay Peninsula was conflated with Persia in old Japan, and was known by the same name.\nIn the early 20th century, the term \"Tanah Melayu\" was generally used by the Malays of the peninsula during the rise of Malay nationalism to describe uniting all Malay states on the peninsula under one Malay nation, and this ambition was largely realised with the formation of \"Persekutuan Tanah Melayu\" (Malay for \"Federation of Malaya\") in 1948.\nEcology.\nThe Malay Peninsula is covered with tropical moist broadleaf forests. Lowland forests are dominated by dipterocarp trees, while montane forests are home to evergreen trees in the beech family (Fagaceae), Myrtle family (Myrtaceae), laurel family (Lauraceae), tropical conifers, and other plant families.\nThe peninsula's forests are home to thousands of species of animals and plants. Several large endangered mammals inhabit the peninsula \u2013 Asian elephant (\"Elephas maximus\"), gaur (\"Bos gaurus\"), tiger (\"Panthera tigris\"), sun bear (\"Helarctos malayanus\"), Malayan tapir (\"Tapirus indicus\"), clouded leopard (\"Neofelis nebulosa\"), and siamang (\"Symphalangus syndactylus\"). The Sumatran rhinoceros (\"Dicerorhinus sumatrensis\") once inhabited the forests, but Malaysia's last rhinoceroses died in 2019, and the species' few remaining members survive only in Sumatra.\nThe peninsula is home to several distinct ecoregions. The Tenasserim\u2013South Thailand semi-evergreen rain forests cover the northern peninsula, including the Tenasserim Hills and the Isthmus of Kra, and extend to the coast on both sides of the isthmus.\nThe Kangar-Pattani floristic boundary crosses the peninsula in southern Thailand and northernmost Malaysia, marking the boundary between the large biogeographic regions of Indochina to the north and Sundaland and Malesia to the south. The forests north of the boundary are characterized by seasonally-deciduous trees, while the Sundaland forests have more year-round rainfall and the trees are mostly evergreen. Peninsular Malaysia is home to three terrestrial ecoregions. The Peninsular Malaysian montane rain forests ecoregion covers the mountains above 1,000 meters elevation. The lowlands and hills are in the Peninsular Malaysian rain forests ecoregion. The Peninsular Malaysian peat swamp forests include distinctive waterlogged forests in the lowlands on both sides of the peninsula.\nExtensive mangroves line both coasts. The Myanmar Coast mangroves are on the western shore of the peninsula, and the Indochina mangroves on the eastern shore.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Sister-inline/styles.css\"/&gt; Media related to at Wikimedia Commons"}
{"id": "20405", "revid": "36112485", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20405", "title": "Miles Davis", "text": "American jazz trumpeter, bandleader and composer (1926\u20131991)\nMiles Dewey Davis III (May 26, 1926\u00a0\u2013 September 28, 1991) was an American trumpeter, bandleader and composer. He is among the most influential and acclaimed figures in the history of jazz and 20th-century music. Davis adopted a variety of musical directions in a roughly five-decade career that kept him at the forefront of many major stylistic developments in genres such as jazz, classical, and experimental music.\nBorn into an upper-middle-class family in Alton, Illinois, and raised in East St. Louis, Davis started on the trumpet in his early teens. He left to study at Juilliard in New York City, before dropping out and making his professional debut as a member of saxophonist Charlie Parker's bebop quintet from 1944 to 1948. Shortly after, he recorded the \"Birth of the Cool\" sessions for Capitol Records, which were instrumental to the development of cool jazz. In the early 1950s, while addicted to heroin, Davis recorded some of the earliest hard bop music under Prestige Records. After a widely acclaimed comeback performance at the Newport Jazz Festival, he signed a long-term contract with Columbia Records, and recorded the album \"'Round About Midnight\" in 1955. It was his first work with saxophonist John Coltrane and bassist Paul Chambers, key members of the sextet he led into the early 1960s. During this period, he alternated between orchestral jazz collaborations with arranger Gil Evans, such as the Spanish music\u2013influenced \"Sketches of Spain\" (1960), and band recordings, such as \"Milestones\" (1958) and \"Kind of Blue\" (1959). The latter recording remains one of the most popular jazz albums of all time, having sold over five million copies in the U.S.\nDavis made several lineup changes while recording \"Someday My Prince Will Come\" (1961), his 1961 Blackhawk concerts, and \"Seven Steps to Heaven\" (1963), another commercial success that introduced bassist Ron Carter, pianist Herbie Hancock and drummer Tony Williams. After adding saxophonist Wayne Shorter to his new quintet in 1964, Davis led them on a series of more abstract recordings often composed by the band members, helping pioneer the post-bop genre with albums such as \"E.S.P.\" (1965) and \"Miles Smiles\" (1967), before transitioning into his electric period. During the 1970s, he experimented with rock, funk, African rhythms, emerging electronic music technology, and an ever-changing lineup of musicians, including keyboardist Joe Zawinul, drummer Al Foster, bassist Michael Henderson and guitarist John McLaughlin. This period, beginning with Davis's 1969 studio album \"In a Silent Way\" and concluding with the 1975 concert recording \"Agharta\", was the most controversial in his career, alienating and challenging many in jazz. His million-selling 1970 record \"Bitches Brew\" helped spark a resurgence in the genre's commercial popularity with jazz fusion as the decade progressed.\nAfter a five-year retirement due to poor health, Davis resumed his career in the 1980s, employing younger musicians and pop sounds on albums such as \"The Man with the Horn\" (1981), \"You're Under Arrest\" (1985) and \"Tutu\" (1986). Critics were often unreceptive but the decade garnered Davis his highest level of commercial recognition. He performed sold-out concerts worldwide, while branching out into visual arts, film and television work, before his death in 1991 from the combined effects of a stroke, pneumonia and respiratory failure. In 2006, Davis was inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame, which recognized him as \"one of the key figures in the history of jazz\". \"Rolling Stone\" described him as \"the most revered jazz trumpeter of all time, not to mention one of the most important musicians of the 20th century,\" while Gerald Early called him inarguably one of the most influential and innovative musicians of that period.\nEarly life.\nDavis was born on May 26, 1926, to an affluent African-American family in Alton, Illinois, north of St. Louis. He had an older sister, Dorothy Mae (1925\u20131996) and a younger brother, Vernon (1929\u20131999). His mother, Cleota Mae Henry of Arkansas, was a music teacher and violinist, and his father, Miles Dewey Davis Jr., also of Arkansas, was a dentist. They owned a estate near Pine Bluff, Arkansas, with a profitable pig farm. In Pine Bluff, he and his siblings fished, hunted, and rode horses. Davis's grandparents were the owners of an Arkansas farm where he would spend many summers.\nIn 1927, the family moved to East St. Louis, Illinois. They lived on the second floor of a commercial building behind a dental office in a predominantly white neighborhood. Davis's father would soon become distant to his children as the Great Depression caused him to become increasingly consumed by his job, typically working six days a week. From 1932 to 1934, Davis attended John Robinson Elementary School, an all-black school, then Crispus Attucks, where he performed well in mathematics, music and sports. Davis had previously attended Catholic school. At an early age he liked music, especially blues, big bands and gospel.\nIn 1935, Davis received his first trumpet as a gift from John Eubanks, a friend of his father. He then took weekly lessons from \"the biggest influence on my life\", Elwood Buchanan, a teacher and musician who was a patient of his father. His mother wanted him to play the violin instead. Against the fashion of the time, Buchanan stressed the importance of playing without vibrato and encouraged him to use a clear, mid-range tone. Davis said that whenever he started playing with heavy vibrato, Buchanan slapped his knuckles. In later years Davis said, \"I prefer a round sound with no attitude in it, like a round voice with not too much tremolo and not too much bass. Just right in the middle. If I can't get that sound I can't play anything.\" The family soon moved to 1701 Kansas Avenue in East St. Louis.\nIn his autobiography, Davis stated, \"By the age of 12, music had become the most important thing in my life.\" On his thirteenth birthday his father bought him a new trumpet, and Davis began to play in local bands. He took additional trumpet lessons from Joseph Gustat, principal trumpeter of the St. Louis Symphony Orchestra. Davis would also play the trumpet in talent shows he and his siblings would put on.\nIn 1941, the 15-year-old attended East St. Louis Lincoln High School, where he joined the marching band directed by Buchanan and entered music competitions. Years later, Davis said that he was discriminated against in these competitions due to his race, but he added that these experiences made him a better musician. When a drummer asked him to play a certain passage of music, and he could not do it, he began to learn music theory. \"I went and got everything, every book I could get to learn about theory.\" At Lincoln, Davis met his first girlfriend, Irene Birth (later Cawthon). He had a band that performed at the Elks Club. Part of his earnings paid for his sister's education at Fisk University. Davis befriended trumpeter Clark Terry, who suggested he play without vibrato, and performed with him for several years.\nWith encouragement from his teacher and girlfriend, Davis filled a vacant spot in the Rhumboogie Orchestra, also known as the Blue Devils, led by Eddie Randle. He became the band's musical director, which involved hiring musicians and scheduling rehearsal. Years later, Davis considered this job one of the most important of his career. Sonny Stitt tried to persuade him to join the Tiny Bradshaw band, which was passing through town, but his mother insisted he finish high school before going on tour. He said later, \"I didn't talk to her for two weeks. And I didn't go with the band either.\" In January 1944, Davis finished high school and graduated in absentia in June. During the next month, his girlfriend gave birth to a daughter, Cheryl.\nIn July 1944, Billy Eckstine visited St. Louis with a band that included Art Blakey, Dizzy Gillespie and Charlie Parker. Trumpeter Buddy Anderson was too sick to perform, so Davis was invited to join. He played with the band for two weeks at Club Riviera. After playing with these musicians, he was certain he should move to New York City, \"where the action was\". His mother wanted him to go to Fisk University, like his sister, and study piano or violin. Davis had other interests.\nCareer.\n1944\u20131948: New York City and the bebop years.\nIn September 1944, Davis accepted his father's idea of studying at the Juilliard School of Music in New York City. After passing the audition, he attended classes in music theory, piano and dictation. Davis often skipped his classes.\nMuch of Davis's time was spent in clubs seeking his idol, Charlie Parker. According to Davis, Coleman Hawkins told him \"finish your studies at Juilliard and forget Bird [Parker]\". After finding Parker, he joined a cadre of regulars at Minton's and Monroe's in Harlem who held jam sessions every night. The other regulars included J. J. Johnson, Kenny Clarke, Thelonious Monk, Fats Navarro and Freddie Webster. Davis reunited with Irene and their daughter Cheryl when they moved to New York City. Parker became a roommate. Around this time Davis was paid an allowance of $40 ().\nIn mid-1945, Davis failed to register for the year's autumn term at Juilliard and dropped out after three semesters because he wanted to perform full-time. Years later he criticized Juilliard for concentrating too much on classical European and \"white\" repertoire, but he praised the school for teaching him music theory and improving his trumpet technique.\nDavis began performing at clubs on 52nd Street with Coleman Hawkins and Eddie \"Lockjaw\" Davis. He recorded for the first time on April 24, 1945, when he entered the studio as a sideman for Herbie Fields's band. During the next year, he recorded as a leader for the first time with the Miles Davis Sextet plus Earl Coleman and Ann Baker, one of the few times he accompanied a singer.\nIn 1945, Davis replaced Dizzy Gillespie in Charlie Parker's quintet. On November 26, he participated in several recording sessions as part of Parker's group Reboppers that also involved Gillespie and Max Roach, displaying hints of the style he would become known for. On Parker's tune \"Now's the Time\", Davis played a solo that anticipated cool jazz. He next joined a big band led by Benny Carter, performing in St. Louis and remaining with the band in California. He again played with Parker and Gillespie. In Los Angeles, Parker had a nervous breakdown that put him in the hospital for several months. In March 1946, Davis played in studio sessions with Parker and began a collaboration with Mingus that summer. Cawthon gave birth to Davis's second child, Gregory, in East St. Louis before reuniting with Davis in New York City the following year. Davis noted that by this time, \"I was still so much into the music that I was even ignoring Irene.\" He had also turned to alcohol and cocaine.\nDavis was a member of Billy Eckstine's big band in 1946 and Gillespie's in 1947. He joined a quintet led by Parker that also included Max Roach. Together they performed live with Duke Jordan and Tommy Potter for much of the year, including several studio sessions. In one session that May, Davis wrote the tune \"Cheryl\", for his daughter. Davis's first session as a leader followed in August 1947, playing as the Miles Davis All Stars that included Parker, pianist John Lewis and bassist Nelson Boyd; they recorded \"Milestones\", \"Half Nelson\" and \"Sippin' at Bells\". After touring Chicago and Detroit with Parker's quintet, Davis returned to New York City in March 1948 and joined the Jazz at the Philharmonic tour, which included a stop in St. Louis on April 30.\n1948\u20131950: Miles Davis Nonet and \"Birth of the Cool\".\nIn August 1948, Davis declined an offer to join Duke Ellington's orchestra as he had entered rehearsals with a nine-piece band featuring baritone saxophonist Gerry Mulligan and arrangements by Gil Evans, taking an active role on what soon became his own project. Evans' Manhattan apartment had become the meeting place for several young musicians and composers such as Davis, Roach, Lewis and Mulligan who were unhappy with the increasingly virtuoso instrumental techniques that dominated bebop. These gatherings led to the formation of the Miles Davis Nonet, which included atypical modern jazz instruments such as French horn and tuba, leading to a thickly textured, almost orchestral sound. The intent was to imitate the human voice through carefully arranged compositions and a relaxed, melodic approach to improvisation. In September, the band completed their sole engagement as the opening band for Count Basie at the Royal Roost for two weeks. Davis had to persuade the venue's manager to write the sign \"Miles Davis Nonet. Arrangements by Gil Evans, John Lewis and Gerry Mulligan\". Davis returned to Parker's quintet, but relationships within the quintet were growing tense mainly due to Parker's erratic behavior caused by his drug addiction. Early in his time with Parker, Davis abstained from drugs, chose a vegetarian diet, and spoke of the benefits of water and juice.\nIn December 1948, Davis quit, saying he was not being paid. His departure began a period when he worked mainly as a freelancer and sideman. His nonet remained active until the end of 1949. After signing a contract with Capitol Records, they recorded sessions in January and April 1949, which sold little but influenced the \"Cool\" or \"West Coast\" style of jazz. The lineup changed throughout the year and included tuba player Bill Barber, alto saxophonist Lee Konitz, pianist Al Haig, trombone players Mike Zwerin with Kai Winding, French horn players Junior Collins with Sandy Siegelstein and Gunther Schuller, and bassists Al McKibbon and Joe Shulman. One track featured singer Kenny Hagood. The presence of white musicians in the group angered some black players, many of whom were unemployed at the time, yet Davis rebuffed their criticisms. Recording sessions with the nonet for Capitol continued until April 1950. The Nonet recorded a dozen tracks which were released as singles and subsequently compiled on the 1957 album \"Birth of the Cool\".\nIn May 1949, Davis performed with the Tadd Dameron Quintet with Kenny Clarke and James Moody at the Paris International Jazz Festival. On his first trip abroad Davis took a strong liking to Paris and its cultural environment, where he felt black jazz musicians and people of color in general were better respected than in the U.S. The trip, he said, \"changed the way I looked at things forever\". He began an affair with singer and actress Juliette Gr\u00e9co.\n1949\u20131955: Signing with Prestige, heroin addiction and hard bop.\nAfter returning from Paris in mid-1949, he became depressed and found little work except a short engagement with Bud Powell in October and guest spots in New York City, Chicago and Detroit until January 1950. He was falling behind in hotel rent and attempts were made to repossess his car. His heroin use became an expensive addiction, and Davis, not yet 24 years old, \"lost my sense of discipline, lost my sense of control over my life, and started to drift\". In August 1950, Cawthon gave birth to Davis's second son, Miles IV. Davis befriended boxer Johnny Bratton which began his interest in the sport. Davis left Cawthon and his three children in New York City in the hands of one his friends, jazz singer Betty Carter. He toured with Eckstine and Billie Holiday and was arrested for heroin possession in Los Angeles. The story was reported in \"DownBeat\" magazine, which led to a further reduction in work, though he was acquitted weeks later. By the 1950s, Davis had become more skilled and was experimenting with the middle register of the trumpet alongside harmonies and rhythms.\nIn January 1951, Davis's fortunes improved when he signed a one-year contract with Prestige after owner Bob Weinstock became a fan of the nonet. Davis chose Lewis, trombonist Bennie Green, bassist Percy Heath, saxophonist Sonny Rollins and drummer Roy Haynes; they recorded what became part of \"Miles Davis and Horns\" (1956). Davis was hired for other studio dates in 1951 and began to transcribe scores for record labels to fund his heroin addiction. His second session for Prestige was released on \"The New Sounds\" (1951), \"Dig\" (1956) and \"Conception\" (1956).\nDavis supported his heroin habit by playing music and by living the life of a hustler, exploiting prostitutes and receiving money from friends. By 1953, his addiction began to impair his playing. His drug habit became public in a \"DownBeat\" interview with Cab Calloway, whom he never forgave as it brought him \"all pain and suffering\". He returned to St. Louis and stayed with his father for several months. After a brief period with Roach and Mingus in September 1953, he returned to his father's home, where he concentrated on addressing his addiction.\nDavis lived in Detroit for about six months, avoiding New York City, where it was easy to get drugs. Though he used heroin, he was still able to perform locally with Elvin Jones and Tommy Flanagan as part of Billy Mitchell's house band at the Blue Bird club. He was also \"pimping a little\". However, he was able to end his addiction, and, in February 1954, Davis returned to New York City, feeling good \"for the first time in a long time\", mentally and physically stronger, and joined a gym. He informed Weinstock and Blue Note that he was ready to record with a quintet, which he was granted. He considered the albums that resulted from these and earlier sessions\u2014\"Miles Davis Quartet\" and \"Miles Davis Volume 2\"\u2014\"very important\" because he felt his performances were particularly strong. He was paid roughly $750 () for each album and refused to give away his publishing rights.\nDavis abandoned the bebop style and turned to the music of pianist Ahmad Jamal, whose approach and use of space influenced him. When he returned to the studio in June 1955 to record \"The Musings of Miles\", he wanted a pianist like Jamal and chose Red Garland. \"Blue Haze\" (1956), \"Bags' Groove\" (1957), \"Walkin\"' (1957), and \"Miles Davis and the Modern Jazz Giants\" (1959) documented the evolution of his sound with the Harmon mute placed close to the microphone, and the use of more spacious and relaxed phrasing. He assumed a central role in hard bop, less radical in harmony and melody, and used popular songs and American standards as starting points for improvisation. Hard bop distanced itself from cool jazz with a harder beat and music inspired by the blues. A few critics consider \"Walkin' \"(April 1954) the album that created the hard bop genre.\nDavis gained a reputation for being cold, distant and easily angered. He wrote that in 1954 Sugar Ray Robinson \"was the most important thing in my life besides music\", and he adopted Robinson's \"arrogant attitude\". He showed contempt for critics and the press.\nDavis had an operation to remove polyps from his larynx in October 1955. The doctors told him to remain silent after the operation, but he got into an argument that permanently damaged his vocal cords and gave him a raspy voice for the rest of his life. He was called the \"prince of darkness\", adding a patina of mystery to his public persona.\n1955\u20131959: Signing with Columbia, first quintet and modal jazz.\nIn July 1955, Davis's fortunes improved considerably when he played at the Newport Jazz Festival, with a lineup of Monk, Heath, drummer Connie Kay, and horn players Zoot Sims and Gerry Mulligan. The performance was praised by critics and audiences alike, who considered it to be a highlight of the festival as well as helping Davis, the least well known musician in the group, to increase his popularity among affluent white audiences. He tied with Dizzy Gillespie for best trumpeter in the 1955 \"DownBeat\" magazine Readers' Poll.\nGeorge Avakian of Columbia Records heard Davis perform at Newport and wanted to sign him to the label. Davis had one year left on his contract with Prestige, which required him to release four more albums. He signed a contract with Columbia that included a $4,000 advance () and required that his recordings for Columbia remain unreleased until his agreement with Prestige expired.\nAt the request of Avakian, he formed the Miles Davis Quintet for a performance at Caf\u00e9 Bohemia. The quintet contained Sonny Rollins on tenor saxophone, Red Garland on piano, Paul Chambers on double bass and Philly Joe Jones on drums. Rollins was replaced by John Coltrane, completing the membership of the first quintet. To fulfill Davis's contract with Prestige, this new group worked through two marathon sessions in May and October 1956 that were released by the label as four LPs: \"Cookin' with the Miles Davis Quintet\" (1957), \"Relaxin' with the Miles Davis Quintet\" (1958), \"Workin' with the Miles Davis Quintet\" (1960) and \"Steamin' with the Miles Davis Quintet\" (1961). Each album was critically acclaimed and helped establish Davis's quintet as one of the best.\nThe style of the group was an extension of their experience playing with Davis. He played long, legato, melodic lines, while Coltrane contrasted with energetic solos. Their live repertoire was a mix of bebop, standards from the Great American Songbook and pre-bop eras, and traditional tunes. They appeared on \"'Round About Midnight\", Davis's first album for Columbia.\nIn 1956, he left his quintet temporarily to tour Europe as part of the Birdland All-Stars, which included the Modern Jazz Quartet and French and German musicians. In Paris, he reunited with Gr\u00e9co and they \"were lovers for many years\". He then returned home, reunited his quintet and toured the US for two months. Conflict arose on tour when he grew impatient with the drug habits of Jones and Coltrane. Davis was trying to live a healthier life by exercising and reducing his use of alcohol. But he continued to use cocaine. At the end of the tour, he fired Jones and Coltrane and replaced them with Sonny Rollins and Art Taylor.\nIn November 1957, Davis went to Paris and recorded the soundtrack to \"Ascenseur pour l'\u00e9chafaud\". directed by Louis Malle and starring Jeanne Moreau. Consisting of French jazz musicians Barney Wilen, Pierre Michelot and Ren\u00e9 Urtreger, and American drummer Kenny Clarke, the group avoided a written score and instead improvised while they watched the film in a recording studio.\nAfter returning to New York, Davis revived his quintet with Adderley and Coltrane, who was clean from his drug habit. Now a sextet, the group recorded material in early 1958 that was released on \"Milestones\", an album on which the title track demonstrated Davis's interest in modal jazz. A performance by Les Ballets Africains drew him to slower, deliberate music that allowed the creation of solos from static harmony rather than constant changing chords.\nBy May 1958, he had replaced Jones with drummer Jimmy Cobb, and Garland left the group, leaving Davis to play piano on \"Sid's Ahead\" for \"Milestones\". He wanted someone who could play modal jazz, so he hired Bill Evans, a young pianist with a background in classical music. This new edition of the sextet made their recording debut on \"Jazz Track\" (1958).\nEvans had an impressionistic approach to piano. His ideas greatly influenced Davis. But after eight months of touring, a tired Evans left. Wynton Kelly, his replacement, brought to the group a swinging style that contrasted with Evans's delicacy.\n1957\u20131963: Collaborations with Gil Evans and \"Kind of Blue\".\nBy early 1957, Davis was exhausted from recording and touring and wished to pursue new projects. In March, the 30-year-old Davis told journalists of his intention to retire soon and revealed offers he had received to teach at Harvard University and be a musical director at a record label. Avakian agreed that it was time for Davis to explore something different, but Davis rejected his suggestion of returning to his nonet as he considered that a step backward. Avakian then suggested that he work with a bigger ensemble, similar to \"Music for Brass\" (1957), an album of orchestral and brass-arranged music led by Gunther Schuller featuring Davis as a guest soloist.\nDavis accepted and worked with Gil Evans in what became a five-album collaboration from 1957 to 1962. \"Miles Ahead\" (1957) showcased Davis on flugelhorn and a rendition of \"The Maids of Cadiz\" by L\u00e9o Delibes, the first piece of classical music that Davis recorded. Evans devised orchestral passages as transitions, thus turning the album into one long piece of music. \"Porgy and Bess\" (1959) includes arrangements of pieces from George Gershwin's opera. \"Sketches of Spain\" (1960) contained music by Joaqu\u00edn Rodrigo and Manuel de Falla and originals by Evans. The classical musicians had trouble improvising, while the jazz musicians couldn't handle the difficult arrangements, but the album was a critical success, selling over 120,000 copies in the US. Davis performed with an orchestra conducted by Evans at Carnegie Hall in May 1961 to raise money for charity. The pair's final album was \"Quiet Nights\" (1963), a collection of bossa nova songs released against their wishes. Evans stated it was only half an album and blamed the record company; Davis blamed producer Teo Macero and refused to speak to him for more than two years. The boxed set \"\" (1996) won the Grammy Award for Best Historical Album and Best Album Notes in 1997.\nIn March and April 1959, Davis recorded what some consider his greatest album, \"Kind of Blue\". He named the album for its mood. He called back Bill Evans, as the music had been planned around Evans's piano style. Both Davis and Evans were familiar with George Russell's ideas about modal jazz. But Davis neglected to tell pianist Wynton Kelly that Evans was returning, so Kelly appeared on only one song, \"Freddie Freeloader\". The sextet had played \"So What\" and \"All Blues\" at performances, but the remaining three compositions they saw for the first time in the studio.\nReleased in August 1959, \"Kind of Blue\" was an instant success, with widespread radio airplay and rave reviews from critics. It has remained a strong seller over the years. In 2019, the album achieved 5\u00d7 platinum certification from the Recording Industry Association of America for sales of over five million copies in the US, making it one of the most successful jazz albums in history. In 2009, the US House of Representatives passed a resolution that honored it as a national treasure.\nIn August 1959, during a break in a recording session at the Birdland nightclub in New York City, Davis was escorting a blonde-haired woman to a taxi outside the club when policeman Gerald Kilduff told him to \"move on\". Davis said that he was working at the club, and he refused to move. Kilduff arrested and grabbed Davis as he tried to protect himself. Witnesses said the policeman hit Davis in the stomach with a nightstick without provocation. Two detectives held the crowd back, while a third approached Davis from behind and beat him over the head. Davis was taken to jail, charged with assaulting an officer, then taken to the hospital where he received five stitches. By January 1960, he was acquitted of disorderly conduct and third-degree assault. He later stated the incident \"changed my whole life and whole attitude again, made me feel bitter and cynical again when I was starting to feel good about the things that had changed in this country\".\nDavis and his sextet toured to support \"Kind of Blue\". Cannonball Adderley left the group September of that year reducing the band back to a quintet. Coltrane was ready to leave as well but Davis persuaded him to play with the group on one final European tour in the spring of 1960. Coltrane then departed to form his quartet, though he returned for a couple tracks on Davis's album \"Someday My Prince Will Come\" (1961). Its front cover shows a photograph of his wife, Frances Taylor, after Davis demanded that Columbia depict black women on his album covers.\n1963\u20131968: Second quintet.\nIn December 1962, Davis, Rollins, Kelly, Chambers and Cobb played together for the last time as the latter three wanted to leave and play as a trio. Rollins left them soon after, leaving Davis to pay over $25,000 () to cancel upcoming gigs and quickly assemble a new group. Following auditions, he found his new band in tenor saxophonist George Coleman, bassist Ron Carter, pianist Victor Feldman and drummer Frank Butler. By May 1963, Feldman and Butler were replaced by 23-year-old pianist Herbie Hancock and 17-year-old drummer Tony Williams who made Davis \"excited all over again\". With this group, Davis completed the rest of what became \"Seven Steps to Heaven\" (1963) and recorded the live albums \"Miles Davis in Europe\" (1964), \"My Funny Valentine\" (1965) and \"Four &amp; More\" (1966). The quintet played essentially the same bebop tunes and standards that Davis's previous bands had played, but they approached them with structural and rhythmic freedom and occasionally breakneck speed.\nIn 1964, Coleman was briefly replaced by saxophonist Sam Rivers (who recorded with Davis on \"Miles in Tokyo\") until Wayne Shorter was persuaded to leave the Jazz Messengers. The quintet with Shorter lasted through 1968, with Shorter becoming the group's principal composer. The album \"E.S.P.\" (1965) was named after his composition. While touring Europe, the group made its first album, \"Miles in Berlin\" (1965).\nDavis needed medical attention for hip pain, which had worsened since his Japanese tour during the previous year. He underwent hip replacement surgery in April 1965, with bone taken from his shin, but it failed. After his third month in the hospital, he discharged himself due to boredom and went home. He returned to the hospital in August after a fall required the insertion of a plastic hip joint. In November 1965, he had recovered enough to return to performing with his quintet, which included gigs at the Plugged Nickel in Chicago. Teo Macero returned as his record producer after their rift over \"Quiet Nights\" had healed.\nIn January 1966, Davis spent three months in the hospital with a liver infection. When he resumed touring, he performed more at colleges because he had grown tired of the typical jazz venues. Columbia president Clive Davis reported in 1966 his sales had declined to around 40,000\u201350,000 per album, compared to as many as 100,000 per release a few years before. Matters were not helped by the press reporting his apparent financial troubles and imminent demise. After his appearance at the 1966 Newport Jazz Festival, he returned to the studio with his quintet for a series of sessions. He started a relationship with actress Cicely Tyson, who helped him reduce his alcohol consumption.\nMaterial from the 1966\u20131968 sessions was released on \"Miles Smiles\" (1966), \"Sorcerer\" (1967), \"Nefertiti\" (1967), \"Miles in the Sky\" (1968) and \"Filles de Kilimanjaro\" (1968). The quintet's approach to the new music became known as \"time no changes\"\u2014which referred to Davis's decision to depart from chordal sequences and adopt a more open approach, with the rhythm section responding to the soloists' melodies. Through \"Nefertiti\" the studio recordings consisted primarily of originals composed by Shorter, with occasional compositions by the other sidemen. In 1967, the group began to play their concerts in continuous sets, each tune flowing into the next, with only the melody indicating any sort of change. His bands performed this way until his hiatus in 1975.\n\"Miles in the Sky\" and \"Filles de Kilimanjaro\"\u2014which tentatively introduced electric bass, electric piano and electric guitar on some tracks\u2014pointed the way to the fusion phase of Davis's career. He also began experimenting with more rock-oriented rhythms on these records. By the time the second half of \"Filles de Kilimanjaro\" was recorded, bassist Dave Holland and pianist Chick Corea had replaced Carter and Hancock. Davis soon took over the compositional duties of his sidemen.\n1968\u20131975: The electric period.\n\"In a Silent Way\" was recorded in a single studio session in February 1969, with Shorter, Hancock, Holland and Williams alongside keyboardists Chick Corea and Joe Zawinul and guitarist John McLaughlin. The album contains two side-long tracks that Macero pieced together from different takes recorded at the session. When the album was released later that year, some critics accused him of \"selling out\" to the rock and roll audience. Nevertheless, it reached number 134 on the US \"Billboard\" Top LPs chart, his first album since \"My Funny Valentine\" to reach the chart. \"In a Silent Way\" was his entry into jazz fusion. The touring band of 1969\u20131970\u2014with Shorter, Corea, Holland and DeJohnette\u2014never completed a studio recording together, and became known as Davis's \"lost quintet\", though radio broadcasts from the band's European tour have been extensively bootlegged.\nFor the double album \"Bitches Brew\" (1970), he hired Jack DeJohnette, Harvey Brooks and Bennie Maupin. The album contained long compositions, some over twenty minutes, that more often than not, were constructed from several takes by Macero and Davis via splicing and tape loops amid epochal advances in multitrack recording technologies. \"Bitches Brew\" peaked at No. 35 on the \"Billboard\" Album chart. In 1976, it was certified gold for selling over 500,000 records. By 2003, it had sold one million copies.\nIn March 1970, Davis began to perform as the opening act for rock bands, allowing Columbia to market \"Bitches Brew\" to a larger audience. He shared a Fillmore East bill with the Steve Miller Band and Neil Young with Crazy Horse on March 6 and 7. Biographer Paul Tingen wrote, \"Miles' newcomer status in this environment\" led to \"mixed audience reactions, often having to play for dramatically reduced fees, and enduring the 'sell-out' accusations from the jazz world\", as well as being \"attacked by sections of the black press for supposedly genuflecting to white culture\". The 1970 tours included the 1970 Isle of Wight Festival on August 29 when he performed to an estimated 600,000 people, the largest of his career. Plans to record with Hendrix ended after the guitarist's death; his funeral was the last one that Davis attended. Several live albums with a transitional sextet/septet including Corea, DeJohnette, Holland, Airto Moreira, saxophonist Steve Grossman and keyboardist Keith Jarrett were recorded during this period, including \"Miles Davis at Fillmore\" (1970) and \"\" (1973).\nBy 1971, Davis had signed a contract with Columbia that paid him $100,000 a year () for three years in addition to royalties. He recorded a soundtrack album (\"Jack Johnson\") for the 1970 documentary film about heavyweight boxer Jack Johnson, containing two long pieces of 25 and 26 minutes in length with Hancock, McLaughlin, Sonny Sharrock and Billy Cobham. He was committed to making music for African-Americans who liked more commercial, pop, groove-oriented music. By November 1971, DeJohnette and Moreira had been replaced in the touring ensemble by drummer Leon \"Ndugu\" Chancler and percussionists James Mtume and Don Alias. \"Live-Evil\" was released in the same month. Showcasing bassist Michael Henderson, who had replaced Holland in 1970, the album demonstrated that Davis's ensemble had transformed into a funk-oriented group while retaining the exploratory imperative of \"Bitches Brew\".\nIn 1972, composer-arranger Paul Buckmaster introduced Davis to the music of avant-garde composer Karlheinz Stockhausen, leading to a period of creative exploration. Biographer J. K. Chambers wrote, \"The effect of Davis' study of Stockhausen could not be repressed for long ... Davis' own 'space music' shows Stockhausen's influence compositionally.\" His recordings and performances during this period were described as \"space music\" by fans, Feather and Buckmaster, who described it as \"a lot of mood changes\u2014heavy, dark, intense\u2014definitely space music\". The studio album \"On the Corner\" (1972) blended the influence of Stockhausen and Buckmaster with funk elements. Davis invited Buckmaster to New York City to oversee the writing and recording of the album with Macero. The album reached No. 1 on the \"Billboard\" jazz chart but peaked at No. 156 on the more heterogeneous Top 200 Albums chart. Davis felt that Columbia marketed it to the wrong audience. \"The music was meant to be heard by young black people, but they just treated it like any other jazz album and advertised it that way, pushed it on the jazz radio stations. Young black kids don't listen to those stations; they listen to R&amp;B stations and some rock stations.\" In October 1972, he broke his ankles in a car crash. He took painkillers and cocaine to cope with the pain. Looking back at his career after the incident, he wrote, \"Everything started to blur.\"\nAfter recording \"On the Corner\", he assembled a group with Henderson, Mtume, Carlos Garnett, guitarist Reggie Lucas, organist Lonnie Liston Smith, tabla player Badal Roy, sitarist Khalil Balakrishna and drummer Al Foster. In striking contrast to that of his previous lineups, the music emphasized rhythmic density and shifting textures instead of solos. This group was recorded live in 1972 for \"In Concert\", but Davis found it unsatisfactory, leading him to drop the tabla and sitar and play organ himself. He also added guitarist Pete Cosey. The compilation studio album \"Big Fun\" contains four long improvisations recorded between 1969 and 1972.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This was music that polarized audiences, provoking boos and walk-outs amid the ecstasy of others. The length, density, and unforgiving nature of it mocked those who said that Miles was interested only in being trendy and popular. Some have heard in this music the feel and shape of a musician's late work, an egoless music that precedes its creator's death. As Theodor Adorno said of the late Beethoven, the disappearance of the musician into the work is a bow to mortality. It was as if Miles were testifying to all that he had been witness to for the past thirty years, both terrifying and joyful.\n \u2014 John Szwed on \"Agharta\" (1975) and \"Pangaea\" (1976)\nStudio sessions throughout 1973 and 1974 led to \"Get Up with It\", an album which included four long pieces alongside four shorter recordings from 1970 and 1972. The track \"He Loved Him Madly\", a thirty-minute tribute to the recently deceased Duke Ellington, influenced Brian Eno's ambient music. In the United States, it performed comparably to \"On the Corner\", reaching number 8 on the jazz chart and number 141 on the pop chart. He then concentrated on live performance with a series of concerts that Columbia released on the double live albums \"Agharta\" (1975), \"Pangaea\" (1976) and \"Dark Magus\" (1977). The first two are recordings of two sets from February 1, 1975, in Osaka, by which time Davis was troubled by several physical ailments; he relied on alcohol, codeine and morphine to get through the engagements. His shows were routinely panned by critics who mentioned his habit of performing with his back to the audience. Cosey later asserted that \"the band really advanced after the Japanese tour\", but Davis was again hospitalized, for his ulcers and a hernia, during a tour of the US while opening for Herbie Hancock.\nAfter appearances at the 1975 Newport Jazz Festival in July and the Schaefer Music Festival in New York in September, Davis dropped out of music.\n1975\u20131980: Hiatus.\nIn his autobiography, Davis wrote frankly about his life during his hiatus from music. He called his Upper West Side brownstone a wreck and chronicled his heavy use of alcohol and cocaine, in addition to sexual encounters with many women. He also stated that \"Sex and drugs took the place music had occupied in my life.\" Drummer Tony Williams recalled that by noon (on average) Davis would be sick from the previous night's intake.\nIn December 1975, he had regained enough strength to undergo a much needed hip replacement operation. In December 1976, Columbia was reluctant to renew his contract and pay his usual large advances. But after his lawyer started negotiating with United Artists, Columbia matched their offer, establishing the Miles Davis Fund to pay him regularly. Pianist Vladimir Horowitz was the only other musician with Columbia who had a similar status.\nIn 1978, Davis asked fusion guitarist Larry Coryell to participate in sessions with keyboardists Masabumi Kikuchi and George Pavlis, bassist T. M. Stevens and drummer Al Foster. Davis played the arranged piece uptempo, abandoned his trumpet for the organ, and had Macero record the session without the band's knowledge. After Coryell declined a spot in a band that Davis was beginning to put together, Davis returned to his reclusive lifestyle in New York City. Soon after, Marguerite Eskridge had Davis jailed for failing to pay child support for their son Erin, which cost him $10,000 () for release on bail. A recording session that involved Buckmaster and Gil Evans was halted, with Evans leaving after failing to receive the payment he was promised. In August 1978, Davis hired a new manager, Mark Rothbaum, who had worked with him since 1972.\n1980\u20131985: Comeback.\nHaving played the trumpet little throughout the previous three years, Davis found it difficult to reclaim his embouchure. His first post-hiatus studio appearance took place in May 1980. A day later, Davis was hospitalized due to a leg infection. He recorded \"The Man with the Horn\" from June 1980 to May 1981 with Macero producing. A large band was abandoned in favor of a combo with saxophonist Bill Evans and bassist Marcus Miller. Both would collaborate with him during the next decade.\n\"The Man with the Horn\" received a poor critical reception despite selling well. In June 1981, Davis returned to the stage for the first time since 1975 in a ten-minute guest solo as part of Mel Lewis's band at the Village Vanguard. This was followed by appearances with a new band. Recordings from a mixture of dates from 1981, including from the Kix in Boston and Avery Fisher Hall, were released on \"We Want Miles\", which earned him a Grammy Award for Best Jazz Instrumental Performance by a Soloist.\nIn January 1982, while Tyson was working in Africa, Davis \"went a little wild\" with alcohol and suffered a stroke that temporarily paralyzed his right hand. Tyson returned home and cared for him. After three months of treatment with a Chinese acupuncturist, he was able to play the trumpet again. He listened to his doctor's warnings and gave up alcohol and drugs. He credited Tyson with helping his recovery, which involved exercise, piano playing and visits to spas. She encouraged him to draw, which he pursued for the rest of his life. Takao Ogawa, a Japanese jazz journalist who befriended Davis during this period, took pictures of his drawings and put them in his book along with the interviews of Davis at his apartment in New York. Davis told Ogawa: \"I'm interested in line and color, line is like phrase and coating colors is like code. When I see good paintings, I hear good music. That is why my paintings are the same as my music. They are different than any paintings.\"\nDavis resumed touring in May 1982 with a lineup that included percussionist Mino Cinelu and guitarist John Scofield, with whom he worked closely on the album \"Star People\" (1983). In mid-1983, he worked on the tracks for \"Decoy\", an album mixing soul music and electronica that was released in 1984. He brought in producer, composer and keyboardist Robert Irving III, who had collaborated with him on \"The Man with the Horn\". With a seven-piece band that included Scofield, Evans, Irving, Foster and Darryl Jones, he played a series of European performances that were positively received. In December 1984, while in Denmark, he was awarded the L\u00e9onie Sonning Music Prize. Trumpeter Palle Mikkelborg had written \"Aura\", a contemporary classical piece, for the event which impressed Davis to the point of returning to Denmark in early 1985 to record his next studio album, \"Aura\". Columbia was dissatisfied with the recording and delayed its release.\nIn May 1985, one month into a tour, Davis signed a contract with Warner Bros. that required him to give up his publishing rights. \"You're Under Arrest\", his final album for Columbia, was released in September. It included cover versions of two pop songs: \"Time After Time\" by Cyndi Lauper and Michael Jackson's \"Human Nature\". He considered releasing an album of pop songs, and he recorded dozens of them, but the idea was rejected. He said that many of today's jazz standards had been pop songs in Broadway theater and that he was simply updating the standards repertoire.\nDavis collaborated with a number of figures from the British post-punk and new wave movements during this period, including Scritti Politti. This period also saw Davis move from his funk inspired sound of the early 1970s to a more melodic style.\n1986\u20131991: Final years.\nAfter taking part in the recording of the 1985 protest song \"Sun City\" as a member of Artists United Against Apartheid, Davis appeared on the instrumental \"Don't Stop Me Now\" by Toto for their album \"Fahrenheit\" (1986). Davis collaborated with Prince on a song titled \"Can I Play With U,\" which went unreleased until 2020. Davis also collaborated with Zane Giles and Randy Hall on the \"Rubberband\" sessions in 1985 but those would remain unreleased until 2019. Instead, he worked with Marcus Miller, and \"Tutu\" (1986) became the first time he used modern studio tools such as programmed synthesizers, sampling and drum loops. Released in September 1986, its front cover is a photographic portrait of Davis by Irving Penn. In 1987, he won a Grammy Award for Best Jazz Instrumental Performance, Soloist. Also in 1987, Davis contacted American journalist Quincy Troupe to work with him on his autobiography. The two men had met the previous year when Troupe conducted a two-day-long interview, which was published by \"Spin\" as a 45-page article.\nIn 1988, Davis had a small part as a street musician in the Christmas comedy film \"Scrooged\" starring Bill Murray. He also collaborated with Zucchero Fornaciari in a version of \"Dune Mosse\" (\"Blue's\"), published in 2004 in \"Zu &amp; Co.\" of the Italian bluesman. In November 1988 he was inducted into the Sovereign Military Order of Malta at a ceremony at the Alhambra Palace in Spain. Later that month, Davis cut his European tour short after he collapsed and fainted after a two-hour show in Madrid and flew home. There were rumors of more poor health reported by the American magazine \"Star\" in its February 21, 1989, edition, which published a claim that Davis had contracted AIDS, prompting his manager Peter Shukat to issue a statement the following day. Shukat said Davis had been in the hospital for a mild case of pneumonia and the removal of a benign polyp on his vocal cords and was resting comfortably in preparation for his 1989 tours. Davis later blamed one of his former wives or girlfriends for starting the rumor and decided against taking legal action. He was interviewed on \"60 Minutes\" by Harry Reasoner. In October 1989, he received a Grande Medaille de Vermeil from Paris mayor Jacques Chirac. In 1990, he received a Grammy Lifetime Achievement Award. In early 1991, he appeared in the Rolf de Heer film \"Dingo\" as a jazz musician.\nDavis followed \"Tutu\" with \"Amandla\" (1989) and soundtracks to four films: \"Street Smart\", \"Siesta\", \"The Hot Spot\" and \"Dingo.\" His last albums were released posthumously: the hip hop-influenced \"Doo-Bop\" (1992) and \"Miles &amp; Quincy Live at Montreux\" (1993), a collaboration with Quincy Jones from the 1991 Montreux Jazz Festival where, for the first time in three decades, he performed songs from \"Miles Ahead\", \"Porgy and Bess\", and \"Sketches of Spain\".\nOn July 8, 1991, Davis returned to performing material from his past at the 1991 Montreux Jazz Festival with a band and orchestra conducted by Quincy Jones. The set consisted of arrangements from his albums recorded with Gil Evans. The show was followed by a concert billed as \"Miles and Friends\" at the Grande halle de la Villette in Paris two days later, with guest performances by musicians from throughout his career, including John McLaughlin, Herbie Hancock and Joe Zawinul. In Paris he was awarded a knighthood, the Chevalier of the Legion of Honour by French Culture Minister, Jack Lang, who called him \"the Picasso of Jazz.\" After returning to America, he stopped in New York City to record material for \"Doo-Bop and\" then returned to California to play at the Hollywood Bowl on August 25, his final live performance.\nPersonal life.\nIn 1957, Davis began a relationship with Frances Taylor, a dancer he had met in 1953 at Ciro's in Los Angeles. They married in December 1959 in Toledo, Ohio. Due to Miles Davis's physical abuse of Frances Taylor, their relationship suffered. He later wrote, \"Every time I hit her, I felt bad because a lot of it really wasn't her fault but had to do with me being temperamental and jealous.\" One theory for his behavior was that in 1963 he had increased his use of alcohol and cocaine to alleviate joint pain caused by sickle cell anemia. He hallucinated, \"looking for this imaginary person\" in his house while wielding a kitchen knife. Soon after the photograph for the album \"E.S.P.\" (1965) was taken, Taylor left him for the final time. She filed for divorce in 1966; it was finalized in February 1968.\nIn September 1968, Davis married 23-year-old model and songwriter Betty Mabry. In his autobiography, Davis described her as a \"high-class groupie, who was very talented but who didn't believe in her own talent\". Mabry, a familiar face in the New York City counterculture, introduced Davis to popular rock, soul and funk musicians. Jazz critic Leonard Feather visited Davis's apartment and was shocked to find him listening to albums by the Byrds, Aretha Franklin and Dionne Warwick. He also liked James Brown, Sly and the Family Stone, and Jimi Hendrix, whose group Band of Gypsys particularly impressed Davis. Davis filed for divorce from Mabry in 1969, after accusing her of having an affair with Hendrix.\nOn October 10, 1969, Davis was shot at five times while in his Ferrari with Marguerite Eskridge, one of his lovers. One bullet grazed his hip; Eskridge was unharmed. \nDavis later wrote that the incident arose from a dispute among nightclub promoters.\nIn 1970, Marguerite gave birth to their son Erin. By 1979, Davis rekindled his relationship with actress Cicely Tyson, who helped him to overcome his cocaine addiction and regain his enthusiasm for music. The two married in November 1981, but their tumultuous marriage ended with Tyson filing for divorce in 1988, which was finalized in 1989.\nIn 1984, Davis met 34-year-old sculptor Jo Gelbard. She taught Davis how to paint; the two were frequent collaborators and were soon romantically involved, eventually leaving their respective partners and living together. \nBy 1985, Davis was diabetic and required daily injections of insulin. Davis became increasingly aggressive in his final year due in part to the medication he was taking, and his aggression manifested as violence towards Gelbard.\nDeath.\nIn early September 1991, Davis checked into St. John's Hospital near his home in Santa Monica, California, for routine tests. Doctors suggested he have a tracheal tube implanted to relieve his breathing after repeated bouts of bronchial pneumonia. The suggestion provoked an outburst from Davis that led to an intracerebral hemorrhage followed by a coma. According to Jo Gelbard, on September 26, Davis painted his final painting\u2014and that painting, composed of dark, ghostly figures dripping blood \"was full of his imminent demise\". After several days on life support, his machine was turned off and he died on September 28, 1991, in the arms of Gelbard. He was 65 years old. \nDavis's death was attributed to the combined effects of a stroke, pneumonia and respiratory failure. According to Troupe, Davis was taking azidothymidine (AZT), a type of antiretroviral drug used for the treatment of HIV and AIDS, during his treatments in the hospital. \nA funeral service was held on October 5, 1991, at St. Peter's Lutheran Church on Lexington Avenue in New York City that was attended by around 500 friends, family members and musical acquaintances, with many fans standing in the rain. He was buried in Woodlawn Cemetery in the Bronx, New York City, with one of his trumpets, near the site of Duke Ellington's grave. \nAt the time of his death, Davis's estate was valued at more than $1 million (equivalent to roughly $\u00a0million in 2024). In his will, Davis left 20 percent to his daughter Cheryl Davis; 40 percent to his son Erin Davis; 10 percent to his nephew Vincent Wilburn Jr. and 15 percent each to his brother Vernon Davis and his sister Dorothy Wilburn. He excluded his two sons Gregory and Miles IV.\nViews on his earlier work.\nLate in his life, from the \"electric period\" onwards, Davis repeatedly explained his reasons for not wishing to perform his earlier works, such as \"Birth of the Cool\" or \"Kind of Blue\". In his view, remaining stylistically static was the wrong option. He commented: \"'So What' or \"Kind of Blue\", they were done in that era, the right hour, the right day, and it happened. It's over\u00a0... What I used to play with Bill Evans, all those different modes, and substitute chords, we had the energy then and we liked it. But I have no feel for it anymore, it's more like warmed-over turkey.\" When Shirley Horn insisted in 1990 that Miles reconsider playing the ballads and modal tunes of his \"Kind of Blue\" period, he said: \"Nah, it hurts my lip.\" Bill Evans, who played piano on \"Kind of Blue\", said: \"I would like to hear more of the consummate melodic master, but I feel that big business and his record company have had a corrupting influence on his material. The rock and pop thing certainly draws a wider audience.\" Throughout his later career, Davis declined offers to reinstate his 1960s quintet.\nMany books and documentaries focus on his work before 1975. According to an article by \"The Independent\", from 1975 onwards a decline in critical praise for Davis's output began to form, with many viewing the era as \"worthless\": \"There is a surprisingly widespread view that, in terms of the merits of his musical output, Davis might as well have died in 1975.\" In a 1982 interview in \"DownBeat\", Wynton Marsalis said: \"They call Miles's stuff jazz. That stuff is not jazz, man. Just because somebody played jazz at one time, that doesn't mean they're still playing it.\" Despite his contempt for Davis' later work, Marsalis' work is \"laden with ironic references to Davis' music of the '60s\". Davis did not necessarily disagree; lambasting what he saw as Marsalis's stylistic conservatism, Davis said \"Jazz is dead\u00a0... it's finito! It's over and there's no point apeing the shit.\" Writer Stanley Crouch criticized Davis's work from \"In a Silent Way\" onwards.\nLegacy and influence.\nMiles Davis is considered one of the most innovative, influential and respected figures in the history of music. \"The Guardian\" described him as \"a pioneer of 20th-century music, leading many of the key developments in the world of jazz.\" He has been called \"one of the great innovators in jazz\", and had the titles Prince of Darkness and the Picasso of Jazz bestowed upon him. \"The Rolling Stone Encyclopedia of Rock &amp; Roll\" said, \"Miles Davis played a crucial and inevitably controversial role in every major development in jazz since the mid-'40s, and no other jazz musician has had so profound an effect on rock. Miles Davis was the most widely recognized jazz musician of his era, an outspoken social critic and an arbiter of style\u2014in attitude and fashion\u2014as well as music.\"\nWilliam Ruhlmann of AllMusic wrote, \"To examine his career is to examine the history of jazz from the mid-1940s to the early 1990s, since he was in the thick of almost every important innovation and stylistic development in the music during that period\u00a0... It can even be argued that jazz stopped evolving when Davis wasn't there to push it forward.\" Francis Davis of \"The Atlantic\" noted that Davis's career can be seen as \"an ongoing critique of bebop: the origins of 'cool' jazz..., hard bop, or 'funky'..., modal improvisation..., and jazz-rock fusion... can be traced to his efforts to tear bebop down to its essentials.\"\nHis approach, owing largely to the African-American performance tradition that focused on individual expression, emphatic interaction, and creative response to shifting contents, had a profound impact on generations of jazz musicians. In 2016, digital publication \"The Pudding\", in an article examining Davis's legacy, found that 2,452 Wikipedia pages mention Davis, with over 286 citing him as an influence.\nOn November 5, 2009, U.S. Representative John Conyers of Michigan sponsored a measure in the United States House of Representatives to commemorate \"Kind of Blue\" on its 50th anniversary. The measure also affirms jazz as a national treasure and \"encourages the United States government to preserve and advance the art form of jazz music\". It passed with a vote of 409\u20130 on December 15, 2009. The trumpet Davis used on the recording is displayed on the campus of the University of North Carolina at Greensboro. It was donated to the school by Arthur \"Buddy\" Gist, who met Davis in 1949 and became a close friend. The gift was the reason why the jazz program at UNCG is named the Miles Davis Jazz Studies Program.\nIn 1986, the New England Conservatory awarded Davis an honorary doctorate for his contributions to music. Since 1960, the National Academy of Recording Arts and Sciences (NARAS) honored him with eight Grammy Awards, a Grammy Lifetime Achievement Award and three Grammy Hall of Fame Awards.\nIn 2001, \"The Miles Davis Story\", a two-hour documentary film by Mike Dibb, won an International Emmy Award for arts documentary of the year. Since 2005, the Miles Davis Jazz Committee has held an annual Miles Davis Jazz Festival. Also in 2005, the Davis biography, \"The Last Miles\" was published, and a London exhibition was held of his paintings, \"The Last Miles: The Music of Miles Davis, 1980\u20131991\", was released detailing his final years and eight of his albums from the 1960s and 1970s were reissued in celebration of the 50th anniversary of his signing to Columbia Records. In 2006, Davis was inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame. In 2012, the U.S. Postal Service issued commemorative stamps featuring Davis.\n\"Miles Ahead\" was a 2015 American music film directed by Don Cheadle, co-written by Cheadle with Steven Baigelman, Stephen J. Rivele and Christopher Wilkinson, which interprets the life and compositions of Davis. It premiered at the New York Film Festival in October 2015. The film stars Cheadle, Emayatzy Corinealdi as Frances Taylor, Ewan McGregor, Michael Stuhlbarg and Lakeith Stanfield. That same year a statue of him was erected in his home city, Alton, Illinois, and listeners of BBC Radio and Jazz FM voted Davis the greatest jazz musician. Publications such as \"The Guardian\" have also ranked Davis among the best of all jazz musicians.\nIn 2018, American rapper Q-Tip played Miles Davis in a theater production, \"My Funny Valentine\". Q-Tip had previously played Davis in 2010. In 2019, the documentary \"\", directed by Stanley Nelson, premiered at the Sundance Film Festival. It was later released on PBS' \"American Masters\" series. Davis is the subject of the upcoming period romance film \"Davis &amp; Juliette\" about his meeting Juliette Gr\u00e9co in Paris in 1949. In a statement to accompany the film's announcement, English musician and co-producer Mick Jagger regarded Davis as \"inarguably one of the most influential and important musicians of the 20th Century.\"\nDavis has, however, been subject to criticism. In 1990, writer Stanley Crouch, a prominent critic of jazz fusion, labeled Davis \"the most brilliant sellout in the history of jazz.\" A 1993 essay by Robert Walser in \"The Musical Quarterly\" claims that \"Davis has long been infamous for missing more notes than any other major trumpet player.\" Also in the essay is a quote by music critic James Lincoln Collier who states that \"if his influence was profound, the ultimate value of his work is another matter\", and calls Davis an \"adequate instrumentalist\" but \"not a great one\". In 2013, \"The A.V. Club\" published an article titled \"Miles Davis beat his wives \"and\" made beautiful music\". In the article, writer Sonia Saraiya praises Davis as a musician, but criticizes him as a person, in particular, his abuse of his wives. Others, such as Francis Davis, have criticized his treatment of women, describing it as \"contemptible\".\nIn 2025 Reservoir Media acquired the rights to Davis' publishing catalog.\nAwards and honors.\nGrammy Awards\nOther awards\nDiscography.\nThe following list intends to outline Davis's major works, particularly studio albums. A more comprehensive discography can be found at the main article.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20406", "revid": "76", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20406", "title": "M-theory", "text": "Framework of superstring theory\nIn physics, M-theory is a theory that unifies all consistent versions of superstring theory. Edward Witten first conjectured the existence of such a theory at a string theory conference at the University of Southern California in 1995. Witten's announcement initiated a flurry of research activity known as the second superstring revolution. Prior to Witten's announcement, string theorists had identified five versions of superstring theory. Although these theories initially appeared to be very different, work by many physicists showed that the theories were related in intricate and nontrivial ways. Physicists found that apparently distinct theories could be unified by mathematical transformations called S-duality and T-duality. Witten's conjecture was based in part on the existence of these dualities and in part on the relationship of the string theories to a field theory called eleven-dimensional supergravity.\nAlthough a complete formulation of M-theory is not known, such a formulation should describe two- and five-dimensional objects called branes and should be approximated by eleven-dimensional supergravity at low energies. Modern attempts to formulate M-theory are typically based on matrix theory or the AdS/CFT correspondence. According to Witten, the \"M\" should stand for \"magic\", \"mystery\" or \"membrane\" (according to one's taste), and the true meaning of the title should be decided when a more fundamental formulation of the theory is known.\nInvestigations of the mathematical structure of M-theory have spawned important theoretical results in physics and mathematics. More speculatively, M-theory may provide a framework for developing a unified theory of all of the fundamental forces of nature. Attempts to connect M-theory to experiment typically focus on compactifying its extra dimensions to construct candidate models of the four-dimensional world, although so far none have been verified to give rise to physics as observed in high-energy physics experiments.\nBackground.\nQuantum gravity and strings.\nOne of the deepest problems in modern physics is the problem of quantum gravity. The current understanding of gravity is based on Albert Einstein's general theory of relativity, which is formulated within the framework of classical physics. However, nongravitational forces are described within the framework of quantum mechanics, a radically different formalism for describing physical phenomena based on probability. A quantum theory of gravity is needed in order to reconcile general relativity with the principles of quantum mechanics, but difficulties arise when one attempts to apply the usual prescriptions of quantum theory to the force of gravity.\nString theory is a theoretical framework that attempts to reconcile gravity and quantum mechanics. In string theory, the point-like particles of particle physics are replaced by one-dimensional objects called strings. String theory describes how strings propagate through space and interact with each other. In a given version of string theory, there is only one kind of string, which may look like a small loop or segment of ordinary string, and it can vibrate in different ways. On distance scales larger than the string scale, a string will look just like an ordinary particle, with its mass, charge, and other properties determined by the vibrational state of the string. In this way, all of the different elementary particles may be viewed as vibrating strings. One of the vibrational states of a string gives rise to the graviton, a quantum mechanical particle that carries gravitational force.\nThere are several versions of string theory: type I, type IIA, type IIB, and two flavors of heterotic string theory (\"SO\"(32) and \"E\"8\u00d7\"E\"8). The different theories allow different types of strings, and the particles that arise at low energies exhibit different symmetries. For example, the type I theory includes both open strings (which are segments with endpoints) and closed strings (which form closed loops), while types IIA and IIB include only closed strings. Each of these five string theories arises as a special limiting case of M-theory. This theory, like its string theory predecessors, is an example of a quantum theory of gravity. It describes a force just like the familiar gravitational force subject to the rules of quantum mechanics.\nNumber of dimensions.\nIn everyday life, there are three familiar dimensions of space: height, width and depth. Einstein's general theory of relativity treats time as a dimension on par with the three spatial dimensions; in general relativity, space and time are not modeled as separate entities but are instead unified to a four-dimensional spacetime, three spatial dimensions and one time dimension. In this framework, the phenomenon of gravity is viewed as a consequence of the geometry of spacetime.\nIn spite of the fact that the universe is well described by four-dimensional spacetime, there are several reasons why physicists consider theories in other dimensions. In some cases, by modeling spacetime in a different number of dimensions, a theory becomes more mathematically tractable, and one can perform calculations and gain general insights more easily. There are also situations where theories in two or three spacetime dimensions are useful for describing phenomena in condensed matter physics. Finally, there exist scenarios in which there could actually be more than four dimensions of spacetime which have nonetheless managed to escape detection.\nOne notable feature of string theory and M-theory is that these theories require extra dimensions of spacetime for their mathematical consistency. In string theory, spacetime is \"ten-dimensional\" (nine spatial dimensions, and one time dimension), while in M-theory it is \"eleven-dimensional\" (ten spatial dimensions, and one time dimension). In order to describe real physical phenomena using these theories, one must therefore imagine scenarios in which these extra dimensions would not be observed in experiments.\nCompactification is one way of modifying the number of dimensions in a physical theory. In compactification, some of the extra dimensions are assumed to \"close up\" on themselves to form circles. In the limit where these curled-up dimensions become very small, one obtains a theory in which spacetime has effectively a lower number of dimensions. A standard analogy for this is to consider a multidimensional object such as a garden hose. If the hose is viewed from a sufficient distance, it appears to have only one dimension, its length. However, as one approaches the hose, one discovers that it contains a second dimension, its circumference. Thus, an ant crawling on the surface of the hose would move in two dimensions.\nDualities.\nTheories that arise as different limits of M-theory turn out to be related in highly nontrivial ways. One of the relationships that can exist between these different physical theories is called S-duality. This is a relationship which says that a collection of strongly interacting particles in one theory can, in some cases, be viewed as a collection of weakly interacting particles in a completely different theory. Roughly speaking, a collection of particles is said to be strongly interacting if they combine and decay often and weakly interacting if they do so infrequently. Type I string theory turns out to be equivalent by S-duality to the \"SO\"(32) heterotic string theory. Similarly, type IIB string theory is related to itself in a nontrivial way by S-duality.\nAnother relationship between different string theories is T-duality. Here one considers strings propagating around a circular extra dimension. T-duality states that a string propagating around a circle of radius \"R\" is equivalent to a string propagating around a circle of radius 1/\"R\" in the sense that all observable quantities in one description are identified with quantities in the dual description. For example, a string has momentum as it propagates around a circle, and it can also wind around the circle one or more times. The number of times the string winds around a circle is called the winding number. If a string has momentum \"p\" and winding number \"n\" in one description, it will have momentum \"n\" and winding number \"p\" in the dual description. For example, type IIA string theory is equivalent to type IIB string theory via T-duality, and the two versions of heterotic string theory are also related by T-duality.\nIn general, the term \"duality\" refers to a situation where two seemingly different physical systems turn out to be equivalent in a nontrivial way. If two theories are related by a duality, it means that one theory can be transformed in some way so that it ends up looking just like the other theory. The two theories are then said to be \"dual\" to one another under the transformation. Put differently, the two theories are mathematically different descriptions of the same phenomena.\nSupersymmetry.\nAnother important theoretical idea that plays a role in M-theory is supersymmetry. This is a mathematical relation that exists in certain physical theories between a class of particles called bosons and a class of particles called fermions. Roughly speaking, fermions are the constituents of matter, while bosons mediate interactions between particles. In theories with supersymmetry, each boson has a counterpart which is a fermion, and vice versa. When supersymmetry is imposed as a local symmetry, one automatically obtains a quantum mechanical theory that includes gravity. Such a theory is called a supergravity theory.\nA theory of strings that incorporates the idea of supersymmetry is called a superstring theory. There are several different versions of superstring theory which are all subsumed within the M-theory framework. At low energies, superstring theories are approximated by one of the three supergravities in ten dimensions, known as type I, type IIA, and type IIB supergravity. Similarly, M-theory is approximated at low energies by supergravity in eleven dimensions.\nBranes.\nIn string theory and related theories such as supergravity theories, a brane is a physical object that generalizes the notion of a point particle to higher dimensions. For example, a point particle can be viewed as a brane of dimension zero, while a string can be viewed as a brane of dimension one. It is also possible to consider higher-dimensional branes. In dimension \"p\", these are called \"p\"-branes. Branes are dynamical objects which can propagate through spacetime according to the rules of quantum mechanics. They can have mass and other attributes such as charge. A \"p\"-brane sweeps out a (\"p\"\u00a0+\u00a01)-dimensional volume in spacetime called its \"worldvolume\". Physicists often study fields analogous to the electromagnetic field which live on the worldvolume of a brane. The word brane comes from the word \"membrane\" which refers to a two-dimensional brane.\nIn string theory, the fundamental objects that give rise to elementary particles are the one-dimensional strings. Although the physical phenomena described by M-theory are still poorly understood, physicists know that the theory describes two- and five-dimensional branes. Much of the current research in M-theory attempts to better understand the properties of these branes.\nHistory and development.\nKaluza\u2013Klein theory.\nIn the early 20th century, physicists and mathematicians including Albert Einstein and Hermann Minkowski pioneered the use of four-dimensional geometry for describing the physical world. These efforts culminated in the formulation of Einstein's general theory of relativity, which relates gravity to the geometry of four-dimensional spacetime.\nThe success of general relativity led to efforts to apply higher dimensional geometry to explain other forces. In 1919, work by Theodor Kaluza showed that by passing to five-dimensional spacetime, one can unify gravity and electromagnetism into a single force. This idea was improved by physicist Oskar Klein, who suggested that the additional dimension proposed by Kaluza could take the form of a circle with radius around 10\u221230 cm.\nThe Kaluza\u2013Klein theory and subsequent attempts by Einstein to develop unified field theory were never completely successful. In part this was because Kaluza\u2013Klein theory predicted a particle (the radion), that has never been shown to exist, and in part because it was unable to correctly predict the ratio of an electron's mass to its charge. In addition, these theories were being developed just as other physicists were beginning to discover quantum mechanics, which would ultimately prove successful in describing known forces such as electromagnetism, as well as new nuclear forces that were being discovered throughout the middle part of the century. Thus it would take almost fifty years for the idea of new dimensions to be taken seriously again.\nEarly work on supergravity.\nNew concepts and mathematical tools provided fresh insights into general relativity, giving rise to a period in the 1960s\u20131970s now known as the golden age of general relativity. In the mid-1970s, physicists began studying higher-dimensional theories combining general relativity with supersymmetry, the so-called supergravity theories.\nGeneral relativity does not place any limits on the possible dimensions of spacetime. Although the theory is typically formulated in four dimensions, one can write down the same equations for the gravitational field in any number of dimensions. Supergravity is more restrictive because it places an upper limit on the number of dimensions. In 1978, work by Werner Nahm showed that the maximum spacetime dimension in which one can formulate a consistent supersymmetric theory is eleven. In the same year, Eug\u00e8ne Cremmer, Bernard Julia, and Jo\u00ebl Scherk of the \u00c9cole Normale Sup\u00e9rieure showed that supergravity not only permits up to eleven dimensions but is in fact most elegant in this maximal number of dimensions.\nInitially, many physicists hoped that by compactifying eleven-dimensional supergravity, it might be possible to construct realistic models of our four-dimensional world. The hope was that such models would provide a unified description of the four fundamental forces of nature: electromagnetism, the strong and weak nuclear forces, and gravity. Interest in eleven-dimensional supergravity soon waned as various flaws in this scheme were discovered. One of the problems was that the laws of physics appear to distinguish between clockwise and counterclockwise, a phenomenon known as chirality. Edward Witten and others observed this chirality property cannot be readily derived by compactifying from eleven dimensions.\nIn the first superstring revolution in 1984, many physicists turned to string theory as a unified theory of particle physics and quantum gravity. Unlike supergravity theory, string theory was able to accommodate the chirality of the standard model, and it provided a theory of gravity consistent with quantum effects. Another feature of string theory that many physicists were drawn to in the 1980s and 1990s was its high degree of uniqueness. In ordinary particle theories, one can consider any collection of elementary particles whose classical behavior is described by an arbitrary Lagrangian. In string theory, the possibilities are much more constrained: by the 1990s, physicists had argued that there were only five consistent supersymmetric versions of the theory.\nRelationships between string theories.\nAlthough there were only a handful of consistent superstring theories, it remained a mystery why there was not just one consistent formulation. However, as physicists began to examine string theory more closely, they realized that these theories are related in intricate and nontrivial ways.\nIn the late 1970s, Claus Montonen and David Olive had conjectured a special property of certain physical theories. A sharpened version of their conjecture concerns a theory called \"N\" \n[[Category:Pages which use a template in place of a magic word|TM-theory]] 4 supersymmetric Yang\u2013Mills theory, which describes theoretical particles formally similar to the quarks and gluons that make up atomic nuclei. The strength with which the particles of this theory interact is measured by a number called the coupling constant. The result of Montonen and Olive, now known as Montonen\u2013Olive duality, states that \"N\" \n 4 supersymmetric Yang\u2013Mills theory with coupling constant \"g\" is equivalent to the same theory with coupling constant 1/\"g\". In other words, a system of strongly interacting particles (large coupling constant) has an equivalent description as a system of weakly interacting particles (small coupling constant) and vice versa by spin-moment.\nIn the 1990s, several theorists generalized Montonen\u2013Olive duality to the S-duality relationship, which connects different string theories. Ashoke Sen studied S-duality in the context of heterotic strings in four dimensions. Chris Hull and Paul Townsend showed that type IIB string theory with a large coupling constant is equivalent via S-duality to the same theory with small coupling constant. Theorists also found that different string theories may be related by T-duality. This duality implies that strings propagating on completely different spacetime geometries may be physically equivalent.\nMembranes and fivebranes.\nString theory extends ordinary particle physics by replacing zero-dimensional point particles by one-dimensional objects called strings. In the late 1980s, it was natural for theorists to attempt to formulate other extensions in which particles are replaced by two-dimensional supermembranes or by higher-dimensional objects called branes. Such objects had been considered as early as 1962 by Paul Dirac, and they were reconsidered by a small but enthusiastic group of physicists in the 1980s.\nSupersymmetry severely restricts the possible number of dimensions of a brane. In 1987, Eric Bergshoeff, Ergin Sezgin, and Paul Townsend showed that eleven-dimensional supergravity includes two-dimensional branes. Intuitively, these objects look like sheets or membranes propagating through the eleven-dimensional spacetime. Shortly after this discovery, Michael Duff, Paul Howe, Takeo Inami, and Kellogg Stelle considered a particular compactification of eleven-dimensional supergravity with one of the dimensions curled up into a circle. In this setting, one can imagine the membrane wrapping around the circular dimension. If the radius of the circle is sufficiently small, then this membrane looks just like a string in ten-dimensional spacetime. In fact, Duff and his collaborators showed that this construction reproduces exactly the strings appearing in type IIA superstring theory.\nIn 1990, Andrew Strominger published a similar result which suggested that strongly interacting strings in ten dimensions might have an equivalent description in terms of weakly interacting five-dimensional branes. Initially, physicists were unable to prove this relationship for two important reasons. On the one hand, the Montonen\u2013Olive duality was still unproven, and so Strominger's conjecture was even more tenuous. On the other hand, there were many technical issues related to the quantum properties of five-dimensional branes. The first of these problems was solved in 1993 when Ashoke Sen established that certain physical theories require the existence of objects with both electric and magnetic charge which were predicted by the work of Montonen and Olive.\nIn spite of this progress, the relationship between strings and five-dimensional branes remained conjectural because theorists were unable to quantize the branes. Starting in 1991, a team of researchers including Michael Duff, Ramzi Khuri, Jianxin Lu, and Ruben Minasian considered a special compactification of string theory in which four of the ten dimensions curl up. If one considers a five-dimensional brane wrapped around these extra dimensions, then the brane looks just like a one-dimensional string. In this way, the conjectured relationship between strings and branes was reduced to a relationship between strings and strings, and the latter could be tested using already established theoretical techniques.\nSecond superstring revolution.\nSpeaking at Strings '95 at the University of Southern California in 1995, Edward Witten of the Institute for Advanced Study made the surprising suggestion that all five superstring theories were in fact just different limiting cases of a single theory in eleven spacetime dimensions. Witten's announcement drew together all of the previous results on S- and T-duality and the appearance of two- and five-dimensional branes in string theory. In the months following Witten's announcement, hundreds of new papers appeared on the Internet confirming that the new theory involved membranes in an important way. Today this flurry of work is known as the second superstring revolution.\nOne of the important developments following Witten's announcement was Witten's work in 1996 with string theorist Petr Ho\u0159ava. Witten and Ho\u0159ava studied M-theory on a special spacetime geometry with two ten-dimensional boundary components. Their work shed light on the mathematical structure of M-theory and suggested possible ways of connecting M-theory to real world physics.\nOrigin of the term.\nInitially, some physicists suggested that the new theory was a fundamental theory of membranes, but Witten was skeptical of the role of membranes in the theory. In a paper from 1996, Ho\u0159ava and Witten wrote\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nIn the absence of an understanding of the true meaning and structure of M-theory, Witten has suggested that the \"M\" should stand for \"magic\", \"mystery\", or \"membrane\" according to taste, and the true meaning of the title should be decided when a more fundamental formulation of the theory is known. Years later, he would state, \"I thought my colleagues would understand that it really stood for membrane. Unfortunately, it got people confused.\"\nMatrix theory.\nBFSS matrix model.\nIn mathematics, a matrix is a rectangular array of numbers or other data. In physics, a matrix model is a particular kind of physical theory whose mathematical formulation involves the notion of a matrix in an important way. A matrix model describes the behavior of a set of matrices within the framework of quantum mechanics.\nOne important example of a matrix model is the BFSS matrix model proposed by Tom Banks, Willy Fischler, Stephen Shenker, and Leonard Susskind in 1997. This theory describes the behavior of a set of nine large matrices. In their original paper, these authors showed, among other things, that the low energy limit of this matrix model is described by eleven-dimensional supergravity. These calculations led them to propose that the BFSS matrix model is exactly equivalent to M-theory. The BFSS matrix model can therefore be used as a prototype for a correct formulation of M-theory and a tool for investigating the properties of M-theory in a relatively simple setting.\nNoncommutative geometry.\nIn geometry, it is often useful to introduce coordinates. For example, in order to study the geometry of the Euclidean plane, one defines the coordinates \"x\" and \"y\" as the distances between any point in the plane and a pair of axes. In ordinary geometry, the coordinates of a point are numbers, so they can be multiplied, and the product of two coordinates does not depend on the order of multiplication. That is, \"xy\" \n \"yx\". This property of multiplication is known as the commutative law, and this relationship between geometry and the commutative algebra of coordinates is the starting point for much of modern geometry.\nNoncommutative geometry is a branch of mathematics that attempts to generalize this situation. Rather than working with ordinary numbers, one considers some similar objects, such as matrices, whose multiplication does not satisfy the commutative law (that is, objects for which \"xy\" is not necessarily equal to \"yx\"). One imagines that these noncommuting objects are coordinates on some more general notion of \"space\" and proves theorems about these generalized spaces by exploiting the analogy with ordinary geometry.\nIn a paper from 1998, Alain Connes, Michael R. Douglas, and Albert Schwarz showed that some aspects of matrix models and M-theory are described by a noncommutative quantum field theory, a special kind of physical theory in which the coordinates on spacetime do not satisfy the commutativity property. This established a link between matrix models and M-theory on the one hand, and noncommutative geometry on the other hand. It quickly led to the discovery of other important links between noncommutative geometry and various physical theories.\nAdS/CFT correspondence.\nOverview.\nThe application of quantum mechanics to physical objects such as the electromagnetic field, which are extended in space and time, is known as quantum field theory. In particle physics, quantum field theories form the basis for our understanding of elementary particles, which are modeled as excitations in the fundamental fields. Quantum field theories are also used throughout condensed matter physics to model particle-like objects called quasiparticles.\nOne approach to formulating M-theory and studying its properties is provided by the anti-de Sitter/conformal field theory (AdS/CFT) correspondence. Proposed by Juan Maldacena in late 1997, the AdS/CFT correspondence is a theoretical result which implies that M-theory is in some cases equivalent to a quantum field theory. In addition to providing insights into the mathematical structure of string and M-theory, the AdS/CFT correspondence has shed light on many aspects of quantum field theory in regimes where traditional calculational techniques are ineffective.\nIn the AdS/CFT correspondence, the geometry of spacetime is described in terms of a certain vacuum solution of Einstein's equation called anti-de Sitter space. In very elementary terms, anti-de Sitter space is a mathematical model of spacetime in which the notion of distance between points (the metric) is different from the notion of distance in ordinary Euclidean geometry. It is closely related to hyperbolic space, which can be viewed as a disk as illustrated on the left. This image shows a tessellation of a disk by triangles and squares. One can define the distance between points of this disk in such a way that all the triangles and squares are the same size and the circular outer boundary is infinitely far from any point in the interior.\nNow imagine a stack of hyperbolic disks where each disk represents the state of the universe at a given time. The resulting geometric object is three-dimensional anti-de Sitter space. It looks like a solid cylinder in which any cross section is a copy of the hyperbolic disk. Time runs along the vertical direction in this picture. The surface of this cylinder plays an important role in the AdS/CFT correspondence. As with the hyperbolic plane, anti-de Sitter space is curved in such a way that any point in the interior is actually infinitely far from this boundary surface.\nThis construction describes a hypothetical universe with only two space dimensions and one time dimension, but it can be generalized to any number of dimensions. Indeed, hyperbolic space can have more than two dimensions and one can \"stack up\" copies of hyperbolic space to get higher-dimensional models of anti-de Sitter space.\nAn important feature of anti-de Sitter space is its boundary (which looks like a cylinder in the case of three-dimensional anti-de Sitter space). One property of this boundary is that, within a small region on the surface around any given point, it looks just like Minkowski space, the model of spacetime used in nongravitational physics. One can therefore consider an auxiliary theory in which \"spacetime\" is given by the boundary of anti-de Sitter space. This observation is the starting point for AdS/CFT correspondence, which states that the boundary of anti-de Sitter space can be regarded as the \"spacetime\" for a quantum field theory. The claim is that this quantum field theory is equivalent to the gravitational theory on the bulk anti-de Sitter space in the sense that there is a \"dictionary\" for translating entities and calculations in one theory into their counterparts in the other theory. For example, a single particle in the gravitational theory might correspond to some collection of particles in the boundary theory. In addition, the predictions in the two theories are quantitatively identical so that if two particles have a 40 percent chance of colliding in the gravitational theory, then the corresponding collections in the boundary theory would also have a 40 percent chance of colliding.\n6D (2,0) superconformal field theory.\nOne particular realization of the AdS/CFT correspondence states that M-theory on the product space \"AdS\"7\u00d7\"S\"4 is equivalent to the so-called (2,0)-theory on the six-dimensional boundary. Here \"(2,0)\" refers to the particular type of supersymmetry that appears in the theory. In this example, the spacetime of the gravitational theory is effectively seven-dimensional (hence the notation \"AdS\"7), and there are four additional \"compact\" dimensions (encoded by the \"S\"4 factor). In the real world, spacetime is four-dimensional, at least macroscopically, so this version of the correspondence does not provide a realistic model of gravity. Likewise, the dual theory is not a viable model of any real-world system since it describes a world with six spacetime dimensions.\nNevertheless, the (2,0)-theory has proven to be important for studying the general properties of quantum field theories. Indeed, this theory subsumes many mathematically interesting effective quantum field theories and points to new dualities relating these theories. For example, Luis Alday, Davide Gaiotto, and Yuji Tachikawa showed that by compactifying this theory on a surface, one obtains a four-dimensional quantum field theory, and there is a duality known as the AGT correspondence which relates the physics of this theory to certain physical concepts associated with the surface itself. More recently, theorists have extended these ideas to study the theories obtained by compactifying down to three dimensions.\nIn addition to its applications in quantum field theory, the (2,0)-theory has spawned important results in pure mathematics. For example, the existence of the (2,0)-theory was used by Witten to give a \"physical\" explanation for a conjectural relationship in mathematics called the geometric Langlands correspondence. In subsequent work, Witten showed that the (2,0)-theory could be used to understand a concept in mathematics called Khovanov homology. Developed by Mikhail Khovanov around 2000, Khovanov homology provides a tool in knot theory, the branch of mathematics that studies and classifies the different shapes of knots. Another application of the (2,0)-theory in mathematics is the work of Davide Gaiotto, Greg Moore, and Andrew Neitzke, which used physical ideas to derive new results in hyperk\u00e4hler geometry.\nABJM superconformal field theory.\nAnother realization of the AdS/CFT correspondence states that M-theory on \"AdS\"4\u00d7\"S\"7 is equivalent to a quantum field theory called the ABJM theory in three dimensions. In this version of the correspondence, seven of the dimensions of M-theory are curled up, leaving four non-compact dimensions. Since the spacetime of our universe is four-dimensional, this version of the correspondence provides a somewhat more realistic description of gravity.\nThe ABJM theory appearing in this version of the correspondence is also interesting for a variety of reasons. Introduced by Aharony, Bergman, Jafferis, and Maldacena, it is closely related to another quantum field theory called Chern\u2013Simons theory. The latter theory was popularized by Witten in the late 1980s because of its applications to knot theory. In addition, the ABJM theory serves as a semi-realistic simplified model for solving problems that arise in condensed matter physics.\nPhenomenology.\nOverview.\nIn addition to being an idea of considerable theoretical interest, M-theory provides a framework for constructing models of real world physics that combine general relativity with the Standard Model of particle physics. Phenomenology is the branch of theoretical physics in which physicists construct realistic models of nature from more abstract theoretical ideas. String phenomenology is the part of string theory that attempts to construct realistic models of particle physics based on string and M-theory.\nTypically, such models are based on the idea of compactification. Starting with the ten- or eleven-dimensional spacetime of string or M-theory, physicists postulate a shape for the extra dimensions. By choosing this shape appropriately, they can construct models roughly similar to the standard model of particle physics, together with additional undiscovered particles, usually supersymmetric partners to analogues of known particles. One popular way of deriving realistic physics from string theory is to start with the heterotic theory in ten dimensions and assume that the six extra dimensions of spacetime are shaped like a six-dimensional Calabi\u2013Yau manifold. This is a special kind of geometric object named after mathematicians Eugenio Calabi and Shing-Tung Yau. Calabi\u2013Yau manifolds offer many ways of extracting realistic physics from string theory. Other similar methods can be used to construct models with physics resembling to some extent that of our four-dimensional world based on M-theory.\nPartly because of theoretical and mathematical difficulties and partly because of the extremely high energies (beyond what is technologically possible for the foreseeable future) needed to test these theories experimentally, there is so far no experimental evidence that would unambiguously point to any of these models being a correct fundamental description of nature. This has led some in the community to criticize these approaches to unification and question the value of continued research on these problems.\nCompactification on \"G\"2 manifolds.\nIn one approach to M-theory phenomenology, theorists assume that the seven extra dimensions of M-theory are shaped like a \"G\"2 manifold. This is a special kind of seven-dimensional shape constructed by mathematician Dominic Joyce of the University of Oxford. These \"G\"2 manifolds are still poorly understood mathematically, and this fact has made it difficult for physicists to fully develop this approach to phenomenology.\nFor example, physicists and mathematicians often assume that space has a mathematical property called smoothness, but this property cannot be assumed in the case of a \"G\"2 manifold if one wishes to recover the physics of our four-dimensional world. Another problem is that \"G\"2 manifolds are not complex manifolds, so theorists are unable to use tools from the branch of mathematics known as complex analysis. Finally, there are many open questions about the existence, uniqueness, and other mathematical properties of \"G\"2 manifolds, and mathematicians lack a systematic way of searching for these manifolds.\nHeterotic M-theory.\nBecause of the difficulties with \"G\"2 manifolds, most attempts to construct realistic theories of physics based on M-theory have taken a more indirect approach to compactifying eleven-dimensional spacetime. One approach, pioneered by Witten, Ho\u0159ava, Burt Ovrut, and others, is known as heterotic M-theory. In this approach, one imagines that one of the eleven dimensions of M-theory is shaped like a circle. If this circle is very small, then the spacetime becomes effectively ten-dimensional. One then assumes that six of the ten dimensions form a Calabi\u2013Yau manifold. If this Calabi\u2013Yau manifold is also taken to be small, one is left with a theory in four-dimensions.\nHeterotic M-theory has been used to construct models of brane cosmology in which the observable universe is thought to exist on a brane in a higher dimensional ambient space. It has also spawned alternative theories of the early universe that do not rely on the theory of cosmic inflation.\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20407", "revid": "28481209", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20407", "title": "Multicast", "text": "Computer networking technique\nIn computer networking, multicast is a type of group communication where data transmission is addressed to a group of destination computers simultaneously. Multicast can be one-to-many or many-to-many distribution. Multicast differs from physical layer point-to-multipoint communication.\nGroup communication may either be application layer multicast or network-assisted multicast, where the latter makes it possible for the source to efficiently send to the group in a single transmission. Copies are automatically created in other network elements, such as routers, switches and cellular network base stations, but only to network segments that currently contain members of the group. Network assisted multicast may be implemented at the data link layer using one-to-many addressing and switching such as Ethernet multicast addressing, Asynchronous Transfer Mode (ATM), point-to-multipoint virtual circuits (P2MP) or InfiniBand multicast. Network-assisted multicast may also be implemented at the Internet layer using IP multicast. In IP multicast the implementation of the multicast concept occurs at the IP routing level, where routers create optimal distribution paths for datagrams sent to a multicast destination address.\nMulticast is often employed in Internet Protocol (IP) applications of streaming media, such as IPTV and multipoint videoconferencing.\nEthernet.\nEthernet frames with a value of 1 in the least-significant bit of the first octet of the destination address are treated as multicast frames and are flooded to all points on the network. This mechanism constitutes multicast at the data link layer. This mechanism is used by IP multicast to achieve one-to-many transmission for IP on Ethernet networks. Modern Ethernet controllers filter received packets to reduce CPU load, by looking up the hash of a multicast destination address in a table, initialized by software, which controls whether a multicast packet is dropped or fully received.\nEthernet multicast is available on all Ethernet networks. Multicasts span the broadcast domain of the network. Multiple Registration Protocol can be used to control Ethernet multicast delivery.\nIP.\nIP multicast is a technique for one-to-many communication over an IP network. The destination nodes send Internet Group Management Protocol \"membership report\" and \"leave group\" messages, for example in the case of IPTV when the user changes from one TV channel to another. IP multicast scales to a larger receiver population by not requiring prior knowledge of who or how many receivers there are. Multicast uses network infrastructure efficiently by requiring the source to send a packet only once, even if it needs to be delivered to a large number of receivers. The nodes in the network take care of replicating the packet to reach multiple receivers only when necessary.\nThe most common transport layer protocol to use multicast addressing is User Datagram Protocol (UDP). By its nature, UDP is not \"reliable\"\u2014messages may be lost or delivered out of order. By adding loss detection and retransmission mechanisms, reliable multicast has been implemented on top of UDP or IP by various middleware products, e.g. those that implement the Real-Time Publish-Subscribe (RTPS) Protocol of the Object Management Group (OMG) Data Distribution Service (DDS) standard, as well as by special transport protocols such as Pragmatic General Multicast (PGM).\nIP multicast is always available within the local subnet. Achieving IP multicast service over a wider area requires multicast routing. Many networks, including the Internet, do not support multicast routing. Multicast routing functionality is available in enterprise-grade network equipment but typically needs to be configured by a network administrator. The Internet Group Management Protocol is used to control IP multicast delivery.\nApplication layer.\nApplication layer multicast overlay services are not based on IP multicast or data link layer multicast. Instead, they use multiple unicast transmissions to simulate a multicast. These services are designed for application-level group communication. Internet Relay Chat (IRC) implements a single spanning tree across its overlay network for all conference groups. The lesser-known PSYC technology uses custom multicast strategies per conference. Some peer-to-peer technologies employ the multicast concept known as peercasting when distributing content to multiple recipients.\nExplicit multi-unicast (Xcast) is another multicast strategy that includes addresses of all intended destinations within each packet. As such, given maximum transmission unit limitations, Xcast cannot be used for multicast groups with many destinations. The Xcast model generally assumes that stations participating in the communication are known ahead of time so that distribution trees can be generated and resources allocated by network elements in advance of actual data traffic.\nWireless networks.\nWireless communications (with the exception of point-to-point radio links using directional antennas) are inherently broadcasting media. However, the communication service provided may be unicast, multicast, or broadcast, depending on if the data is addressed to an individual node, a specific group of nodes, or all nodes in the covered network, respectively.\nWireless networks use electromagnetic waves to transmit data through the air, enabling devices to connect and communicate without physical cables. These networks come in various types, including Wi-Fi, Bluetooth, cellular, and satellite networks, each serving different purposes.\nTypes of Wireless Communication.\nUnicast: In a unicast wireless communication, data is transmitted from a single source to a single, specific receiver. This is typical in point-to-point communication, where a device sends data directly to another device. Examples include internet browsing or file downloads.\nMulticast: In multicast communication, data is sent from one source to multiple specific receivers, often to a defined group within a network. This is efficient in scenarios like live streaming, where the data is only sent once but received by multiple devices interested in the same content.\nBroadcast: Broadcast communication involves sending data from one source to all devices within the network's range. In this case, every device receives the same data, regardless of whether it is requested. Examples of broadcast communication include certain emergency alerts and some radio communications.\nSecurity Considerations: Wireless networks are more vulnerable to security threats compared to wired networks, primarily because their signals can be intercepted more easily. Common security measures include encryption protocols such as WPA3 for Wi-Fi networks, firewalls, and the use of Virtual Private Networks (VPNs) to safeguard communication.\nAdvantages and Challenges: Wireless networks offer flexibility and mobility, allowing users to connect devices without being tethered to a physical connection. However, they can be affected by interference from physical obstacles, environmental factors, or even other wireless devices, leading to slower speeds or connection issues. \nTelevision.\nIn digital television, the concept of multicast service sometimes is used to refer to content protection by broadcast encryption, i.e. encrypted pay television content over a simplex broadcast channel only addressed to paying viewers. In this case, data is broadcast to all receivers but only addressed to a specific group.\nThe concept of \"interactive multicast\", for example using IP multicast, may be used over TV broadcast networks to improve efficiency, offer more TV programs, or reduce the required spectrum. Interactive multicast implies that TV programs are sent only over transmitters where there are viewers and that only the most popular programs are transmitted. It relies on an additional interaction channel (a back-channel or return channel), where user equipment may send join and leave messages when the user changes TV channel. Interactive multicast has been suggested as an efficient transmission scheme in DVB-H and DVB-T2 terrestrial digital television systems, A similar concept is \"switched broadcast\" over cable TV networks, where only the currently most popular content is delivered in the cable-TV network. Scalable video multicast in an application of interactive multicast, where a subset of the viewers receive additional data for high-resolution video.\nTV gateways converts satellite (DVB-S, DVB-S2), cable (DVB-C, DVB-C2) and terrestrial television (DVB-T, DVB-T2) to IP for distribution using unicast and multicast in home, hospitality and enterprise applications\nAnother similar concept is Cell-TV, and implies TV distribution over 3G cellular networks using the network-assisted multicasting offered by the Multimedia Broadcast Multicast Service (MBMS) service, or over 4G/LTE cellular networks with the eMBMS (enhanced MBMS) service.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20408", "revid": "49871587", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20408", "title": "Marie Curie", "text": "Polish-French physicist and chemist (1867\u20131934)\nMaria Salomea Sk\u0142odowska-Curie (; n\u00e9e\u00a0Sk\u0142odowska; 7 November 1867 \u2013 4 July 1934), known as Marie Curie ( ; ), was a Polish and naturalised-French physicist and chemist who conducted pioneering research on radioactivity. \nShe was the first woman to win a Nobel Prize, the first person to win a Nobel Prize twice, and the only person to win a Nobel Prize in two scientific fields. Her husband, Pierre Curie, was a co-winner of her first Nobel Prize, making them the first married couple to win the Nobel Prize and launching the Curie family legacy of five Nobel Prizes. She was, in 1906, the first woman to become a professor at the University of Paris.\nShe was born in Warsaw, in what was then the Kingdom of Poland, part of the Russian Empire. She studied at Warsaw's clandestine Flying University and began her practical scientific training in Warsaw. In 1891, aged 24, she followed her elder sister Bronis\u0142awa to study in Paris, where she earned her higher degrees and conducted her subsequent scientific work. In 1895, she married the French physicist Pierre Curie, and she shared the 1903 Nobel Prize in Physics with him and with the physicist Henri Becquerel for their pioneering work developing the theory of \"radioactivity\"\u2014a term she coined. In 1906, Pierre Curie died in a Paris street accident. Marie won the 1911 Nobel Prize in Chemistry for her discovery of the elements polonium and radium, using techniques she invented for isolating radioactive isotopes. \nUnder her direction, the world's first studies were conducted into the treatment of neoplasms by the use of radioactive isotopes. She founded the Curie Institute in Paris in 1920, and the Curie Institute in Warsaw in 1932; both remain major medical research centres. During World War I, she developed mobile radiography units to provide X-ray services to field hospitals.\nWhile a French citizen, Marie Sk\u0142odowska Curie, who used both surnames, never lost her sense of Polish identity. She taught her daughters the Polish language and took them on visits to Poland. She named the first chemical element she discovered \"polonium\", after her native country. \nMarie Curie died in 1934, aged 66, at the sanatorium in Passy (), France, of aplastic anaemia likely from exposure to radiation in the course of her scientific research and in the course of her radiological work at field hospitals during World War I. In addition to her Nobel Prizes, she received numerous other honours and tributes; in 1995 she became the first woman to be entombed on her own merits in the Paris , and Poland declared 2011 the Year of Marie Curie during the International Year of Chemistry. She is the subject of numerous biographies.\nLife and career.\nEarly years.\nMaria Salomea Sk\u0142odowska was born in Warsaw, in Congress Poland in the Russian Empire, on 7 November 1867, the fifth and youngest child of well-known teachers Bronis\u0142awa, \"n\u00e9e\" Boguska, and W\u0142adys\u0142aw Sk\u0142odowski. The elder siblings of Maria (nicknamed \"Mania\") were Zofia (born 1862, nicknamed \"Zosia\"), J\u00f3zef (born 1863, nicknamed \"J\u00f3zio\"), Bronis\u0142awa (born 1865, nicknamed \"Bronia\") and Helena (born 1866, nicknamed \"Hela\").\nOn both the paternal and maternal sides, the family had lost their property and fortunes through patriotic involvements in Polish national uprisings aimed at restoring Poland's independence (the most recent had been the January Uprising of 1863\u20131865). This condemned the subsequent generation, including Maria and her elder siblings, to a difficult struggle to get ahead in life. Maria's paternal grandfather, J\u00f3zef Sk\u0142odowski had been principal of the Lublin primary school attended by Boles\u0142aw Prus, who became a leading figure in Polish literature.\nW\u0142adys\u0142aw Sk\u0142odowski taught mathematics and physics, subjects that Maria was to pursue, and was also director of two Warsaw \"gymnasia\" (secondary schools) for boys. After Russian authorities eliminated laboratory instruction from the Polish schools, he brought much of the laboratory equipment home and instructed his children in its use. He was eventually fired by his Russian supervisors for pro-Polish sentiments and forced to take lower-paying posts; the family also lost money on a bad investment and eventually chose to supplement their income by lodging boys in the house. Maria's mother Bronis\u0142awa operated a prestigious Warsaw boarding school for girls; she resigned from the position after Maria was born. She died of tuberculosis in May 1878, when Maria was ten years old. Less than three years earlier, Maria's oldest sibling, Zofia, had died of typhus contracted from a boarder. Maria's father was an atheist, her mother a devout Catholic. The deaths of Maria's mother and sister caused her to give up Catholicism and become agnostic.\nWhen she was ten years old, Maria began attending J. Sikorska's boarding school; next she attended a gymnasium (secondary school) for girls, from which she graduated on 12 June 1883 with a gold medal. After a collapse, possibly due to depression, she spent the following year in the countryside with relatives of her father, and the next year with her father in Warsaw, where she did some tutoring. Unable to enrol in a regular institution of higher education because she was a woman, she and her sister Bronis\u0142awa became involved with the clandestine Flying University (sometimes translated as \"Floating University\"), a Polish patriotic institution of higher learning that admitted women students.\nMaria made an agreement with her sister, Bronis\u0142awa, that she would give her financial assistance during Bronis\u0142awa's medical studies in Paris, in exchange for similar assistance two years later. In connection with this, Maria took a position first as a home tutor in Warsaw, then for two years as a governess in Szczuki with a landed family, the \u017borawskis, who were relatives of her father. While working for the latter family, she fell in love with their son, Kazimierz \u017borawski, a future eminent mathematician. His parents rejected the idea of his marrying the penniless relative, and Kazimierz was unable to oppose them. Maria's loss of the relationship with \u017borawski was tragic for both. He soon earned a doctorate and pursued an academic career as a mathematician, becoming a professor and rector of Krak\u00f3w University. Still, as an old man and a mathematics professor at the Warsaw Polytechnic, he would sit contemplatively before the statue of Maria Sk\u0142odowska that had been erected in 1935 before the Radium Institute, which she had founded in 1932.\nAt the beginning of 1890, Bronis\u0142awa\u2014who a few months earlier had married Kazimierz D\u0142uski, a Polish physician and social and political activist\u2014invited Maria to join them in Paris. Maria declined because she could not afford the university tuition; it would take her a year and a half longer to gather the necessary funds. She was helped by her father, who was able to secure a more lucrative position again. All that time she continued to educate herself, reading books, exchanging letters, and being tutored herself. In early 1889 she returned home to her father in Warsaw. She continued working as a governess and remained there until late 1891. She tutored, studied at the Flying University, and began her practical scientific training (1890\u20131891) in a chemistry laboratory at the Museum of Industry and Agriculture at Krakowskie Przedmie\u015bcie 66, near Warsaw's Old Town. The laboratory was run by her cousin J\u00f3zef Boguski, who had been an assistant in Saint Petersburg to the Russian chemist Dmitri Mendeleyev.\nLife in Paris.\nIn late 1891, she left Poland for France. In Paris, Maria (or Marie, as she would be known in France) briefly found shelter with her sister and brother-in-law before renting a garret closer to the university, in the Latin Quarter, and proceeding with her studies of physics, chemistry, and mathematics at the University of Paris, where she enrolled in late 1891. She subsisted on her meagre resources, keeping herself warm during cold winters by wearing all the clothes she had. She focused so hard on her studies that she sometimes forgot to eat. Sk\u0142odowska studied during the day and tutored evenings, barely earning her keep. In 1893, she was awarded a degree in physics and began work in an industrial laboratory of Gabriel Lippmann. Meanwhile, she continued studying at the University of Paris and with the aid of a fellowship she was able to earn a second degree in 1894.\nSk\u0142odowska had begun her scientific career in Paris with an investigation of the magnetic properties of various steels, commissioned by the Society for the Encouragement of National Industry. That same year, Pierre Curie entered her life: it was their mutual interest in natural sciences that drew them together. Pierre Curie was an instructor at The City of Paris Industrial Physics and Chemistry Higher Educational Institution (ESPCI Paris). They were introduced by Polish physicist J\u00f3zef Wierusz-Kowalski, who had learned that she was looking for a larger laboratory space, something that Wierusz-Kowalski thought Pierre could access. Though Curie did not have a large laboratory, he was able to find some space for Sk\u0142odowska where she was able to begin work.\nTheir mutual passion for science brought them increasingly closer, and they began to develop feelings for one another. Eventually, Pierre proposed marriage, but at first Sk\u0142odowska did not accept as she was still planning to go back to her native country. Curie, however, declared that he was ready to move with her to Poland, even if it meant being reduced to teaching French. Meanwhile, for the 1894 summer break, Sk\u0142odowska returned to Warsaw, where she visited her family. She was still labouring under the illusion that she would be able to work in her chosen field in Poland, but she was denied a place at Krak\u00f3w University because of sexism in academia. A letter from Pierre convinced her to return to Paris to pursue a PhD. At Sk\u0142odowska's insistence, Curie had written up his research on magnetism and received his own doctorate in March 1895; he was also promoted to professor at the School. A contemporary quip would call Sk\u0142odowska \"Pierre's biggest discovery\".\nOn 26 July 1895, they were married in Sceaux; neither wanted a religious service. Marie's dark blue outfit, worn instead of a bridal gown, would serve her for many years as a laboratory outfit. They shared two pastimes: long bicycle trips and journeys abroad, which brought them even closer. In Pierre, Marie had found a new love, a partner, and a scientific collaborator on whom she could depend.\nNew elements.\nIn 1895, Wilhelm R\u00f6ntgen discovered the existence of X-rays, though the mechanism behind their production was not yet understood. In 1896, Henri Becquerel discovered that uranium salts emitted rays that resembled X-rays in their penetrating power. He demonstrated that this radiation, unlike phosphorescence, did not depend on an external source of energy but seemed to arise spontaneously from uranium itself. Influenced by these two important discoveries, Curie decided to look into uranium rays as a possible field of research for a thesis.\nShe used an innovative technique to investigate samples. Fifteen years earlier, her husband and his brother had developed a version of the electrometer, a sensitive device for measuring electric charge. Using her husband's electrometer, she discovered that uranium rays caused the air around a sample to conduct electricity. Using this technique, her first result was the finding that the activity of the uranium compounds depended only on the quantity of uranium present. She hypothesized that the radiation was not the outcome of some interaction of molecules but must come from the atom itself. This hypothesis was an important step in disproving the assumption that atoms were indivisible.\nIn 1897, her daughter Ir\u00e8ne was born. To support her family, Curie began teaching at the . The Curies did not have a dedicated laboratory; most of their research was carried out in a converted shed next to ESPCI. The shed, formerly a medical school dissecting room, was poorly ventilated and not even waterproof. They were unaware of the deleterious effects of radiation exposure attendant on their continued unprotected work with radioactive substances. ESPCI did not sponsor her research, but she received subsidies from metallurgical and mining companies and from various organisations and governments.\nCurie's systematic studies included two uranium minerals, pitchblende and torbernite (also known as chalcolite). Her electrometer showed that pitchblende was four times as active as uranium itself, and chalcolite twice as active. She concluded that, if her earlier results relating the quantity of uranium to its activity were correct, then these two minerals must contain small quantities of another substance that was far more active than uranium. She began a systematic search for additional substances that emit radiation, and by 1898 she discovered that the element thorium was also radioactive. Pierre Curie was increasingly intrigued by her work. By mid-1898 he was so invested in it that he decided to drop his work on crystals and to join her.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nShe was acutely aware of the importance of promptly publishing her discoveries and thus establishing her priority. Had not Becquerel, two years earlier, presented his discovery to the Acad\u00e9mie des Sciences the day after he made it, credit for the discovery of radioactivity (and even a Nobel Prize), would instead have gone to Silvanus Thompson. Curie chose the same rapid means of publication. Since she was not a member of the Acad\u00e9mie, her paper, giving a brief and simple account of her work, was presented for her to the Acad\u00e9mie on 12 April 1898 by her former professor, Gabriel Lippmann. Even so, just as Thompson had been beaten by Becquerel, so Curie was beaten in the race to tell of her discovery that thorium gives off rays in the same way as uranium; two months earlier, Gerhard Carl Schmidt had published his own finding in Berlin.\nAt that time, no one else in the world of physics had noticed what Curie recorded in a sentence of her paper, describing how much greater were the activities of pitchblende and chalcolite than that of uranium itself: \"The fact is very remarkable, and leads to the belief that these minerals may contain an element which is much more active than uranium.\" She later would recall how she felt \"a passionate desire to verify this hypothesis as rapidly as possible\". On 14 April 1898, the Curies optimistically weighed out a 100-gram sample of pitchblende and ground it with a pestle and mortar. They did not realise at the time that what they were searching for was present in such minute quantities that they would eventually have to process tonnes of the ore.\nIn July 1898, Curie and her husband published a joint paper announcing the existence of an element they named 'polonium', in honour of her native Poland, which would for another twenty years remain partitioned among three empires (Russia, Austria, and Prussia). On 26 December 1898, the Curies announced the existence of a second element, which they named 'radium', from the Latin word for 'ray'. In the course of their research, they also coined the word 'radioactivity'.\nTo prove their discoveries beyond any doubt, the Curies sought to isolate polonium and radium in pure form. Pitchblende is a complex mineral; the chemical separation of its constituents was an arduous task. The discovery of polonium had been relatively easy; chemically it resembles the element bismuth, and polonium was the only bismuth-like substance in the ore. Radium, however, was more elusive; it is closely related chemically to barium, and pitchblende contains both elements. By 1898 the Curies had obtained traces of radium, but appreciable quantities, uncontaminated with barium, were still beyond reach. The Curies undertook the arduous task of separating out radium salt by differential crystallisation. From a tonne of pitchblende, one-tenth of a gram of radium chloride was separated in 1902. In 1910, she isolated pure radium metal. She never succeeded in isolating polonium, which has a half-life of only 138 days.\nBetween 1898 and 1902, the Curies published, jointly or separately, a total of 32 scientific papers, including one that announced that, when exposed to radium, diseased, tumour-forming cells were destroyed faster than healthy cells.\nIn 1900, Curie became the first woman faculty member at the \u00c9cole normale sup\u00e9rieure de jeunes filles and her husband joined the faculty of the University of Paris. In 1902 she visited Poland on the occasion of her father's death.\nIn June 1903, supervised by Gabriel Lippmann, Curie was awarded her doctorate from the University of Paris. That month the couple were invited to the Royal Institution in London to give a speech on radioactivity; being a woman, she was prevented from speaking, and Pierre Curie alone was allowed to. Meanwhile, a new industry began developing, based on radium. The Curies did not patent their discovery and benefited little from this increasingly profitable business.\nNobel Prizes.\nIn December 1903 the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences awarded Pierre Curie, Marie Curie, and Henri Becquerel the Nobel Prize in Physics, \"in recognition of the extraordinary services they have rendered by their joint researches on the radiation phenomena discovered by Professor Henri Becquerel.\" At first the committee had intended to honour only Pierre Curie and Henri Becquerel, but a committee member and advocate for women scientists, Swedish mathematician Magnus G\u00f6sta Mittag-Leffler, alerted Pierre to the situation, and after his complaint, Marie's name was added to the nomination. Marie Curie was the first woman to be awarded a Nobel Prize.\nCurie and her husband declined to go to Stockholm to receive the prize in person; they were too busy with their work, and Pierre Curie, who disliked public ceremonies, was feeling increasingly ill. As Nobel laureates were required to deliver a lecture, the Curies finally undertook the trip in 1905. The award money allowed the Curies to hire their first laboratory assistant. Following the award of the Nobel Prize, and galvanised by an offer from the University of Geneva, which offered Pierre Curie a position, the University of Paris gave him a professorship and the chair of physics, although the Curies still did not have a proper laboratory. Upon Pierre Curie's complaint, the University of Paris relented and agreed to furnish a new laboratory, but it would not be ready until 1906.\nIn December 1904, Curie gave birth to their second daughter, \u00c8ve. She hired Polish governesses to teach her daughters her native language, and sent or took them on visits to Poland.\nOn 19 April 1906, Pierre Curie died in a road accident. Walking across the Rue Dauphine in heavy rain, he was struck by a horse-drawn vehicle and fell under its wheels, which fractured his skull and killed him instantly. Curie was devastated by her husband's death. On 13 May 1906 the physics department of the University of Paris decided to retain the chair that had been created for her late husband and offer it to Marie. She accepted it, hoping to create a world-class laboratory as a tribute to her husband Pierre. She was the first woman to become a professor at the University of Paris.\nCurie's quest to create a new laboratory did not end with the University of Paris, however. In her later years, she headed the Radium Institute (, now Curie Institute, ), a radioactivity laboratory created for her by the Pasteur Institute and the University of Paris. The initiative for creating the Radium Institute had come in 1909 from Pierre Paul \u00c9mile Roux, director of the Pasteur Institute, who had been disappointed that the University of Paris was not giving Curie a proper laboratory and had suggested that she move to the Pasteur Institute. Only then, with the threat of Curie leaving, did the University of Paris relent, and eventually the Curie Pavilion became a joint initiative of the University of Paris and the Pasteur Institute.\nIn 1910 Curie succeeded in isolating radium; she also defined an international standard for radioactive emissions that was eventually named for her and Pierre: the curie. Nevertheless, in 1911 the French Academy of Sciences failed, by one or two votes, to elect her to membership in the academy. Elected instead was \u00c9douard Branly, an inventor who had helped Guglielmo Marconi develop the wireless telegraph. It was only over half a century later, in 1962, that a doctoral student of Curie's, Marguerite Perey, became the first woman elected to membership in the academy.\nDespite Curie's fame as a scientist working for France, the public's attitude tended toward xenophobia\u2014the same that had led to the Dreyfus affair\u2014which also fuelled false speculation that Curie was Jewish. During the French Academy of Sciences elections, she was vilified by the right-wing press as a foreigner and atheist. Her daughter later remarked on the French press's hypocrisy in portraying Curie as an unworthy foreigner when she was nominated for a French honour, but portraying her as a French heroine when she received foreign honours such as her Nobel Prizes.\nIn 1911, it was revealed that Curie was involved in a year-long affair with physicist Paul Langevin, a former student of Pierre Curie's, a married man who was estranged from his wife. This resulted in a press scandal that was exploited by her academic opponents. Curie (then in her mid-40s) was five years older than Langevin and was misrepresented in the tabloids as a foreign Jewish home-wrecker. When the scandal broke, she was away at a conference in Belgium; on her return, she found an angry mob in front of her house and had to seek refuge, with her daughters, in the home of her friend Camille Marbo.\nInternational recognition for her work had been growing to new heights, and the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences, overcoming opposition prompted by the Langevin scandal, honoured her a second time, with the 1911 Nobel Prize in Chemistry. This award was \"in recognition of her services to the advancement of chemistry by the discovery of the elements radium and polonium, by the isolation of radium and the study of the nature and compounds of this remarkable element\". Because of the negative publicity due to her affair with Langevin, the chair of the Nobel committee, Svante Arrhenius, attempted to prevent her attendance at the official ceremony for her Nobel Prize in Chemistry, citing her questionable moral standing. Curie replied that she would be present at the ceremony, because \"the prize has been given to her for her discovery of polonium and radium\" and that \"there is no relation between her scientific work and the facts of her private life\".\nShe was the first person to win or share two Nobel Prizes, and remains alone with Linus Pauling as Nobel laureates in two fields each. A delegation of celebrated Polish men of learning, headed by novelist Henryk Sienkiewicz, encouraged her to return to Poland and continue her research in her native country. Curie's second Nobel Prize enabled her to persuade the French government to support the Radium Institute, built in 1914, where research was conducted in chemistry, physics, and medicine. A month after accepting her 1911 Nobel Prize, she was hospitalised with depression and a kidney ailment. For most of 1912, she avoided public life but did spend time in England with her friend and fellow physicist Hertha Ayrton. She returned to her laboratory only in December, after a break of about 14 months.\nIn 1912 the Warsaw Scientific Society offered her the directorship of a new laboratory in Warsaw but she declined, focusing on the developing Radium Institute to be completed in August 1914, and on a new street named Rue Pierre-Curie (today rue Pierre-et-Marie-Curie). She was appointed director of the Curie Laboratory in the Radium Institute of the University of Paris, founded in 1914. She visited Poland in 1913 and was welcomed in Warsaw but the visit was mostly ignored by the Russian authorities. The institute's development was interrupted by the First World War, as most researchers were drafted into the French Army; it fully resumed its activities after the war, in 1919.\nWorld War I.\nDuring World War I, Curie recognised that wounded soldiers were best served if operated upon as soon as possible. She saw a need for field radiological centres near the front lines to assist battlefield surgeons, including to obviate amputations when in fact limbs could be saved. After a quick study of radiology, anatomy, and automotive mechanics, she procured X-ray equipment, vehicles, and auxiliary generators, and she developed mobile radiography units, which came to be popularly known as (\"Little Curies\"). She became the director of the Red Cross Radiology Service and set up France's first military radiology centre, operational by late 1914. Assisted at first by a military doctor and her 17-year-old daughter Ir\u00e8ne, Curie directed the installation of 20 mobile radiological vehicles and another 200 radiological units at field hospitals in the first year of the war. Later, she began training other women as aides.\nIn 1915, Curie produced hollow needles containing \"radium emanation\", a colourless, radioactive gas given off by radium, later identified as radon, to be used for sterilising infected tissue. She provided the radium from her own one-gram supply. It is estimated that over a million wounded soldiers were treated with her X-ray units. Busy with this work, she carried out very little scientific research during that period. In spite of all her humanitarian contributions to the French war effort, Curie never received any formal recognition of it from the French government.\nAlso, promptly after the war started, she attempted to donate her gold Nobel Prize medals to the war effort but the French National Bank refused to accept them. She did buy war bonds, using her Nobel Prize money. She said:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nShe was also an active member in committees of Poles in France dedicated to the Polish cause. After the war, she summarised her wartime experiences in a book, \"Radiology in War\" (1919).\nPostwar years.\nIn 1920, for the 25th anniversary of the discovery of radium, the French government established a stipend for her; its previous recipient was Louis Pasteur, who had died in 1895. In 1921, Curie toured the United States to raise funds for research on radium. Marie Mattingly Meloney, after interviewing Curie, created a \"Marie Curie Radium Fund\" and helped publicise her trip.\nIn 1921 U.S. President Warren G. Harding received Curie at the White House to present her with the 1\u00a0gram of radium collected in the United States. Before the meeting, recognising her growing fame abroad, and embarrassed by the fact that she had no French official distinctions to wear in public, the French government had offered her a Legion of Honour award, but she refused it. In 1922 she became a fellow of the French Academy of Medicine. She also travelled to other countries, appearing publicly and giving lectures in Belgium, Brazil, Spain, and Czechoslovakia.\nLed by Curie, the Institute produced four more Nobel Prize winners, including her daughter Ir\u00e8ne Joliot-Curie and her son-in-law, Fr\u00e9d\u00e9ric Joliot-Curie. Eventually, it became one of the world's four major radioactivity-research laboratories, the others being the Cavendish Laboratory, with Ernest Rutherford; the Institute for Radium Research, Vienna, with Stefan Meyer; and the Kaiser Wilhelm Institute for Chemistry, with Otto Hahn and Lise Meitner.\nIn August 1922, Curie became a member of the League of Nations' newly created International Committee on Intellectual Cooperation. She sat on the committee until 1934 and contributed to League of Nations' scientific coordination with other prominent researchers such as Albert Einstein, Hendrik Lorentz, and Henri Bergson. In 1923 she wrote a biography of her late husband, titled \"Pierre Curie\". In 1925 she visited Poland to participate in a ceremony laying the foundations for Warsaw's Radium Institute. Her second American tour, in 1929, succeeded in equipping the Warsaw Radium Institute with radium; the Institute opened in 1932, with her sister Bronis\u0142awa its director. These distractions from her scientific labours, and the attendant publicity, caused her much discomfort but provided resources for her work. In 1930, she was elected to the International Atomic Weights Committee, on which she served until her death. In 1931, Curie was awarded the Cameron Prize for Therapeutics of the University of Edinburgh.\nDeath.\nCurie visited Poland for the last time in early 1934. A few months later, on 4 July 1934, she died aged 66 at the Sancellemoz sanatorium in Passy, Haute-Savoie, from aplastic anaemia believed to have been contracted from her long-term exposure to radiation, causing damage to her bone marrow.\nThe damaging effects of ionising radiation were not known at the time of her work, which had been carried out without the safety measures later developed. She had carried test tubes containing radioactive isotopes in her pocket, and she stored them in her desk drawer, remarking on the faint light that the substances gave off in the dark. Curie was also exposed to X-rays from unshielded equipment while serving as a radiologist in field hospitals during the First World War. When Curie's body was exhumed in 1995, the French \"Office de Protection contre les Rayonnements Ionisants\" (\"OPRI\") \"concluded that she could not have been exposed to lethal levels of radium while she was alive\". They pointed out that radium poses a risk only if it is ingested, and speculated that her illness was more likely to have been due to her use of radiography during the First World War.\nShe was interred at the cemetery in Sceaux, alongside her husband Pierre. Sixty years later, in 1995, in honour of their achievements, the remains of both were transferred to the Paris . Their remains were sealed in a lead lining because of the radioactivity. She became the second woman to be interred at the Panth\u00e9on (after Sophie Berthelot) and the first woman to be honoured with interment in the Panth\u00e9on on her own merits.\nBecause of their levels of radioactive contamination, her papers from the 1890s are considered too dangerous to handle. Even her cookbooks are highly radioactive. Her papers are kept in lead-lined boxes, and those who wish to consult them must wear protective clothing. In her last year, she worked on a book, \"Radioactivity\", which was published posthumously in 1935.\nLegacy.\nThe physical and societal aspects of the Curies' work contributed to shaping the world of the twentieth and twenty-first centuries. Cornell University professor L. Pearce Williams observes:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The result of the Curies' work was epoch-making. Radium's radioactivity was so great that it could not be ignored. It seemed to contradict the principle of the conservation of energy and therefore forced a reconsideration of the foundations of physics. On the experimental level the discovery of radium provided men like Ernest Rutherford with sources of radioactivity with which they could probe the structure of the atom. As a result of Rutherford's experiments with alpha radiation, the nuclear atom was first postulated. In medicine, the radioactivity of radium appeared to offer a means by which cancer could be successfully attacked.\nIn addition to helping to overturn established ideas in physics and chemistry, Curie's work has had a profound effect in the societal sphere. To attain her scientific achievements, she had to overcome barriers, in both her native and her adoptive country, that were placed in her way because she was a woman.\nShe was known for her honesty and moderate lifestyle. Having received a small scholarship in 1893, she returned it in 1897 as soon as she began earning her keep. She gave much of her first Nobel Prize money to friends, family, students, and research associates. Curie intentionally refrained from patenting the radium-isolation process so that the scientific community could do research unhindered. She insisted that monetary gifts and awards be given to the scientific institutions she was affiliated with rather than to her. She and her husband often refused awards and medals. Albert Einstein reportedly remarked that she was probably the only person who could not be corrupted by fame.\nCommemorations.\nAs one of the most famous scientists in history, Marie Curie has become an icon in the scientific world and has received tributes from across the globe, even in the realm of pop culture. She also received many honorary degrees from universities across the world.\nMarie Curie was the first woman to win a Nobel Prize, the first person to win two Nobel Prizes, the only woman to win in two fields, and the only person to win in multiple sciences. Awards and honours that she received include:\nEntities that have been named after Marie Curie include:\nNumerous biographies are devoted to her, including:\nMarie Curie has been the subject of a number of films:\nCurie is the subject of the 2013 play \"False Assumptions\" by Lawrence Aronovitch, in which the ghosts of three other women scientists observe events in her life. Curie has also been portrayed by Susan Marie Frontczak in her play, \"Manya: The Living History of Marie Curie\", a one-woman show which by 2014 had been performed in 30 U.S. states and nine countries. Lauren Gunderson's 2019 play \"The Half-Life of Marie Curie\" portrays Curie during the summer after her 1911 Nobel Prize victory, when she was grappling with depression and facing public scorn over the revelation of her affair with Paul Langevin.\nThe life of the scientist was also the subject of a 2018 Korean musical, titled \"Marie Curie\". The show was since translated in English (as \"Marie Curie a New Musical\") and has been performed several times across Asia and Europe, receiving its official Off West End premiere in London's Charing Cross Theatre in summer 2024.\nCurie has appeared on more than 600 postage stamps in many countries across the world.\nBetween 1989 and 1996, she was depicted on a 20,000-z\u0142oty banknote designed by Andrzej Heidrich. In 2011, a commemorative 20-z\u0142oty banknote depicting Curie was issued by the National Bank of Poland on the 100th anniversary of the scientist receiving the Nobel Prize in Chemistry.\nIn 1994, the Bank of France issued a 500-franc banknote depicting Marie and Pierre Curie. Since 2024, Curie has been depicted on French 50 euro cent coins to commemorate her importance in French history.\nIn 2025, the European Central Bank announced that Curie had been selected to appear on the obverse of twenty euro banknotes in a future redesign, were the theme \"European culture\" to be selected over \"Rivers and birds\".\nMarie Curie was immortalized in at least one color Autochrome Lumi\u00e8re photograph during her lifetime. It was saved in Mus\u00e9e Curie in Paris.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20409", "revid": "3145267", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20409", "title": "Marie Sklodowska-Curie", "text": ""}
{"id": "20412", "revid": "211905", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20412", "title": "MATLAB", "text": "Numerical computing environment and programming language\nMATLAB (Matrix Laboratory) is a proprietary multi-paradigm programming language and numeric computing environment developed by MathWorks. MATLAB allows matrix manipulations, plotting of functions and data, implementation of algorithms, creation of user interfaces, and interfacing with programs written in other languages.\nAlthough MATLAB is intended primarily for numeric computing, an optional toolbox uses the MuPAD symbolic engine allowing access to symbolic computing abilities. An additional package, Simulink, adds graphical multi-domain simulation and model-based design for dynamic and embedded systems.\nAs of 2020[ [update]], MATLAB has more than four million users worldwide. They come from various backgrounds of engineering, science, and economics. As of 2017[ [update]], more than 5000 global colleges and universities use MATLAB to support instruction and research.\nHistory.\nOrigins.\nMATLAB was invented by mathematician and computer programmer Cleve Moler. The idea for MATLAB was based on his 1960s PhD thesis. Moler became a math professor at the University of New Mexico and started developing MATLAB for his students as a hobby. He developed MATLAB's initial linear algebra programming in 1967 with his one-time thesis advisor, George Forsythe. This was followed by Fortran code for linear equations in 1971.\nBefore version 1.0, MATLAB \"was not a programming language; it was a simple interactive matrix calculator. There were no programs, no toolboxes, no graphics. And no ODEs or FFTs.\"\nThe first early version of MATLAB was completed in the late 1970s. The software was disclosed to the public for the first time in February 1979 at the Naval Postgraduate School in California. Early versions of MATLAB were simple matrix calculators with 71 pre-built functions. At the time, MATLAB was distributed for free to universities. Moler would leave copies at universities he visited and the software developed a strong following in the math departments of university campuses.\nIn the 1980s, Cleve Moler met John N. Little. They decided to reprogram MATLAB in C and market it for the IBM desktops that were replacing mainframe computers at the time. John Little and programmer Steve Bangert re-programmed MATLAB in C, created the MATLAB programming language, and developed features for toolboxes.\nCommercial development.\nMATLAB was first released as a commercial product in 1984 at the Automatic Control Conference in Las Vegas. MathWorks, Inc. was founded to develop the software and the MATLAB programming language was released. The first MATLAB sale was the following year, when Nick Trefethen from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology bought ten copies. \nBy the end of the 1980s, several hundred copies of MATLAB had been sold to universities for student use. The software was popularized largely thanks to toolboxes created by experts in various fields for performing specialized mathematical tasks. Many of the toolboxes were developed as a result of Stanford students that used MATLAB in academia, then brought the software with them to the private sector.\nOver time, MATLAB was re-written for early operating systems created by Digital Equipment Corporation, VAX, Sun Microsystems, and for Unix PCs. Version 3 was released in 1987. The first MATLAB compiler was developed by Stephen C. Johnson in the 1990s.\nIn 2000, MathWorks added a Fortran-based library for linear algebra in MATLAB 6, replacing the software's original LINPACK and EISPACK subroutines that were in C. MATLAB's Parallel Computing Toolbox was released at the 2004 Supercomputing Conference and support for graphics processing units (GPUs) was added to it in 2010.\nRecent history.\nSome especially large changes to the software were made with version 8 in 2012. The user interface was reworked and Simulink's functionality was expanded. \nBy 2016, MATLAB had introduced several technical and user interface improvements, including the MATLAB Live Editor notebook, and other features.\nRelease history.\nFor a complete list of changes of both MATLAB an official toolboxes, check MATLAB previous releases.\nSyntax.\nThe MATLAB application is built around the MATLAB programming language. \nCommon usage of the MATLAB application involves using the \"Command Window\" as an interactive mathematical shell or executing text files containing MATLAB code.\n\"Hello, world!\" example.\nAn example of a \"Hello, world!\" program exists in MATLAB.\ndisp('Hello, world!')\nIt displays like so:\nHello, world!\nVariables.\nVariables are defined using the assignment operator, codice_1. \nMATLAB is a weakly typed programming language because types are implicitly converted. It is an inferred typed language because variables can be assigned without declaring their type, except if they are to be treated as symbolic objects, and that their type can change. \nValues can come from constants, from computation involving values of other variables, or from the output of a function. \nFor example:\n\u00bb x = 17\nx =\n 17\n\u00bb x = 'hat'\nx =\nhat\n\u00bb x = [3*4, pi/2]\nx =\n 12.0000 1.5708\n\u00bb y = 3*sin(x)\ny =\n -1.6097 3.0000\nVectors and matrices.\nA simple array is defined using the colon syntax: \"initial\"codice_2\"increment\"codice_2\"terminator\". For instance:\n\u00bb array = 1:2:9\narray =\n 1 3 5 7 9\ndefines a variable named codice_4 (or assigns a new value to an existing variable with the name codice_4) which is an array consisting of the values 1, 3, 5, 7, and 9. That is, the array starts at 1 (the \"initial\" value), increments with each step from the previous value by 2 (the \"increment\" value), and stops once it reaches (or is about to exceed) 9 (the \"terminator\" value).\nThe \"increment\" value can actually be left out of this syntax (along with one of the colons), to use a default value of 1.\n\u00bb ari = 1:5\nari =\n 1 2 3 4 5\nassigns to the variable named codice_6 an array with the values 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5, since the default value of 1 is used as the increment.\nIndexing is one-based, which is the usual convention for matrices in mathematics, unlike zero-based indexing commonly used in other programming languages such as C, C++, and Java.\nMatrices can be defined by separating the elements of a row with blank space or comma and using a semicolon to separate the rows. The list of elements should be surrounded by square brackets codice_7. Parentheses codice_8 are used to access elements and subarrays (they are also used to denote a function argument list).\n\u00bb A = [16, 3, 2, 13 ; 5, 10, 11, 8 ; 9, 6, 7, 12 ; 4, 15, 14, 1]\nA =\n 16 3 2 13\n 5 10 11 8\n 9 6 7 12\n 4 15 14 1\n\u00bb A(2,3)\nans =\n 11\nSets of indices can be specified by expressions such as codice_9, which evaluates to codice_10. For example, a submatrix taken from rows 2 through 4 and columns 3 through 4 can be written as:\n\u00bb A(2:4,3:4)\nans =\n 11 8\n 7 12\n 14 1\nA square identity matrix of size \"n\" can be generated using the function codice_11, and matrices of any size with zeros or ones can be generated with the functions codice_12 and codice_13, respectively.\n\u00bb eye(3,3)\nans =\n 1 0 0\n 0 1 0\n 0 0 1\n\u00bb zeros(2,3)\nans =\n 0 0 0\n 0 0 0\n\u00bb ones(2,3)\nans =\n 1 1 1\n 1 1 1\nTransposing a vector or a matrix is done either by the function codice_14 or by adding dot-prime after the matrix (without the dot, prime will perform conjugate transpose for complex arrays):\n\u00bb A = [1 ; 2], B = A.', C = transpose(A)\nA =\n 1\n 2\nB =\n 1 2\nC =\n 1 2\n\u00bb D = [0, 3 ; 1, 5], D.'\nD =\n 0 3\n 1 5\nans =\n 0 1\n 3 5\nMost functions accept arrays as input and operate element-wise on each element. For example, codice_15 will multiply every element in \"J\" by 2, and then reduce each element modulo \"n\". MATLAB does include standard codice_16 and codice_17 loops, but (as in other similar applications such as APL and R), using the vectorized notation is encouraged and is often faster to execute. The following code, excerpted from the function \"magic.m\", creates a magic square \"M\" for odd values of \"n\" (MATLAB function codice_18 is used here to generate square matrices I and J containing &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;):\n[J,I] = meshgrid(1:n);\nA = mod(I + J - (n + 3) / 2, n);\nB = mod(I + 2 * J - 2, n);\nM = n * A + B + 1;\nStructures.\nMATLAB supports structure data types. Since all variables in MATLAB are arrays, a more adequate name is \"structure array\", where each element of the array has the same field names. In addition, MATLAB supports dynamic field names (field look-ups by name, field manipulations, etc.).\nFunctions.\nWhen creating a MATLAB function, the name of the file should match the name of the first function in the file. Valid function names begin with an alphabetic character, and can contain letters, numbers, or underscores. Variables and functions are case sensitive.\nFunction handles.\nMATLAB supports elements of lambda calculus by introducing function handles, or function references, which are implemented either in .m files or anonymous/nested functions.\nClasses and object-oriented programming.\nMATLAB supports object-oriented programming including classes, inheritance, virtual dispatch, packages, pass-by-value semantics, and pass-by-reference semantics. However, the syntax and calling conventions are significantly different from other languages. MATLAB has value classes and reference classes, depending on whether the class has \"handle\" as a super-class (for reference classes) or not (for value classes).\nMethod call behavior is different between value and reference classes. For example, a call to a method:\nobject.method();\ncan alter any member of \"object\" only if \"object\" is an instance of a reference class, otherwise value class methods must return a new instance if it needs to modify the object.\nAn example of a simple class is provided below:\nclassdef Hello\n methods\n function greet(obj)\n disp('Hello!')\n end\n end\nend\nWhen put into a file named codice_19, this can be executed with the following commands:\n\u00bb x = Hello();\n\u00bb x.greet();\nHello!\nGraphics and graphical user interface programming.\n&lt;graph&gt;{\n \"version\": 2,\n \"width\": 400,\n \"height\": 200,\n \"data\": [\n \"name\": \"table\",\n \"values\": [\n \"x\": 3,\n \"y\": 1\n {\n \"x\": 1,\n \"y\": 3\n {\n \"x\": 2,\n \"y\": 2\n {\n \"x\": 3,\n \"y\": 4\n ]\n ],\n \"scales\": [\n \"name\": \"x\",\n \"type\": \"ordinal\",\n \"range\": \"width\",\n \"zero\": false,\n \"domain\": {\n \"data\": \"table\",\n \"field\": \"x\"\n },\n \"name\": \"y\",\n \"type\": \"linear\",\n \"range\": \"height\",\n \"nice\": true,\n \"domain\": {\n \"data\": \"table\",\n \"field\": \"y\"\n \"axes\": [\n \"type\": \"x\",\n \"scale\": \"x\"\n {\n \"type\": \"y\",\n \"scale\": \"y\"\n ],\n \"marks\": [\n \"type\": \"rect\",\n \"from\": {\n \"data\": \"table\"\n \"properties\": {\n \"enter\": {\n \"x\": {\n \"scale\": \"x\",\n \"field\": \"x\"\n \"y\": {\n \"scale\": \"y\",\n \"field\": \"y\"\n \"y2\": {\n \"scale\": \"y\",\n \"value\": 0\n \"fill\": {\n \"value\": \"steelblue\"\n \"width\": {\n \"scale\": \"x\",\n \"band\": \"true\",\n \"offset\": -1\n}&lt;/graph&gt;\nMATLAB has tightly integrated graph-plotting features. For example, the function \"plot\" can be used to produce a graph from two vectors \"x\" and \"y\". The code:\nx = 0:pi/100:2*pi;\ny = sin(x);\nplot(x,y)\nproduces the following figure of the sine function:\nMATLAB supports three-dimensional graphics as well:\nMATLAB supports developing graphical user interface (GUI) applications. UIs can be generated either programmatically or using visual design environments such as \"GUIDE\" and \"App Designer\".\nMATLAB and other languages.\nMATLAB can call functions and subroutines written in the programming languages C or Fortran. A wrapper function is created allowing MATLAB data types to be passed and returned. MEX files (MATLAB executables) are the dynamically loadable object files created by compiling such functions. Since 2014 increasing two-way interfacing with Python was being added.\nLibraries written in Perl, Java, ActiveX or .NET can be directly called from MATLAB, and many MATLAB libraries (for example XML or SQL support) are implemented as wrappers around Java or ActiveX libraries. Calling MATLAB from Java is more complicated, but can be done with a MATLAB toolbox which is sold separately by MathWorks, or using an undocumented mechanism called JMI (Java-to-MATLAB Interface), (which should not be confused with the unrelated Java Metadata Interface that is also called JMI). Official MATLAB API for Java was added in 2016.\nAs alternatives to the MuPAD based Symbolic Math Toolbox available from MathWorks, MATLAB can be connected to Maple or Mathematica.\nLibraries also exist to import and export MathML.\nRelations to US sanctions.\nIn 2020, MATLAB withdrew services from two Chinese universities as a result of US sanctions. The universities said this will be responded to by increased use of open-source alternatives and by developing domestic alternatives.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20414", "revid": "36759310", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20414", "title": "Meuse", "text": "River in western Europe\nThe Meuse or Maas is a major European river, rising in France and flowing through Belgium and the Netherlands before draining into the North Sea from the Rhine\u2013Meuse\u2013Scheldt delta. It has a total length of .\nHistory.\nFrom 1301, the upper Meuse roughly marked the western border of the Holy Roman Empire with the Kingdom of France, after Count Henry III of Bar had to receive the western part of the County of Bar (\"Barrois mouvant\") as a French fief from the hands of King Philip IV. In 1408, a Burgundian army led by John the Fearless went to the aid of John III against the citizens of Li\u00e8ge, who were in open revolt. After the battle, which saw the men from Li\u00e8ge defeated, John ordered the drowning in the Meuse of burghers and noblemen in Li\u00e8ge whose loyalties he suspected.\nThe border remained relatively stable until the annexation of the Three Bishoprics Metz, Toul and Verdun by King Henry II in 1552 and the occupation of the Duchy of Lorraine by the forces of King Louis XIII in 1633. Its lower Belgian (Walloon) portion, part of the sillon industriel, was the first fully industrialized area in continental Europe.\nThe Afgedamde Maas was created in the late Middle Ages, when a major flood made a connection between the Maas and the Merwede at the town of Woudrichem. From that moment on, the current Afgedamde Maas was the main branch of the lower Meuse. The former main branch eventually silted up and is today called the Oude Maasje. In the late 19th century and early 20th century the connection between the Maas and Rhine was closed off and the Maas was given a new, artificial mouth \u2013 the Bergse Maas. The resulting separation of the rivers Rhine and Maas reduced the risk of flooding and was considered to be the greatest achievement in Dutch hydraulic engineering before the completion of the Zuiderzee Works and Delta Works. The former main branch was, after the dam at its southern inlet was completed in 1904, renamed \"Afgedamde Maas\" and no longer receives water from the Maas.\nThe Meuse and its crossings were a key objective of the Battle of France, the Battle of Sedan and also for the last major German WWII counter-offensive on the Western Front, the Battle of the Bulge in December 1944 and January 1945.\nThe Meuse is represented in the documentary \"The River People\" released in 2012 by Xavier Istasse.\nIn July 2021, the Meuse basin was one of the many regions in Europe to experience catastrophic flooding during the 2021 European floods.\nEtymology.\nThe name \"Meuse\" is derived from the French name of the river, derived from its Latin name, \"Mosa\", which ultimately derives from the Celtic or Proto-Celtic name *\"Mos\u0101\". This probably derives from the same root as English \"maze\", referring to the river's twists and turns.\nThe Dutch name \"Maas\" descends from Middle Dutch \"Mase\", which comes from the presumed but unattested Old Dutch form *\"Masa\", from Proto-Germanic *\"Mas\u014d\". Modern Dutch and German \"Maas\" and Limburgish \"Maos\" preserve this Germanic form. Despite the similarity, the Germanic name is not derived from the Celtic name, judging from the change from earlier \"o\" into \"a\", which is characteristic of the Germanic languages.\nGeography.\nThe Meuse rises in Pouilly-en-Bassigny, commune of Le Ch\u00e2telet-sur-Meuse on the Langres plateau in France from where it flows northwards past Sedan (the head of navigation) and Charleville-M\u00e9zi\u00e8res into Belgium.\nAt Namur it is joined by the Sambre. Beyond Namur the Meuse winds eastwards and passes Li\u00e8ge before turning north. The river then forms part of the Belgian-Dutch border, except that at Maastricht the border lies further to the west. In the Netherlands it continues northwards through Venlo closely along the border to Germany, then turns towards the west, where it runs parallel to the Waal and forms part of the extensive Rhine\u2013Meuse\u2013Scheldt delta, together with the Scheldt to its south and the Rhine to the north. The river has been divided near Heusden into the Afgedamde Maas on the right and the Bergse Maas on the left. The Bergse Maas continues under the name of Amer, which is part of De Biesbosch. The Afgedamde Maas joins the Waal, the main stem of the Rhine at Woudrichem, and then flows under the name of Boven Merwede to Hardinxveld-Giessendam, where it splits into Nieuwe Merwede and Beneden Merwede. Near Lage Zwaluwe, the Nieuwe Merwede joins the Amer, forming the Hollands Diep, which splits into Grevelingen and Haringvliet, before finally flowing into the North Sea.\nThe Meuse is crossed by railway bridges between the following stations (on the left and right banks respectively):\nThere are also numerous road bridges and around 32 ferry crossings.\nThe Meuse is navigable over a substantial part of its total length: In the Netherlands and Belgium, the river is part of the major inland navigation infrastructure, connecting the Rotterdam-Amsterdam-Antwerp port areas to the industrial areas upstream: 's-Hertogenbosch, Venlo, Maastricht, Li\u00e8ge, Namur. Between Maastricht and Maasbracht, an unnavigable section of the Meuse is bypassed by the Juliana Canal. South of Namur, further upstream, the river can only carry more modest vessels, although a barge as long as . can still reach the French border town of Givet.\nFrom Givet, the river is canalized over a distance of . The canalized Meuse used to be called the \"Canal de l'Est \u2014 Branche Nord\" but was recently rebaptized into \"Canal de la Meuse\". The waterway can be used by the smallest barges that are still in use commercially almost long and just over wide. Just upstream of the town of Commercy, the Canal de la Meuse connects with the Marne\u2013Rhine Canal by means of a short diversion canal.\nThe Cretaceous sea reptile \"Mosasaurus\" is named after the river Meuse. The first fossils of it were discovered outside Maastricht in 1780.\nBasin area.\nAn international agreement was signed in 2002 in Ghent, Belgium, about the management of the river amongst France, Germany, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, and Belgium. Also participating in the agreement were the Belgian regional governments of Flanders, Wallonia, and Brussels (which is not in the basin of the Meuse but pumps running water into the Meuse).\nMost of the basin area (approximately 36,000\u00a0km2) is in Wallonia (12,000\u00a0km2), followed by France (9,000\u00a0km2), the Netherlands (8,000\u00a0km2), Germany (2,000\u00a0km2), Flanders (2,000\u00a0km2) and Luxembourg (a few km2).\nAn International Commission on the Meuse has the responsibility of the implementation of the treaty.\nThe costs of this Commission are met by all these countries, in proportion of their own territory in the basin of the Meuse: Netherlands 30%, Wallonia 30%, France 15%, Germany 14.5%, Flanders 5%, Brussels 4.5%, Kingdom of Belgium 0.5%, and Luxembourg 0.5%.\nThe map of the basin area of Meuse was joined to the text of the treaty.\nAs for culture, as a major communication route the River Meuse is the origin of Mosan art, principally (Wallonia and France).\nThe first landscape painted in the Renaissance was the landscape of Meuse by Joachim Patinir. He was likely the uncle of Henri Bl\u00e8s, who is sometimes defined as a Mosan landscape painter active during the second third of the 16th century (i.e. second generation of landscape painters).\nTributaries.\nThe main tributaries of the Meuse are listed below in downstream-upstream order, with the town where the tributary meets the river:\nDistributaries.\nThe mean annual discharge rate of the Meuse has been relatively stable over the last few thousand years. One recent study estimates that average flow has increased by about 10% since 2000\u00a0BC. The hydrological distribution of the Meuse changed during the later Middle Ages, when a major flood forced it to shift its main course northwards towards the river Merwede. From then on several stretches of the original Merwede were renamed \"Maas\" (i.e. Meuse) and served as the primary outflow of that river. Those branches are currently known as the Nieuwe Maas and Oude Maas.\nHowever during another series of severe floods the Meuse found an additional path towards the sea, resulting in the creation of the Biesbosch wetlands and Hollands Diep estuaries. Thereafter the Meuse split near Heusden into two main distributaries, one flowing north to join the Merwede and one flowing direct to the sea. The branch of the Meuse leading direct to the sea eventually silted up (and now forms the Oude Maasje stream), but in 1904 the canalised Bergse Maas was dug to take over the functions of the silted-up branch. At the same time the branch leading to the Merwede was dammed at Heusden (and has since been known as the Afgedamde Maas) so that little water from the Meuse entered the old Maas courses or the Rhine distributaries. The resulting separation of the rivers Rhine and Meuse is considered to be the greatest achievement in Dutch hydraulic engineering before the completion of the Zuiderzee Works and Delta Works. In 1970 the Haringvlietdam has been finished. Since then the reunited Rhine and Meuse waters have reached the North Sea either at this site or, during times of lower discharges of the Rhine, at Hook of Holland.\nA 2008 study notes that the difference between summer and winter flow volumes has increased significantly in the last 100\u2013200\u00a0years. It points out that the frequency of serious floods (\"i.e.\" flows &gt; 1000% of normal) has increased markedly. They predict that winter flooding of the Meuse may become a recurring problem in the coming decades.\nD\u00e9partements, provinces and towns.\nThe Meuse flows through the following departments of France, provinces of Belgium, provinces of the Netherlands and towns:\nDetailed route.\n\"Main cities and tributaries will be in bold.\"\nMention in patriotic songs.\nThe Meuse (\"Maas\") is mentioned in the first stanza of Germany's old national anthem, the . However, since its re-adoption as national anthem in 1952, only the third stanza of the \"Deutschlandlied\" has been sung as the German national anthem, the first and second stanzas being omitted. This was confirmed after German reunification in 1991 when only the third stanza was defined as the official anthem. The lyrics written in 1841 describe a then\u2013disunited Germany with the river as its western boundary, where King William I of the Netherlands had joined the German Confederation with his Duchy of Limburg in 1839. Though the duchy's territory officially became an integral part of the Netherlands by the 1867 Treaty of London, the text passage remained unchanged when the \"Deutschlandlied\" was declared the national anthem of the Weimar Republic in 1922.\nThe name of the rivers also forms part of the title of \"Le R\u00e9giment de Sambre et Meuse\", written after the French defeat in the Franco-Prussian War of 1870, and a popular patriotic song for the rest of the 19th century and into the 20th.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20415", "revid": "9092818", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20415", "title": "Manic depression", "text": ""}
{"id": "20416", "revid": "205121", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20416", "title": "Manic Depression", "text": ""}
{"id": "20417", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20417", "title": "Mood stabilisers", "text": ""}
{"id": "20418", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20418", "title": "Michael Bentine", "text": "British comedian (1922\u20131996)\nMichael Bentine (born Michael James Bentin; 26 January 1922 \u2013 26 November 1996) was a British comedian, comic actor and founding member of the Goons. His father was a Peruvian Briton.\nBiography.\nBentine was born in Watford, Hertfordshire, to a Peruvian father, Adam Bentin, and a British mother, Florence Dawkins, and grew up in Folkestone, Kent. He was educated at Eton College. With the help of speech trainer, Harry Burgess, he learned to manage a stammer and subsequently developed an interest in amateur theatricals, along with the Tomlinson family, including the young David Tomlinson. He spoke fluent Spanish and French.\nHis father was an early aeronautical engineer for the Sopwith Aviation Company during and after World War I and invented a tension meter for setting the tension on aircraft rigging wires.\nIn World War II, Bentine volunteered for all services when the war broke out (the RAF was his first choice owing to the influence of his father's experience), but was initially rejected because of his father's nationality.\nHe started his acting career in 1940, in a touring company in Cardiff playing a juvenile lead in \"Sweet Lavender\". He went on to join Robert Atkins' Shakespearean company in Regent's Park, London, until he was called up for service in the RAF. He was appearing in a Shakespearean play in doublet and hose in the open-air theatre in London's Hyde Park when two RAF Police NCOs marched on stage and arrested him for desertion. Unknown to him, an RAF conscription notice had been following him for a month as his company toured.\nOnce in the RAF he went through flying training. He was the penultimate man going through a medical line receiving inoculations for typhoid with the other flight candidates in his class (they were going to Canada to receive new aircraft) when the vaccine ran out. They refilled the bottle to inoculate him and the other man as well. By mistake they loaded a pure culture of typhoid. The other man died immediately, and Bentine was in a coma for six weeks. When he regained consciousness his eyesight was ruined, leaving him myopic for the rest of his life. Since he was no longer physically qualified for flying, he was transferred to RAF Intelligence and seconded to MI9, a unit that was dedicated to supporting resistance movements and helping prisoners escape. His immediate superior was the Colditz escapee Airey Neave.\nAt the end of the war, he took part in the liberation of Bergen-Belsen concentration camp. He said about this experience:\nMillions of words have been written about these horror camps, many of them by inmates of those unbelievable places. I've tried, without success, to describe it from my own point of view, but the words won't come. To me Belsen was the ultimate blasphemy. (\"The Reluctant Jester\", Chapter 17.)\nComedy career.\nAfter the war Bentine decided to become a comedian and worked in the Windmill Theatre where he met Harry Secombe. He specialised in off-the-wall humour, often involving cartoons and other types of animation. His acts included giving lectures in an invented language called Slobodian, \"Imaginative Young Man with a Walking Stick\" and \"The Chairback\", with a broken chairback having a number of uses from comb to machine gun and taking on a demoniacal life of its own. Peter Sellers told him this was the inspiration for the prosthetic arm routine in \"Dr Strangelove\". This act led to his engagement by Val Parnell to appear in the Starlight Roof revues starring Vic Oliver, where he met and married his second wife Clementina, with whom he had four children. Also on the bill were Fred Emney and a young Julie Andrews.\nBentine co-created \"The Goon Show\" radio show with Spike Milligan, Peter Sellers and Harry Secombe, but appeared in only the first 38 shows on the BBC Home Service from 1951 to 1952. The first of these shows were actually called \"Those Crazy People\" and subtitled \"The Junior Crazy Gang\"; the term \"Goon\" was used as the headline of a review of Bentine's act by \"Picture Post\" dated 5 November 1948. Only one of this first series (and very few of the following three in which he did not appear) has survived, the rest of the original disc recordings having apparently been destroyed or discarded as no longer usable, so there is almost no record of his work as a radio \"Goon\". He also appeared in the 1952 \"Goon Show\" film \"Down Among the Z Men\".\nIn 1951 Bentine was invited to the United States to appear on \"The Ed Sullivan Show\". On his return he parted amicably from his partners and continued touring in variety, remaining close to Secombe and Sellers for the rest of his life. In 1972, Secombe and Sellers told Michael Parkinson that Bentine was \"always calling everyone a genius\" and, since he was the only one of the four with a \"proper education\", they always believed him.\nHis first appearances on television were as presenter on a 13-part children's series featuring remote controlled puppets, \"The Bumblies\", which he also devised, designed and wrote. These were three small creatures from outer space who slept on \"Professor Bentine's\" ceiling and who had come to Earth to learn the ways of Earthling children. Angelo de Calferta modelled the puppets from Bentine's designs and Richard Dendy moulded them in latex rubber. He sold the series to the BBC for less than they had cost to make. He then spent two years touring in Australia (1954\u201355).\nOn his return to Britain in 1954, he worked as a scriptwriter for Peter Sellers and then on 39 episodes of his own radio show \"Round the Bend in 30 Minutes\", which has also been wiped from the BBC archive. He then teamed up with Dick Lester to devise a series of six TV programmes \"Before Midnight\" for ABC Weekend TV in Birmingham in 1958. This led to a 13-programme series called \"After Hours\" in which he appeared alongside Dick Emery, Clive Dunn, David Lodge, Joe Gibbons and Benny Lee. The show featured the \"olde English sport of drats, later known as nurdling\". Some of the sketches were adapted into a stage revue at the Cambridge Theatre, \"Don't Shoot, We're English\". He also appeared in the film comedy \"Raising a Riot\", starring Kenneth More, which featured his five-year-old daughter \"Fusty\". He joked that she got better billing.\nFrom 1960 to 1964, he had a television series, \"It's a Square World\", which won a BAFTA award in 1962 and Grand Prix de la Presse at Montreux in 1963. A prominent feature of the series was the imaginary flea circus where plays were enacted on tiny sets using nothing but special effects to show the movement of things too small to see and sounds with Bentine's commentary. One, titled \"The Beast of the Black Bog Tarn\", was set in a (miniature) haunted house.\nHe was the subject of \"This Is Your Life\" in April 1963 when he was surprised by Eamonn Andrews at the BBC Television Theatre.\nHe co wrote and starred in a film \"The Sandwich Man\" (1966) but it was not a success.\nIn 1969\u201370 he was presenter of \"The Golden Silents\" on BBC TV, which attempted authentic showings of silent films, without the commentaries with which they were usually shown on television before then.\nFrom 1974 to 1980 he wrote, designed, narrated and presented the children's television programme \"Michael Bentine's Potty Time\" and made one-off comedy specials.\nFrom January to May 1984 Bentine put out 11 half-hour episodes, in two series, of \"The Michael Bentine Show\" on Radio 4. These have subsequently been repeated, several times, on the BBC's archive radio station BBC7 (now BBC Radio 4 Extra).\nHe was the writer of 16 best-selling novels, comedies and non-fiction books. Four of his books, \"The Long Banana Skin\" (1975), \"The Door Marked Summer\" (1981), \"Doors of the Mind\" and \"The Reluctant Jester\" (1992) are autobiographical.\nOther interests.\nIn 1968, travelling on the British Hovercraft Corporation (BHC) SR.N6, \"GH\u20132012\", Bentine took part in the first hovercraft expedition up the River Amazon.\nIn the 1995 New Year Honours, Bentine received a CBE from Queen Elizabeth II \"for services to entertainment\". In 1971, Bentine received the Order of Merit of Peru following his fund-raising work for the 1970 Great Peruvian earthquake.\nBentine was a crack pistol shot and helped to start the idea of a counter-terrorist wing within 22 SAS Regiment. In doing so, he became the first non-SAS person to fire a gun inside the close-quarters battle training house at Hereford.\nHis interests included parapsychology. This was as a result of his and his family's extensive research into the paranormal, which resulted in his writing \"The Door Marked Summer\" and \"Doors of the Mind\". He was, for the final years of his life, president of the Association for the Scientific Study of Anomalous Phenomena.\nOn 14 December 1977, he appeared with Arthur C. Clarke on Patrick Moore's BBC \"The Sky at Night\" programme. The broadcast was entitled \"Suns, Spaceships and Bug-Eyed Monsters\" \u2013 a light-hearted look at how science fiction had become science fact, as well as how ideas of space travel had become reality through the 20th century. In the opening of the programme, Moore introduces Bentine with Bentine confirming that he was the possessor of a \"Reader's Digest Degree\". This remark was typical of Bentine's comic approach to most things in life that concealed his knowledge of science. Bentine appeared in a subsequent broadcast on a similar theme with Moore in 1980. Following the death of Arthur C. Clarke, \"BBC Sky at Night\" magazine released a copy of the 1977 archive programme on the cover of their May 2008 edition.\nFamily and health.\nBentine was married twice. With his first wife Marie Barradell, married 1941\u20131947, he had a daughter, Elaine (1942\u20131983).\nIn 1949, he married his second wife, Clementina Stuart, a Royal Ballet dancer. They had four children.\nHis two eldest daughters died from cancer in the 1980s. His elder son was killed with a pilot friend when a Piper PA-18 Super Cub crashed into a hillside at Ditcham Park Woods near Petersfield, Hampshire, on 28 August 1971. Their bodies and the aircraft were not found until October 1971. The AAIB after an 11-month investigation found that the aircraft went into clouds when taking action to avoid power cables while flying low in poor visibility, and subsequently, went out of control. Bentine's subsequent investigation into regulations governing private airfields resulted in his writing a report for Special Branch into the use of personal aircraft in smuggling operations. He fictionalised much of the material in his novel \"Lords of the Levels\".\nFrom 1975 until his death in 1996, he and his wife spent their winters at a second home in Palm Springs, California, US.\nShortly before his death from prostate cancer at the age of 74, he was visited in hospital by the future King Charles.\nProgrammes.\nSome of the programmes Bentine appeared in were:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20419", "revid": "50686988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20419", "title": "Mania", "text": "State of abnormally elevated or irritable mood, arousal, and/or energy levels\nMedical condition&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Infobox/styles-images.css\" /&gt;\nMania ( ; also known as manic syndrome) is a psychiatric behavioral syndrome defined as a state of abnormally elevated arousal, affect, and energy level. During a manic episode, an individual will experience rapidly changing emotions and moods, highly influenced by surrounding stimuli. Although mania is often conceived of as a \"mirror image\" to depression, the heightened mood can be dysphoric as well as euphoric. As the mania intensifies, irritability can be more pronounced and result in anxiety or anger.\nThe symptoms of mania include elevated mood (either euphoric or irritable), flight of ideas, pressure of speech, increased energy, decreased \"need\" and desire for sleep, and hyperactivity. They are most plainly evident in fully developed hypomanic states, however, in full-blown mania, these symptoms become progressively exacerbated. In severe manic episodes, these symptoms may even be obscured by other signs and symptoms characteristic of psychosis, such as delusions (it may include delusions of grandeur and paranoid delusions), hallucinations, fragmentation of behavior, and catatonia.\nClassification.\nMixed states.\nIn a mixed affective state, the individual, though meeting the general criteria for a hypomanic (discussed below) or manic episode, experiences three or more concurrent depressive symptoms. This has caused some speculation, among clinicians, that mania and depression, rather than constituting \"true\" polar opposites, are, rather, two independent axes in a unipolar\u2014bipolar spectrum.\nA mixed affective state, especially with prominent manic symptoms, places the patient at a greater risk for suicide. Depression on its own is a risk factor but, when coupled with an increase in energy and goal-directed activity, the patient is far more likely to act on suicidal impulses.\nHypomania.\nHypomania, which means \"less than mania\", is a lowered state of mania that does not always impair function or decrease quality of life. Although creativity and hypomania have been historically linked, a review and meta-analysis exploring this relationship found that this assumption may be too general and empirical research evidence is lacking. In hypomania, there is less need for sleep and both goal-motivated behaviour and metabolism increase. Some studies exploring brain metabolism in subjects with hypomania, however, did not find any conclusive link; while there are studies that reported abnormalities, others failed to detect differences. Though the elevated mood and energy level typical of hypomania could be seen positively, mania itself generally has many undesirable consequences, including suicidal tendencies. Hypomania can also have these effects, if the prominent mood is irritable as opposed to euphoric. In addition, the intense cases of hypomania can lead to problems. Where trait-based positivity for a person could make them more engaging, outgoing, and cause them to have a positive outlook in life, exaggerated in hypomania, such a person can display excessive optimism, grandiosity, and poor decision-making, often with little regard to the consequences.\nAssociated disorders.\nA single manic episode, in the absence of secondary causes, (i.e., substance use disorders, certain medications, or general medical conditions) is often sufficient to diagnose bipolar I disorder. Hypomania may be indicative of bipolar II disorder. Manic episodes are often complicated by delusions and/or hallucinations; and if the psychotic features persist for a duration significantly longer than the episode of typical mania (two weeks or more), a diagnosis of schizoaffective disorder is more appropriate. \nCertain obsessive\u2013compulsive spectrum disorders as well as impulse-control disorders share the suffix \"-mania,\" namely, kleptomania, pyromania, and trichotillomania. Despite the unfortunate association implied by the name, however, no connection exists between mania or bipolar disorder and these disorders. \nEvidence indicates a vitamin B12 deficiency can also cause symptoms characteristic of mania and psychosis. Hyperthyroidism can produce similar symptoms to those of mania, such as agitation, elevated mood, increased energy, hyperactivity, sleep disturbances and sometimes, especially in severe cases, psychosis.\nPostpartum psychosis can also cause manic episodes (unipolar mania).\nSigns and symptoms.\nA \"manic episode\" is defined in the American Psychiatric Association's diagnostic manual (DSM) as a \"distinct period of abnormally and persistently elevated, expansive, or irritable mood and abnormally and persistently increased activity or energy, lasting at least 1 week and present most of the day, nearly every day (or any duration, if hospitalization is necessary),\" where the mood is not caused by drugs/medication or a non-mental medical illness (e.g., hyperthyroidism), and: (a) is causing obvious difficulties at work or in social relationships and activities, or (b) requires admission to hospital to protect the person or others, or (c) the person has psychosis.\nTo be classified as a manic episode, while the disturbed mood and an increase in goal-directed activity or energy is present, at least three (or four, if only irritability is present) of the following must have been consistently present:\nThough the activities one participates in while in a manic state are not \"always\" negative, those with the potential to have negative outcomes are more common.\nIf the person is concurrently depressed, they are said to be having a mixed episode.\nThe World Health Organization's International Classification of Diseases (ICD) defines \"a manic episode\" as one where mood is higher than the person's situation warrants and may vary from relaxed high spirits to barely controllable exuberance, is accompanied by hyperactivity, a compulsion to speak, a reduced sleep requirement, difficulty sustaining attention, and/or often increased distractibility. Frequently, confidence and self-esteem are excessively enlarged, and grand, extravagant ideas are expressed. Behavior that is out-of-character and risky, foolish or inappropriate may result from a loss of normal social restraint.\nSome people also have physical symptoms, such as sweating, pacing, and weight loss. In full-blown mania, often the manic person will feel as though their goal(s) are of paramount importance, that there are no consequences, or that negative consequences would be minimal, and that they need not exercise restraint in the pursuit of what they are after. Hypomania is different, as it may cause little or no impairment in function. The hypomanic person's connection with the external world, and its standards of interaction, remain intact, although intensity of moods is heightened. But those with prolonged unresolved hypomania do run the risk of developing full mania, and may do so without even realizing they have.\nOne of the signature symptoms of mania (and to a lesser extent, hypomania) is what many have described as racing thoughts. These are usually instances in which the manic person is excessively distracted by objectively unimportant stimuli. This experience creates an absent-mindedness where the manic individual's thoughts totally preoccupy them, making them unable to keep track of time, or be aware of anything besides the flow of thoughts. Racing thoughts also interfere with the ability to fall asleep.\nManic states are always relative to the normal state of intensity of the affected individual; thus, already irritable patients may find themselves losing their tempers even more quickly, and an academically gifted person may, during the hypomanic stage, adopt seemingly \"genius\" characteristics and an ability to perform and articulate at a level far beyond that which they would be capable of during euthymia. A very simple indicator of a manic state would be if a thus far clinically depressed patient suddenly becomes inordinately energetic, enthusiastic, cheerful, aggressive, or \"over-happy\". Other, often less obvious, elements of mania include delusions (generally of either grandeur or persecution, according to whether the predominant mood is euphoric or irritable), hypersensitivity, hypervigilance, hypersexuality, hyper-religiosity, hyperactivity and impulsivity, a compulsion to over explain (typically accompanied by pressure of speech), grandiose schemes and ideas, and a decreased need for sleep (for example, feeling rested after only 3 or 4 hours of sleep). In the case of the latter, the eyes of such patients may both look and seem abnormally \"wide open\", rarely blinking, and may contribute to some clinicians' erroneous belief that these patients are under the influence of a stimulant drug, when the patient, in fact, is either not on any mind-altering substances or is actually on a depressant drug. Individuals may also engage in out-of-character behavior during the episode, such as questionable business transactions, wasteful expenditures of money (e.g., spending sprees), risky sexual activity, abuse of recreational substances, excessive gambling, reckless behavior (such as extreme speeding or other daredevil activity), abnormal social interaction (e.g., over-familiarity and conversing with strangers), or highly vocal arguments. These behaviours may increase stress in personal relationships, lead to problems at work, and increase the risk of altercations with law enforcement. There is a high risk of impulsively taking part in activities potentially harmful to the self and others.\nThe experience of mania is often quite unpleasant and sometimes frightening, for the person involved and for those close to them, and it may lead to impulsive behaviour that may later be regretted. It can also often be complicated by the individual's lack of judgment and insight regarding periods of exacerbation of characteristic states. Manic patients may frequently deny anything is wrong with them. Because mania frequently encourages high energy and decreased perception of need or ability to sleep, within a few days of a manic cycle, sleep-deprived psychosis may appear, further complicating the ability to think clearly. \nMania may also, as earlier mentioned, be divided into three \"stages\". Stage I corresponds with hypomania and may feature typical hypomanic characteristics, such as gregariousness and euphoria. In stages II and III mania, however, the patient may be extraordinarily irritable, psychotic or even delirious. These latter two stages are referred to as acute and delirious (or Bell's), respectively.\nCauses.\nVarious triggers have been associated with switching from euthymic or depressed states into mania. One common trigger of mania is antidepressant therapy. Studies show that the risk of switching while on an antidepressant is between 6-69 percent. Dopaminergic drugs such as reuptake inhibitors and dopamine agonists may also increase risk of switch. Other medications possibly include glutaminergic agents and drugs that alter the HPA axis. Lifestyle triggers include irregular sleep-wake schedules and sleep deprivation, as well as extremely emotional or stressful stimuli.\nVarious genes that have been implicated in genetic studies of bipolar have been manipulated in preclinical animal models to produce syndromes reflecting different aspects of mania. CLOCK and DBP polymorphisms have been linked to bipolar in population studies, and behavioral changes induced by knockout are reversed by lithium treatment. Metabotropic glutamate receptor 6 has been genetically linked to bipolar, and found to be under-expressed in the cortex. Pituitary adenylate cyclase-activating peptide has been associated with bipolar in gene linkage studies, and knockout in mice produces mania like-behavior. Targets of various treatments such as GSK-3, and ERK1 have also demonstrated mania like behavior in preclinical models.\nMania may be associated with strokes, especially cerebral lesions in the right hemisphere.\nDeep brain stimulation of the subthalamic nucleus in Parkinson's disease has been associated with mania, especially with electrodes placed in the ventromedial STN. A proposed mechanism involves increased excitatory input from the STN to dopaminergic nuclei.\nThere are certain psychoactive substances that can induce a state of manic psychosis, including: amphetamine, cathinone, cocaine, MDMA, methamphetamine, methylphenidate, oxycodone, phencyclidine, designer drugs, etc.\nMania can also be caused by physical trauma or illness. When the causes are physical, it is called secondary mania. In some individuals, manic symptoms are also correlated with the season of spring.\nMechanism.\nThe mechanism underlying mania is unknown, but the neurocognitive profile of mania is highly consistent with dysfunction in the right prefrontal cortex, a common finding in neuroimaging studies. Various lines of evidence from post-mortem studies and the putative mechanisms of anti-manic agents point to abnormalities in GSK-3, dopamine, Protein kinase C, and Inositol monophosphatase.\nMeta analysis of neuroimaging studies demonstrate increased thalamic activity, and bilaterally reduced inferior frontal gyrus activation. Activity in the amygdala and other subcortical structures such as the ventral striatum tend to be increased, although results are inconsistent and likely dependent upon task characteristics such as valence. Reduced functional connectivity between the ventral prefrontal cortex and amygdala along with variable findings supports a hypothesis of general dysregulation of subcortical structures by the prefrontal cortex. A bias towards positively valenced stimuli, and increased responsiveness in reward circuitry may predispose towards mania. Mania tends to be associated with right hemisphere lesions, while depression tends to be associated with left hemisphere lesions.\nPost-mortem examinations of bipolar disorder demonstrate increased expression of Protein Kinase C (PKC). While limited, some studies demonstrate manipulation of PKC in animals produces behavioral changes mirroring mania, and treatment with PKC inhibitor tamoxifen (also an anti-estrogen drug) demonstrates antimanic effects. Traditional antimanic drugs also demonstrate PKC inhibiting properties, among other effects such as GSK3 inhibition.\nManic episodes may be triggered by dopamine receptor agonists, and this combined with tentative reports of increased VMAT2 activity, measured via PET scans of radioligand binding, suggests\na role of dopamine in mania. Decreased cerebrospinal fluid levels of the serotonin metabolite 5-HIAA have been found in manic patients too, which may be explained by a failure of serotonergic regulation and dopaminergic hyperactivity.\nLimited evidence suggests that mania is associated with behavioral reward hypersensitivity, as well as with neural reward hypersensitivity. Electrophysiological evidence supporting this comes from studies associating left frontal EEG activity with mania. As left frontal EEG activity is generally thought to be a reflection of behavioral activation system activity, this is thought to support a role for reward hypersensitivity in mania. Tentative evidence also comes from one study that reported an association between manic traits and feedback negativity during receipt of monetary reward or loss. Neuroimaging evidence during acute mania is sparse, but one study reported elevated orbitofrontal cortex activity to monetary reward, and another study reported elevated striatal activity to reward omission. The latter finding was interpreted in the context of either elevated baseline activity (resulting in a null finding of reward hypersensitivity), or reduced ability to discriminate between reward and punishment, still supporting reward hyperactivity in mania. Punishment hyposensitivity, as reflected in a number of neuroimaging studies as reduced lateral orbitofrontal response to punishment, has been proposed as a mechanism of reward hypersensitivity in mania.\nDiagnosis.\nIn the ICD-10, there are several disorders with the manic syndrome: organic manic disorder (https://), mania without psychotic symptoms (https://), mania with psychotic symptoms (https://), other manic episodes (https://), unspecified manic episode (https://), manic type of schizoaffective disorder (https://), bipolar disorder, current episode manic without psychotic symptoms (https://), bipolar affective disorder, current episode manic with psychotic symptoms (https://).\nTreatment.\nBefore beginning treatment for mania, careful differential diagnosis must be performed to rule out secondary causes.\nAcute mania is considered a medical emergency. The acute treatment of a manic episode of bipolar disorder involves the utilization of either a mood stabilizer (e.g.,carbamazepine, valproate, lithium, or lamotrigine) or an atypical antipsychotic (e.g., olanzapine, quetiapine, risperidone, aripiprazole, or cariprazine). In 2024, iloperidone was approved by the FDA for the acute treatment of manic episodes related to bipolar I disorder. The use of antipsychotic agents in the treatment of acute mania was reviewed by Tohen and Vieta in 2009.\nWhen the manic behaviours have gone, long-term treatment then focuses on prophylactic treatment to try to stabilize the patient's mood, typically through a combination of pharmacotherapy and psychotherapy. The likelihood of having a relapse is very high for those who have experienced two or more episodes of mania or depression. While medication for bipolar disorder is important to manage symptoms of mania and depression, studies show relying on medications alone is not the most effective method of treatment. Medication is most effective when used in combination with other bipolar disorder treatments, including psychotherapy, self-help coping strategies, and healthy lifestyle choices.\nLithium is the classic mood stabilizer to prevent further manic and depressive episodes. A systematic review found that long term lithium treatment substantially reduces the risk of bipolar manic relapse, by 42%. Anticonvulsants such as valproate, oxcarbazepine, and carbamazepine are also used for prophylaxis. More recent drug solutions include lamotrigine and topiramate, both anticonvulsants as well.\nIn some cases, long-acting benzodiazepines, particularly clonazepam, are used after other options are exhausted. In more urgent circumstances, such as in emergency rooms, lorazepam, combined with haloperidol, is used to promptly alleviate symptoms of agitation, aggression, and psychosis.\nAntidepressant monotherapy is not recommended for the treatment of depression in patients with bipolar disorders I or II, and no benefit has been demonstrated by combining antidepressants with mood stabilizers in these patients. Some atypical antidepressants, however, such as mirtazapine and trazodone, have been occasionally used after other options have failed.\nSociety and culture.\nIn \"Electroboy: A Memoir of Mania\" by Andy Behrman, he describes his experience of mania as \"the most perfect prescription glasses with which to see the world... life appears in front of you like an oversized movie screen.\" Behrman indicates early in his memoir that he sees himself not as a person with an uncontrollable disabling illness, but as a director of the movie that is his vivid and emotionally alive life. There is some evidence that people in the creative industries have bipolar disorder more often than those in other occupations.\nWinston Churchill had periods of manic symptoms that may have been both an asset and a liability.\nEnglish actor Stephen Fry, who has bipolar disorder, recounts manic behaviour during his adolescence: \"When I was about 17 ... going around London on two stolen credit cards, it was a sort of fantastic reinvention of myself, an attempt to. I bought ridiculous suits with stiff collars and silk ties from the 1920s, and would go to the Savoy and Ritz and drink cocktails.\" While he has experienced suicidal thoughts, he says the manic side of his condition has had positive contributions on his life.\nEtymology.\nThe nosology of the various stages of a manic episode has changed over the decades. The word derives from the Ancient Greek \u03bc\u03b1\u03bd\u03af\u03b1 (\"man\u00eda\"), \"madness, frenzy\" and the verb \u03bc\u03b1\u03af\u03bd\u03bf\u03bc\u03b1\u03b9 (\"ma\u00ednomai\"), \"to be mad, to rage, to be furious.\"\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20420", "revid": "892079", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20420", "title": "Multimedia", "text": "Content using a combination of forms\nMultimedia is a form of communication that uses a combination of different content forms, such as writing, audio, images, animations, or video, into a single presentation. This is in contrast to traditional mass media, such as printed material or audio recordings, which only feature one form of media content. Popular examples of multimedia include video podcasts, audio slideshows, and animated videos. Creating multimedia content involves the application of the principles of effective interactive communication. The five main building blocks of multimedia are text, image, audio, video, and animation. \nMultimedia encompasses various types of content, each serving different purposes:\nMultimedia can be recorded for playback on computers, laptops, smartphones, and other electronic devices. In the early years of multimedia, the term \"rich media\" was synonymous with interactive multimedia. Over time, hypermedia extensions brought multimedia to the World Wide Web, and streaming services became more common.\nTerminology.\nThe term \"multimedia\" was coined by singer and artist Bob Goldstein (later 'Bobb Goldsteinn') to promote the July 1966 opening of his \"Lightworks at L'Oursin\" show in Southampton, New York, Long Island. Goldstein was perhaps aware of an American artist named Dick Higgins, who had two years previously discussed a new approach to art-making he called \"intermedia\".\nOn August 10, 1966, Richard Albarino of \"Variety\" borrowed the terminology, reporting: \"Brainchild of song scribe-comic Bob ('Washington Square') Goldstein, the 'Lightworks' is the latest \"multi-media\" music-cum-visuals to debut as discoth\u00e8que fare.\" Two years later, in 1968, the term \"multimedia\" was re-appropriated to describe the work of a political consultant, David Sawyer, the husband of Iris Sawyer\u2014one of Goldstein's producers at L'Oursin.\n In the intervening forty years, the word has taken on different meanings. In the late 1970s, the term referred to presentations consisting of multi-projector slide shows timed to an audio track. However, by the 1990s, 'multimedia' had taken on its current meaning.\nIn the 1993 first edition of \"Multimedia: Making It Work\", Tay Vaughan declared, \"Multimedia is any combination of text, graphic art, sound, animation, and video that is delivered by computer. When you allow the user \u2013 the viewer of the project \u2013 to control what and when these elements are delivered, it is \"interactive multimedia\". When you provide a structure of linked elements through which the user can navigate, interactive multimedia becomes \"hypermedia\".\" This book contained the \"Tempra Show\" software. This was a later, rebranded version of the 1985 DOS multimedia software \"VirtulVideo Producer,\" about which the Smithsonian declared, \"It is one of the first, if not the first, multi-media authoring systems on the market.\" \nThe German language society Gesellschaft f\u00fcr deutsche Sprache recognized the word's significance and ubiquitousness in the 1990s by awarding it the title of German 'Word of the Year' in 1995. The institute summed up its rationale by stating, \"[Multimedia] has become a central word in the wonderful new media world\".\nIn common usage, \"multimedia\" refers to the usage of multiple media of communication, including video, still images, animation, audio, and text, in such a way that they can be accessed interactively. Video, still images, animation, audio, and written text are the building blocks on which multimedia takes shape. In the 1990s, some computers were called \"multimedia computers\" because they represented advances in graphical and audio quality, such as the Amiga 1000, which could produce 4096 colors (12-bit color), outputs for TVs and VCRs, and four-voice stereo audio. Changes in removable storage technology during this time were also important, as the standard CD-ROM can hold on average 700 megabytes of data, while the maximum size a 3.5-inch floppy disk can hold is 2.8 megabytes, with an average of 1.44 megabytes. Greater storage allowed for larger digital media files and therefore more complex multimedia.\nThe term \"video\", if not used exclusively to describe motion photography, is ambiguous in multimedia terminology. \"Video\" is often used to describe the file format, delivery format, or presentation format instead of \"footage\" which is used to distinguish motion photography from \"animation\" of rendered motion imagery. Multiple forms of information content are often not considered modern forms of presentation, such as audio or video. Likewise, single forms of information content with single methods of information processing (e.g., non-interactive audio) are often called multimedia, perhaps to distinguish static media from active media. In the fine arts, for example, Leda Luss Luyken's ModulArt brings two key elements of musical composition and film into the world of painting: variation of a theme and movement of and within a picture, making \"ModulArt\" an interactive multimedia form of art. Performing arts may also be considered multimedia, considering that performers and props are multiple forms of both content and media.\nIn modern times, a multimedia device can be referred to as an electronic device, such as a smartphone, a video game system, or a computer. Each and every one of these devices has a main function but also has other uses beyond their intended purpose, such as reading, writing, recording video and audio, listening to music, and playing video games. This has led them to be called \"multimedia devices.\" While previous media was always local, many are now handled through web-based solutions, particularly streaming.\nMajor characteristics.\nMultimedia presentations are presentations featuring multiple types of media. The different types of media can include text, graphics, audio, video and animations. These different types of media convey information to their target audience and effectively communicate with them. Videos are a great visual example to use in multimedia presentations because they can create visual aids to the presenter's ideas. They are commonly used among education and many other industries to benefit students and workers, as they effectively retain chunks of information in a limited amount of time and can be stored easily. Another example is charts and graphs, as the presenters can show their audience the trends using data associated with their researches. This provides the audience a visual idea of a company's capabilities and performances. Audio also helps people understand the message being presented, as most modern videos are combined with audio to increase its efficiency, while animations are made to simplify things from the presenter's perspective. These technological methods allow efficient communication and understanding across a wide range of audiences (with an even wider range of abilities) throughout different fields. \nMultimedia games and simulations may be used in a physical environment with special effects, with multiple users in an online network, or locally with an offline computer, game system, simulator, virtual reality, or augmented reality.\nThe various formats of technological or digital multimedia may be intended to enhance the users' experience, for example, to make it easier and faster to convey information. Or in entertainment or art, combine an array of artistic insights that include elements from different art forms to engage, inspire, or captivate an audience.\nEnhanced levels of interactivity are made possible by combining multiple forms of media content. Online multimedia is increasingly becoming object-oriented and data-driven, enabling applications with collaborative end-user innovation and personalization on multiple forms of content over time. Examples of these range from multiple forms of content on Web sites like photo galleries with both images (pictures) and titles (text) user-updated to simulations whose coefficients, events, illustrations, animations, or videos are modifiable, allowing the multimedia \"experience\" to be altered without reprogramming. In addition to seeing and hearing, haptic technology enables virtual objects to be felt. Emerging technology involving illusions of taste and smell may also enhance the multimedia experience.\nCategorization.\nMultimedia may be broadly divided into linear and non-linear categories:\nMultimedia presentations can be live or recorded:\nUses.\nMultimedia finds its application in various areas, including, but not limited to, advertisements, art, education, entertainment, engineering, medicine, mathematics, business, scientific research, and spatial temporal applications. Several examples are as follows:\nCreative industries.\nCreative industries use multimedia for a variety of purposes, ranging from fine arts, entertainment, commercial art, journalism, to media and software services provided for any of the industries listed below. An individual multimedia designer may cover the spectrum throughout their career. Requests for their skills range from technical to analytical to creative. Multimedia, but more impressively in the modern day, the interactivity of the multimedia created forms the foundation for which most creative endeavors that take place online. Microsoft is one of the biggest computer industries in the world, and a core foundation of its success relies on the ability of multimedia designers to optimize user experience through interacting with their products.\nCommercial uses.\nCommercialization and marketing of products by companies in the modern day rely on increasingly more advanced displays of Interactive Multimedia for sophisticated tactics and customer retention. Advertising companies rely heavily on social interfaces and television to promote products, while ads and websites that utilize pop-ups need their shorter, more concise methods to be as efficient and pleasing to the potential customers as possible. Using these platforms, they are able to express their message or persuade a targeted audience. External and internal office communications are often developed by hired creative service firms for advanced displays of information in a variety of necessary situations. Examples range from as common as holding more engaging presentations to providing trainees or new workers with more effective media to educate on a company's policies. Commercial multimedia developers may be hired to design for governmental services and nonprofit service applications as well, which often takes the form of the campaigning websites and commercials pushed out to the public. In addition, the prominence of data mining within multimedia platforms in order to adjust marketing techniques based on the data they mine is a crucial and notable practice of commercial advertisement to efficiently understand the demographic of a target audience. In recent years, a new trend of multimedia has arrived: a new sort of digital billboard placed on the side of buildings and usually wrapped around the side of them. These clips are made at differing angles to trick the brain into seeing them as 3-dimensional, like they're leaving the billboard entirely. This makes them eye-catching and therefore more likely to draw people's attention, which is, of course, very good for commercial purposes.\nEntertainment and fine arts.\nMultimedia is heavily used in the entertainment industry, especially to develop special effects in movies and animations (VFX, 3D animation, etc.). Multimedia games are a popular pastime and are software programs available either as CD-ROMs or online. Video games are considered multimedia, as they meld animation, audio, and interactivity to give the player an immersive experience. While video games can vary in terms of animation style or audio type, the element of interactivity makes them a striking example of \"interactive multimedia\". \"Interactive multimedia\" refers to multimedia applications that allow users to actively participate instead of just sitting by as passive recipients of information.\nIn the arts, there are multimedia artists who blend techniques using different media that in some way incorporate interaction with the viewer. Another approach entails the creation of multimedia that can be displayed in a traditional fine arts arena, such as an art gallery. Video has become an intrinsic part of many concerts and theatrical productions in the modern era and has spawned content creation opportunities for many media professionals. Although multimedia display material may be volatile, the survivability of the content is as strong as any traditional medium.\nEducation.\nIn education, multimedia is used to produce computer-based training courses (popularly called CBTs) and reference books like encyclopedias and almanacs. A CBT lets the user go through a series of presentations, text about a particular topic, and associated illustrations in various information formats.\nLearning theory in the past decade has expanded dramatically because of the introduction of multimedia. Several lines of research have evolved, e.g., cognitive load and multimedia learning.\nFrom multimedia learning (MML) theory, David Roberts has developed a large group lecture practice using PowerPoint and based on the use of full-slide images in conjunction with a reduction of visible text (all text can be placed in the notes view' section of PowerPoint). The method has been applied and evaluated in 9 disciplines. In each experiment, students' engagement and active learning have been approximately 66% greater than with the same material being delivered using bullet points, text, and speech, corroborating a range of theories presented by multimedia learning scholars like Sweller and Mayer. The idea of media convergence is also becoming a major factor in education, particularly higher education. Defined as separate technologies such as voice (and telephony features), data (and productivity applications), and video that now share resources and interact with each other, media convergence is rapidly changing the curriculum in universities all over the world. Higher education has been implementing the use of social media applications such as Twitter, YouTube, Facebook, etc. to increase student collaboration and develop new processes in how information can be conveyed to students.\nEducational technology.\nMultimedia provides students with an alternate means of acquiring knowledge designed to enhance teaching and learning through various media and platforms. In the 1960s, technology began to expand into classrooms through devices such as screens and telewriters. This technology allows students to learn at their own pace and gives teachers the ability to observe the individual needs of each student. The capacity for multimedia to be used in multi-disciplinary settings is structured around the idea of creating a hands-on learning environment through the use of technology. Lessons can be tailored to the subject matter as well as personalized to the students' varying levels of knowledge on the topic. Learning content can be managed through activities that utilize and take advantage of multimedia platforms. This kind of usage of modern multimedia encourages interactive communication between students and teachers and opens feedback channels, introducing an active learning process, especially with the prevalence of new media and social media. Technology has impacted multimedia as it is largely associated with the use of computers or other electronic devices and digital media due to its capabilities concerning research, communication, problem-solving through simulations, and feedback opportunities. The innovation of technology in education through the use of multimedia allows for diversification among classrooms to enhance the overall learning experience for students.\nWithin education, video games, specifically fast-paced action games, are able to play a big role in improving cognitive abilities involving attention, task switching, and resistance to distractors. Research also shows that, though video games may take time away from schoolwork, implementing games into the school curriculum has an increased probability of moving attention from games to curricular goals.\nSocial work.\nMultimedia is a robust education methodology within the social work context. The five different types of multimedia that support the education process are narrative media, interactive media, communicative media, adaptive media, and productive media. Contrary to long-standing belief, multimedia technology in social work education existed before the prevalence of the internet. It takes the form of images, audio, and video into the curriculum.\nFirst introduced to social work education by Seabury &amp; Maple in 1993, multimedia technology is utilized to teach social work practice skills, including interviewing, crisis intervention, and group work. In comparison with conventional teaching methods, including face-to-face courses, multimedia education shortens transportation time, increases knowledge and confidence in a richer and more authentic context for learning, generates interaction between online users, and enhances understanding of conceptual materials for novice students.\nIn an attempt to examine the impact of multimedia technology on students' studies, A. Elizabeth Cauble &amp; Linda P. Thurston conducted research in which Building Family Foundations (BFF), an interactive multimedia training platform, was utilized to assess social work students' reactions to multimedia technology on variables of knowledge, attitudes, and self-efficacy. The results state that respondents show a substantial increase in academic knowledge, confidence, and attitude. Multimedia also benefits students because it brings experts online, fits students' schedule, and allows students to choose courses that suit them.\nMayer's Cognitive Theory of Multimedia Learning suggests that \"people learn more from words and pictures than from words alone.\" According to Mayer and other scholars, multimedia technology stimulates people's brains by implementing visual and auditory effects and thereby assists online users to learn efficiently. Researchers suggest that when users establish dual channels while learning, they tend to understand and memorize better. The mixed literature of this theory is still present in the fields of multimedia and social work.\nLanguage communication.\nWith the spread and development of the English language around the world, multimedia has become an important way of communicating between different people and cultures. Multimedia technology creates a platform where language can be taught. The traditional form of teaching English as a Second Language in classrooms has drastically changed with the prevalence of technology, making it easier for students to obtain language learning skills. Multimedia motivates students to learn more languages through audio, visual, and animation support. It also helps create English contexts since an important aspect of learning a language is developing their grammar, vocabulary, and knowledge of pragmatics and genres. In addition, cultural connections in terms of forms, contexts, meanings, and ideologies have to be constructed. By improving thought patterns, multimedia develops students' communicative competence by improving their capacity to understand the language. One of the studies, carried out by Izquierdo, Simard and Pulido, presented the correlation between \"Multimedia Instruction (MI) and learners' second language (L2)\" and its effects on learning behavior. Their findings, based on Gardner's theory of the \"socio-educational model of learner motivation and attitudes,\" show that there is easier access to language learning materials as well as increased motivation with MI along with the use of computer-assisted language learning.\nJournalism.\nNewspaper companies all over the world are trying to embrace the new phenomenon by implementing its practices in their work. While some have been slow to come around, other major newspapers like \"The New York Times\", \"USA Today,\" and \"The Washington Post\" are setting a precedent for the positioning of the newspaper industry in a globalized world. To keep up with the changing world of multimedia, journalistic practices are adopting and utilizing different multimedia functions through the inclusion of visuals such as varying audio, video, text, etc. in their writings.\nNews reporting is not limited to traditional media outlets. Freelance journalists can use different new media to produce multimedia pieces for their news stories. It engages global audiences and tells stories with technology, which develops new communication techniques for both media producers and consumers. The Common Language Project, later renamed The Seattle Globalist, is an example of this type of multimedia journalism production.\nMultimedia reporters who are mobile (usually driving around a community with cameras, audio and video recorders, and laptop computers) are often referred to as mojos, or \"mobile \"journalists.\nMultimedia engineering.\nSoftware engineers may use multimedia in computer simulations for anything from entertainment to training, such as military or industrial training. Multimedia for software interfaces is often done as a collaboration between creative professionals and software engineers. Multimedia helps expand the teaching practices that can be found in engineering to allow for more innovative methods to not only educate future engineers but to help evolve the scope of understanding of where multimedia can be used in specialized engineer careers like software engineers.\nMultimedia is also allowing major car manufacturers, such as Ford and General Motors, to expand the design and safety standards of their cars. By using a game engine and virtual reality glasses, these companies are able to test the safety features and the design of the car before a prototype is even made. Building a car virtually reduces the time it takes to produce new vehicles, cutting down on the time needed to test designs and allowing the designers to make changes in real time. It also reduces expenses since, with a virtual car, making real-world prototypes is no longer needed.\nMathematical and scientific research.\nIn mathematical and scientific research, multimedia is mainly used for modeling and simulation with binary code. For example, a scientist can look at a molecular model of a particular substance and manipulate it to arrive at a new substance. Representative research can be found in journals such as the \"Journal of Multimedia\". One well-known example of this being applied would be in the movie Interstellar, where Executive Director Kip Thorne helped create one of the most realistic depictions of a black hole in film. The visual effects team under Paul Franklin took Kip Thorne's mathematical data and applied it into their own visual effects engine called \"Double Negative Gravitational Renderer,\" a.k.a. \"Gargantua,\" to create a \"real\" black hole used in the final cut. Later on, the visual effects team went on to publish a black hole study.\nMedicine.\nMedical professionals and students have a wide variety of ways to learn new techniques and procedures through interactive media, online courses, and lectures. The methods of conveying information to students have drastically evolved with the help of multimedia. From the 1800s to today, lessons are commonly taught using chalkboards. Projected aids, such as the epidiascope and slide projectors, were introduced into classrooms around the 1960s. With the growing use of computers, the medical field has begun to incorporate new devices and procedures to assist in teaching students, performing procedures, and analyzing patient data. As well as providing that data in a meaningful way to the patients.\nVirtual reality.\nVirtual reality is a technology that creates a simulated environment, often using computer-generated imagery or a combination of real and virtual content, to immerse users in an interactive and lifelike experience. The aim of virtual reality is to make users feel as if they are physically present in a different environment, even though they are typically still physically located in the real world. Virtual reality finds applications across various fields, including gaming, education, healthcare, training, and entertainment. In gaming, users can be transported to fantastical worlds, experiencing games in a more immersive way. In education, VR can provide realistic simulations for training purposes, allowing users to practice skills in a risk-free environment. Healthcare professionals use VR for therapeutic purposes and medical training. The U.S. Air Force has shown using VR for training programs for their new pilots to simulate piloting an aircraft. This allows new pilots to learn in a safe environment and get comfortable before getting in a real aircraft.\nHead-mounted display (HMD): Users wear a headset that covers their eyes and ears, providing visual and auditory stimuli. These headsets are equipped with screens that display the virtual environment, and some may also have built-in speakers or headphones for audio. \nMotion tracking: Sensors track the user's movements, allowing them to interact with the virtual world. This can include head movements, hand gestures, and sometimes even full-body movements, enhancing the sense of immersion.\nInput devices: Controllers or other input devices are used to interact with the virtual environment. These devices can simulate hands or tools, enabling users to manipulate objects or navigate within the virtual space.\nComputer processing: Powerful computers or gaming consoles are often required to generate and render the complex graphics and simulations needed for a convincing virtual experience.\nAugmented reality.\nAugmented reality overlays digital content or output onto the real world using media such as audio, animation, and text. Augmented reality became widely popular only in the 21st century; however, some of the earlier versions of such were things like the Sega Genesis Activator Controller back in 1992, which allowed users to literally stand in an octagon and control in-game movement with physical movement, or to stretch back even further, the R.O.B. NES Robot back in 1984, which, with its array of accessories, was able to also provide users with the sensation of holding a firearm. These multimedia input devices are among the earliest of the augmented reality devices, allowing users to input commands to facilitate a different user experience. A more modern example of augmented reality is Pok\u00e9mon GO, a mobile game released on July 6, 2016, which allows users to see a Pok\u00e9mon in a real-world environment.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20421", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20421", "title": "Max Headroom (TV series)", "text": "1987\u20131988 satirical science fiction show\nMax Headroom is an American satirical cyberpunk science fiction television series by Chrysalis Visual Programming and Lakeside Productions for Lorimar-Telepictures that aired in the United States on ABC from March 31, 1987, to May 5, 1988. The series is set in a futuristic dystopia ruled by an oligarchy of television networks, and features the character and media personality Max Headroom. The story is based on the Channel 4 British TV film produced by Chrysalis, \"\".\nPremise.\nIn the future, an oligarchy of television networks rules the world. Even the government functions primarily as a puppet of the network executives, serving mainly to pass laws\u2014such as banning \"off\" switches on televisions\u2014that protect and consolidate the networks' power. Television technology has advanced to the point that viewers' physical movements and thoughts can be monitored through their television sets. \nAlmost all non-television technology has been discontinued or destroyed. The only real check on the power of the networks is Edison Carter, a crusading investigative journalist who regularly exposes the unethical practices of his own employer, and the team of allies both inside and outside the system who assist him in getting his reports to air and protecting him from the forces that wish to silence or kill him.\nCharacters.\nEdison Carter.\nEdison Carter (Matt Frewer) is a hard-hitting reporter for Network 23, who sometimes uncovers things that his superiors in the network would prefer be kept private. Eventually, one of these instances requires him to flee his workspace, and he is injured in a motorcycle accident in a parking lot.\nEdison cares about his co-workers, especially Theora Jones and Bryce Lynch, and he has a deep respect for his producer, Murray (although he rarely shows it).\nMax Headroom.\nMax Headroom (Frewer) is a computer reconstruction of Carter, created after Bryce Lynch uploads a copy of his mind. He appears as a computer-rendered bust of Carter superimposed on a wire-frame background. Since Carter's last sight before the motorcycle crash are the sign \"Max. headroom\" on a parking garage gate, these are the reconstruction's first words and ultimately his name. While Carter is a dedicated professional, Max is a wisecracking observer of human contradictions.\nDespite being the titular character, Max appears rarely in the show. While he occasionally plays a significant part in a plot\u2014sometimes by traveling through networks to gain information or by revealing secrets about Carter that Carter himself would not divulge\u2014his most frequent role is as comic relief, delivering brief quips in reaction to events or giving a humorous soliloquy at the end of an episode.\nTheora Jones.\nTheora Jones first appeared in the British-made television pilot film for the series. She was Network 23's star controller (\"stolen\" from the World One Network by Murray) and, working with Edison, the network's star reporter, she often helped save the day for everyone. She was also a potential love interest for Edison, but that subplot was not explored fully on the show before it was cancelled.\nNetwork 23's personnel files list her father as unknown, her mother as deceased, and her brother as Shawn Jones; Shawn is the focus on the second episode broadcast, \"Rakers\".\nTheora Jones was played by Amanda Pays, who along with Matt Frewer and W. Morgan Sheppard, was one of only three cast members to also appear in the American-made series that followed.\nBen Cheviot.\nCheviot (George Coe), was one of the executives on Network 23's board of directors. He later becomes the board's new chairman after Ned Grossberg is fired in the wake of the Blipvert incident. He is mostly ethical and almost invariably backs Edison Carter, occasionally against the wishes of the Network 23 board of directors. However, he has compromised himself on a few occasions when he felt the ratings for the Network would rise using methods that were questionable such as allowing the network to copyright the exclusive news of a terrorist organization, and mixing sex and politics. He once had an affair with board member Julia Fornby, though by the start of the show they had ended it long ago. Cheviot, while usually rolling over for his greatest client, did not do so when they attempted to supplant television networks themselves.\nBryce Lynch.\nBryce Lynch (Chris Young), a child prodigy and computer hacker, is Network 23's one-man technology research department.\nIn the stereotypical hacker ethos, Bryce has few principles and fewer loyalties. He seems to accept any task, even morally questionable ones, as long as he is allowed to have the freedom to play with technology however he sees fit. This, in turn, makes him a greater asset to the technological needs and demands of the network, and the whims of its executives and stars. However, he also generally does not hurt or infringe on others, making him a rare neutral character in the Max Headroom universe.\nIn the pilot episode of the series, Bryce is enlisted by evil network CEO Ned Grossberg (Charles Rocket) to investigate the mental patterns of unconscious reporter Edison Carter, to determine whether or not Carter has discovered the secrets of the \"Blipverts\" scandal. Bryce uploads the contents of Carter's memory into the Network 23 computer system, creating Max Headroom. It had been Bryce, following orders from Grossberg, who fought a hacking battle of sorts with Theora Jones that led to Edison hitting his head on a traffic barrier and falling unconscious.\nAfter the first episode, Bryce is generally recruited by Carter and his controller, Theora Jones, to provide technical aid to their investigative reporting efforts.\nMurray McKenzie.\nMurray (Jeffrey Tambor), Carter's serious and high-strung producer, whose job often becomes a balancing act between supporting Carter's stories and pleasing Network 23's executives. In his younger years he was also a field reporter and may have had some experience with the systems of a controller, though the system in his younger years had changed since and would not be reliable to replace one. When creating the \"What I Want To Know Show\" it was a toss-up between Edison Carter and another reporter and Murray \"Choose The Best\" a decision that would have future repercussions. Murray is divorced and sees his kids on weekends.\nBlank Reg.\nReg (W. Morgan Sheppard) is a \"blank\", a person not indexed in the government's database. He broadcasts the underground Big Time Television Network from his bus. He is a good friend of Edison Carter, and saves him on more than one occasion. With colleague/lover Dominique, he operates and is the onscreen voice of Big Time television, \"All day every day, making tomorrow seem like yesterday.\"\nHe dresses in a punk style and has a Mohawk haircut. He has an energetic personality and a strong nostalgic streak, defending antiquated music videos and printed books in equal measure, despite not having the ability to read.\nNed Grossberg.\nNed Grossberg is a recurring villain on the series, played by Charles Rocket.\nIn the pilot episode, Grossberg is the chairman of Network 23, a major city television station with the highest-rated investigative-news show in town, hosted by Edison Carter. In the Max Headroom world, real-time ratings equal advertising dollars, and advertisements have replaced stocks as the measure of corporate worth.\nGrossberg, with his secret prodigy Bryce Lynch, develops a high-speed advertising delivery method known as Blipverts, which condenses full advertisements into a few seconds. When Carter discovers that Blipverts are killing people, Grossberg orders Lynch to prevent Carter from getting out of the building. Knocked unconscious, Carter's memories are extracted into a computer by Lynch in order to determine whether Carter uncovered Grossberg's knowledge of the danger of Blipverts. The resulting computer file of the memory-extraction process becomes Max Headroom, making Grossberg directly responsible for the creation of the character. In the end, Grossberg is publicly exposed as responsible for the Blipverts scandal, and is removed as chairman of Network 23.\nA few episodes later, in \"Grossberg's Return\", Grossberg reappears as a board member of Network 66. Again, he invents a dubious television viewing medium and convinces the chairman of the network to adopt it for political reasons knowing it's fraudulent. When the viewing method is shown to be a complete fraud, and a false news story threatens to be exposed, the resulting public reaction against the network leads to the chairman being removed, and Grossberg manages to assume the chairmanship. This results not only in public ridicule for both Network 23 and 66, but the said networks become bitter rivals afterward. Grossberg continues to find a means to boost the ratings of Network 66, being more cautious about his steps, but occasionally his own board members operate behind his back. He is still chairman of 66 by the end of the show.\nWhen under stress, Grossberg exhibits a tic of slightly stretching his neck in his suit's collar, first seen in episode 1 when he confronts Lynch in his lab regarding Max retaining Carter's memory about the blipverts.\nIn the UK telefilm \"Max Headroom: 20 Minutes Into the Future\" upon which the American series was based, the character was called Grossman and was played by Nickolas Grace.\nDevelopment and production.\nThe series was based on the Channel 4 British TV film produced by Chrysalis, \"\". Cinemax aired the UK pilot followed by a six-week run of highlights from \"The Max Headroom Show\", a UK music video show where Headroom appears between music videos. ABC took an interest in the pilot and asked Chrysalis/Lakeside to produce the series for American audiences.\n\"Max Headroom: 20 Minutes into the Future\" was re-shot as a pilot program for a new series broadcast by the U.S. ABC television network. The pilot featured plot changes and some minor visual touches, but retained the same basic storyline. The only original cast retained for the series were Matt Frewer (Max Headroom/Edison Carter) and Amanda Pays (Theora Jones); a third original cast member, W. Morgan Sheppard, joined the series as \"Blank Reg\" in later episodes. Among the non-original cast, Jeffrey Tambor co-starred as \"Murray\", Edison Carter's neurotic producer.\nThe show went into production in late 1986 and ran for six episodes in the first season and eight in the second.\nHome media.\nShout! Factory (under license from Warner Bros. Home Entertainment) released \"Max Headroom: The Complete Series\" on DVD in the United States and Canada on August 10, 2010. The bonus features includes a round-table discussion with most of the major cast members (other than Matt Frewer), and interviews with the writers and producers.\nReception.\nThe series began as a mid-season replacement in spring of 1987, and did well enough to be renewed for the fall television season, but the viewer ratings could not be sustained in direct competition with CBS's Top 20 hit \"Dallas\" (also produced by Lorimar) and NBC's Top 30 hit \"Miami Vice.\" \"Max Headroom\" was canceled part-way into its second season. The entire series, along with two previously unbroadcast episodes, was rerun in spring 1988 during the Writers Guild of America strike. In the late 1990s, U.S. cable TV channels Bravo and the Sci-Fi Channel re-ran the series. Reruns also briefly appeared on TechTV in 2002. A cinema spin-off titled \"Max Headroom for President\" was announced with production intended to start in early 1988 in order to capitalize on the 1988 United States presidential election, but it was never made.\n\"Max Headroom\" has been called \"the first cyberpunk television series\", with \"deep roots in the Western philosophical tradition\".\nReboot.\nIn 2022, a reboot of Max Headroom was announced, with Halt and Catch Fire co-creator Christopher Cantwell set to serve as the showrunner. Original Max Headroom actor Matt Frewer is slated to reprise his role in the revived series.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20423", "revid": "43819313", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20423", "title": "Malaria", "text": "Mosquito-borne disease\nMedical condition&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Infobox/styles-images.css\" /&gt;\nMalaria is a mosquito-borne infectious disease that affects vertebrates and \"Anopheles\" mosquitoes. Human malaria causes symptoms that typically include fever, fatigue, vomiting, and headaches. In severe cases, it can cause jaundice, seizures, coma, or death. Symptoms usually begin 10 to 15 days after being bitten by an infected \"Anopheles\" mosquito. If not properly treated, people may have recurrences of the disease months later. In those who have recently survived an infection, reinfection usually causes milder symptoms. This partial resistance disappears over months to years if the person has no continuing exposure to malaria. The mosquitoes themselves are harmed by malaria, causing reduced lifespans in those infected by it.\nMalaria is caused by single-celled eukaryotes of the genus \"Plasmodium\". In mammals, it is spread through bites of infected female \"Anopheles\" mosquitoes. The mosquito bite introduces the parasites from the mosquito's saliva into the blood. The parasites travel to the liver, where they mature and reproduce. Five species of \"Plasmodium\" commonly infect humans. The three species associated with more severe cases are \"P.\u00a0falciparum\" (which is responsible for the vast majority of malaria deaths), \"P.\u00a0vivax\", and \"P.\u00a0knowlesi\" (a simian malaria that spills over into thousands of people a year). \"P.\u00a0ovale\" and \"P.\u00a0malariae\" generally cause a milder form of malaria. Malaria is typically diagnosed by the microscopic examination of blood using blood films, or with antigen-based rapid diagnostic tests. Methods that use the polymerase chain reaction to detect the parasite's DNA have been developed, but they are not widely used in areas where malaria is common, due to their cost and complexity.\nThe risk of disease can be reduced by preventing mosquito bites through the use of mosquito nets and insect repellents or with mosquito-control measures such as spraying insecticides and draining standing water. Several medications are available to prevent malaria for travellers in areas where the disease is common. Occasional doses of the combination medication sulfadoxine/pyrimethamine are recommended in infants and after the first trimester of pregnancy in areas with high rates of malaria. As of 2023, two malaria vaccines have been endorsed by the World Health Organization. The recommended treatment for malaria is a combination of antimalarial medications that includes artemisinin. The second medication may be either mefloquine (noting first its potential toxicity and the possibility of death), lumefantrine, or sulfadoxine/pyrimethamine. Quinine, along with doxycycline, may be used if artemisinin is not available. In areas where the disease is common, malaria should be confirmed if possible before treatment is started due to concerns of increasing drug resistance. Resistance among the parasites has developed to several antimalarial medications; for example, chloroquine-resistant \"P.\u00a0falciparum\" has spread to most malaria-prone areas, and resistance to artemisinin has become a problem in some parts of Southeast Asia.\nThe disease is widespread in the tropical and subtropical regions that exist in a broad band around the equator. This includes much of sub-Saharan Africa, Asia, and Latin America. In 2023, some 263 million cases of malaria worldwide resulted in an estimated 597,000 deaths. Around 95% of the cases and deaths occurred in sub-Saharan Africa. Rates of disease decreased from 2010 to 2014, but increased from 2015 to 2021. According to UNICEF, nearly every minute, a child under five died of malaria in 2021, and \"many of these deaths are preventable and treatable\". Malaria is commonly associated with poverty and has a significant negative effect on economic development. In Africa, it is estimated to result in losses of US$12 billion a year due to increased healthcare costs, lost ability to work, and adverse effects on tourism. The malaria caseload in India decreased by 69% from 6.4 million cases in 2017 to two million cases in 2023. Similarly, the estimated malaria deaths decreased from 11,100 to 3,500 (a 68% decrease) in the same period.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nEtymology.\nThe term \"malaria\" originates from Medieval 'bad air', a part of miasma theory; the disease was formerly called \"ague\" or \"marsh fever\" due to its association with swamps and marshland. The term appeared in English at least as early as 1768. Malaria was once common in most of Europe and North America, where it is no longer endemic, though imported cases do occur.\nThe scientific study of malaria is called malariology.\nSigns and symptoms.\nAdults with malaria tend to experience chills and fever, classically in periodic paroxysmal attacks lasting around six hours, followed by a period of sweating and fever relief\u2014as well as headache, fatigue, abdominal discomfort, and muscle pain. Children tend to have more general symptoms: fever, cough, vomiting, and diarrhea.\nInitial manifestations of the disease\u2014common to infection with all malaria parasite species\u2014are similar to flu-like symptoms, and can resemble other conditions such as sepsis, gastroenteritis, and viral diseases. The presentation may include headache, fever, shivering, joint pain, vomiting, hemolytic anemia, jaundice, hemoglobin in the urine, retinal damage, and convulsions.\nThe classic symptom of malaria is paroxysmal attacks\u2014a cyclical occurrence of sudden coldness followed by shivering and then fever and sweating, occurring every two days (tertian fever) in \"P.\u00a0vivax\" and \"P.\u00a0ovale\" infections, and every three days (quartan fever) for \"P.\u00a0malariae\". \"P.\u00a0falciparum\" infection can cause recurrent fever every 36\u201348 hours, or a less pronounced and almost continuous fever.\nSymptoms typically begin 10\u201315 days after the initial mosquito bite, but can occur as late as several months after infection with some \"P. vivax\" strains. Travellers taking preventative malaria medications may develop symptoms once they stop taking the drugs.\nSevere malaria is usually caused by \"P.\u00a0falciparum\" (often referred to as falciparum malaria). Symptoms of falciparum malaria arise 9\u201330 days after infection. Individuals with cerebral malaria frequently exhibit neurological symptoms, including abnormal posturing, nystagmus, conjugate gaze palsy (failure of the eyes to turn together in the same direction), opisthotonus, seizures, or coma.\nComplications.\nMalaria has several serious complications, including the development of respiratory distress, which occurs in up to 25% of adults and 40% of children with severe \"P.\u00a0falciparum\" malaria. Possible causes include respiratory compensation of metabolic acidosis, noncardiogenic pulmonary edema, concomitant pneumonia, and severe anaemia. Although rare in young children with severe malaria, acute respiratory distress syndrome occurs in 5\u201325% of adults and up to 29% of pregnant women. Coinfection of HIV with malaria increases mortality. Kidney failure is a feature of blackwater fever, where haemoglobin from lysed red blood cells leaks into the urine.\nInfection with \"P.\u00a0falciparum\" may result in cerebral malaria, a form of severe malaria that involves encephalopathy. It is associated with retinal whitening, which may be a useful clinical sign in distinguishing malaria from other causes of fever. An enlarged spleen, enlarged liver or both of these, severe headache, low blood sugar, and haemoglobin in the urine with kidney failure may occur. Complications may include spontaneous bleeding, coagulopathy, and shock.\nCerebral malaria can bring about death within forty-eight hours of the first symptoms of the infection being evident.\nMalaria during pregnancy can cause stillbirths, infant mortality, miscarriage, and low birth weight, particularly in \"P.\u00a0falciparum\" infection, but also with \"P.\u00a0vivax\".\nCause.\nMalaria is caused by infection with parasites in the genus \"Plasmodium\". In humans, malaria is caused by six \"Plasmodium\" species: \"P.\u00a0falciparum\", \"P.\u00a0malariae\", \"P.\u00a0ovale curtisi\", \"P.\u00a0ovale wallikeri\", \"P.\u00a0vivax\" and \"P.\u00a0knowlesi\". Among those infected, \"P.\u00a0falciparum\" is the most common species identified (~75%) followed by \"P.\u00a0vivax\" (~20%). Although \"P.\u00a0falciparum\" traditionally accounts for the majority of deaths, recent evidence suggests that \"P.\u00a0vivax\" malaria is associated with potentially life-threatening conditions about as often as with a diagnosis of \"P. falciparum\" infection. \"P.\u00a0vivax\" proportionally is more common outside Africa. Some cases have been documented of human infections with several species of \"Plasmodium\" from higher apes, but except for \"P.\u00a0knowlesi\"\u2014a zoonotic species that causes malaria in macaques\u2014these are mostly of limited public health importance.\nThe \"Anopheles\" mosquitos initially get infected by \"Plasmodium\" by taking a blood meal from a previously \"Plasmodium\" infected person or animal. Parasites are then typically introduced by the bite of an infected \"Anopheles\" mosquito. Some of these inoculated parasites, called \"sporozoites\", probably remain in the skin, but others travel in the bloodstream to the liver, where they invade hepatocytes. They grow and divide in the liver for 2\u201310 days, with each infected hepatocyte eventually harboring up to 40,000 parasites. The infected hepatocytes break down, releasing these invasive \"Plasmodium\" cells, called \"merozoites\", into the bloodstream. In the blood, the merozoites rapidly invade individual red blood cells, replicating over 24\u201372 hours to form 16\u201332 new merozoites. The infected red blood cell lyses, and the new merozoites infect new red blood cells, resulting in a cycle that continuously amplifies the number of parasites in an infected person. Over rounds of this infection cycle, a small portion of parasites do not replicate, but instead develop into early sexual stage parasites called male and female \"gametocytes\". These gametocytes develop in the bone marrow for 11 days, then return to the blood circulation to await uptake by the bite of another mosquito. Once inside a mosquito, the gametocytes undergo sexual reproduction, and eventually form daughter sporozoites that migrate to the mosquito's salivary glands to be injected into a new host when the mosquito bites.\nThe liver infection causes no symptoms; all symptoms of malaria result from the infection of red blood cells. Symptoms develop once there are more than around 100,000 parasites per milliliter of blood. Many of the symptoms associated with severe malaria are caused by the tendency of \"P. falciparum\" to bind to blood vessel walls, resulting in damage to the affected vessels and surrounding tissue. Parasites sequestered in the blood vessels of the lung contribute to respiratory failure. In the brain, they contribute to coma. In the placenta they contribute to low birthweight and preterm labor, and increase the risk of abortion and stillbirth. The destruction of red blood cells during infection often results in anemia, exacerbated by reduced production of new red blood cells during infection.\nOnly female mosquitoes feed on blood; male mosquitoes feed on plant nectar and do not transmit the disease. Females of the mosquito genus \"Anopheles\" prefer to feed at night. They usually start searching for a meal at dusk, and continue through the night until they succeed. However, in Africa, due to the extensive use of bed nets, they began to bite earlier, before bed-net time. Malaria parasites can also be transmitted by blood transfusions, although this is rare.\nRecurrent malaria.\nSymptoms of malaria can recur after varying symptom-free periods. Depending upon the cause, recurrence can be classified as either recrudescence, relapse, or reinfection. Recrudescence is when symptoms return after a symptom-free period due to failure to remove blood-stage parasites by adequate treatment. Relapse is when symptoms reappear after the parasites have been eliminated from the blood but have persisted as dormant hypnozoites in liver cells. Relapse commonly occurs between 8 and 24 weeks after the initial symptoms and is often seen in \"P.\u00a0vivax\" and \"P.\u00a0ovale\" infections. \"P.\u00a0vivax\" malaria cases in temperate areas often involve overwintering by hypnozoites, with relapses beginning the year after the mosquito bite. Reinfection means that parasites were eliminated from the entire body but new parasites were then introduced. Reinfection cannot readily be distinguished from relapse and recrudescence, although recurrence of infection within two weeks of treatment ending is typically attributed to treatment failure. People may develop some immunity when exposed to frequent infections.\nPathophysiology.\nMalaria infection develops via two phases: one that involves the liver (exoerythrocytic phase), and one that involves red blood cells, or erythrocytes (erythrocytic phase). When an infected mosquito pierces a person's skin to take a blood meal, sporozoites in the mosquito's saliva enter the bloodstream and migrate to the liver where they infect hepatocytes, multiplying asexually and asymptomatically for a period of 8\u201330 days.\nAfter a potential dormant period in the liver, these organisms differentiate to yield thousands of merozoites, which, following rupture of their host cells, escape into the blood and infect red blood cells to begin the erythrocytic stage of the life cycle. The parasite escapes from the liver undetected by wrapping itself in the cell membrane of the infected host liver cell.\nThe parasites multiply asexually within red blood cells, periodically breaking out to infect new ones. This repeated cycle results in synchronized waves of merozoites escaping and invading red blood cells, which cause the characteristic fever patterns.\nSome \"P.\u00a0vivax\" sporozoites do not immediately develop into exoerythrocytic-phase merozoites, but instead, produce hypnozoites that remain dormant for periods ranging from several months (7\u201310 months is typical) to several years. After a period of dormancy, they reactivate and produce merozoites. Hypnozoites are responsible for long incubation and late relapses in \"P.\u00a0vivax\" infections, although their existence in \"P.\u00a0ovale\" is uncertain.\nThe parasite is relatively protected from attack by the body's immune system because for most of its human life cycle it resides within the liver and blood cells and is relatively invisible to immune surveillance. However, circulating infected blood cells are destroyed in the spleen. To avoid this fate, the \"P.\u00a0falciparum\" parasite displays adhesive proteins on the surface of the infected blood cells, causing the blood cells to stick to the walls of small blood vessels, thereby sequestering the parasite from passage through the general circulation and the spleen. The blockage of the microvasculature causes symptoms such as those in placental malaria. Sequestered red blood cells can breach the blood\u2013brain barrier and cause cerebral malaria.\nGenetic resistance.\nDue to the high levels of mortality and morbidity caused by malaria\u2014especially the \"P.\u00a0falciparum\" species\u2014it has placed the greatest selective pressure on the human genome in recent history. Several genetic factors provide some resistance to it including sickle cell trait, thalassaemia traits, glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency, and the absence of Duffy antigens on red blood cells.\nThe effect of sickle cell trait on malaria immunity illustrates some evolutionary trade-offs that have occurred because of endemic malaria. Sickle cell trait causes a change in the haemoglobin molecule in the blood. Normally, red blood cells have a very flexible, biconcave shape that allows them to move through narrow capillaries; however, when the modified haemoglobin\u00a0S molecules are exposed to low amounts of oxygen, or crowd together due to dehydration, they can stick together forming strands that cause the cell to distort into a curved sickle shape. In these strands, the molecule is not as effective in taking or releasing oxygen, and the cell is not flexible enough to circulate freely. In the early stages of malaria, the parasite can cause infected red cells to sickle, and so they are removed from circulation sooner. This reduces the frequency with which malaria parasites complete their life cycle in the cell. Individuals who are homozygous (with two copies of the abnormal haemoglobin beta allele) have sickle-cell anaemia, while those who are heterozygous (with one abnormal allele and one normal allele) experience resistance to malaria without severe anaemia. Although the shorter life expectancy for those with the homozygous condition would tend to disfavour the trait's survival, the trait is preserved in malaria-prone regions because of the benefits provided by the heterozygous form.\nLiver dysfunction.\nLiver dysfunction as a result of malaria is uncommon and usually only occurs in those with another liver condition such as viral hepatitis or chronic liver disease. The syndrome is sometimes called \"malarial hepatitis\". While it has been considered a rare occurrence, malarial hepatopathy has seen an increase, particularly in Southeast Asia and India. Liver compromise in people with malaria correlates with a greater likelihood of complications and death.\nEffects on vaccine response.\nMalaria infection affects the immune responses following vaccination for various diseases. For example, malaria suppresses immune responses to polysaccharide vaccines. A potential solution is to give curative treatment before vaccination in areas where malaria is present.\nDiagnosis.\nDue to the non-specific nature of malaria symptoms, diagnosis is typically suspected based on symptoms and travel history, then confirmed with a laboratory test to detect the presence of the parasite in the blood (parasitological test). In areas where malaria is common, the World Health Organization (WHO) recommends clinicians suspect malaria in any person who reports having fevers, or who has a current temperature above 37.5\u00a0\u00b0C without any other obvious cause. Malaria should be suspected in children with signs of anemia: pale palms or a laboratory test showing hemoglobin levels below 8 grams per deciliter of blood. In areas of the world with little to no malaria, the WHO recommends only testing people with possible exposure to malaria (typically travel to a malaria-endemic area) and unexplained fever.\nIn sub-Saharan Africa, testing is low, with only about one in four (28%) of children with a fever receiving medical advice or a rapid diagnostic test in 2021. There was a 10-percentage point gap in testing between the richest and the poorest children (33% vs 23%). Additionally, a greater proportion of children in Eastern and Southern Africa (36%) were tested than in West and Central Africa (21%). According to UNICEF, 61% of children with a fever were taken for advice or treatment from a health facility or provider in 2021. Disparities are also observed by wealth, with an 18 percentage point difference in care-seeking behaviour between children in the richest (71%) and the poorest (53%) households.\nMalaria is usually confirmed by the microscopic examination of blood films or by antigen-based rapid diagnostic tests (RDT). Microscopy\u2014i.e. examining Giemsa-stained blood with a light microscope\u2014is the gold standard for malaria diagnosis. Microscopists typically examine both a \"thick film\" of blood, allowing them to scan many blood cells in a short time, and a \"thin film\" of blood, allowing them to clearly see individual parasites and identify the infecting \"Plasmodium\" species. Under typical field laboratory conditions, a microscopist can detect parasites when there are at least 100 parasites per microliter of blood, which is around the lower range of symptomatic infection. Microscopic diagnosis is relatively resource intensive, requiring trained personnel, specific equipment and a consistent supply of microscopy slides and stains.\nIn places where microscopy is unavailable, malaria is diagnosed with RDTs, rapid antigen tests that detect parasite proteins in a fingerstick blood sample. A variety of RDTs are commercially available, targeting the parasite proteins histidine rich protein 2 (HRP2, detects \"P. falciparum\" only), lactate dehydrogenase, or aldolase. The HRP2 test is widely used in Africa, where \"P. falciparum\" predominates. However, since HRP2 persists in the blood for up to five weeks after an infection is treated, an HRP2 test sometimes cannot distinguish whether someone currently has malaria or previously had it. Additionally, some \"P. falciparum\" parasites in the Amazon region lack the \"HRP2\" gene, complicating detection. Some \"P. falciparum\" species also have genetic deletions of the genes coding for the HRP2 antigen; leading to possible false negative results. Rapid tests also cannot quantify the parasite burden in a person. RDTs are fast and easily deployed to places without full diagnostic laboratories. However they give considerably less information than microscopy, and sometimes vary in quality from producer to producer and lot to lot.\nSerological tests to detect antibodies against \"Plasmodium\" from the blood have been developed, but are not used for malaria diagnosis due to their relatively poor sensitivity and specificity. Highly sensitive nucleic acid amplification tests have been developed, but are not used clinically due to their relatively high cost, and poor specificity for active infections.\nClassification.\nMalaria is classified into either \"severe\" or \"uncomplicated\" by the World Health Organization (WHO). It is deemed severe when \"any\" of the following criteria are present, otherwise it is considered uncomplicated.\nCerebral malaria is defined as a severe \"P.\u00a0falciparum\"-malaria presenting with neurological symptoms, including coma (with a Glasgow coma scale less than 11, or a Blantyre coma scale less than 3), or with a coma that lasts longer than 30 minutes after a seizure.\nPrevention.\nMethods used to prevent malaria include medications, mosquito elimination and the prevention of bites. As of 2023, there are two malaria vaccines, approved for use in children by the WHO: RTS,S and R21. The presence of malaria in an area requires a combination of high human population density, high \"Anopheles\" mosquito population density and high rates of transmission from humans to mosquitoes and from mosquitoes to humans. If any of these is lowered sufficiently, the parasite eventually disappears from that area, as happened in North America, Europe, and parts of the Middle East. However, unless the parasite is eliminated from the whole world, it could re-establish if conditions revert to a combination that favors the parasite's reproduction. Furthermore, the cost per person of eliminating anopheles mosquitoes rises with decreasing population density, making it economically unfeasible in some areas.\nPrevention of malaria may be more cost-effective than treatment of the disease in the long run, but the initial costs required are out of reach of many of the world's poorest people. There is a wide difference in the costs of control (i.e. maintenance of low endemicity) and elimination programs between countries. For example, in China\u2014whose government in 2010 announced a strategy to pursue malaria elimination in the Chinese provinces\u2014the required investment is a small proportion of public expenditure on health. In contrast, a similar programme in Tanzania would cost an estimated one-fifth of the public health budget. In 2021, the World Health Organization confirmed that China has eliminated malaria. In 2023, the World Health Organization confirmed that Azerbaijan, Tajikistan, and Belize have eliminated malaria.\nIn areas where malaria is common, children under five years old often have anaemia, which is sometimes due to malaria. Giving children with anaemia in these areas preventive antimalarial medication improves red blood cell levels slightly but does not affect the risk of death or need for hospitalisation.\nMosquito control.\nVector control refers to methods used to decrease malaria by reducing the levels of transmission by mosquitoes. For individual protection, the most effective insect repellents are based on DEET or picaridin. However, there is insufficient evidence that mosquito repellents can prevent malaria infection. Insecticide-treated nets (ITNs) and indoor residual spraying (IRS) are effective, have been commonly used to prevent malaria, and their use has contributed significantly to the decrease in malaria in the 21st century. ITNs and IRS may not be sufficient to eliminate the disease, as these interventions depend on how many people use nets, how many gaps in insecticide there are (low coverage areas), if people are not protected when outside of the home, and an increase in mosquitoes that are resistant to insecticides. Modifications to people's houses to prevent mosquito exposure may be an important long term prevention measure.\nInsecticide-treated nets.\nMosquito nets help keep mosquitoes away from people and reduce infection rates and transmission of malaria. Nets are not a perfect barrier and are often treated with an insecticide designed to kill the mosquito before it has time to find a way past the net. Insecticide-treated nets (ITNs) are estimated to be twice as effective as untreated nets and offer greater than 70% protection compared with no net. Between 2000 and 2008, the use of ITNs saved the lives of an estimated 250,000 infants in Sub-Saharan Africa. According to UNICEF, only 36% of households had sufficient ITNs for all household members in 2019. In 2000, 1.7\u00a0million (1.8%) African children living in areas of the world where malaria is common were protected by an ITN. That number increased to 20.3\u00a0million (18.5%) African children using ITNs in 2007, leaving 89.6\u00a0million children unprotected and to 68% African children using mosquito nets in 2015. The percentage of children sleeping under ITNs in sub-Saharan Africa increased from less than 40% in 2011 to over 50% in 2021. Most nets are impregnated with pyrethroids, a class of insecticides with low toxicity. They are most effective when used from dusk to dawn. It is recommended to hang a large \"bed net\" above the center of a bed and either tuck the edges under the mattress or make sure it is large enough such that it touches the ground. ITNs are beneficial towards pregnancy outcomes in malaria-endemic regions in Africa but more data is needed in Asia and Latin America.\nIn areas of high malaria resistance, piperonyl butoxide (PBO) combined with pyrethroids in mosquito netting is effective in reducing malaria infection rates. Questions remain concerning the durability of PBO on nets as the effect on mosquito mortality was not sustained after twenty washes in experimental trials.\nUNICEF notes that the use of insecticide-treated nets has been increased since 2000 through accelerated production, procurement and delivery, stating that \"over 2.5 billion ITNs have been distributed globally since 2004, with 87% (2.2 billion) distributed in sub-Saharan Africa. In 2021, manufacturers delivered about 220 million ITNs to malaria endemic countries, a decrease of 9 million ITNs compared with 2020 and 33 million less than were delivered in 2019\". As of 2021, 66% of households in sub-Saharan Africa had ITNs, with figures \"ranging from 31 per cent in Angola in 2016 to approximately 97 per cent in Guinea-Bissau in 2019\". Slightly more than half of the households with an ITN had enough of them to protect all members of the household, however.\nA 2025 Malaria Atlas Project analysis estimated that malaria interventions in Africa prevented 1.57 billion cases from 2000\u20132024, with insecticide-treated nets (ITNs) accounting for 72% of cases averted, which showed an increase from the previously reported 68% during the period of 2000-2015. The report warned that progress has slowed due to plateauing ITN coverage and emphasized that expanding ITN access remains essential, as vaccine efficacy improves as transmission declines, making ITNs critical to enabling vaccines to achieve their full impact. \nIndoor residual spraying.\nIndoor residual spraying is the spraying of insecticides on the walls inside a home. After feeding, many mosquitoes rest on a nearby surface while digesting the bloodmeal, so if the walls of houses have been coated with insecticides, the resting mosquitoes can be killed before they can bite another person and transfer the malaria parasite. As of 2006, the World Health Organization recommends 12 insecticides in IRS operations, including DDT and the pyrethroids cyfluthrin and deltamethrin. This public health use of small amounts of DDT is permitted under the Stockholm Convention, which prohibits its agricultural use. One problem with all forms of IRS is insecticide resistance. Mosquitoes affected by IRS tend to rest and live indoors, and due to the irritation caused by spraying, their descendants tend to rest and live outdoors, meaning that they are less affected by the IRS. Communities using insecticide treated nets, in addition to indoor residual spraying with 'non-pyrethroid-like' insecticides found associated reductions in malaria. Additionally, the use of 'pyrethroid-like' insecticides in addition to indoor residual spraying did not result in a detectable additional benefit in communities using insecticide treated nets.\nHousing modifications.\nHousing is a risk factor for malaria and modifying the house as a prevention measure may be a sustainable strategy that does not rely on the effectiveness of insecticides such as pyrethroids. The physical environment inside and outside the home that may improve the density of mosquitoes are considerations. Examples of potential modifications include how close the home is to mosquito breeding sites, drainage and water supply near the home, availability of mosquito resting sites (vegetation around the home), the proximity to live stock and domestic animals, and physical improvements or modifications to the design of the home to prevent mosquitoes from entering, such as window screens.\nIn addition to installing window screens, house screening measures include screening ceilings, doors, and eaves. In 2021, the World Health Organization's (WHO) Guideline Development Group conditionally recommended screening houses in this manner to reduce malaria transmission. However, the WHO does point out that there are local considerations that need to be addressed when incorporating these techniques. These considerations include the delivery method, maintenance, house design, feasibility, resource needs, and scalability.\nSeveral studies have suggested that screening houses can have a significant effect on malaria transmission. Beyond the protective barrier screening provides, it also does not call for daily behavioral changes in the household. Screening eaves can also have a community-level protective effect, ultimately reducing mosquito-biting densities in neighboring houses that do not have this intervention in place.\nIn some cases, studies have used insecticide-treated (e.g., transfluthrin) or untreated netting to deter mosquito entry. One widely used intervention is the In2Care BV EaveTube. In 2021, In2Care BV received funding from the United States Agency for International Development to develop a ventilation tube that would be installed in housing walls. When mosquitoes approach households, the goal is for them to encounter these EaveTubes instead. Inside these EaveTubes is insecticide-treated netting that is lethal to insecticide-resistant mosquitoes. This approach to mosquito control is called the Lethal House Lure method. The WHO is currently evaluating the efficacy of this product for widespread use.\nMass drug administration.\nMass drug administration (MDA) involves the administration of drugs to the entire population of an area regardless of disease status. A subtype, known as seasonal malaria chemoproprophylaxis (or chemoprevention) involves giving those vulnerable to complications from malaria (such as young children under 5, or pregnant women) medications to prevent malaria. This may be done during certain seasons, where mosquitos are more likely to spread the disease. Malaria vaccination, when combined with seasonal chemoprevention has been shown to prevent more cases of malaria compared to vaccination alone.\nA 2021 Cochrane review on the use of community administration of ivermectin found that, to date, low quality evidence shows no significant effect on reducing incidence of malaria transmission from the community administration of ivermectin.\nMosquito-targeted drug delivery.\nOne potential way to reduce the burden of malaria is to target the infection in mosquitoes, before it enters the mammalian host (during sporogeny). Drugs may be used for this purpose which have unacceptable toxicity profiles in humans. For example, aminoquinoline derivates show toxicity in humans, but this has not been shown in mosquitoes. Primaquine is particularly effective against \"Plasmodium\" gametocytes. Likewise, pyrroloquinazolinediamines show unacceptable toxicity in mammals, but it is unknown whether this is the case in mosquitoes. Pyronaridine, thiostrepton, and pyrimethamine have been shown to dramatically reduce ookinete formation in \"P. berghei\", while artefenomel, NPC-1161B, and tert-butyl isoquine reduce exflagellation in \"P. Falciparum\".\nOther mosquito control methods.\nPeople have tried a number of other methods to reduce mosquito bites and slow the spread of malaria. Efforts to decrease mosquito larvae by decreasing the availability of open water where they develop, or by adding substances to decrease their development, are effective in some locations. Electronic mosquito repellent devices, which make very high-frequency sounds that are supposed to keep female mosquitoes away, have no supporting evidence of effectiveness. There is a low certainty evidence that fogging may have an effect on malaria transmission. Larviciding by hand delivery of chemical or microbial insecticides into water bodies containing low larval distribution may reduce malarial transmission. There is insufficient evidence to determine whether larvivorous fish can decrease mosquito density and transmission in the area.\nMedications.\nThere are a number of medications that can help prevent or interrupt malaria in travellers to places where infection is common. Many of these medications are also used in treatment. In places where \"Plasmodium\" is resistant to one or more medications, three medications\u2014mefloquine, doxycycline, or the combination of atovaquone/proguanil (\"Malarone\")\u2014are frequently used for prevention. Doxycycline and the atovaquone/proguanil are better tolerated while mefloquine is taken once a week. Areas of the world with chloroquine-sensitive malaria are uncommon. Antimalarial mass drug administration to an entire population at the same time may reduce the risk of contracting malaria in the population, however the effectiveness of mass drug administration may vary depending on the prevalence of malaria in the area. Other factors such as drug administration plus other protective measures such as mosquito control, the proportion of people treated in the area, and the risk of reinfection with malaria may play a role in the effectiveness of mass drug treatment approaches.\nThe protective effect does not begin immediately, and people visiting areas where malaria exists usually start taking the drugs one to two weeks before they arrive, and continue taking them for four weeks after leaving (except for atovaquone/proguanil, which only needs to be started two days before and continued for seven days afterward). The use of preventive drugs is often not practical for those who live in areas where malaria exists, and their use is usually given only to pregnant women and short-term visitors. This is due to the cost of the drugs, side effects from long-term use, and the difficulty in obtaining antimalarial drugs outside of wealthy nations. During pregnancy, medication to prevent malaria has been found to improve the weight of the baby at birth and decrease the risk of anaemia in the mother. The use of preventive drugs where malaria-bearing mosquitoes are present may encourage the development of partial resistance.\nGiving antimalarial drugs to infants through intermittent preventive therapy can reduce the risk of having malaria infection, hospital admission, and anaemia.\nMefloquine is more effective than sulfadoxine-pyrimethamine in preventing malaria for HIV-negative pregnant women. Cotrimoxazole is effective in preventing malaria infection and reduce the risk of getting anaemia in HIV-positive women. Giving Dihydroartemisinin/piperaquine and mefloquine in addition to the daily cotrimoxazole to HIV-positive pregnant women seem to be more efficient in preventing malaria infection than cotrimoxazole alone.\nPrompt treatment of confirmed cases with artemisinin-based combination therapies (ACTs) may also reduce transmission.\nVaccines.\nMalaria vaccines have been another goal of research. The first promising studies demonstrating the potential for a malaria vaccine were performed in 1967 by immunising mice with live, radiation-attenuated sporozoites, which provided significant protection to the mice upon subsequent injection with normal, viable sporozoites. Since the 1970s, there has been considerable progress in developing similar vaccination strategies for humans.\nIn 2013, WHO and the malaria vaccine funders group set a goal to develop vaccines designed to interrupt malaria transmission with malaria eradication's long-term goal. The first vaccine, called RTS,S, was approved by European regulators in 2015. As of 2023, two malaria vaccines have been licensed for use. Other approaches to combat malaria may require investing more in research and greater primary health care. Continuing surveillance will also be important to prevent the return of malaria in countries where the disease has been eliminated.\nAs of 2019 it is undergoing pilot trials in 3 sub-Saharan African countries\u2014Ghana, Kenya and Malawi\u2014as part of the WHO's Malaria Vaccine Implementation Programme (MVIP).\nImmunity (or, more accurately, tolerance) to \"P.\u00a0falciparum\" malaria does occur naturally, but only in response to years of repeated infection. The highly polymorphic nature of many \"P.\u00a0falciparum\" proteins results in significant challenges to vaccine design. Vaccine candidates that target antigens on gametes, zygotes, or ookinetes in the mosquito midgut aim to block the transmission of malaria. These transmission-blocking vaccines induce antibodies in the human blood; when a mosquito takes a blood meal from a protected individual, these antibodies prevent the parasite from completing its development in the mosquito. Other vaccine candidates, targeting the blood-stage of the parasite's life cycle, have been inadequate on their own. For example, SPf66 was tested extensively in areas where the disease was common in the 1990s, but trials showed it to be insufficiently effective.\nAs of 2020, the RTS,S vaccine has been shown to reduce the risk of malaria by about 40% in children in Africa.\nThe R-21/Matrix M malaria vaccine was found to reduce cases of malaria by 75% in areas with seasonal spread and by 68% in areas of year-round spread in children in sub-saharan Africa. The R-21/Matrix M malaria vaccine was endorsed by the WHO for the prevention of malaria in children in 2023.\nGermany-based BioNTECH SE is developing an mRNA-based malaria vaccine BNT165 which has recently initiated a Phase 1 study [clinicaltrials.gov identifier: NCT05581641] in December 2022. The vaccine, based on the circumsporozoite protein (CSP) is being tested in adults aged 18\u201355 yrs at 3 dose levels to select a safe and tolerable dose of a three-dose schedule. Unlike GSK's RTS,S (AS01) and Serum Institute of India's R21/MatrixM, BNT-165 is being studied in adult age groups meaning it could be developed for Western travelers as well as those living in endemic countries. \nAnother vaccine targeting the erythrocytic stage of the parasite is under development. It has provisionally been named RH5.1/Matrix-M, and there is hope that this combined with the pre-erythrocytic vaccine R21/Matrix-M will generate an even more effective second-generation vaccine against malaria.\nOthers.\nCommunity participation and health education strategies promoting awareness of malaria and the importance of control measures have been successfully used to reduce the incidence of malaria in some areas of the developing world. Recognising the disease in the early stages can prevent it from becoming fatal. Education can also inform people to cover over areas of stagnant, still water, such as water tanks that are ideal breeding grounds for the parasite and mosquito, thus cutting down the risk of the transmission between people. This is generally used in urban areas where there are large centers of population in a confined space and transmission would be most likely in these areas. Intermittent preventive therapy is another intervention that has been used successfully to control malaria in pregnant women and infants, and in preschool children where transmission is seasonal.\nTreatment.\nMalaria is treated with antimalarial medications; the ones used depend on the type and severity of the disease, the patient's weight and other medical factors. While medications against fever are commonly used, their effects on outcomes are not clear. Providing free antimalarial drugs to households may reduce childhood deaths when used appropriately. Programmes which presumptively treat all causes of fever with antimalarial drugs may lead to overuse of antimalarials and undertreat other causes of fever. Nevertheless, the use of malaria rapid-diagnostic kits can help to reduce over-usage of antimalarials.\nUncomplicated malaria.\nSimple or uncomplicated malaria may be treated with oral medications. Artemisinin drugs are effective and safe in treating uncomplicated malaria. Artemisinin in combination with other antimalarials (known as artemisinin-combination therapy, or ACT) is about 90% effective when used to treat uncomplicated malaria. The most effective treatment for \"P.\u00a0falciparum\" infection is the use of ACT, which decreases resistance to any single drug component. Artemether-lumefantrine (six-dose regimen) is more effective than the artemether-lumefantrine (four-dose regimen) or other regimens not containing artemisinin derivatives in treating falciparum malaria. Another recommended combination is dihydroartemisinin and piperaquine. Artemisinin-naphthoquine combination therapy showed promising results in treating falciparum malaria but more research is needed to establish its efficacy as a reliable treatment. Artesunate plus mefloquine performs better than mefloquine alone in treating uncomplicated falciparum malaria in low transmission settings. Atovaquone-proguanil is effective against uncomplicated falciparum with a possible failure rate of 5% to 10%; the addition of artesunate may reduce failure rate. Azithromycin monotherapy or combination therapy has not shown effectiveness in treating \"Plasmodium falciparum\" or \"Plasmodium vivax\" malaria. Amodiaquine plus sulfadoxine-pyrimethamine may achieve less treatment failures when compared to sulfadoxine-pyrimethamine alone in uncomplicated falciparum malaria. There is insufficient data on chlorproguanil-dapsone in treating uncomplicated falciparum malaria. The addition of primaquine with artemisinin-based combination therapy for falciparum malaria reduces its transmission at day 3\u20134 and day 8 of infection. Sulfadoxine-pyrimethamine plus artesunate is better than sulfadoxine-pyrimethamine plus amodiaquine in controlling treatment failure at day 28. However, the latter is better than the former in reducing gametocytes in blood at day 7.\nInfection with \"P.\u00a0vivax\", \"P.\u00a0ovale\" or \"P.\u00a0malariae\" usually does not require hospitalisation. Treatment of \"P.\u00a0vivax\" malaria requires both elimination of the parasite in the blood with chloroquine or with artemisinin-based combination therapy and clearance of parasites from the liver with an 8-aminoquinoline agent such as primaquine or tafenoquine. These two drugs act against blood stages as well, the extent to which they do so still being under investigation.\nTo treat malaria during pregnancy, the WHO recommends the use of quinine plus clindamycin early in the pregnancy (1st trimester), and ACT in later stages (2nd and 3rd trimesters). There is limited safety data on the antimalarial drugs in pregnancy.\nSevere and complicated malaria.\nCases of severe and complicated malaria are almost always caused by infection with \"P. falciparum\". The other species usually cause only febrile disease. Severe and complicated malaria cases are medical emergencies since mortality rates are high (10% to 50%).\nRecommended treatment for severe malaria is the intravenous use of antimalarial drugs. For severe malaria, parenteral artesunate was superior to quinine in both children and adults. In another systematic review, artemisinin derivatives (artemether and arteether) were as efficacious as quinine in the treatment of cerebral malaria in children. Treatment of severe malaria involves supportive measures that are best done in a critical care unit. This includes the management of high fevers and the seizures that may result from it. It also includes monitoring for poor breathing effort, low blood sugar, and low blood potassium. Artemisinin derivatives have the same or better efficacy than quinolones in preventing deaths in severe or complicated malaria. Quinine loading dose helps to shorten the duration of fever and increases parasite clearance from the body. There is no difference in effectiveness when using intrarectal quinine compared to intravenous or intramuscular quinine in treating uncomplicated/complicated falciparum malaria. There is insufficient evidence for intramuscular arteether to treat severe malaria. The provision of rectal artesunate before transfer to hospital may reduce the rate of death for children with severe malaria. In children with malaria and concomitant hypoglycaemia, sublingual administration of glucose appears to result in better increases in blood sugar after 20 minutes when compared to oral administration, based on very limited data.\nCerebral malaria is the form of severe and complicated malaria with the worst neurological symptoms. There is insufficient data on whether osmotic agents such as mannitol or urea are effective in treating cerebral malaria. Routine phenobarbitone in cerebral malaria is associated with fewer convulsions but possibly more deaths. There is no evidence that steroids would bring treatment benefits for cerebral malaria.\nManaging cerebral malaria.\nCerebral malaria usually makes a patient comatose. If the cause of the coma is in doubt, testing for other locally prevalent causes of encephalopathy (bacterial, viral or fungal infection) should be carried out. In areas where there is a high prevalence of malaria infection (e.g. tropical region) treatment can start without testing first. To manage the cerebral malaria when confirmed the following can be done:\nThere is insufficient evidence to show that blood transfusion is useful in either reducing deaths for children with severe anaemia or in improving their haematocrit in one month. There is insufficient evidence that iron chelating agents such as deferoxamine and deferiprone improve outcomes of those with malaria falciparum infection.\nMonoclonal antibodies.\nA 2022 clinical trial shows that a monoclonal antibody mAb L9LS offers protection against malaria. It binds the \"Plasmodium falciparum\" circumsporozoite protein (CSP-1), essential to disease, and makes it ineffective.\nResistance.\nDrug resistance poses a growing problem in 21st-century malaria treatment. In the 2000s (decade), malaria with partial resistance to artemisins emerged in Southeast Asia. Resistance is now common against all classes of antimalarial drugs apart from artemisinins. Treatment of resistant strains became increasingly dependent on this class of drugs. The cost of artemisinins limits their use in the developing world. Malaria strains found on the Cambodia\u2013Thailand border are resistant to combination therapies that include artemisinins, and may, therefore, be untreatable. Exposure of the parasite population to artemisinin monotherapies in subtherapeutic doses for over 30 years and the availability of substandard artemisinins likely drove the selection of the resistant phenotype. Resistance to artemisinin has been detected in Cambodia, Myanmar, Thailand, and Vietnam, and there has been emerging resistance in Laos. Resistance to the combination of artemisinin and piperaquine was first detected in 2013 in Cambodia, and by 2019 had spread across Cambodia and into Laos, Thailand and Vietnam (with up to 80 percent of malaria parasites resistant in some regions).\nThere is insufficient evidence in unit packaged antimalarial drugs in preventing treatment failures of malaria infection. However, if supported by training of healthcare providers and patient information, there is improvement in compliance of those receiving treatment.\nPrognosis.\nWhen properly treated, people with malaria can usually expect a complete recovery. However, severe malaria can progress extremely rapidly and cause death within hours or days. In the most severe cases of the disease, fatality rates can reach 20%, even with intensive care and treatment. Over the longer term, developmental impairments have been documented in children who have had episodes of severe malaria. Chronic infection without severe disease can occur in an immune-deficiency syndrome associated with a decreased responsiveness to \"Salmonella\" bacteria and the Epstein\u2013Barr virus.\nDuring childhood, malaria causes anaemia during a period of rapid brain development, and also direct brain damage resulting from cerebral malaria. Some survivors of cerebral malaria have an increased risk of neurological and cognitive deficits, behavioural disorders, and epilepsy. Malaria prophylaxis was shown to improve cognitive function and school performance in clinical trials when compared to placebo groups.\nEpidemiology.\nThe WHO estimates that in 2021 there were 247 million total cases of malaria resulting in 619,000 deaths. Children under five years old were the most affected, accounting for 67% of malaria deaths worldwide in 2019. About 125 million pregnant women were at risk of infection each year; in Sub-Saharan Africa, maternal malaria was associated with up to 200,000 estimated infant deaths yearly. Since 2015, the WHO European Region has been free of malaria. The last country to report an indigenous malaria case was Tajikistan in 2014. There are about 1300\u20131500 malaria cases per year in the United States. The United States eradicated malaria as a major public health concern in 1951, though small outbreaks persist. Locally acquired mosquito-borne malaria occurred in the United States in 2003, when eight cases of locally acquired \"P. vivax\" malaria were identified in Florida, and again in May 2023, in four cases, as well as one case in Texas, and in August in one case in Maryland. About 900 people died from the disease in Europe between 1993 and 2003. Both the global incidence of disease and resulting mortality have declined in recent years. According to the WHO and UNICEF, deaths attributable to malaria in 2015 were reduced by 60% from a 2000 estimate of 985,000, largely due to the widespread use of insecticide-treated nets and artemisinin-based combination therapies. Between 2000 and 2019, malaria mortality rates among all ages halved from about 30 to 13 per 100,000 population at risk. During this period, malaria deaths among children under five also declined by nearly half (47%) from 781,000 in 2000 to 416,000 in 2019.\nMalaria is presently endemic in a broad band around the equator, in areas of the Americas, many parts of Asia, and much of Africa. Eighty-five to ninety percent of malaria fatalities occur in Sub-Saharan Africa. An estimate for 2009 reported that countries with the highest death rate per 100,000 of population were Ivory Coast (86.15), Angola (56.93) and Burkina Faso (50.66). A 2010 estimate indicated the deadliest countries per population were Burkina Faso, Mozambique and Mali. The Malaria Atlas Project aims to map global levels of malaria, providing a way to determine the global spatial limits of the disease and to assess disease burden. This effort led to the publication of a map of \"P.\u00a0falciparum\" endemicity in 2010 and an update in 2019. As of 2021, 84 countries have endemic malaria.\nThe geographic distribution of malaria within large regions is complex, and malaria-afflicted and malaria-free areas are often found close to each other. Malaria is prevalent in tropical and subtropical regions because of rainfall, consistent high temperatures and high humidity, along with stagnant waters where mosquito larvae readily mature, providing them with the environment they need for continuous breeding. In drier areas, outbreaks of malaria have been predicted with reasonable accuracy by mapping rainfall. Malaria is more common in rural areas than in cities. For example, several cities in the Greater Mekong Subregion of Southeast Asia are essentially malaria-free, but the disease is prevalent in many rural regions, including along international borders and forest fringes. In contrast, malaria in Africa is present in both rural and urban areas, though the risk is lower in the larger cities.\nAccording to the World Health Organization's 2023 World Malaria Report, there were an estimated 263 million malaria cases globally in 2023, up from 252 million in 2022. The number of malaria deaths stood at 597,000 in 2023, a slight decrease from 600,000 in 2022. The African region continues to bear a disproportionate share of the global malaria burden, accounting for approximately 94% of all cases and 95% of deaths.\nClimate change.\nClimate change is likely to affect malaria transmission, but the degree of effect and the areas affected is uncertain. Greater rainfall in certain areas of India, and following an El Ni\u00f1o event is associated with increased mosquito numbers.\nSince 1900 there has been substantial change in temperature and rainfall over Africa. However, factors that contribute to how rainfall results in water for mosquito breeding are complex, incorporating the extent to which it is absorbed into soil and vegetation for example, or rates of runoff and evaporation. Recent research has provided a more in-depth picture of conditions across Africa, combining a malaria climatic suitability model with a continental-scale model representing real-world hydrological processes.\nChanges in geographic distribution.\nClimate change has led to shifts in malaria-endemic regions, with the disease expanding into higher altitudes and previously malaria-free areas.\nRising temperatures allow mosquitoes to survive in regions that were once too cold for them, including highland areas in Africa, South America, and parts of Asia.\nA study analyzing malaria cases in Ethiopian and Colombian highlands found a strong correlation between increased temperatures and malaria incidence, demonstrating that climate change has made previously inhospitable areas suitable for transmission.\nIncreased transmission season.\nMalaria transmission is highly sensitive to temperature and rainfall patterns. Climate change has led to longer transmission seasons in tropical regions, where mosquitoes can breed year-round due to prolonged periods of high humidity and warm temperatures. Research suggests that in parts of sub-Saharan Africa, the malaria transmission season has lengthened by several months, particularly in regions where warming has pushed temperatures into the optimal range for \"Plasmodium falciparum\" development. In regions such as West Africa and parts of India, increasing temperatures and prolonged rainy seasons have contributed to a rise in malaria cases. Some studies predict that by 2050, many malaria-endemic areas will experience a 20\u201330% increase in transmission duration due to warming trends.\nEffects of extreme weather events.\nExtreme weather events, such as heavy rainfall, flooding, and droughts, are increasing in frequency and intensity due to climate change, creating favorable conditions for malaria outbreaks. Flooding provides ideal breeding grounds for mosquitoes by forming stagnant water pools, while droughts can also exacerbate malaria by forcing human populations to store water in open containers, which serve as mosquito habitats. This effect has been observed in parts of sub-Saharan Africa and South Asia, where prolonged drought periods were followed by spikes in malaria cases. A review of malaria outbreaks linked to climate variability found that El Ni\u00f1o events, which increase rainfall and temperatures in malaria-endemic regions, have been associated with significant surges in cases.\nResistance and adaptation of vectors.\nHigher temperatures accelerate the development of \"Plasmodium\" parasites within mosquitoes, potentially leading to increased transmission efficiency. Additionally, rising temperatures and changing environmental conditions have been linked to the spread of insecticide resistance in mosquito populations, complicating malaria control efforts. A global survey found that \"Anopheles\" mosquitoes in Africa, Asia, and South America have developed increased resistance to commonly used insecticides such as pyrethroids.\nUrbanization and malaria trends.\nUrbanization has a great effect on malaria. There are better healthcare and infrastructure in the cities which then reduce malaria. Whereas poorer areas with bad sanitation allow mosquitoes to thrive which then increase malaria. Some African cities have more malaria cases compared to suburban areas. In Bangkok, it has been shown that malaria has dropped due to better control.\nGlobal trends since 2000.\nAt the start of the 21st century, several global initiatives renewed efforts to control and eventually eradicate malaria. In 2000, malaria control became a key objective of the United Nations Millennium Development Goals, followed in 2015 by the Sustainable Development Goals, which aim to end the malaria epidemic by 2030. From 2005 to 2014, global financing for malaria programmes rose sharply from about US $960 million to US $2.5 billion, largely driven by international donors and focused on the WHO African Region. This surge in funding, channelled through programmes such as the Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria and Malaria No More supported an extensive scale-up of malaria control tools such as insecticide-treated nets, indoor spraying, rapid diagnostic tests, and artemisinin-based combination therapies, though overall resources remained below the estimated US $5 billion needed annually to meet global targets. \nBetween 2004 and 2015, the global scale-up of malaria control led to a dramatic rise in insecticide-treated net deliveries to endemic countries, from 6 million to nearly 190 million per year, with more than a billion distributed overall. As a result, household access to such nets in sub-Saharan Africa increased from 7 percent in 2005 to about two-thirds by 2015, though universal coverage targets remained unmet. By 2014, coverage of preventive malaria treatment during pregnancy had increased, with more than half of eligible women receiving at least one dose. However, many opportunities to deliver treatment were missed, and preventive drug programmes for children and infants were adopted in only a few countries.\nBetween 2005 and 2014, diagnostic testing for malaria increased sharply, particularly in the WHO African Region, where testing of suspected cases in the public sector rose from 36 to 65 percent, largely due to the spread of rapid diagnostic tests. Over the same period, treatment practices improved, with the share of children under five receiving artemisinin-based combination therapies increasing from under 1 percent in 2005 to about 16 percent in 2015, while use of older antimalarial drugs declined. From 2000 to 2015, global malaria cases declined from about 262 million to 214 million, a reduction of roughly 18 percent, with the WHO African Region accounting for nearly nine out of ten infections. During the same period, malaria deaths fell by almost half, from an estimated 839 000 to 438 000, reflecting major progress toward international targets to reduce disease incidence and mortality.\nBy 2015, a growing number of countries had moved closer to eliminating malaria. The number of nations with fewer than 1,000 cases rose from 13 in 2000 to 33, and 16 countries reported no locally transmitted cases. That same year, the WHO European Region recorded zero indigenous infections for the first time, meeting the target set in the Tashkent Declaration.\nThe progress made until 2015 stalled thereafter. From 2015 to 2022, case rates remained stable, followed by a slight rise in 2023 to 60.4 per 1,000, with sharp increases reported in Ethiopia, Madagascar, and Pakistan. Malaria deaths fell steadily until 2019, rose sharply in 2020 as a result of COVID-19 disruptions, and then declined again in the following years. While malaria remained most deadly for young children, their share of overall deaths had fallen. A small group of countries accounted for 95% of global cases, with Nigeria, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Uganda, Ethiopia, and Mozambique together responsible for more than half.\nThis stalling from 2015 was due to a combination of environmental, humanitarian, and biological challenges. Climate change created conditions that favored mosquito breeding and survival, with rising temperatures, shifting rainfall, and frequent floods expanding transmission zones. In Pakistan, for example, the 2022 floods led to an eightfold increase in malaria cases within two years. Conflicts and resulting humanitarian crises have also disrupted health services and displaced millions of people into areas with little access to prevention or treatment. At the same time, growing resistance to both insecticides and artemisinin-based therapies has made malaria harder to control and treat. These overlapping pressures\u2014climate change, conflict, displacement, and resistance\u2014have together undermined the progress achieved in earlier decades.\nHistory.\nAlthough the parasite responsible for \"P.\u00a0falciparum\" malaria has been in existence for 50,000\u2013100,000 years, the population size of the parasite did not increase until about 10,000 years ago, concurrently with advances in agriculture and the development of human settlements. Close relatives of the human malaria parasites remain common in chimpanzees. Some evidence suggests that the \"P.\u00a0falciparum\" malaria may have originated in gorillas.\nReferences to the unique periodic fevers of malaria are found throughout history. Ancient Indian physician Sushruta believed that the disease was associated with biting insects, long before the Roman Columella associated the disease with insects from swamps. Hippocrates described periodic fevers, labelling them tertian, quartan, subtertian and quotidian. Malaria may have contributed to the decline of the Roman Empire, and was so pervasive in Rome that it was known as the \"Roman fever\". Several regions in ancient Rome were considered at-risk for the disease because of the favourable conditions present for malaria vectors. This included areas such as southern Italy, the island of Sardinia, the Pontine Marshes, the lower regions of coastal Etruria and the city of Rome along the Tiber. The presence of stagnant water in these places was preferred by mosquitoes for breeding grounds. Irrigated gardens, swamp-like grounds, run-off from agriculture, and drainage problems from road construction led to the increase of standing water.\nMalaria is not referenced in the medical books of the Mayans or Aztecs. Despite this, antibodies against malaria have been detected in some South American mummies, indicating that some malaria strains in the Americas might have a pre-Columbian origin. European settlers and the West Africans they enslaved likely brought malaria to the Americas starting in the 16th century.\nScientific studies on malaria made their first significant advance in 1880, when Charles Louis Alphonse Laveran\u2014a French army doctor working in the military hospital of Constantine in Algeria\u2014observed parasites inside the red blood cells of infected people for the first time. He, therefore, proposed that malaria is caused by this organism, the first time a protist was identified as causing disease. For this and later discoveries, he was awarded the 1907 Nobel Prize for Physiology or Medicine. A year later, Carlos Finlay, a Cuban doctor treating people with yellow fever in Havana, provided strong evidence that mosquitoes were transmitting disease to and from humans. This work followed earlier suggestions by Josiah C. Nott, and work by Sir Patrick Manson, the \"father of tropical medicine\", on the transmission of filariasis.\nIn April 1894, a Scottish physician, Sir Ronald Ross, visited Sir Patrick Manson at his house on Queen Anne Street, London. This visit was the start of four years of collaboration and fervent research that culminated in 1897 when Ross, who was working in the Presidency General Hospital in Calcutta, proved the complete life-cycle of the malaria parasite in mosquitoes. He thus proved that the mosquito was the vector for malaria in humans by showing that certain mosquito species transmit malaria to birds. He isolated malaria parasites from the salivary glands of mosquitoes that had fed on infected birds. For this work, Ross received the 1902 Nobel Prize in Medicine. After resigning from the Indian Medical Service, Ross worked at the newly established Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine and directed malaria-control efforts in Egypt, Panama, Greece and Mauritius. The findings of Finlay and Ross were later confirmed by a medical board headed by Walter Reed in 1900. Its recommendations were implemented by William C. Gorgas in the health measures undertaken during construction of the Panama Canal. This public-health work saved the lives of thousands of workers and helped develop the methods used in future public-health campaigns against the disease.\nIn 1896, Amico Bignami discussed the role of mosquitoes in malaria. In 1898, Bignami, Giovanni Battista Grassi and Giuseppe Bastianelli succeeded in showing experimentally the transmission of malaria in humans, using infected mosquitoes to contract malaria themselves which they presented in November 1898 to the Accademia dei Lincei.\nThe first effective treatment for malaria came from the bark of cinchona tree, which contains quinine. This tree grows on the slopes of the Andes, mainly in Peru. The indigenous peoples of Peru made a tincture of cinchona to control fever. Its effectiveness against malaria was found and the Jesuits introduced the treatment to Europe around 1640; by 1677, it was included in the London Pharmacopoeia as an antimalarial treatment. It was not until 1820 that the active ingredient, quinine, was extracted from the bark, isolated and named by the French chemists Pierre Joseph Pelletier and Joseph Bienaim\u00e9 Caventou.\nQuinine was the predominant malarial medication until the 1920s when other medications began to appear. In the 1940s, chloroquine replaced quinine as the treatment of both uncomplicated and severe malaria until resistance supervened, first in Southeast Asia and South America in the 1950s and then globally in the 1980s.\nThe medicinal value of \"Artemisia annua\" has been used by Chinese herbalists in traditional Chinese medicines for 2,000 years. In 1596, Li Shizhen recommended tea made from qinghao specifically to treat malaria symptoms in his \"Compendium of Materia Medica\", however the efficacy of tea, made with \"A.\u00a0annua\", for the treatment of malaria is dubious, and is discouraged by the World Health Organization (WHO). Artemisinins, discovered by Chinese scientist Tu Youyou and colleagues in the 1970s from the plant \"Artemisia annua\", became the recommended treatment for \"P.\u00a0falciparum\" malaria, administered in severe cases in combination with other antimalarials. Tu says she was influenced by a traditional Chinese herbal medicine source, \"The Handbook of Prescriptions for Emergency Treatments\", written in 340 by Ge Hong. For her work on malaria, Tu Youyou received the 2015 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine.\n\"Plasmodium vivax\" was used between 1917 and the 1940s for malariotherapy\u2014deliberate injection of malaria parasites to induce a fever to combat certain diseases such as tertiary syphilis. In 1927, the inventor of this technique, Julius Wagner-Jauregg, received the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine for his discoveries. The technique was dangerous, killing about 15% of patients, so it is no longer in use.\nThe first pesticide used for indoor residual spraying was DDT. Although it was initially used exclusively to combat malaria, its use quickly spread to agriculture. In time, pest control, rather than disease control, came to dominate DDT use, and this large-scale agricultural use led to the evolution of pesticide-resistant mosquitoes in many regions. The DDT resistance shown by \"Anopheles\" mosquitoes can be compared to antibiotic resistance shown by bacteria. During the 1960s, awareness of the negative consequences of its indiscriminate use increased, ultimately leading to bans on agricultural applications of DDT in many countries in the 1970s. Before DDT, malaria was successfully eliminated or controlled in tropical areas like Brazil and Egypt by removing or poisoning the breeding grounds of the mosquitoes or the aquatic habitats of the larval stages, for example by applying the highly toxic arsenic compound Paris Green to places with standing water.\nNames.\nVarious types of malaria have been called by the names below:\nInitial WHO program (1955\u20131969).\nIn 1955 the WHO launched the Global Malaria Eradication Program (GMEP). The program relied largely on DDT for mosquito control and rapid diagnosis and treatment to break the transmission cycle. The program eliminated the disease in \"North America, Europe, the former Soviet Union\", and in \"Taiwan, much of the Caribbean, the Balkans, parts of northern Africa, the northern region of Australia, and a large swath of the South Pacific\" and dramatically reduced mortality in Sri Lanka and India.\nHowever, failure to sustain the program, increasing mosquito tolerance to DDT, and increasing parasite tolerance led to a resurgence. In many areas early successes partially or completely reversed, and in some cases rates of transmission increased. Experts tie malarial resurgence to multiple factors, including poor leadership, management and funding of malaria control programs; poverty; civil unrest; and increased irrigation. The evolution of resistance to first-generation drugs (e.g. chloroquine) and to insecticides exacerbated the situation. The program succeeded in eliminating malaria only in areas with \"high socio-economic status, well-organized healthcare systems, and relatively less intensive or seasonal malaria transmission\".\nFor example, in Sri Lanka, the program reduced cases from about one million per year before spraying to just 18 in 1963 and 29 in 1964. Thereafter the program was halted to save money and malaria rebounded to 600,000 cases in 1968 and the first quarter of 1969. The country resumed DDT vector control but the mosquitoes had evolved resistance in the interim, presumably because of continued agricultural use. The program switched to malathion, but despite initial successes, malaria continued its resurgence into the 1980s.\nDue to vector and parasite resistance and other factors, the feasibility of eradicating malaria with the strategy used at the time and resources available led to waning support for the program. WHO suspended the program in 1969 and attention instead focused on controlling and treating the disease. Spraying programs (especially using DDT) were curtailed due to concerns over safety and environmental effects, as well as problems in administrative, managerial and financial implementation. Efforts shifted from spraying to the use of bednets impregnated with insecticides and other interventions.\nEradication efforts.\nThere have been two major global malaria eradication efforts: the first, led by the World Health Organization between 1955 and 1969, and the second, initiated by the United Nations in the 21st century through the Millennium and Sustainable Development Goals. Malaria has been eliminated or significantly reduced in many regions of the world, but remains widespread in others. Most of Europe, North America, Australia, North Africa and the Caribbean, along with parts of South America, Asia and Southern Africa, are now free from malaria, while much of the central part of Africa continues to experience high levels of transmission.\nSociety and culture.\nEconomic consequences.\nMalaria is not just a disease commonly associated with poverty; some evidence suggests that it is also a cause of poverty and a major hindrance to economic development. Although tropical regions are most affected, malaria's furthest influence reaches into some temperate zones that have extreme seasonal changes. The disease has been associated with major negative economic effects on regions where it is widespread. During the late 19th and early 20th centuries, it was a major factor in the slow economic development of the American southern states.\nA comparison of average per capita GDP in 1995, adjusted for parity of purchasing power, between countries with malaria and countries without malaria gives a fivefold difference (US$1,526 versus US$8,268). In the period 1965 to 1990, countries where malaria was common had an average per capita GDP that increased only 0.4% per year, compared to 2.4% per year in other countries.\nPoverty can increase the risk of malaria since those in poverty do not have the financial capacities to prevent or treat the disease. In its entirety, the economic consequences of malaria has been estimated to cost Africa US$12\u00a0billion every year. This includes costs of health care, working days lost due to sickness, days lost in education, decreased productivity due to brain damage from cerebral malaria, and loss of investment and tourism. The disease has a heavy burden in some countries, where it may be responsible for 30\u201350% of hospital admissions, up to 50% of outpatient visits, and up to 40% of public health spending.\nCerebral malaria is one of the leading causes of neurological disabilities in African children. Studies comparing cognitive functions before and after treatment for severe malarial illness continued to show significantly impaired school performance and cognitive abilities even after recovery. Consequently, severe and cerebral malaria have far-reaching socioeconomic consequences that extend beyond the immediate effects of the disease.\nCounterfeit and substandard drugs.\nSophisticated counterfeits have been found in several Asian countries such as Cambodia, China, Indonesia, Laos, Thailand, and Vietnam, and are a major cause of avoidable death in those countries. The WHO said that studies indicate that up to 40% of artesunate-based malaria medications are counterfeit, especially in the Greater Mekong region. They have established a rapid alert system to rapidly report information about counterfeit drugs to relevant authorities in participating countries. There is no reliable way for doctors or lay people to detect counterfeit drugs without help from a laboratory. Companies are attempting to combat the persistence of counterfeit drugs by using new technology to provide security from source to distribution.\nAnother clinical and public health concern is the proliferation of substandard antimalarial medicines resulting from inappropriate concentration of ingredients, contamination with other drugs or toxic impurities, poor quality ingredients, poor stability and inadequate packaging. A 2012 study demonstrated that roughly one-third of antimalarial medications in Southeast Asia and Sub-Saharan Africa failed chemical analysis, packaging analysis, or were falsified.\nWar.\nThroughout history, the contraction of malaria has played a prominent role in the fates of government rulers, nation-states, military personnel, and military actions. In 1910, Nobel Prize in Medicine-winner Sir Ronald Ross (himself a malaria survivor), published a book titled \"The Prevention of Malaria\" that included a chapter titled \"The Prevention of Malaria in War\". The chapter's author, Colonel C. H. Melville, Professor of Hygiene at Royal Army Medical College in London, addressed the prominent role that malaria has historically played during wars: \"The history of malaria in war might almost be taken to be the history of war itself, certainly the history of war in the Christian era.\u00a0... It is probably the case that many of the so-called camp fevers, and probably also a considerable proportion of the camp dysentery, of the wars of the sixteenth, seventeenth and eighteenth centuries were malarial in origin.\" In British-occupied India the cocktail gin and tonic may have come about as a way of taking quinine, known for its antimalarial properties.\nThe Scottish attempt to build a canal near what is now the Panamanian one was largely defeated by malaria. Starting with the establishment of \"New Caledonia\", The Dari\u00e8n Gap Project drained the kingdom \u2014 not yet part of the United Kingdom \u2014 of most of its wealth. The cost of the bail-out from London was the independence of Scotland.\nMalaria was the most significant health hazard encountered by U.S. troops in the South Pacific during World War II, where about 500,000 men were infected. According to Joseph Patrick Byrne, \"Sixty thousand American soldiers died of malaria during the African and South Pacific campaigns.\"\nSignificant financial investments have been made to procure existing and create new antimalarial agents. During World War I and World War II, inconsistent supplies of the natural antimalaria drugs cinchona bark and quinine prompted substantial funding into research and development of other drugs and vaccines. American military organisations conducting such research initiatives include the Navy Medical Research Center, Walter Reed Army Institute of Research, and the U.S. Army Medical Research Institute of Infectious Diseases of the US Armed Forces.\nAdditionally, initiatives have been founded such as Malaria Control in War Areas (MCWA), established in 1942, and its successor, the Communicable Disease Center (now known as the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, or CDC) established in 1946. According to the CDC, MCWA \"was established to control malaria around military training bases in the southern United States and its territories, where malaria was still problematic\".\nResearch.\nThe Malaria Eradication Research Agenda (malERA) initiative was a consultative process to identify which areas of research and development (R&amp;D) must be addressed for worldwide eradication of malaria.\nMedications.\nMalaria parasites contain apicoplasts, organelles related to the plastids found in plants, complete with their own genomes. These apicoplasts are thought to have originated through the endosymbiosis of algae and play a crucial role in various aspects of parasite metabolism, such as fatty acid biosynthesis. Over 400 proteins have been found to be produced by apicoplasts and these are now being investigated as possible targets for novel antimalarial drugs.\nWith the onset of drug-resistant \"Plasmodium\" parasites, new strategies are being developed to combat the widespread disease. One such approach lies in the introduction of synthetic pyridoxal-amino acid adducts, which are taken up by the parasite and ultimately interfere with its ability to create several essential B vitamins. Antimalarial drugs using synthetic metal-based complexes are attracting research interest.\nOn the basis of molecular docking outcomes, compounds 3j, 4b, 4h, 4m were exhibited selectivity towards PfLDH. The post docking analysis displayed stable dynamic behavior of all the selected compounds compared to Chloroquine. The end state thermodynamics analysis stated 3j compound as a selective and potent PfLDH inhibitor.\nNew targets.\nTargeting \"Plasmodium\" liver-stage parasites selectively is emerging as an alternative strategy in the face of resistance to the latest frontline combination therapies against blood stages of the parasite.\nIn research conducted in 2019, using experimental analysis with knockout (KO) mutants of \"Plasmodium berghei\", the authors were able to identify genes that are potentially essential in the liver stage. Moreover, they generated a computational model to analyse pre\u2013erytrocytic development and liver\u2013stage metabolism. Combining both methods they identified seven metabolic subsystems that become essential compared to the blood stage. Some of these metabolic pathways are fatty acid synthesis and elongation, tricarboxylic acid, amino acid and heme metabolism among others.\nSpecifically, they studied three subsystems: fatty acid synthesis and elongation, and amino sugar biosynthesis. For the first two pathways they demonstrated a clear dependence of the liver stage on its own fatty acid metabolism.\nThey proved for the first time the critical role of amino sugar biosynthesis in the liver stage of \"P. berghei\". The uptake of N\u2013acetyl\u2013glucosamine appears to be limited in the liver stage, being its synthesis needed for the parasite development.\nThese findings and the computational model provide a basis for the design of antimalarial therapies targeting metabolic proteins.\nGenomic research.\nThe genome of \"Plasmodium falciparum\" was sequenced and published in the year 2002.\nA species of malaria plasmodium tends to have rather polymorphic antigens which can serve as immune system targets. Some searches of \"P. falciparum\" genes for hotspots of encoded variations found sections of genes that when tested proved to encode for antigens. When such antigens are used for vaccine targets a strain of plasmodium with a different allele for the antigen can sometimes escape the immune response stimulated by the vaccine.\nTwo related viruses, MaRNAV-1 and MaRNAV-2 in \"Plasmodium vivax\" and in avian Leucocytozoon respectively, were found through RNA-Sequencing of blood. The finding of a virus infecting a human malaria plasmodium is a first discovery of its kind. It should lead to better understanding of malaria biology.\nOther.\nA non-chemical vector control strategy involves genetic manipulation of malaria mosquitoes. Advances in genetic engineering technologies make it possible to introduce foreign DNA into the mosquito genome and either decrease the lifespan of the mosquito, or make it more resistant to the malaria parasite. Sterile insect technique is a genetic control method whereby large numbers of sterile male mosquitoes are reared and released. Mating with wild females reduces the wild population in the subsequent generation; repeated releases eventually eliminate the target population.\nGenomics is central to malaria research. With the sequencing of \"P.\u00a0falciparum\", one of its vectors \"Anopheles gambiae\", and the human genome, the genetics of all three organisms in the malaria life cycle can be studied. Another new application of genetic technology is the ability to produce genetically modified mosquitoes that do not transmit malaria, potentially allowing biological control of malaria transmission.\nIn one study, a genetically modified strain of \"Anopheles stephensi\" was created that no longer supported malaria transmission, and this resistance was passed down to mosquito offspring.\nGene drive is a technique for changing wild populations, for instance to combat or eliminate insects so they cannot transmit diseases (in particular mosquitoes in the cases of malaria, zika, dengue and yellow fever). One example of this method was performed with \"Anopheles gambiae\", where the researchers induced a male-biased sex-distorter gene drive (SDGD). They induced the super-Mendelian inheritance of the I-Ppol nuclease, which is responsible for the shredding of the X-chromosome, and coupled it to a CRISPR-based gene drive. The nuclease was inserted into the \"doublesex\" gene, which acts to control the sexual differentiation of insects and determine whether they will become female or male. By inducing this, the population of mosquitoes they were working with became male-only, so that there was a decrease in the population, and reportedly no resistance development\nIn a study conducted in 2015, researchers observed a specific interaction between malaria and co-infection with the nematode Nippostrongylus brasiliensis, a pulmonary migrating helminth, in mice. The co-infection was found to reduce the virulence of the \"Plasmodium\" parasite, the causative agent of malaria. This reduction was attributed to the nematode infection causing increased destruction of erythrocytes, or red blood cells. Given that \"Plasmodium\" has a predilection for older host erythrocytes, the increased erythrocyte destruction and ensuing erythropoiesis result in a predominantly younger erythrocyte population, which in turn leads to a decrease in \"Plasmodium\" population. Notably, this effect appears to be largely independent of the host's immune control of \"Plasmodium\".\nFinally, a review article published in December 2020 noted a correlation between malaria-endemic regions and COVID-19 case fatality rates. The study found that, on average, regions where malaria is endemic reported lower COVID-19 case fatality rates compared to regions without endemic malaria.\nIn 2017, a bacterial strain of the genus Serratia was genetically modified to prevent malaria in mosquitos and in 2023, it has been reported that the bacterium Delftia tsuruhatensis naturally prevents the development of malaria by secreting a molecule called Harmane.\nOther avenue that can contribute to understanding of malaria transmission, is the source of meal for the vector when they have the parasites. Its known that plant sugars are the primary source of nutrients for survival of adult mosquitoes, therefore utilising this link for management of the vector will contribute in mitigating malaria transmission.\nIn a 2018 study of 400 Kenyan school aged children, researchers were able to diagnose malaria with 100% sensitivity based on volatile biomarkers in the skin (molecules that cause odors). And the volatile biomarker signature of those with symptomatic and asymptomatic disease differed significantly. Thus introducing a possible new diagnostic test for the disease.\nOther animals.\nWhile none of the main four species of malaria parasite that cause human infections are known to have animal reservoirs, \"P.\u00a0knowlesi\" is known to infect both humans and non-human primates. Other non-human primate malarias (particularly \"P. cynomolgi\" and \"P. simium\") have also been found to have spilled over into humans. Nearly 200 \"Plasmodium\" species have been identified that infect birds, reptiles, and other mammals, and about 30 of them naturally infect non-human primates. Some malaria parasites of non-human primates (NHP) serve as model organisms for human malarial parasites, such as \"P.\u00a0coatneyi\" (a model for \"P.\u00a0falciparum\") and \"P.\u00a0cynomolgi\" (a model for \"P.\u00a0vivax\"). Diagnostic techniques used to detect parasites in NHP are similar to those employed for humans. Malaria parasites that infect rodents are widely used as models in research, such as \"P.\u00a0berghei\". Avian malaria primarily affects species of the order Passeriformes, and poses a substantial threat to birds of Hawaii, the Galapagos, and other archipelagoes. The parasite \"P.\u00a0relictum\" is known to play a role in limiting the distribution and abundance of endemic Hawaiian birds. Global warming is expected to increase the prevalence and global distribution of avian malaria, as elevated temperatures provide optimal conditions for parasite reproduction.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20424", "revid": "234689", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20424", "title": "Lunar phase", "text": "Shape of the Moon's sunlit portion as viewed from Earth\nA lunar phase or Moon phase is the apparent shape of the Moon's day and night phases of the lunar day as viewed from afar. Because the Moon is tidally locked to Earth, the cycle of phases takes one lunar month and moves across the same side of the Moon, which always faces Earth. In common usage, the four major phases are the new moon, the first quarter, the full moon and the last quarter; the four minor phases are waxing crescent, waxing gibbous, waning gibbous, and waning crescent. A lunar month is the time between successive recurrences of the same phase: due to the eccentricity of the Moon's orbit, this duration is not perfectly constant but averages about 29.5 days.\nThe appearance of the Moon (its phase) gradually changes over a lunar month as the relative orbital positions of the Moon around Earth, and Earth around the Sun, shift. The visible side of the Moon is sunlit to varying extents, depending on the position of the Moon in its orbit, with the sunlit portion varying from 0% (at new moon) to nearly 100% (at full moon).\nPhenomenon.\nThe Moon rotates as it orbits Earth, changing orientation toward the Sun experiencing a lunar day. A lunar day is equal to one lunar month (one synodic orbit around Earth) due to it being tidally locked to Earth. Since the Moon is not tidally locked to the Sun, lunar daylight and night times both occur around the Moon. The changing position of the illumination of the Moon by the Sun during a lunar day is observable from Earth as the changing lunar phases, waxing crescent being the sunrise and the waning crescent the sunset phase of a day observed from afar.\nPhases of the Moon.\nThere are four \"principal\" (primary, or major) lunar phases: the new moon, first quarter, full moon, and last quarter (also known as third or final quarter), when the Moon's ecliptic longitude is at an angle to the Sun (as viewed from the center of the Earth) of 0\u00b0, 90\u00b0, 180\u00b0, and 270\u00b0 respectively. Each of these phases appears at slightly different times at different locations on Earth, and tabulated times are therefore always \"geocentric\" (calculated for the Earth's center).\nBetween the principal phases are \"intermediate\" phases, during which the apparent shape of the illuminated Moon is either crescent or gibbous. On average, the intermediate phases last one-quarter of a synodic month, or 7.38 days.\nThe term \"waxing\" is used for an intermediate phase when the Moon's apparent shape is thickening, from new to a full moon; and \"waning\" when the shape is thinning. The duration from full moon to new moon (or new moon to full moon) varies from approximately to about .\nDue to lunar motion relative to the meridian and the ecliptic, in Earth's Northern Hemisphere:\nNon-Western cultures may use a different number of lunar phases; for example, traditional Hawaiian culture has a total of 30 phases (one per day).\nWaxing and waning.\nWhen the Sun and Moon are aligned on the same side of the Earth (conjunct), the Moon is \"new\", and the side of the Moon facing Earth is not illuminated by the Sun. As the Moon \"waxes\" (the amount of illuminated surface as seen from Earth increases), the lunar phases progress through the new moon, crescent moon, first-quarter moon, gibbous moon, and full moon phases. The Moon then \"wanes\" as it passes through the gibbous moon, third-quarter moon, and crescent moon phases, before returning back to new moon.\nThe terms \"old moon\" and \"new moon\" are not interchangeable. The \"old moon\" is a waning sliver (which eventually becomes undetectable to the naked eye) until the moment it aligns with the Sun and begins to wax, at which point it becomes new again. \"Half moon\" is often used to mean the first- and third-quarter moons, while the term \"quarter\" refers to the extent of the Moon's cycle around the Earth, not its shape.\nWhen an illuminated hemisphere is viewed from a certain angle, the portion of the illuminated area that is visible will have a two-dimensional shape as defined by the intersection of an ellipse and circle (in which the ellipse's major axis coincides with the circle's diameter). If the half-ellipse is convex with respect to the half-circle, then the shape will be gibbous (bulging outwards), whereas if the half-ellipse is concave with respect to the half-circle, then the shape will be a crescent. When a crescent moon occurs, the phenomenon of earthshine may be apparent, where the night side of the Moon dimly reflects indirect sunlight reflected from Earth.\nTimekeeping.\nArchaeologists have reconstructed methods of timekeeping that go back to prehistoric times, at least as old as the Neolithic. The natural units for timekeeping used by most historical societies are the day, the solar year and the lunation. The first crescent of the new moon provides a clear and regular marker in time and pure lunar calendars (such as the Islamic Hijri calendar) rely completely on this metric. The fact, however, that a year of twelve lunar months is ten or eleven days shorter than the solar year means that a lunar calendar drifts out of step with the seasons. Lunisolar calendars resolve this issue with a year of thirteen lunar months every few years, or by restarting the count at the first new (or full) moon after the winter solstice. The Sumerian calendar is the first recorded to have used the former method; Chinese calendar uses the latter, despite delaying its start until the second or even third new moon after the solstice. The Hindu calendar, also a lunisolar calendar, further divides the month into two fourteen day periods that mark the waxing moon and the waning moon. \nThe ancient Roman calendar was broadly a lunisolar one; on the decree of Julius Caesar in the first century BCE, Rome changed to a solar calendar of twelve months, each of a fixed number of days except in a leap year. This, the Julian calendar (slightly revised in 1582 to correct the leap year rule), is the basis for the Gregorian calendar that is almost exclusively the civil calendar in use worldwide today.\nCalculating phase.\nEach of the four intermediate phases lasts approximately seven days (7.38 days on average), but varies \u00b111.25% due to lunar apogee and perigee.\nThe number of days counted from the time of the new moon is the Moon's \"age\". Each complete cycle of phases is called a \"lunation\".\nThe approximate age of the Moon, and hence the approximate phase, can be calculated for any date by calculating the number of days since a known new moon (such as 1 January 1900 or 11 August 1999) and reducing this modulo 29.53059 days (the mean length of a synodic month). The difference between two dates can be calculated by subtracting the Julian day number of one from that of the other, or there are simpler formulae giving (for instance) the number of days since 31 December 1899. However, this calculation assumes a perfectly circular orbit and makes no allowance for the time of day at which the new moon occurred and therefore may be incorrect by several hours. (It also becomes less accurate the larger the difference between the required date and the reference date.) It is accurate enough to use in a novelty clock application showing lunar phase, but specialist usage taking account of lunar apogee and perigee requires a more elaborate calculation. Also, due to lunar libration it is not uncommon to see up to 101% of the full moon or even up to 5% of the lunar backside.\nCalculating phase size.\nThe phase is equal to the area of the visible lunar sphere that is illuminated by the Sun. This area or \"degree of illumination\" is given by formula_1, where formula_2 is the elongation (i.e., the angle between Moon, the observer on Earth, and the Sun).\nOrientation by latitude.\nIn the Northern Hemisphere, if the left side of the Moon is dark, then the bright part is thickening, and the Moon is described as waxing (shifting toward full moon). If the right side of the Moon is dark, then the bright part is thinning, and the Moon is described as waning (past full and shifting toward new moon). Assuming that the viewer is in the Northern Hemisphere, the right side of the Moon is the part that is always waxing. (That is, if the right side is dark, the Moon is becoming darker; if the right side is lit, the Moon is getting brighter.)\nIn the Southern Hemisphere, the Moon is observed from a perspective inverted, or rotated 180\u00b0, to that of the Northern and to all of the images in this article, so that the opposite sides appear to wax or wane.\nCloser to the Equator, the lunar terminator will appear horizontal during the morning and evening. Since the above descriptions of the lunar phases only apply at middle or high latitudes, observers moving towards the tropics from northern or southern latitudes will see the Moon rotated anti-clockwise or clockwise with respect to the images in this article.\nThe lunar crescent can open upward or downward, with the \"horns\" of the crescent pointing up or down, respectively. When the Sun appears above the Moon in the sky, the crescent opens downward; when the Moon is above the Sun, the crescent opens upward. The crescent Moon is most clearly and brightly visible when the Sun is below the horizon, which implies that the Moon must be above the Sun, and the crescent must open upward. This is therefore the orientation in which the crescent Moon is most often seen from the tropics. The waxing and waning crescents look very similar. The waxing crescent appears in the western sky in the evening, and the waning crescent in the eastern sky in the morning.\nOther observational phenomena.\nLunar libration.\nThe eccentricity of Moon's orbit leads to slight variation in its apparent size as viewed from Earth, and also causes it to be seen from slightly different angles at different times.\nThe effect is subtle to the naked eye, from night to night, but it can be seen in time-lapse photography.\nLunar libration causes part of the back side of the Moon to be visible to a terrestrial observer some of the time. Because of this, around 59% of the Moon's surface has been imaged from the ground.\nEffect of parallax.\nThe Earth subtends an angle of about two degrees when seen from the Moon. This means that an observer on Earth who sees the Moon when it is close to the eastern horizon sees it from an angle that is about 2 degrees different from the line of sight of an observer who sees the Moon on the western horizon. The Moon moves about 12 degrees around its orbit per day, so, if these observers were stationary, they would see the phases of the Moon at times that differ by about one-sixth of a day, or 4 hours. But in reality, the observers are on the surface of the rotating Earth, so someone who sees the Moon on the eastern horizon at one moment sees it on the western horizon about 12 hours later. This adds an oscillation to the apparent progression of the lunar phases. They appear to occur more slowly when the Moon is high in the sky than when it is below the horizon. The Moon appears to move jerkily, and the phases do the same. The amplitude of this oscillation is never more than about four hours, which is a small fraction of a month. It does not have any obvious effect on the appearance of the Moon. It does however affect accurate calculations of the times of lunar phases.\nEarthlight.\nWhen the Moon seen from Earth is a thin crescent, Earth viewed from the Moon is almost fully lit by the Sun. The dark side of the Moon is dimly illuminated by sunlight reflected from Earth, called earthshine, which is bright enough to be easily visible from Earth. This is sometimes referred to as \"the old moon in the new moon's arms\" during a waning crescent or \"the new moon in the old moon's arms\" during a waxing crescent.\nMisconceptions.\nOrbital period.\nIt can be confusing that the Moon's orbital sidereal period is 27.3 days while the phases complete a cycle once every 29.5 days (synodic period). This is due to the Earth's orbit around the Sun. The Moon orbits the Earth 13.4 times a year, but only passes between the Earth and Sun 12.4 times.\nEclipses.\nIt might be expected that once every month, when the Moon passes between Earth and the Sun during a new moon, its shadow would fall on Earth causing a solar eclipse, but this does not happen every month. Nor is it true that during every full moon, the Earth's shadow falls on the Moon, causing a lunar eclipse. Solar and lunar eclipses are not observed \"every\" month because the plane of the Moon's orbit around the Earth is tilted by about 5\u00b0 with respect to the plane of Earth's orbit around the Sun (the plane of the ecliptic). Thus, when new and full moons occur, the Moon usually lies to the north or south of a direct line through the Earth and Sun.\nAlthough an eclipse can only occur when the Moon is either new (solar) or full (lunar), it must also be positioned very near the intersection of Earth's orbital plane about the Sun and the Moon's orbital plane about the Earth (that is, at one of its nodes). This happens about twice per year, and so there are between four and seven eclipses in a calendar year. Most of these eclipses are partial; total eclipses of the Moon or Sun are less frequent.\nMechanism.\nThe phases are not caused by the Earth's shadow falling on the Moon, as some people believe. They are caused by the Moon's shadow on itself, just as the Earth's shadow makes it night on one side of the Earth. The angle of the Sun in relation to the Moon determines how much of the Moon is illuminated.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20425", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20425", "title": "Metonic", "text": ""}
{"id": "20426", "revid": "1318008206", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20426", "title": "Metonic cycle", "text": "19 solar year recurrence of lunar phases\nThe Metonic cycle or enneadecaeteris (from , from \u1f10\u03bd\u03bd\u03b5\u03b1\u03ba\u03b1\u03af\u03b4\u03b5\u03ba\u03b1, \"nineteen\") is a period of almost exactly 19 years after which the lunar phases recur at the same time of the year. The recurrence is not perfect, and by precise observation the Metonic cycle defined as 235 synodic months is just 2 hours, 4 minutes and 58 seconds longer than 19 tropical years. Meton of Athens, in the 5th century BC, judged the cycle to be a whole number of days, 6,940. Using these whole numbers facilitates the construction of a lunisolar calendar.\nA tropical year (about 365.24 days) is longer than 12 lunar months (about 354.36 days) and shorter than 13 of them (about 383.90 days). In a Metonic calendar (a type of lunisolar calendar), there are twelve years of 12 lunar months and seven years of 13 lunar months.\nApplication in traditional calendars.\nIn the Babylonian and Hebrew lunisolar calendars, the years 3, 6, 8, 11, 14, 17, and 19 are the long (13-month) years of the Metonic cycle. This cycle forms the basis of the Greek and Hebrew calendars. A 19-year cycle is used for the computation of the date of Easter each year.\nThe Babylonians applied the 19-year cycle from the late sixth century BC.\nAccording to Livy, the second king of Rome, Numa Pompilius (reigned 715\u2013673 BC), inserted intercalary months in such a way that \"in the twentieth year the days should fall in with the same position of the sun from which they had started\". As \"the twentieth year\" takes place nineteen years after \"the first year\", this seems to indicate that the Metonic cycle was applied to Numa's calendar.\nDiodorus Siculus reports that Apollo is said to have visited the Hyperboreans once every 19 years.\nThe Metonic cycle was implemented in the 2nd century BC Antikythera mechanism, which offers unexpected evidence for the popularity of the calendar based on it.\nThe (19-year) Metonic cycle is a lunisolar cycle, as is the (76-year) Callippic cycle. An important example of an application of the Metonic cycle in the Julian calendar is the 19-year lunar cycle insofar as provided with a Metonic structure. Meton introduced the 19 year cycle to the Attic calendar in 432 BC. In the following century, Callippus developed the Callippic cycle of four 19-year periods for a 76-year cycle with a mean year of exactly 365.25 days.\nAround AD 260 the Alexandrian computist Anatolius, who became bishop of Laodicea in AD 268, was the first to devise a method for determining the date of Easter Sunday. However, it was some later, somewhat different, version of the Metonic 19-year lunar cycle which, as the basic structure of Dionysius Exiguus' and also of Bede's Easter table, would ultimately prevail throughout Christendom, at least until in the year 1582, when the Gregorian calendar was introduced.\nThe Coligny calendar is a Celtic lunisolar calendar using the Metonic cycle. The bronze plaque on which it was found dates from c. AD 200, but the internal evidence points to the calendar itself being several centuries older, created in the Iron Age or late Bronze Age.\nThe Metonic cycle is thought to be numerically encoded on the Berlin Gold Hat from central Europe, dating from c. 1000-800 BC.\nThe Runic calendar is a perpetual calendar based on the 19-year-long Metonic cycle. It is also known as a Rune staff or Runic Almanac. This calendar does not rely on knowledge of the duration of the tropical year or of the occurrence of leap years. It is set at the beginning of each year by observing the first full moon after the winter solstice. The oldest one known, and the only one from the Middle Ages, is the Nyk\u00f6ping staff, which is believed to date from the 13th century.\nThe Bah\u00e1'\u00ed calendar, established during the middle of the 19th century, is also based on cycles of 19 solar years.\nHebrew calendar.\nA Small Ma\u1e25zor (Hebrew \u05de\u05d7\u05d6\u05d5\u05e8, , meaning \"cycle\") is a 19-year cycle in the lunisolar calendar system used by the Jewish people. It is similar to, but slightly different in usage from, the Greek Metonic cycle (being based on a month of &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;29+13753\u204425920 days, giving a cycle of &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;6939+3575\u20445184\u00a0\u2248\u00a06939.69 days), and likely derived from or alongside the much earlier Babylonian calendar.\nPolynesia.\nIt is possible that the Polynesian kilo-hoku (astronomers) discovered the Metonic cycle in the same way Meton had, by trying to make the month fit the year.\nMathematical basis.\nThe Metonic cycle is the most accurate cycle of time (in a timespan of less than 100 years) for synchronizing the tropical year and the lunar month (synodic month), when the method of synchronizing is the intercalation of a thirteenth lunar month in a calendar year from time to time. The traditional lunar year of 12 synodic months is about 354 days, approximately eleven days short of the solar year. Thus, every 2 to 3 years there is a discrepancy of 22 to 33 days, or a full synodic month. For example, if the winter solstice and the new moon coincide, it takes 19 tropical years for the coincidence to recur. The mathematical logic is this:\nThat duration is almost the same as 235 synodic months:\nThus the algorithm is correct to 0.087 days (2 hours, 5 minutes and 16 seconds).\nFor a lunisolar calendar to 'catch up' to this discrepancy and thus maintain seasonal consistency, seven intercalary months are added (one at a time), at intervals of every 2\u20133 years during the course of 19 solar years. Thus twelve of those years have 12 lunar months and seven have 13 months. Of these months, 125 were full (30 days) and 110 were deficient (29 days), to give a total of 6940 days.\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20427", "revid": "754658", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20427", "title": "March 26", "text": "Day 85 of the year in Gregorian calendar\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"This date in recent years/styles.css\"/&gt;\nDay of the yearMarch 26 is the day of the year in the Gregorian calendar\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20428", "revid": "36213392", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20428", "title": "Marcello Malpighi", "text": "Italian biologist and physician\nMarcello Malpighi (10 March 1628 \u2013 30 November 1694) was an Italian biologist and physician, who is referred to as the \"founder of microscopical anatomy, histology and father of physiology and embryology\". Malpighi's name is borne by several physiological features related to the biological excretory system, such as the Malpighian corpuscles and Malpighian pyramids of the kidneys and the Malpighian tubule system of insects. The splenic lymphoid nodules are often called the \"Malpighian bodies of the spleen\" or Malpighian corpuscles. The botanical family Malpighiaceae is also named after him. He was the first person to see capillaries in animals, and he discovered the link between arteries and veins that had eluded William Harvey. Malpighi was one of the earliest people to observe red blood cells under a microscope, after Jan Swammerdam. His treatise \"De polypo cordis\" (1666) was important for understanding blood composition, as well as how blood clots. In it, Malpighi described how the form of a blood clot differed in the right against the left sides of the heart.\nThe use of the microscope enabled Malpighi to discover that insects do not use lungs to breathe, but small holes in their skin called tracheae. Malpighi also studied the anatomy of the brain and concluded this organ is a gland. In terms of modern endocrinology, this deduction is correct because the hypothalamus of the brain has long been recognized for its hormone-secreting capacity.\nBecause Malpighi had a wide knowledge of both plants and animals, he made contributions to the scientific study of both. The Royal Society of London published two volumes of his botanical and zoological works in 1675 and 1679. Another edition followed in 1687, and a supplementary volume in 1697. In his autobiography, Malpighi speaks of his \"Anatome Plantarum\", decorated with the engravings of Robert White, as \"the most elegant format in the whole literate world.\"\nHis study of plants led him to conclude that plants had tubules similar to those he saw in insects like the silkworm (using his microscope, he probably saw the stomata, through which plants exchange carbon dioxide with oxygen). Malpighi observed that when a ring-like portion of bark was removed on a trunk a swelling occurred in the tissues above the ring, and he correctly interpreted this as growth stimulated by food coming down from the leaves, and being blocked above the ring.\nEarly years.\nMalpighi was born on 10 March 1628 at Crevalcore near Bologna, Italy. The son of well-to-do parents, Malpighi was educated in his native city, entering the University of Bologna at the age of 17. In a posthumous work delivered and dedicated to the Royal Society in London in 1697, Malpighi says he completed his grammatical studies in 1645, at which point he began to apply himself to the study of peripatetic philosophy. He completed these studies in about 1649, where at the persuasion of his mother Frances Natalis, he began to study physics. When his parents and grandmother became ill, he returned to his family home near Bologna to care for them. Malpighi studied Aristotelian philosophy at the University of Bologna while he was very young. He joined the school of anatomy under Bartolomeo Massari and was one of nine students who met at the home of the master to conduct dissections. He married Francesca the daughter of Massari but it was short-lived as she died shortly after. Despite opposition from the university authorities because he was non-Bolognese by birth, in 1653 he was granted doctorates in both medicine and philosophy. He later graduated as a medical doctor at the age of 25. Subsequently, he was appointed as a teacher, whereupon he immediately dedicated himself to further study in anatomy and medicine. For most of his career, Malpighi combined an intense interest in scientific research with a fond love of teaching. He was invited to correspond with the Royal Society in 1667 by Henry Oldenburg, and became a fellow of the society the next year.\nIn 1656, Ferdinand II of Tuscany invited him to the professorship of theoretical medicine at the University of Pisa. There Malpighi began his lifelong friendship with Giovanni Borelli, mathematician and naturalist, who was a prominent supporter of the Accademia del Cimento, one of the first scientific societies. Malpighi questioned the prevailing medical teachings at Pisa, tried experiments on colour changes in blood, and attempted to recast anatomical, physiological, and medical problems of the day. Family responsibilities and poor health prompted Malpighi's return in 1659 to the University of Bologna, where he continued to teach and do research with his microscopes. In 1661 he identified and described the pulmonary and capillary network connecting small arteries with small veins. Malpighi's views evoked increasing controversy and dissent, mainly from envy and lack of understanding on the part of his colleagues.\nCareer.\nIn 1653, his father, mother, and grandmother being dead, Malpighi left his family villa and returned to the University of Bologna to study anatomy. In 1656, he was made a reader at Bologna, and then a professor of physics at Pisa, where he began to abandon the disputative method of learning and apply himself to a more experimental method of research. Based on this research, he wrote some \"Dialogues against the Peripatetics and Galenists\" (those who followed the precepts of Galen and were spearheaded at the University Bologna by fellow physician but inveterate foe Giovanni Girolamo Sbaraglia), which were destroyed when his house burned down. Weary of philosophical disputation, in 1660, Malpighi returned to Bologna and dedicated himself to the study of anatomy. He subsequently discovered a new structure of the lungs which led him to several disputes with the learned medical men of the times. In 1662, he was made a professor of physics at the Academy of Messina.\nRetiring from university life to his villa in the country near Bologna in 1663, he worked as a physician while continuing to conduct experiments on the plants and insects he found on his estate. There he made discoveries of the structure of plants which he published in his \"Observations\". At the end of 1666, Malpighi was invited to return to the public academy at Messina, which he did in 1667. Although he accepted temporary chairs at the universities of Pisa and Messina, throughout his life he continuously returned to Bologna to practice medicine, a city that repaid him by erecting a monument in his memory after his death.\nAs a physician, Malpighi's medical consultations with his patients, which were mostly those belonging to social elite classes, proved useful in better understanding the links between the human anatomy, disease pathology, and treatments for said diseases. Furthermore, Malpighi conducted his consultations not only by bedside, but also by post, using letters to request and conduct them for various patients. These letters served as social connections for the medical practices he performed, allowing his ideas to reach the public even in the face of criticism. These connections that Malpighi created in his practice became even more widespread due to the fact that he practised in various countries. However, long distances complicated consults for some of his patients. The manner in which Malpighi practised medicine also reveals that it was customary in his time for Italian patients to have multiple attending physicians as well as consulting physicians. One of Malpighi's principles of medical practice was that he did not rely on anecdotes or experiences concerning remedies for various illnesses. Rather, he used his knowledge of human anatomy and disease pathology to practice what he denoted as \"rational\" medicine (\"rational\" medicine was in contrast to \"empirics\"). Malpighi did not abandon traditional substances or treatments, but he did not employ their use simply based on past experiences that did not draw from the nature of the underlying anatomy and disease process. Specifically in his treatments, Malpighi's goal was to reset fluid imbalances by coaxing the body to correct them on its own. For example, fluid imbalances should be fixed over time by urination and not by artificial methods such as purgatives and vesicants. In addition to Malpighi's \"rational\" approaches, he also believed in so-called \"miraculous,\" or \"supernatural\" healing. For this to occur, though, he argued that the body could not have attempted to expel any malignant matter, such as vomit. Cases in which this did occur, when healing could not be considered miraculous, were known as \"crises.\"\nIn 1668, Malpighi received a letter from Mr. Oldenburg of the Royal Society in London, inviting him to correspond. Malpighi wrote his history of the silkworm in 1668, and sent the manuscript to Mr. Oldenburg. As a result, Malpighi was made a member of the Royal Society in 1669. In 1671, Malpighi's \"Anatomy of Plants\" was published in London by the Royal Society, and he simultaneously wrote to Mr. Oldenburg, telling him of his recent discoveries regarding the lungs, fibres of the spleen and testicles, and several other discoveries involving the brain and sensory organs. He also shared more information regarding his research on plants. At that time, he related his disputes with some younger physicians who were strenuous supporters of the Galenic principles and opposed all new discoveries. Following many other discoveries and publications, in 1691, Malpighi was invited to Rome by Pope Innocent XII to become a papal physician and professor of medicine at the Papal Medical School. He remained in Rome until his death.\nMarcello Malpighi is buried in the church of Santi Gregorio e Siro, in Bologna, where nowadays can be seen a marble monument to the scientist with an inscription in Latin remembering \u2013 among other things \u2013 his \"SUMMUM INGENIUM / INTEGERRIMAM VITAM / FORTEM STRENUAMQUE MENTEM / AUDACEM SALUTARIS ARTIS AMOREM\" (great genius, honest life, strong and tough mind, daring love for the medical art).\nResearch.\nAround the age of 38, and with a remarkable academic career behind him, Malpighi decided to dedicate his free time to anatomical studies. Although he conducted some of his studies using vivisection and others through the dissection of corpses, his most illustrative efforts appear to have been based on the use of the microscope. Because of this work, many microscopic anatomical structures are named after Malpighi, including a skin layer (Malpighi layer) and two different Malpighian corpuscles in the kidneys and the spleen, as well as the Malpighian tubules in the excretory system of insects.\nAlthough a Dutch spectacle maker created the compound lens and inserted it in a microscope around the turn of the 17th century, and Galileo had applied the principle of the compound lens to the making of his microscope patented in 1609, its possibilities as a microscope had remained unexploited for half a century, until Robert Hooke improved the instrument. Following this, Marcello Malpighi, Hooke, and two other early investigators associated with the Royal Society, Nehemiah Grew and Antoine van Leeuwenhoek were fortunate to have a virtually untried tool in their hands as they began their investigations.\nIn 1661, Malpighi observed capillary structures in frog lungs. Malpighi's first attempt at examining circulation in the lungs was in September 1660, with the dissection of sheep and other mammals where he would inject black ink into the pulmonary artery. Tracing the inks distribution through the artery to the veins in the animal's lungs however, the chosen sheep/mammal's large size was limiting for his observation of capillaries as they were too small for magnification. Malpighi's frog dissection in 1661, proved to be a suitable size that could be magnified to display the capillary network not seen in the larger animals. In discovering and observing the capillaries in the frog's lungs, Malpighi studied the movement of the blood in a contained system. This contrasted the previous view of an open circulatory system in which blood would come from the liver/spleen and pool into open spaces in the body. This discovery of capillaries also contributed to William Harvey's theory of blood circulation, with capillaries acting as the connection from veins to arteries and confirming a closed system of circulation in animals.\nFurthering his analysis of the lungs, Malpighi identified the airways branched into thin membraned spherical cavities which he likened to honeycomb holes surrounded by capillary vessels, in his 1661 work \"De pulmonibus observationes anatomicae\". These lung structures now known as alveoli he used to describe the air pathway as continuous inhalation and exhalation with the alveoli at the ends of the pathway acting as a \"imperfect sponge\" for the air to enter the body. Extrapolating to humans, he offered an explanation for how air and blood mix in the lungs. Malpighi also used the microscope for his studies of the skin, kidneys, and liver. \nIn the years 1663\u20131667, at the University of Messina where his research focus was on studying the human nervous system where he identified and described nerve endings in the body, structure of the brain, and optic nerve. All of his work in 1665 surrounding the nervous system he published in 3 separate works published in the same year titled, De Lingua about taste and the tongue, De Cerebro about the brain and De Externo Tactus Organo about feeling/touch sensation. In regards to his work on the tongue he discovered small muscle bumps, taste buds, which he called \"papillae\" and when examining them he described a linked connection to nerve endings that gave the taste sensation when eating. Furthermore, in 1686 through studying a bovine tongue Malpighi dividing the tongue papillae into separate \"patches\" on the tongues length. When studying the brain, he was one of the first to try to map the grey and white tissue and hypothesized a connection between the brain and spinal cord through nerve endings.\nMalpighi's work on plant anatomy was inspired in Messina when visiting his patron Visconte Ruffo's garden where a chestnut tree's split branch had a structure that intrigued him, this structure in modern literature being xylem.\u00a0He examined the structure in different plants and noted the arrangement of xylem was in either a ring shape or in scattered groupings in the stem. This distinction was later used by biologists to separate the two major families of plants.\nA talented sketch artist, Malpighi seems to have been the first author to have made detailed drawings of individual organs of flowers. In his \"Anatome plantarum\" is a longitudinal section of a flower of \"Nigella\" (his Melanthi, literally honey-flower) with details of the nectariferous organs. He adds that it is strange that nature has produced on the leaves of the flower shell-like organs in which honey is produced.\nMalpighi had success in tracing the ontogeny of plant organs, and the serial development of the shoot owing to his instinct shaped in the sphere of animal embryology. He specialized in seedling development, and in 1679, he published a volume containing a series of exquisitely drawn and engraved images of the stages of development of Leguminosae (beans) and Cucurbitaceae (squash, melons). Later, he published material depicting the development of the date palm. The great Swedish botanist Linnaeus named the genus \"Malpighia\" in honour of Malpighi's work with plants; \"Malpighia\" is the type genus for the Malpighiaceae, a family of tropical and subtropical flowering plants.\nBecause Malpighi was concerned with teratology (the scientific study of the visible conditions caused by the interruption or alteration of normal development) he expressed grave misgivings about the view of his contemporaries that the galls of trees and herbs gave birth to insects. He conjectured (correctly) that the creatures in question arose from eggs previously laid in the plant tissue.\nMalpighi's investigations of the lifecycle of plants and animals led him to the topic of reproduction. He created detailed drawings of his studies of chick embryo development, starting from 2\u20133 days after fertilization with these drawings of embryos having a focus on the developmental timing of the limbs and organs. Additionally, seed development in plants (such as the lemon tree), and the transformation of caterpillars into insects. Malpighi also postulated about the embryotic growth of humans, written in a letter to Girolamo Correr, a patron of scientists, Malphighi suggested that all the components of the circulatory system would have been developed at the same time in embryo. His discoveries helped to illuminate philosophical arguments surrounding the topics of \"embo\u00eetment\", pre-existence, preformation, epigenesis, and metamorphosis.\nYears in Rome.\nIn 1691 Pope Innocent XII invited him to Rome as papal physician. He taught medicine in the Papal Medical School and wrote a long treatise about his studies which he donated to the Royal Society of London.\nMarcello Malpighi died of apoplexy (an old-fashioned term for a stroke or stroke-like symptoms) in Rome on 30 November 1694, at the age of 66. In accordance with his wishes, an autopsy was performed. The Royal Society published his studies in 1696. Asteroid 11121 Malpighi is named in his honour.\nWorks.\nOnline editions\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20431", "revid": "6727347", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20431", "title": "Momentum", "text": "Property of a mass in motion\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Hlist/styles.css\"/&gt;\nIn Newtonian mechanics, momentum (pl.: momenta or momentums; more specifically linear momentum or translational momentum) is the product of the mass and velocity of an object. It is a vector quantity, possessing a magnitude and a direction. If \"m\" is an object's mass and v is its velocity (also a vector quantity), then the object's momentum p (from Latin \"\" \"push, drive\") is: formula_1\nIn the International System of Units (SI), the unit of measurement of momentum is the kilogram metre per second (kg\u22c5m/s), which is dimensionally equivalent to the newton-second.\nNewton's second law of motion states that the rate of change of a body's momentum is equal to the net force acting on it. Momentum depends on the frame of reference, but in any inertial frame of reference, it is a \"conserved\" quantity, meaning that if a closed system is not affected by external forces, its total momentum does not change. Momentum is also conserved in special relativity (with a modified formula) and, in a modified form, in electrodynamics, quantum mechanics, quantum field theory, and general relativity. It is an expression of one of the fundamental symmetries of space and time: translational symmetry.\nAdvanced formulations of classical mechanics, Lagrangian and Hamiltonian mechanics, allow one to choose coordinate systems that incorporate symmetries and constraints. In these systems the conserved quantity is generalized momentum, and in general this is different from the kinetic momentum defined above. The concept of generalized momentum is carried over into quantum mechanics, where it becomes an operator on a wave function. The momentum and position operators are related by the Heisenberg uncertainty principle.\nIn continuous systems such as electromagnetic fields, fluid dynamics and deformable bodies, a momentum density can be defined as momentum per volume (a volume-specific quantity). A continuum version of the conservation of momentum leads to equations such as the Navier\u2013Stokes equations for fluids or the Cauchy momentum equation for deformable solids or fluids.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nClassical.\nMomentum is a vector quantity: it has both magnitude and direction. Since momentum has a direction, it can be used to predict the resulting direction and speed of motion of objects after they collide. Below, the basic properties of momentum are described in one dimension. The vector equations are almost identical to the scalar equations (see multiple dimensions).\nSingle particle.\nThe momentum of a particle is conventionally represented by the letter \"p\". It is the product of two quantities, the particle's mass (represented by the letter \"m\") and its velocity (\"v\"):\nformula_2\nThe unit of momentum is the product of the units of mass and velocity. In SI units, if the mass is in kilograms and the velocity is in meters per second then the momentum is in kilogram meters per second (kg\u22c5m/s). In cgs units, if the mass is in grams and the velocity in centimeters per second, then the momentum is in gram centimeters per second (g\u22c5cm/s).\nBeing a vector, momentum has magnitude and direction. For example, a 1\u00a0kg model airplane, traveling due north at 1\u00a0m/s in straight and level flight, has a momentum of 1\u00a0kg\u22c5m/s due north measured with reference to the ground.\nMany particles.\nThe momentum of a system of particles is the vector sum of their momenta. If two particles have respective masses and , and velocities and , the total momentum is\nformula_3\nThe momenta of more than two particles can be added more generally with the following:\nformula_4\nA system of particles has a center of mass, a point determined by the weighted sum of their positions:\nformula_5\nIf one or more of the particles is moving, the center of mass of the system will generally be moving as well (unless the system is in pure rotation around it). If the total mass of the particles is formula_6, and the center of mass is moving at velocity , the momentum of the system is:\nformula_7\nThis is known as Euler's first law.\nRelation to force.\nIf the net force F applied to a particle is constant, and is applied for a time interval , the momentum of the particle changes by an amount\nformula_8\nIn differential form, this is Newton's second law; the rate of change of the momentum of a particle is equal to the instantaneous force F acting on it,\nformula_9\nIf the net force experienced by a particle changes as a function of time, , the change in momentum (or impulse J) between times and is\nformula_10\nImpulse is measured in the derived units of the newton second (1\u00a0N\u22c5s = 1\u00a0kg\u22c5m/s) or dyne second (1 dyne\u22c5s = 1 g\u22c5cm/s)\nUnder the assumption of constant mass m, it is equivalent to write\nformula_11\nhence the net force is equal to the mass of the particle times its acceleration.\n\"Example\": A model airplane of mass 1\u00a0kg accelerates from rest to a velocity of 6\u00a0m/s due north in 2\u00a0s. The net force required to produce this acceleration is 3\u00a0newtons due north. The change in momentum is 6\u00a0kg\u22c5m/s due north. The rate of change of momentum is 3\u00a0(kg\u22c5m/s)/s due north which is numerically equivalent to 3\u00a0newtons.\nConservation.\nIn a closed system (one that does not exchange any matter with its surroundings and is not acted on by external forces) the total momentum remains constant. This fact, known as the law of conservation of momentum, is implied by Newton's laws of motion. Suppose, for example, that two particles interact. As explained by the third law, the forces between them are equal in magnitude but opposite in direction. If the particles are numbered 1 and 2, the second law states that and . Therefore,\nformula_12\nwith the negative sign indicating that the forces oppose. Equivalently,\nformula_13\nIf the velocities of the particles are and before the interaction, and afterwards they are and , then\nformula_14\nThis law holds no matter how complicated the force is between particles. Similarly, if there are several particles, the momentum exchanged between each pair of particles adds to zero, so the total change in momentum is zero. The conservation of the total momentum of a number of interacting particles can be expressed as formula_15\nThis conservation law applies to all interactions, including collisions (both elastic and inelastic) and separations caused by explosive forces. It can also be generalized to situations where Newton's laws do not hold, for example in the theory of relativity and in electrodynamics.\nDependence on reference frame.\nMomentum is a measurable quantity, and the measurement depends on the frame of reference. For example: if an aircraft of mass 1000\u00a0kg is flying through the air at a speed of 50\u00a0m/s its momentum can be calculated to be 50,000\u00a0kg.m/s. If the aircraft is flying into a headwind of 5\u00a0m/s its speed relative to the surface of the Earth is only 45\u00a0m/s and its momentum can be calculated to be 45,000\u00a0kg.m/s. Both calculations are equally correct. In both frames of reference, any change in momentum will be found to be consistent with the relevant laws of physics.\nSuppose x is a position in an inertial frame of reference. From the point of view of another frame of reference, moving at a constant speed u relative to the other, the position (represented by a primed coordinate) changes with time as\nformula_16\nThis is called a Galilean transformation.\nIf a particle is moving at speed in the first frame of reference, in the second, it is moving at speed\nformula_17\nSince u does not change, the second reference frame is also an inertial frame and the accelerations are the same:\nformula_18\nThus, momentum is conserved in both reference frames. Moreover, as long as the force has the same form, in both frames, Newton's second law is unchanged. Forces such as Newtonian gravity, which depend only on the scalar distance between objects, satisfy this criterion. This independence of reference frame is called Newtonian relativity or Galilean invariance.\nA change of reference frame can often simplify calculations of motion. For example, in a collision of two particles, a reference frame can be chosen where one particle begins at rest. Another commonly used reference frame is the center of mass frame \u2013 one that is moving with the center of mass. In this frame, the total momentum is zero.\nApplication to collisions.\nIf two particles, each of known momentum, collide and coalesce, the law of conservation of momentum can be used to determine the momentum of the coalesced body. If the outcome of the collision is that the two particles separate, the law is not sufficient to determine the momentum of each particle. If the momentum of one particle after the collision is known, the law can be used to determine the momentum of the other particle. Alternatively if the combined kinetic energy after the collision is known, the law can be used to determine the momentum of each particle after the collision. Kinetic energy is usually not conserved. If it is conserved, the collision is called an \"elastic collision\"; if not, it is an \"inelastic collision\".\nElastic collisions.\nAn elastic collision is one in which no kinetic energy is transformed into heat or some other form of energy. Perfectly elastic collisions can occur when the objects do not touch each other, as for example in atomic or nuclear scattering where electric repulsion keeps the objects apart. A slingshot maneuver of a satellite around a planet can also be viewed as a perfectly elastic collision. A collision between two pool balls is a good example of an \"almost\" totally elastic collision, due to their high rigidity, but when bodies come in contact there is always some dissipation.\nA head-on elastic collision between two bodies can be represented by velocities in one dimension, along a line passing through the bodies. If the velocities are and before the collision and and after, the equations expressing conservation of momentum and kinetic energy are:\nformula_19\nA change of reference frame can simplify analysis of a collision. For example, suppose there are two bodies of equal mass m, one stationary and one approaching the other at a speed v (as in the figure). The center of mass is moving at speed and both bodies are moving towards it at speed . Because of the symmetry, after the collision both must be moving away from the center of mass at the same speed. Adding the speed of the center of mass to both, we find that the body that was moving is now stopped and the other is moving away at speed v. The bodies have exchanged their velocities. Regardless of the velocities of the bodies, a switch to the center of mass frame leads us to the same conclusion. Therefore, the final velocities are given by\nformula_20\nIn general, when the initial velocities are known, the final velocities are given by\nformula_21\nIf one body has much greater mass than the other, its velocity will be little affected by a collision while the other body will experience a large change.\nInelastic collisions.\nIn an inelastic collision, some of the kinetic energy of the colliding bodies is converted into other forms of energy (such as heat or sound). Examples include traffic collisions, in which the effect of loss of kinetic energy can be seen in the damage to the vehicles; electrons losing some of their energy to atoms (as in the Franck\u2013Hertz experiment); and particle accelerators in which the kinetic energy is converted into mass in the form of new particles.\nIn a perfectly inelastic collision (such as a bug hitting a windshield), both bodies have the same motion afterwards. A head-on inelastic collision between two bodies can be represented by velocities in one dimension, along a line passing through the bodies. If the velocities are and before the collision then in a perfectly inelastic collision both bodies will be travelling with velocity v2 after the collision. The equation expressing conservation of momentum is:\nformula_22\nIf one body is motionless to begin with (e.g. formula_23), the equation for conservation of momentum is\nformula_24\nso\nformula_25\nIn a different situation, if the frame of reference is moving at the final velocity such that formula_26, the objects would be brought to rest by a perfectly inelastic collision and 100% of the kinetic energy is converted to other forms of energy. In this instance the initial velocities of the bodies would be non-zero, or the bodies would have to be massless.\nOne measure of the inelasticity of the collision is the coefficient of restitution , defined as the ratio of relative velocity of separation to relative velocity of approach. In applying this measure to a ball bouncing from a solid surface, this can be easily measured using the following formula:\nformula_27\nThe momentum and energy equations also apply to the motions of objects that begin together and then move apart. For example, an explosion is the result of a chain reaction that transforms potential energy stored in chemical, mechanical, or nuclear form into kinetic energy, acoustic energy, and electromagnetic radiation. Rockets also make use of conservation of momentum: propellant is thrust outward, gaining momentum, and an equal and opposite momentum is imparted to the rocket.\nMultiple dimensions.\nReal motion has both direction and velocity and must be represented by a vector. In a coordinate system with axes, velocity has components in the x-direction, in the y-direction, in the z-direction. The vector is represented by a boldface symbol:\nformula_28\nSimilarly, the momentum is a vector quantity and is represented by a boldface symbol:\nformula_29\nThe equations in the previous sections, work in vector form if the scalars p and v are replaced by vectors p and v. Each vector equation represents three scalar equations. For example,\nformula_30\nrepresents three equations:\nformula_31\nThe kinetic energy equations are exceptions to the above replacement rule. The equations are still one-dimensional, but each scalar represents the magnitude of the vector, for example,\nformula_32\nEach vector equation represents three scalar equations. Often coordinates can be chosen so that only two components are needed, as in the figure. Each component can be obtained separately and the results combined to produce a vector result.\nA simple construction involving the center of mass frame can be used to show that if a stationary elastic sphere is struck by a moving sphere, the two will head off at right angles after the collision (as in the figure).\nObjects of variable mass.\nThe concept of momentum plays a fundamental role in explaining the behavior of variable-mass objects such as a rocket ejecting fuel or a star accreting gas. In analyzing such an object, one treats the object's mass as a function that varies with time: . The momentum of the object at time t is therefore . One might then try to invoke Newton's second law of motion by saying that the external force F on the object is related to its momentum by , but this is incorrect, as is the related expression found by applying the product rule to :\nformula_33\nThis equation does not correctly describe the motion of variable-mass objects. The correct equation is\nformula_34\nwhere u is the velocity of the ejected/accreted mass \"as seen in the object's rest frame\". This is distinct from v, which is the velocity of the object itself as seen in an inertial frame.\nThis equation is derived by keeping track of both the momentum of the object as well as the momentum of the ejected/accreted mass (). When considered together, the object and the mass () constitute a closed system in which total momentum is conserved.\nformula_35\nGeneralized.\nNewton's laws can be difficult to apply to many kinds of motion because the motion is limited by \"constraints\". For example, a bead on an abacus is constrained to move along its wire and a pendulum bob is constrained to swing at a fixed distance from the pivot. Many such constraints can be incorporated by changing the normal Cartesian coordinates to a set of \"generalized coordinates\" that may be fewer in number. Refined mathematical methods have been developed for solving mechanics problems in generalized coordinates. They introduce a \"generalized momentum\", also known as the \"canonical momentum\" or \"conjugate momentum\", that extends the concepts of both linear momentum and angular momentum. To distinguish it from generalized momentum, the product of mass and velocity is also referred to as \"mechanical momentum\", \"kinetic momentum\" or \"kinematic momentum\". The two main methods are described below.\nLagrangian mechanics.\nIn Lagrangian mechanics, a Lagrangian is defined as the difference between the kinetic energy T and the potential energy V:\nformula_36\nIf the generalized coordinates are represented as a vector q \n (q1, q2, ... , q) and time differentiation is represented by a dot over the variable, then the equations of motion (known as the Lagrange or Euler\u2013Lagrange equations) are a set of N equations:\nformula_37\nIf a coordinate is not a Cartesian coordinate, the associated generalized momentum component does not necessarily have the dimensions of linear momentum. Even if is a Cartesian coordinate, will not be the same as the mechanical momentum if the potential depends on velocity. Some sources represent the kinematic momentum by the symbol \u03a0.\nIn this mathematical framework, a generalized momentum is associated with the generalized coordinates. Its components are defined as\nformula_38\nEach component is said to be the \"conjugate momentum\" for the coordinate .\nNow if a given coordinate does not appear in the Lagrangian (although its time derivative might appear), then is constant. This is the generalization of the conservation of momentum.\nEven if the generalized coordinates are just the ordinary spatial coordinates, the conjugate momenta are not necessarily the ordinary momentum coordinates. An example is found in the section on electromagnetism.\nHamiltonian mechanics.\nIn Hamiltonian mechanics, the Lagrangian (a function of generalized coordinates and their derivatives) is replaced by a Hamiltonian that is a function of generalized coordinates and momentum. The Hamiltonian is defined as\nformula_39\nwhere the momentum is obtained by differentiating the Lagrangian as above. The Hamiltonian equations of motion are\nformula_40\nAs in Lagrangian mechanics, if a generalized coordinate does not appear in the Hamiltonian, its conjugate momentum component is conserved.\nSymmetry and conservation.\nConservation of momentum is a mathematical consequence of the homogeneity (shift symmetry) of space (position in space is the canonical conjugate quantity to momentum). That is, conservation of momentum is a consequence of the fact that the laws of physics do not depend on position; this is a special case of Noether's theorem. For systems that do not have this symmetry, it may not be possible to define conservation of momentum. Examples where conservation of momentum does not apply include curved spacetimes in general relativity or time crystals in condensed matter physics.\nMomentum density.\nIn deformable bodies and fluids.\nConservation in a continuum.\nIn fields such as fluid dynamics and solid mechanics, it is not feasible to follow the motion of individual atoms or molecules. Instead, the materials must be approximated by a continuum in which, at each point, there is a particle or fluid parcel that is assigned the average of the properties of atoms in a small region nearby. In particular, it has a density \u03c1 and velocity v that depend on time t and position r. The momentum per unit volume is .\nConsider a column of water in hydrostatic equilibrium. All the forces on the water are in balance and the water is motionless. On any given drop of water, two forces are balanced. The first is gravity, which acts directly on each atom and molecule inside. The gravitational force per unit volume is , where g is the gravitational acceleration. The second force is the sum of all the forces exerted on its surface by the surrounding water. The force from below is greater than the force from above by just the amount needed to balance gravity. The normal force per unit area is the pressure p. The average force per unit volume inside the droplet is the gradient of the pressure, so the force balance equation is\nformula_41\nIf the forces are not balanced, the droplet accelerates. This acceleration is not simply the partial derivative because the fluid in a given volume changes with time. Instead, the material derivative is needed:\nformula_42\nApplied to any physical quantity, the material derivative includes the rate of change at a point and the changes due to advection as fluid is carried past the point. Per unit volume, the rate of change in momentum is equal to . This is equal to the net force on the droplet.\nForces that can change the momentum of a droplet include the gradient of the pressure and gravity, as above. In addition, surface forces can deform the droplet. In the simplest case, a shear stress \u03c4, exerted by a force parallel to the surface of the droplet, is proportional to the rate of deformation or strain rate. Such a shear stress occurs if the fluid has a velocity gradient because the fluid is moving faster on one side than another. If the speed in the x direction varies with z, the tangential force in direction x per unit area normal to the z direction is\nformula_43\nwhere \u03bc is the viscosity. This is also a flux, or flow per unit area, of x-momentum through the surface.\nIncluding the effect of viscosity, the momentum balance equations for the incompressible flow of a Newtonian fluid are\nformula_44\nThese are known as the Navier\u2013Stokes equations.\nThe momentum balance equations can be extended to more general materials, including solids. For each surface with normal in direction i and force in direction j, there is a stress component . The nine components make up the Cauchy stress tensor \u03c3, which includes both pressure and shear. The local conservation of momentum is expressed by the Cauchy momentum equation:\nformula_45\nwhere f is the body force.\nThe Cauchy momentum equation is broadly applicable to deformations of solids and liquids. The relationship between the stresses and the strain rate depends on the properties of the material (see Types of viscosity).\nAcoustic waves.\nA disturbance in a medium gives rise to oscillations, or waves, that propagate away from their source. In a fluid, small changes in pressure p can often be described by the acoustic wave equation:\nformula_46\nwhere c is the speed of sound. In a solid, similar equations can be obtained for propagation of pressure (P-waves) and shear (S-waves).\nThe flux, or transport per unit area, of a momentum component by a velocity is equal to . In the linear approximation that leads to the above acoustic equation, the time average of this flux is zero. However, nonlinear effects can give rise to a nonzero average. It is possible for momentum flux to occur even though the wave itself does not have a mean momentum.\nIn electromagnetics.\nParticle in a field.\nIn Maxwell's equations, the forces between particles are mediated by electric and magnetic fields. The electromagnetic force (\"Lorentz force\") on a particle with charge q due to a combination of electric field E and magnetic field B is\nformula_47\n(in SI units).\nIt has an electric potential and magnetic vector potential A(r, t).\nIn the non-relativistic regime, its generalized momentum is\nformula_48\nwhile in relativistic mechanics this becomes\nformula_49\nThe quantity is sometimes called the \"potential momentum\". It is the momentum due to the interaction of the particle with the electromagnetic fields. The name is an analogy with the potential energy , which is the energy due to the interaction of the particle with the electromagnetic fields. These quantities form a four-vector, so the analogy is consistent; besides, the concept of potential momentum is important in explaining the so-called hidden momentum of the electromagnetic fields.\nConservation.\nIn Newtonian mechanics, the law of conservation of momentum can be derived from the law of action and reaction, which states that every force has a reciprocating equal and opposite force. Under some circumstances, moving charged particles can exert forces on each other in non-opposite directions. Nevertheless, the combined momentum of the particles and the electromagnetic field is conserved.\nVacuum.\nThe Lorentz force imparts a momentum to the particle, so by Newton's second law the particle must impart a momentum to the electromagnetic fields.\nIn a vacuum, the momentum per unit volume is\nformula_50\nwhere is the vacuum permeability and c is the speed of light. The momentum density is proportional to the Poynting vector S which gives the directional rate of energy transfer per unit area:\nformula_51\nIf momentum is to be conserved over the volume V over a region Q, changes in the momentum of matter through the Lorentz force must be balanced by changes in the momentum of the electromagnetic field and outflow of momentum. If Pmech is the momentum of all the particles in Q, and the particles are treated as a continuum, then Newton's second law gives\nformula_52\nThe electromagnetic momentum is\nformula_53\nand the equation for conservation of each component i of the momentum is\nformula_54\nThe term on the right is an integral over the surface area \u03a3 of the surface \u03c3 representing momentum flow into and out of the volume, and is a component of the surface normal of S. The quantity is called the Maxwell stress tensor, defined as\nformula_55 \nMedia.\nThe above results are for the \"microscopic\" Maxwell equations, applicable to electromagnetic forces in a vacuum (or on a very small scale in media). It is more difficult to define momentum density in media because the division into electromagnetic and mechanical is arbitrary. The definition of electromagnetic momentum density is modified to\nformula_56\nwhere the H-field H is related to the B-field and the magnetization M by\nformula_57\nThe electromagnetic stress tensor depends on the properties of the media.\nNon-classical.\nQuantum mechanical.\nIn quantum mechanics, momentum is defined as a self-adjoint operator on the wave function. The Heisenberg uncertainty principle defines limits on how accurately the momentum and position of a single observable system can be known at once. In quantum mechanics, position and momentum are conjugate variables.\nFor a single particle described in the position basis the momentum operator can be written as\nformula_58\nwhere \u2207 is the gradient operator, \u0127 is the reduced Planck constant, and i is the imaginary unit. This is a commonly encountered form of the momentum operator, though the momentum operator in other bases can take other forms. For example, in momentum space the momentum operator is represented by the eigenvalue equation\nformula_59\nwhere the operator p acting on a wave eigenfunction yields that wave function multiplied by the eigenvalue p, in an analogous fashion to the way that the position operator acting on a wave function yields that wave function multiplied by the eigenvalue x.\nFor both massive and massless objects, relativistic momentum is related to the phase constant \u03b2 by\nformula_60\nElectromagnetic radiation (including visible light, ultraviolet light, and radio waves) is carried by photons. Even though photons (the particle aspect of light) have no mass, they still carry momentum. This leads to applications such as the solar sail. The calculation of the momentum of light within dielectric media is somewhat controversial (see Abraham\u2013Minkowski controversy).\nRelativistic.\nLorentz invariance.\nNewtonian physics assumes that absolute time and space exist outside of any observer; this gives rise to Galilean invariance. It also results in a prediction that the speed of light can vary from one reference frame to another. This is contrary to what has been observed. In the special theory of relativity, Einstein keeps the postulate that the equations of motion do not depend on the reference frame, but assumes that the speed of light c is invariant. As a result, position and time in two reference frames are related by the Lorentz transformation instead of the Galilean transformation.\nConsider, for example, one reference frame moving relative to another at velocity v in the x direction. The Galilean transformation gives the coordinates of the moving frame as\nformula_61\nwhile the Lorentz transformation gives\nformula_62\nwhere \u03b3 is the Lorentz factor:\nformula_63\nNewton's second law, with mass fixed, is not invariant under a Lorentz transformation. However, it can be made invariant by making the \"inertial mass\" m of an object a function of velocity:\nformula_64\n is the object's invariant mass.\nThe modified momentum,\nformula_65\nobeys Newton's second law:\nformula_66\nWithin the domain of classical mechanics, relativistic momentum closely approximates Newtonian momentum: at low velocity, is approximately equal to , the Newtonian expression for momentum.\nFour-vector formulation.\nIn the theory of special relativity, physical quantities are expressed in terms of four-vectors that include time as a fourth coordinate along with the three space coordinates. These vectors are generally represented by capital letters, for example R for position. The expression for the \"four-momentum\" depends on how the coordinates are expressed. Time may be given in its normal units or multiplied by the speed of light so that all the components of the four-vector have dimensions of length. If the latter scaling is used, an interval of proper time, \u03c4, defined by\nformula_67\nis invariant under Lorentz transformations (in this expression and in what follows the (+ \u2212 \u2212 \u2212) metric signature has been used, different authors use different conventions). Mathematically this invariance can be ensured in one of two ways: by treating the four-vectors as Euclidean vectors and multiplying time by ; or by keeping time a real quantity and embedding the vectors in a Minkowski space. In a Minkowski space, the scalar product of two four-vectors U = (U0, U1, U2, U3) and V = (V0, V1, V2, V3) is defined as\nformula_68\nIn all the coordinate systems, the (contravariant) relativistic four-velocity is defined by\nformula_69\nand the (contravariant) four-momentum is\nformula_70\nwhere is the invariant mass. If R = (ct, x, y, z) (in Minkowski space), then\nformula_71\nUsing Einstein's mass\u2013energy equivalence, E = mc2, this can be rewritten as\nformula_72\nThus, conservation of four-momentum is Lorentz-invariant and implies conservation of both mass and energy.\nThe magnitude of the momentum four-vector is equal to :\nformula_73\nand is invariant across all reference frames.\nThe relativistic energy\u2013momentum relationship holds even for massless particles such as photons; by setting m0 = 0 it follows that\nformula_74\nIn a game of relativistic \"billiards\", if a stationary particle is hit by a moving particle in an elastic collision, the paths formed by the two afterwards will form an acute angle. This is unlike the non-relativistic case where they travel at right angles.\nThe four-momentum of a planar wave can be related to a wave four-vector\nformula_75\nFor a particle, the relationship between temporal components, E = \u0127\u03c9, is the Planck\u2013Einstein relation, and the relation between spatial components, p = \u0127k, describes a de Broglie matter wave.\nHistory of the concept.\nImpetus.\nJohn Philoponus.\nIn about 530 AD, John Philoponus developed a concept of momentum in \"On Physics\", a commentary to Aristotle's \"Physics\". Aristotle claimed that everything that is moving must be kept moving by something. For example, a thrown ball must be kept moving by motions of the air. Philoponus pointed out the absurdity in Aristotle's claim that motion of an object is promoted by the same air that is resisting its passage. He proposed instead that an impetus was imparted to the object in the act of throwing it.\nIbn S\u012bn\u0101.\nIn 1020, Ibn S\u012bn\u0101 (also known by his Latinized name Avicenna) read Philoponus and published his own theory of motion in \"The Book of Healing\". He agreed that an impetus is imparted to a projectile by the thrower; but unlike Philoponus, who believed that it was a temporary virtue that would decline even in a vacuum, he viewed it as a persistent, requiring external forces such as air resistance to dissipate it.\nPeter Olivi, Jean Buridan.\nIn the 13th and 14th century, Peter Olivi and Jean Buridan read and refined the work of Philoponus, and possibly that of Ibn S\u012bn\u0101. Buridan, who in about 1350 was made rector of the University of Paris, referred to impetus being proportional to the weight times the speed. Moreover, Buridan's theory was different from his predecessor's in that he did not consider impetus to be self-dissipating, asserting that a body would be arrested by the forces of air resistance and gravity which might be opposing its impetus.\nQuantity of motion.\nRen\u00e9 Descartes.\nIn \"Principles of Philosophy\" (\"Principia Philosophiae\") from 1644, the French philosopher Ren\u00e9 Descartes defined \"quantity of motion\" (\"Latin: quantitas motus\") as the product of size and speed, and claimed that the total quantity of motion in the universe is conserved.&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;If x is twice the size of y, and is moving half as fast, then there's the same amount of motion in each.&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;[God] created matter, along with its motion ... merely by\u00a0letting things run their course, he preserves the same amount of motion ... as he put there in the beginning.\nThis should not be read as a statement of the modern law of conservation of momentum, since Descartes had no concept of mass as distinct from weight and size. (The concept of mass, as distinct from weight, was introduced by Newton in 1686.) More important, he believed that it is speed rather than velocity that is conserved. So for Descartes, if a moving object were to bounce off a surface, changing its direction but not its speed, there would be no change in its quantity of motion. Galileo, in his \"Two New Sciences\" (published in 1638), used the Italian word to similarly describe Descartes's quantity of motion.\nChristiaan Huygens.\nIn the 1600s, Christiaan Huygens concluded quite early that Descartes's laws for the elastic collision of two bodies must be wrong, and he formulated the correct laws. An important step was his recognition of the Galilean invariance of the problems. His views then took many years to be circulated. He passed them on in person to William Brouncker and Christopher Wren in London, in 1661. What Spinoza wrote to Henry Oldenburg about them, in 1666 during the Second Anglo-Dutch War, was guarded. Huygens had actually worked them out in a manuscript in the period 1652\u20131656. The war ended in 1667, and Huygens announced his results to the Royal Society in 1668. He published them in the in 1669.\nMomentum.\nJohn Wallis.\nIn 1670, John Wallis, in , stated the law of conservation of momentum: \"the initial state of the body, either of rest or of motion, will persist\" and \"If the force is greater than the resistance, motion will result\". Wallis used \"momentum\" for quantity of motion, and for force.\nGottfried Leibniz.\nIn 1686, Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz, in \"Discourse on Metaphysics\", gave an argument against Descartes' construction of the conservation of the \"quantity of motion\" using an example of dropping blocks of different sizes different distances. He points out that force is conserved but quantity of motion, construed as the product of size and speed of an object, is not conserved.\nIsaac Newton.\nIn 1687, Isaac Newton, in , just like Wallis, showed a similar casting around for words to use for the mathematical momentum. His Definition II defines , \"quantity of motion\", as \"arising from the velocity and quantity of matter conjointly\", which identifies it as momentum. Thus when in Law II he refers to , \"change of motion\", being proportional to the force impressed, he is generally taken to mean momentum and not motion.\nJohn Jennings.\nIn 1721, John Jennings published \"Miscellanea\", where the momentum in its current mathematical sense is attested, five years before the final edition of Newton's . \"Momentum\" M or \"quantity of motion\" was being defined for students as \"a rectangle\", the product of Q and V, where Q is \"quantity of material\" and V is \"velocity\", .\nIn 1728, the Cyclopedia states:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The \"Momentum\", \"Impetus\", or Quantity of Motion of any Body, is the \"Factum\" [i.e., product] of its Velocity, (or the Space it moves in a given Time, see Motion) multiplied into its Mass.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20432", "revid": "48643156", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20432", "title": "Mood stabilizer", "text": "Psychiatric medication used to treat mood disorders\nA mood stabilizer is a psychiatric medication used to treat mood disorders characterized by intense and sustained mood shifts, such as bipolar disorder and the bipolar type of schizoaffective disorder.\nUses.\nMood stabilizers are considered a cornerstone in the treatment of bipolar disorder, where they help prevent relapses into both manic and depressive episodes and maintain long-term mood stability.\nThey are also prescribed for the bipolar type of schizoaffective disorder, and in some cases are used as adjuncts for treatment-resistant major depressive disorder. In addition, certain mood stabilizers have been shown to reduce impulsivity and aggression in selected psychiatric and neurological conditions.\nEvidence also suggests that lithium, in particular, reduces the risk of suicide in patients with mood disorders, making it a unique therapeutic option among mood stabilizers.\nExamples.\nThe term \"mood stabilizer\" does not describe a mechanism but an effect. More precise terminology based on pharmacology is used to further classify these agents. Drugs commonly classed as mood stabilizers include:\n Lithium is the \"classic\" mood stabilizer, the first to be approved by the US FDA, and still popular in treatment. Therapeutic drug monitoring is required to ensure lithium levels remain in the therapeutic range: 0.6 to 0.8 or 0.8\u20131.2 mEq/L (or millimolar). Signs and symptoms of toxicity include nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, and ataxia. The most common side effects are lethargy and weight gain (up to ). The less common side effects of using lithium are blurred vision, a slight tremble in the hands, and a feeling of being mildly ill (malaise). In general, these side effects occur in the first few weeks after commencing lithium treatment. These symptoms can often be improved by lowering the dose. Long-term lithium therapy also carries risks such as hypothyroidism and chronic kidney disease, requiring periodic monitoring of thyroid and renal function.\n It is also one of the few mood stabilizers with proven anti-suicidal properties, making it unique among psychiatric medications.\nAnticonvulsants.\nAnticonvulsants, also known as antiseizure medications, are agents originally developed for treating epilepsy and seizure disorders. In the 1970s, clinical trials demonstrated that certain anticonvulsants were effective in mood stabilization, subsequently, these medications were adopted in psychiatry for treating mood disorders.\nThis class of medication is divided into first generation and second generation agents based on the time of their development, with the second generation agents having lesser adverse effects and better tolerability compared to the first generation.\n Valproate is a first generation anticonvulsant agent. This drug is considered as the first line treatment for both acute mania and maintenance of bipolar disorder. It primarily acts by inhibiting GABA transaminase and increasing GABAergic activity, thereby decreasing neuronal excitability. It can also inactivate sodium and calcium channels.\n This drug can be very irritating to the stomach, especially when taken as a free acid. Requires regular hepatic panels and full blood count monitoring. Common side effects include sleepiness, nausea, and dry mouth. More serious side effects include liver dysfunction, pancreatitis, and polycystic ovary syndrome. Weight gain is possible.\n It is recommended that women of childbearing age should avoid using valproate due its teratogenic potential, including the increased risk of neural tube defects, even with folic acid supplementation.\nCarbamazepine\n Carbamazepine is also a first generation anticonvulsant. It is considered second-line for bipolar disorder due to its side effects, including gastrointestinal symptoms, Stevens\u2010Johnson syndrome, toxic epidermal necrolysis, and weight gain. It primarily acts by inhibiting sodium channels.\n Carbamazepine can rarely cause a dangerous decrease in neutrophils, a type of white blood cell, called agranulocytosis. It interacts with many medications, including other mood stabilizers (e.g., lamotrigine) and antipsychotics (e.g., quetiapine). \n While using carbamazepine, the effectiveness of oral contraceptive is significantly decreased, and it also has \n teratogenic potential.\n FDA-approved for bipolar disorder maintenance therapy, not for acute mood problems like acute depression or mania, including hypomania. The usual target dose is 100\u2013200\u00a0mg daily, titrated to by 25\u00a0mg increments every 2 weeks. Lamotrigine can cause Stevens\u2013Johnson syndrome, a very rare but potentially fatal skin condition.\nThere is insufficient evidence to support the use of various other anticonvulsants, such as gabapentin and topiramate, as mood stabilizers.\nAntipsychotics.\nSome atypical antipsychotics (aripiprazole, asenapine, cariprazine, lurasidone, olanzapine, paliperidone, quetiapine, risperidone, and ziprasidone) also have mood-stabilizing effects and are thus commonly prescribed even when psychotic symptoms are absent.\n It is also conjectured that omega-3 fatty acids may have mood-stabilizing effects. Compared with placebo, omega-3 fatty acids appear better able to augment known mood stabilizers in reducing depressive\u2014but perhaps not manic\u2014symptoms of bipolar disorder; additional trials would be needed to establish the effects of omega-3 fatty acids alone.\"\" Recent studies suggest that preparations with a higher ratio of eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA) to docosahexaenoic acid (DHA) -types of omega-3 fatty acids- are more effective in improving depressive symptoms, while effects on mania remain inconsistent.\n It is known that even subclinical hypothyroidism can blunt a patient's response to both mood stabilizers and antidepressants. Furthermore, preliminary research into the use of thyroid augmentation in patients with refractory and rapid-cycling bipolar disorder has been positive, showing a slowing in cycle frequency and reduction in symptoms. Most studies have been conducted on an open-label basis. One large, controlled study of a 300 mcg daily dose of levothyroxine (T4) found it superior to placebo in the setting of bipolar disorder. In general, studies have shown T4 to be well tolerated and to show effectiveness even in patients without overt hypothyroidism. It is reported that supraphysiological doses of levothyroxine may be particularly beneficial in women with treatment-resistant bipolar depression, although long-term safety still needs further evaluation. Hypothyroidism is common among patients with bipolar disorder regardless of the mood stabilizer used.\nCombination therapy.\nIn routine practice, monotherapy is often insufficiently effective for acute and/or maintenance therapy. Thus, most patients are placed on combination therapy. Combination therapy (e.g., an atypical antipsychotic with lithium or valproate) has demonstrated better effectiveness over monotherapy in the control of manic episodes, as well as the prevention of relapse. However, side effects are more frequent and discontinuation rates are higher due to adverse events with combination therapy than with monotherapy.\nRelationship to Antidepressants.\nMost mood stabilizers are primarily antimanic agents, meaning that they are effective at treating mania and mood cycling and shifting, but are not effective at treating acute depression. The principal exceptions to that rule, because they treat both manic and depressive symptoms, are lamotrigine, lithium carbonate, olanzapine and quetiapine. There is a need for caution when treating bipolar patients with antidepressant medication due to the risks that they pose.\nNevertheless, antidepressants are still often prescribed in addition to mood stabilizers during depressive phases. This brings some risks, however, as antidepressants can induce mania (increases risk by 34%), psychosis (relative risk not reported), cycle acceleration, and other disturbing problems in people with bipolar disorder\u2014in particular, when taken alone. The risk of antidepressant-induced mania when given to patients concomitantly on antimanic agents is not known for certain but may still exist. SSRIs and bupropion appear to have lower chances of switching, while SNRIs and tricyclics are more likely to cause switching. A single large, population based study reports that the manic \"switch\" risk is not increased over regular mood stabilizer treatment when an antidepressant is combined with a mood stabilizer. When an antidepressant is used alone, the risk is about 3 times the regular value. Gitlin (2018) notes that \"the potential issue of worsening suicidality in adolescents and young adults treated with antidepressants [...] both controversial and infrequently seen.\"\nEqually critical is the question of whether adding antidepressant has any effect on bipolar depression. High-quality data is lacking in this field, and simply using different analytical approaches can lead to different conclusions. It's also possible that the effect depends on the mood stabilizer used: one study finds no effect when antidepressant is added to lithium or valporate, but some efficacy when it's added to atypical antipsychotics.\nPharmacodynamics.\nPharmacodynamics refers to the study of the biochemical and cellular effects of medications, as well as their mechanisms of action. As noted, \"mood stabilizers\" do not share a single way of working; the term simply indicates how these drugs are used in treatment. However, some research shows that Lithium, Valproate, and Carbamazepine may share a common mechanism of action, but not tricyclic antidepressants. This mechanism includes the reduction of inositol, a compound involved in many pathways that lead to increased cell signaling in the brain. When these pathways are inhibited or blocked, the mood stabilizing effect is accomplished. Another possible target of several mood stabilizers is the arachidonic acid cascade.\nLithium's exact mechanism of action remains unknown; it likely affects several sites within the neuron including the nucleus and the synapse. As mentioned, lithium is thought to cause inositol reduction. It does this by being an uncompetitive inhibitor to the enzymes inositol monophosphatase 1 and inositol polyphosphate 1-phosphatase. Lithium is also known to inhibit the enzyme GSK-3B, which helps regulate the circadian rhythm. If the circadian rhythm is disrupted, it may lead to key traits of Bipolar Disorder, like mood episodes. Chronic use of lithium helps regulate gene transcription of brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF). This boosts neural plasticity; which may be key to lithium's therapeutic effects. Lithium's role in the human body isn't fully clear. However, its benefits likely connect to its impact on electrolytes like potassium, sodium, calcium, and magnesium. Lithium is generally neuroprotective.\nValproate, also known as Valproic Acid, is an anticonvulsant. It affects brain activity in several ways. Valproate's main effect is the indirect inhibition of the breakdown of GABA, which is an inhibitory neurotransmitter. It works by reducing the activity of enzymes that break down GABA. This includes GABA transaminase and succinate semialdehyde dehydrogenase. It also decreases the expression of glutamate receptors; thus decreasing neuronal excitability. In addition, valproate blocks sodium, potassium and calcium voltage-gated channels, and this reduces how often neurons fire. Research has since shown valproate to have several cellular effects. These include the inhibition of histone deacetylases and upregulation of LEF1. These mechanisms hint at possible uses in cancer therapy. It is also neuroprotective.\nCarbamazepine is another anticonvulsant that functions mainly as a sodium channel blocker. Voltage-gated sodium channels are found on the cell membrane of neurons and help create action potentials. Carbamazepine keeps these channels inactivated, which stops continuous action potential firing. The liver breaks down carbamazepine through the liver enzyme CYP3A4. Many drugs can change how CYP3A4 works. They can either boost or reduce its activity. This is why carbamazepine needs careful monitoring when other medications are used with it, with a possible need for dosage adjustment.\nLamotrigine lowers excitatory nerve signaling in the central nervous system by lowering glutamate release. In addition, it increases inhibitory nerve signaling by boosting GABA release. Recent studies suggest the lamotrigine is relatively safe during pregnancy, but does need close monitoring by a specialist. This is important because researchers have linked it to neonatal malformations, such as oral clefts.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20433", "revid": "1306275994", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20433", "title": "Mere Christianity", "text": "1952 theological book by C. S. Lewis\nMere Christianity is a Christian apologetical book by the British author C. S. Lewis. It was adapted from a series of BBC radio talks made between 1941 and 1944, originally published as three separate volumes: \"Broadcast Talks\" (1942), \"Christian Behaviour\" (1943), and \"Beyond Personality\" (1944). The book consists of four parts: the first presents Lewis's arguments for the existence of God; the second contains his defence of Christian theology, including his notable \"Liar, lunatic, or Lord\" trilemma; the third has him exploring Christian ethics, among which are cardinal and theological virtues; in the final, he writes on the Christian conception of God.\n\"Mere Christianity\" was published in the United Kingdom by Geoffrey Bles on 7 July 1952. While initial reviews to the book were generally positive, modern reviewers were more critical of it, and its overall reception was relatively mixed. The praise was primarily directed to Lewis's humorous, straightforward style of writing; the criticism was primarily around the validity of his trilemma, which defends the Christian doctrine of the divinity of Jesus, and how he should have considered providing more choices.\nDeemed a classic in Lewis's career and religious literature, \"Mere Christianity\" has often received a wide readership decades following its release, and contributed to establishing its author's reputation as \"one of the most 'original' exponents of the Christian faith\" in the 20th century. The work, with Lewis's arguments for God's existence in it, continued to be examined in scholarly circles. \"Mere Christianity\" has retained popularity among Christians from various denominations, and appeared in several lists of finest Christian books. Often used as a tool of evangelism, it has been translated into over thirty languages, and cited by a number of public figures as their influence to their conversion to Christianity. Several \"biographies\" of the book have also been written.\nBackground.\nAfter reading Lewis's \"The Problem of Pain\" James Welch, the Director of Religious Broadcasting for the BBC, wrote Lewis the following:I write to ask whether you would be willing to help us in our work of religious broadcasting ... The microphone is a limiting, and rather irritating, instrument, but the quality of thinking and depth of conviction which I find in your book ought sure to be shared with a great many other people. Welch suggested two potential subjects. Lewis responded with thanks and observed that modern literature, the first, did not suit him, choosing instead the Christian faith as Lewis understood it.\nIn the preface to later editions, Lewis described his desire to avoid contested theological doctrine by focusing on core beliefs of the Christian Faith. \nEvery Wednesday from 7:45\u00a0pm to 8\u00a0pm during August 1941, Lewis gave live talks entitled \"Right or Wrong: A Clue to the Meaning of the Universe\" which would become the first book in \"Mere Christianity\". The first set of talks became very popular and flooded Lewis with responses from an adoring and irate public. This feedback led to Lewis's going back on air to answer listeners' questions.\nThe following January and February, Lewis gave the next set of talks on what would become \"What Christians Believe\". The talks remained popular and because of the success of the newly released \"The Screwtape Letters\", Lewis's publisher was happy to publish the broadcast talks as books that year.\nIn Autumn 1942, the third series of talks were cut down from 15 to 10 minutes. Due to a miscommunication, Lewis had prepared for 15 minutes, but added the cut material back into the next book and added several more chapters.\nThe fourth set of talks did not take place until 1944. The script drafts had a much wider scope originally, and Lewis prepared for 10-minute talks when the BBC was giving him 15. The timing of these talks was important and strictly adhered to due to technology and World War II, Germany would broadcast propaganda through the English-spoken \"Lord Hawhaw\" during any dead air. Due to the timing of the fourth set of talks (10:20\u00a0pm), Lewis said he could not do them all live and would have to record some.\nThe Case for Christianity (Broadcast Talks in UK).\nThe core of the first section centres on an argument from morality, the basis of which is the \"law of human nature\", a \"rule about right and wrong,\" which, Lewis maintained, is commonly available and known to all human beings. He cites, as an example, the case of Nazi Germany, writing: This law was called the Law of nature because people thought that everyone knew it by nature and did not need to be taught it. They did not mean, of course, that you might not find an odd individual here and there who did not know it, just as you find a few people who are colour-blind or have no ear for a tune. But taking the race as a whole, they thought that the human idea of decent behaviour was obvious to everyone. And I believe they were right. If they were not, then all the things we said about the war were nonsense. What was the sense in saying the enemy were in the wrong unless Right is a real thing which the Nazis at bottom knew as well as we did and ought to have practised? If they had had no notion of what we mean by right, then, though we might still have had to fight them, we could no more have blamed them for that than for the colour of their hair.\nOn a mundane level, it is generally accepted that stealing is a violation of this moral law. Lewis argues that the moral law is like scientific laws (e.g. gravity) or mathematics in that it was not contrived by humans. However, it is unlike scientific laws in that it can be broken or ignored, and it is known intuitively, rather than through experimentation. After introducing the moral law, Lewis argues that thirst reflects the fact that people naturally need water, and there is no other substance which satisfies that need. Lewis points out that earthly experience does not satisfy the human craving for \"joy\" and that only God could fit the bill; humans cannot know to yearn for something if it does not exist.\nAfter providing reasons for his conversion to theism, Lewis explicates various conceptions of God. Pantheism, he argues, is incoherent, and atheism too simple. Eventually, he arrives at Jesus Christ, and invokes a well-known argument now known as \"Lewis's trilemma\". Lewis, arguing that Jesus was claiming to be God, uses logic to advance three possibilities: either Jesus really was God; Jesus was deliberately lying; or Jesus was not really God but only thought himself to be (which would make him delusional and likely insane). \nThe book goes on to say that the latter two possibilities are not consistent with Jesus' character and it was most likely that he was being truthful.\nChristian Behaviour.\nThe next third of the book explores the ethics resulting from Christian belief. He cites the four cardinal virtues: prudence, justice, temperance, and fortitude. After touching on these, he goes into the three theological virtues: hope, faith, and charity. Lewis also explains morality as being composed of three \"layers\": relationships between man and man, the motivations and attitudes of the man himself, and contrasting worldviews.\nLewis also covers such topics as social relations and forgiveness, sexual ethics and the tenets of Christian marriage, and the relationship between morality and psychoanalysis. He also writes about \"the great sin\": pride, which he argues to be the root cause of all evil and rebellion.\nHis most important point is that Christianity mandates that one \"love your neighbour as yourself.\" He points out that all persons unconditionally love themselves. Even if one does not \"like\" oneself, one would still love oneself. Christians, he writes, must also apply this attitude to others, even if they do not like them. Lewis calls this one of the \"great secrets\": when one acts as if he loves others, he will presently come to love them.\nCritical reception.\nInitial reviews of \"Mere Christianity\" generally show enthusiasm, and most of them were from Christian publications. However, combining them with the reviews published decades later indicated a more mixed reception. The historian Stephanie L. Derrick observed that the book's literary elements, such as its eloquence, were the aspect most frequently noted by contemporary publications. The historian George M. Marsden summarised that \"Mere Christianity\" \"has been hated as well as loved. Nonetheless, as a popular presentation of the faith it has drawn less systematic criticism than would a book that purported to be a definitive treatise on Christian apologetics and theology.\" On the general reception to the book, the Lewis biographer Margaret Patterson Hannay described it as his \"most popular and ... most disparaged\" work, adding that \"probably because its fans have spoken of it as a profound piece of theology, while it is, as was designed to be, only a primer\".\nDescribing the book as \"a rare gift\", Edward Skillin of the \"Commonweal\" magazine commented of Lewis's ability to make \"complicated matters\" more accessible especially to laypeople. On a passage of the book, Edward D. Myers of \"Theology Today\" noted, \"This is clear, it is simple, it is eminently Christian, and it is typical of the ease with which Mr. Lewis puts great matters into plain language.\" Joseph McSorley of \"The Catholic World\" found Lewis writing \"with his customary clarity and incisiveness, and with proofs that the average man will find convincing. It is a delight to see him demolish in a paragraph many of the heresies which have contributed to our present ghastly condition.\" \"The Tablet\", a Catholic magazine, wrote:\nWe have never read arguments better marshalled and handled so that they can be remembered, or any book more useful to the Christian, in the Army or elsewhere, who finds himself called upon to argue briefly from first premises, to say why morality is not herd-instinct, why there is a special and unique character attaching to the sense of obligation, why the conviction that there is a law of right and wrong and a transcendent morality is only intelligible if there is a God.\n\"The Times Literary Supplement\" wrote of Lewis's \"quite unique power\" of making theology interesting, even \"exciting and (one might almost say) uproariously funny\". The reviewer added: \"No writer of popular apologetics today is more effective than Mr. C. S. Lewis.\" \"The Clergy Review\"'s G. D. Smith opined that Lewis \"shows himself a master in the rare art of conveying profound truths in simple and compelling language\". J. H. Homes of the \"New York Herald Tribune Weekly Book Review\" wrote that \"his clarity of thought and simplicity of expression have a magic about them which makes plain the most abstruse problems of theological speculation\". \"The Guardian\" said: \"His learning is abundantly seasoned with common sense, his humor and his irony are always at the service of the most serious purposes, and his originality is the offspring of enthusiastically loyal orthodoxy.\"\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"\"Mere Christianity\" is a popular, not an academic, book, which is not directed towards a readership of academic theologians or philosophers. It is simply unfair to expect Lewis to engage here with detailed philosophical debates, when these would clearly turn his brisk, highly readable book into a quagmire of fine philosophical distinctions. \"Mere Christianity\" is an informal handshake to begin a more formal acquaintance and conversation.\"\n\u2014Alister McGrath on the book's readability\nThe author Colin Duriez praised it as easy to understand, and the biographer Thomas C. Peters opined that his straightforward language makes the book fit to a wide audience. There had been also criticism, which was primarily directed towards Lewis's \"Liar, lunatic, or Lord\" trilemma. The Lewis biographer and Christian apologist Alister McGrath, while commending the book in general, felt that his trilemma is a weak defence for the doctrine of the divinity of Jesus, calling this the book's \"most obvious concern\". McGrath wrote that Lewis\u2019 argument is mostly unsupported by modern biblical scholarship, and argued that other alternatives should have been included, such as that Jesus was mistaken about his identity.\nScathing criticism came from the philosopher John Beversluis, in his book \"C. S. Lewis and the Search for Rational Religion\" (1985). Beversluis analysed Lewis's arguments for Christianity, arriving in the conclusion that each of them is built on faulty logic. He argued that Lewis made his arguments convincing by creating false analogies, with an instance in his trilemma. Beversluis said there are more alternatives in addition to Jesus being a liar or lunatic, one of which is that his disciples misinterpreted his words. The philosopher Victor Reppert replied to Beversluis in \"C. S. Lewis's Dangerous Idea\" (2003), noting that Beversluis was correct in pointing out that many of Lewis's arguments are not strictly logical but overestimating the degree to which Lewis rested his case for Christianity on reason alone. Reppert continued that Lewis, in his autobiography, \"Surprised by Joy\" (1955), realised Christianity rests on far more than solely reason.\nLegacy.\n\"Mere Christianity\" has been referred to as a classic of Lewis's career, as well as of religious literature, particularly in the category of Christian apologetics. Commentators have also seen it as a guide to the basics of the Christian faith and to his theology. The book, along with his arguments for the existence of God, have frequently received academic evaluation, either complimenting or critical. Analysing Lewis's books, the Australian archeologist Warwick Ball believed \"Mere Christianity\" is perhaps his most influential and widely read apologetic work; the American philosopher C. Stephen Evans called his moral argument the \"most widely-convincing apologetic argument of the twentieth century\"; McGrath considered it \"perhaps as outstanding an example of a lucid and intelligent presentation of the rational and moral case for Christian belief as we are ever likely to see\".\n\"Mere Christianity\" has retained popularity years after its publication, and has been compared to other well-known Christian works, including Augustine's \"The City of God\" and G. K. Chesterton's \"The Everlasting Man\" (1925). The BBC journalist Justin Phillips observed that it \"continues to transform the lives of those who read it. There is no reason why it won't continue to be potent for decades to come.\" According to the authors Roger Lancelyn Green and Walter Hooper, its success led to the acknowledgment of Lewis as \"one of the most 'original' exponents of the Christian faith\" of the 20th century. The book, Hooper continued, shows Lewis's ability of providing a comprehensible guidance of the Christian beliefs/theology to everyone, and \"has become synonymous with Lewis\". The academic Bruce L. Edwards noted that it contributes to shaping Lewis's reputation as \"a witty, articulate proponent of Christianity\". The author Marvin D. Hinten wrote: \"When people are asked which C. S. Lewis book has most influenced them spiritually, the most common answer is \"Mere Christianity\".\"\nAccording to Peters, the book is more popular among Christians of various denominations, including Catholic, Latter-day Saint, Orthodox, and Protestant, but less among non-Christians. It is often used as an evangelistic tool, predominantly in Christian-majority countries, including the United States, where its influence is most felt. Furthermore, its influence is strengthened by the publication of its translations; according to Marsden, it has been translated to about thirty-six languages. In the next decades, \"Mere Christianity\" is continued to be reprinted and sold by Christian and online booksellers. For instance, soon after the dissolution of the Soviet Union, it was translated into the several native languages of its breakaway states, which was done by Orthodox Christians to rebuild their influence. As of 2010, the book had been in BookScan Religion Bestseller's list for 513 weeks, consecutively. There is also a considerable readership in China, with 60,000 copies had been sold there as of 2014.\nThe book has also been cited by a number of public figures as their influence to their conversion, or re-conversion, to Christianity as well as other Christian denominations. The American geneticist Francis Collins related his story of conversion from atheism in his book, \"The Language of God\" (2006), and described \"Mere Christianity\" as having influenced him to embrace Christianity. The American attorney Charles Colson's conversion happened after him reading a copy of the book given by his friend, Thomas L. Phillips (the chairman of the board of the Raytheon Company). His story became popular, enhanced by the release of his autobiography in 1976, which was consequently declared the \"Year of the Evangelicals\" by the \"Newsweek\" magazine. Catholic converts include the British philanthropist Leonard Cheshire, the German economist E. F. Schumacher, the American author Sheldon Vanauken, the American columnist Ross Douthat, the American theologian Peter Kreeft, and the American philosopher Francis J. Beckwith.\n\"Mere Christianity\" has been featured in several lists. It was included in the 2000 book, \"100 Christian Books That Changed the Century\", by William J. Petersen and Randy Petersen. In 2000 and 2006, the evangelical magazine \"Christianity Today\"'s editorial board included \"Mere Christianity\" in its \"Books of the Century\" and \"The Top 50 Books That Have Shaped Evangelicals\", respectively. In a 2013 article to \"Christianity Today\", McGrath ranked it the first among the five books by Lewis he liked the most. In the same year's \"The Best Christian Book of All Time Tournament\", run by InterVarsity Christian Fellowship, \"Mere Christianity\" was voted as the all-time, best Christian book, only after Augustine's autobiography \"Confessions\". In 2018, \"Christianity Today\"'s Greg Cootsona, a writer of the relationship between religion and science, featured it in his \"5 Books That Bring Science and Christianity Together\" listing.\n\"Mere Christianity\" has influenced other Christian publications, with the scholar Gary L. Tandy noting that it remains the standard for assessing them, mainly the apologetic ones. Subsequent publications with allusion to the book in their titles include N. T. Wright's \"Simply Christian\" (2006) and McGrath's \"Mere Apologetics\" (2012). The American pastor Tim Keller referred to his apologetic \"The Reason for God\" (2012) as \"\"Mere Christianity\" for dummies\". The bimonthly ecumenical Christian magazine \"Touchstone\", which started publication in 1986, is subtitled \"A Journal of Mere Christianity\". Paul McCusker's \"C. S. Lewis &amp; Mere Christianity\", which provides insights to the work in its historical context, was published in 2014; it was praised for being well-researched but was criticised for its factual errors. Another \"biography\" of the book, \"C. S. Lewis's Mere Christianity\", written by Marsden, was released in 2016, and received a positive reception from critics, with some criticism to its conclusion.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nChapters\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20434", "revid": "15962782", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20434", "title": "Mathematical game", "text": "Game defined by mathematical parameters\nA mathematical game is a game whose rules, strategies, and outcomes are defined by clear mathematical parameters. Often, such games have simple rules and match procedures, such as tic-tac-toe and dots and boxes. Generally, mathematical games need not be conceptually intricate to involve deeper computational underpinnings. For example, even though the rules of Mancala are relatively basic, the game can be rigorously analyzed through the lens of combinatorial game theory.\nMathematical games differ sharply from mathematical puzzles in that mathematical puzzles require specific mathematical expertise to complete, whereas mathematical games do not require a deep knowledge of mathematics to play. Often, the arithmetic core of mathematical games is not readily apparent to players untrained to note the statistical or mathematical aspects.\nSome mathematical games are of deep interest in the field of recreational mathematics.\nWhen studying a game's core mathematics, arithmetic theory is generally of higher utility than actively playing or observing the game itself. To analyze a game numerically, it is particularly useful to study the rules of the game insofar as they can yield equations or relevant formulas. This is frequently done to determine winning strategies or to distinguish if the game has a solution.\nAdditionally, mathematical games can aid children in grasping fundamental concepts such as addition, subtraction, multiplication, and division, enhancing their arithmetic skills in an engaging manner.\nList of games.\nSometimes it is not immediately obvious that a particular game involves chance. Often a card game is described as \"pure strategy\" and such, but a game with any sort of random shuffling or face-down dealing of cards should not be considered to be \"no chance\". Several abstract strategy games are listed below:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20435", "revid": "50641829", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20435", "title": "Martin Gardner", "text": "American mathematics and science writer (1914\u20132010)\nMartin Gardner (October 21, 1914\u00a0\u2013 May 22, 2010) was an American popular mathematics and popular science writer with interests also encompassing magic, scientific skepticism, micromagic, philosophy, religion, and literature\u00a0\u2013 especially the writings of Lewis Carroll, L. Frank Baum, and G.\u00a0K. Chesterton. He was a leading authority on Lewis Carroll; \"The Annotated Alice\", which incorporated the text of Carroll's two Alice books, was his most successful work and sold over a million copies. He had a lifelong interest in magic and illusion and in 1999, \"MAGIC\" magazine named him as one of the \"100 Most Influential Magicians of the Twentieth Century\". He was considered the doyen of American puzzlers. He was a prolific and versatile author, publishing more than 100 books.\nGardner was best known for creating and sustaining interest in recreational mathematics\u2014and by extension, mathematics in general\u2014throughout the latter half of the 20th century, principally through his \"Mathematical Games\" columns. These appeared for twenty-five years in \"Scientific American\", and his subsequent books collecting them.\nGardner was one of the foremost anti-pseudoscience polemicists of the 20th century. His 1957 book \"Fads and Fallacies in the Name of Science\" is a seminal work of the skeptical movement. In 1976, he joined with fellow skeptics to found CSICOP, an organization promoting scientific inquiry and the use of reason in examining extraordinary claims.\nBiography.\nYouth and education.\nMartin Gardner was born into a prosperous family in Tulsa, Oklahoma, to James Henry Gardner, a petroleum geologist, and his wife, Willie Wilkerson Spiers, a Montessori-trained teacher. His mother taught Martin to read before he started school, reading him \"The Wizard of Oz\", and this began a lifelong interest in the Oz books of L.\u00a0Frank Baum. His fascination with mathematics started in his boyhood when his father gave him a copy of Sam Loyd's \"Cyclopedia of 5000 Puzzles, Tricks and Conundrums\".\nHe attended the University of Chicago where he studied history, literature and sciences under their intellectually-stimulating Great Books curriculum and earned his bachelor's degree in philosophy in 1936. Early jobs included reporter on the \"Tulsa Tribune\", writer at the University of Chicago Office of Press Relations, and case worker in Chicago's Black Belt for the city's Relief Administration. During World War II, he served for four years in the U.S. Navy as a yeoman on board the destroyer escort USS \"Pope\" in the Atlantic. His ship was still in the Atlantic when the war came to an end with the surrender of Japan in August 1945.\nAfter the war, Gardner returned to the University of Chicago. He attended graduate school for a year there, but he did not earn an advanced degree.\nEarly career.\nIn the late 1940s, Gardner moved to New York City and became a writer and editor at \"Humpty Dumpty\" magazine, where for eight years, he wrote features and stories for it and several other children's magazines. His paper-folding puzzles at that magazine led to his first work at \"Scientific American.\" For many decades, Gardner, his wife Charlotte, and their two sons, Jim and Tom, lived in Hastings-on-Hudson, New York, where he earned his living as a freelance author, publishing books with several different publishers, and also publishing hundreds of magazine and newspaper articles.\nMiddle age.\nIn 1950, he wrote an article in the \"Antioch Review\" entitled \"The Hermit Scientist\". It was one of Gardner's earliest articles about junk science, and in 1952 a much-expanded version became his first published book: \"In the Name of Science: An Entertaining Survey of the High Priests and Cultists of Science, Past and Present\". The year 1960 saw the original edition of the best-selling book of his career, \"The Annotated Alice\".\nIn 1957 Gardner started writing a column for \"Scientific American\" called \"Mathematical Games\". It ran for over a quarter century and dealt with the subject of recreational mathematics. The \"Mathematical Games\" column became the most popular feature of the magazine and was the first thing that many readers turned to. In September 1977 \"Scientific American\" acknowledged the prestige and popularity of Gardner's column by moving it from the back to the very front of the magazine.\nRetirement and death.\nIn 1979, Gardner left \"Scientific American\". He and his wife Charlotte moved to Hendersonville, North Carolina. He continued to write math articles, sending them to \"The Mathematical Intelligencer\", \"Math Horizons\", \"The College Mathematics Journal\", and \"Scientific American\". He also revised some of his older books such as \"Origami, Eleusis, and the Soma Cube\". Charlotte died in 2000 and in 2004 Gardner returned to Oklahoma, where his son, James Gardner, was a professor of education at the University of Oklahoma in Norman. He died there on May 22, 2010. An autobiography\u00a0\u2013 \"Undiluted Hocus-Pocus: The Autobiography of Martin Gardner\"\u00a0\u2013 was published posthumously.\nMathematical Games column.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nI just play all the time and am fortunate enough to get paid for it.\n\u2013 Martin Gardner, 1998\nThe \"Mathematical Games\" column began with a free-standing article on hexaflexagons which ran in the December 1956 issue of \"Scientific American\". Flexagons became a bit of a fad and soon people all over New York City were making them. Gerry Piel, the \"SA\" publisher at the time, asked Gardner, \"Is there enough similar material to this to make a regular feature?\" Gardner said he thought so. The January 1957 issue contained his first column, entitled \"Mathematical Games\". Almost 300 more columns were to follow.\nIt ran from 1956 to 1981 with sporadic columns afterwards and was the first introduction of many subjects to a wider audience, notably:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nGardner had problems learning calculus and never took a mathematics course after high school. While editing \"Humpty Dumpty Magazine\" he constructed many paper folding puzzles. At a magic show in 1956 fellow magician Royal Vale Heath introduced Gardner to the intricately folded paper shapes known as flexagons and steered him to the four Princeton University professors who had invented and investigated their mathematical properties. The subsequent article Gardner wrote on hexaflexagons led directly to the column.\nGardner's son Jim once asked him what was his favorite puzzle, and Gardner answered almost immediately: \"The monkey and the coconuts\". It had been the subject of his April 1958 Games column and in 2001 he chose to make it the first chapter of his \"best of\" collection, \"The Colossal Book of Mathematics\".\nIn the 1980s \"Mathematical Games\" began to appear only irregularly. Other authors began to share the column, and the June 1986 issue saw the final installment under that title. In 1981, on Gardner's retirement from \"Scientific American\", the column was replaced by Douglas Hofstadter's \"Metamagical Themas\", a name that is an anagram of \"Mathematical Games\".\nVirtually all of the games columns were collected in book form starting in 1959 with \"The Scientific American Book of Mathematical Puzzles &amp; Diversions\". Over the next four decades fourteen more books followed. Donald Knuth called them the .\nInfluence.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHis depth and clarity will illuminate our world for a long time.\n \u2013Persi Diaconis\nMartin Gardner had a major impact on mathematics in the second half of the 20th century. His column ran for 25 years and was read avidly by the generation of mathematicians and physicists who grew up in the years 1956 to 1981. His writing inspired, directly or indirectly, many who would go on to careers in mathematics, science, and other related endeavors.\nGardner's admirers included such diverse individuals as W. H. Auden, Arthur C. Clarke, Carl Sagan, Isaac Asimov, Richard Dawkins, Stephen Jay Gould, and the entire French literary group known as the Oulipo. Salvador Dal\u00ed once sought him out to discuss four-dimensional hypercubes. David Auerbach wrote: \"A case can be made, in purely practical terms, for Martin Gardner as one of the most influential writers of the 20th century. His popularizations of science and mathematical games in Scientific American, over the 25 years he wrote for them, might have helped create more young mathematicians and computer scientists than any other single factor prior to the advent of the personal computer.\" Colm Mulcahy described him as \"without doubt the best friend mathematics ever had.\"\nGardner's column introduced the public to books such as A K Dewdney\u2019s \"Planiverse\" and Douglas Hofstadter\u2019s \"G\u00f6del, Escher, Bach\". His writing was credited as both broad and deep. Noam Chomsky once wrote, \"Martin Gardner's contribution to contemporary intellectual culture is unique\u00a0\u2013 in its range, its insight, and understanding of hard questions that matter.\" Gardner repeatedly alerted the public (and other mathematicians) to recent discoveries in mathematics\u2013recreational and otherwise. In addition to introducing many first-rate puzzles and topics such as Penrose tiles and Conway's Game of Life, he was equally adept at writing columns about traditional mathematical topics such as knot theory, Fibonacci numbers, Pascal's triangle, the M\u00f6bius strip, transfinite numbers, four-dimensional space, Zeno's paradoxes, Fermat's Last Theorem, and the four-color problem.\nGardner set a new high standard for writing about mathematics. In a 2004 interview he said, \"I go up to calculus, and beyond that I don't understand any of the papers that are being written. I consider that that was an advantage for the type of column I was doing because I had to understand what I was writing about, and that enabled me to write in such a way that an average reader could understand what I was saying. If you are writing popularly about math, I think it's good not to know too much math.\" John Horton Conway called him \"the most learned man I have ever met.\"\nGardner's mathematical grapevine.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHe had carried on incredibly interesting exchanges with hundreds of mathematicians, as well as with artists and polymaths such as Maurits Escher and Piet Hein.\n \u2013 AMS Notices\nGardner maintained an extensive network of experts and amateurs with whom he regularly exchanged information and ideas. Doris Schattschneider would later term this circle of collaborators \"Gardner's mathematical grapevine\" or \"MG2\".\nGardner's role as a hub of this network helped facilitate several introductions that led to further fruitful collaborations. Mathematicians Conway, Berlekamp, and Guy, who met as a result of Gardner's influence, would go on to write \"Winning Ways for your Mathematical Plays\", a foundational book in combinatorial game theory that Gardner subsequently championed. Gardner also introduced Conway to Benoit Mandelbrot because he knew of their mutual interest in Penrose tiles. Gardner's network was also responsible for introducing Doris Schattschneider and Marjorie Rice, who worked together to document the newly discovered pentagon tilings.\nAs he was launching his monthly column in 1956 and 1957, Gardner began corresponding with mathematicians\u00a0such as Claude Shannon,\u00a0John Nash,\u00a0John Milnor, and\u00a0David Gale.He credited his network with generating further material for his columns: \"When I first started the column, I was not in touch with any mathematicians, and gradually mathematicians who were creative in the field found out about the column and began corresponding with me. So my most interesting columns were columns based on the material I got from them, so I owe them a big debt of gratitude.\"\nGardner prepared each of his columns in a painstaking and scholarly fashion and conducted copious correspondence to be sure that everything was fact-checked for mathematical accuracy. Communication was often by postcard or telephone and Gardner kept meticulous notes of everything, typically on index cards. Archives of some of his correspondence stored at Stanford University occupy some 63 linear feet of shelf space. This correspondence led to columns about the rep-tiles and pentominos of Solomon W. Golomb; the space filling curves of Bill Gosper; the aperiodic tiles of Roger Penrose; the Game of Life invented by John H. Conway; the superellipse and the Soma cube of Piet Hein; the trapdoor functions of Diffie, Hellman, and Merkle; the flexagons of Stone, Tuckerman, Feynman, and Tukey; the geometrical delights in a book by H. S. M. Coxeter; the game of Hex invented by Piet Hein and John Nash; Tutte's account of squaring the square; and many other topics.\nThe wide array of mathematicians, physicists, computer scientists, philosophers, magicians, artists, writers, and other influential thinkers who can be counted as part of Gardner's mathematical grapevine includes:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nPublic key cryptography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n These new ciphers are not absolutely unbreakable in the sense of the one-time pad, but in practice they are unbreakable in a much stronger sense than any cipher previously designed for widespread use. In principle these new ciphers can be broken. but only by computer programs that run for millions of years!\n\u2013Martin Gardner\nIn his August 1977 column, \"A new kind of cipher that would take millions of years to break\", Gardner described a new cryptographic system invented by Ron Rivest, Adi Shamir and Leonard Adleman. The system, based on trapdoor functions, was known as RSA (after the three researchers) and has become a component of the majority of secure data transmission schemes. Since RSA is a relatively slow algorithm it is not widely used to directly encrypt data.\u00a0More often, it is used to transmit shared keys for\u00a0symmetric-key\u00a0cryptography.\nGardner identified the memorandum that his column was based on and invited readers to write to Rivest to request a copy of it. Over seven thousand requests came pouring in, some of them from other countries. This caused significant consternation in the US defense agencies and possible legal problems for Gardner himself. The National Security Agency (NSA) asked the RSA team to stop distributing the report and one letter to the IEEE suggested that disseminating such information might be violating the Arms Export Control Act and the International Traffic in Arms Regulations. In the end the defense establishment could provide no legal basis for suppressing the new technology, and when a detailed paper about RSA was published in \"Communications of the ACM\", the NSA\u2019s crypto monopoly was effectively terminated.\nPseudoscience and skepticism.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nMartin Gardner is the single brightest beacon defending rationality and good science against the mysticism and anti-intellectualism that surround us.\n \u2013 Stephen Jay Gould\nGardner was a critic of fringe science. His book \"Fads and Fallacies in the Name of Science\" (1952, revised 1957) launched the modern skeptical movement. It debunked dubious movements and theories including Fletcherism, Lamarckism, food faddism, Dowsing Rods, Charles Fort, Rudolf Steiner, Dianetics, the Bates method for improving eyesight, Einstein deniers, the Flat Earth theory, the lost continents of Atlantis and Lemuria, Immanuel Velikovsky's Worlds in Collision, the reincarnation of Bridey Murphy, Wilhelm Reich's orgone theory, the spontaneous generation of life, extra-sensory perception and psychokinesis, homeopathy, phrenology, palmistry, graphology, and numerology. This book and his subsequent efforts (\"Science: Good, Bad and Bogus\", 1981; \"Order and Surprise\", 1983, \"Gardner's Whys &amp; Wherefores\", 1989, etc.) provoked a lot of criticism from the advocates of alternative science and New Age philosophy. He kept up running dialogues (both public and private) with many of them for decades.\nIn a review of \"Science: Good, Bad and Bogus\", Stephen Jay Gould called Gardner \"The Quack Detector\", a writer who \"expunge[d] nonsense\" and in so doing had \"become a priceless national resource.\" In 1976 Gardner joined with fellow skeptics philosopher Paul Kurtz, psychologist Ray Hyman, sociologist Marcello Truzzi, and stage magician James Randi to found the Committee for the Scientific Investigation of Claims of the Paranormal (now called the Committee for Skeptical Inquiry). Intellectuals including astronomer Carl Sagan, author and biochemist Isaac Asimov, psychologist B. F. Skinner, and journalist Philip J. Klass became fellows of the program. From 1983 to 2002 he wrote a monthly column called \"Notes of a Fringe Watcher\" (originally \"Notes of a Psi-Watcher\") for \"Skeptical Inquirer\", that organization's monthly magazine. These columns have been collected in five books starting with \"The New Age: Notes of a Fringe Watcher\" in 1988.\nGardner was a critic of self-proclaimed Israeli psychic Uri Geller and wrote two satirical booklets about him in the 1970s using the pen name \"Uriah Fuller\" in which he explained how such purported psychics do their seemingly impossible feats such as mentally bending spoons and reading minds.\nMartin Gardner continued to criticize junk science throughout his life. His targets included not just safe subjects like astrology and UFO sightings, but more vigorously defended topics such as chiropractic, vegetarianism, creationism, Scientology, the Laffer Curve, and Christian Science. His final work, written just a month before his death in 2010, was an article excoriating the \"dubious medical opinions and bogus science\" of Oprah Winfrey\u00a0\u2013 particularly her support for the thoroughly discredited theory that vaccinations cause autism; it went on to bemoan the \"needless deaths of children\" that such notions are likely to cause.\n\"Skeptical Inquirer\" named him one of the Ten Outstanding Skeptics of the Twentieth Century. In 2010 he was posthumously honored with an award for his contributions in the skeptical field from the Independent Investigations Group. In 1982 the Committee for Skeptical Inquiry awarded Gardner its \"In Praise of Reason Award\" for his \"heroic efforts in defense of reason and the dignity of the skeptical attitude\", and in 2011 it added Gardner to its Pantheon of Skeptics.\nMagic.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCard magic, and magic in general, owe a far greater debt to Martin Gardner than most conjurors realize.\n\u2013Stephen Minch\nMartin Gardner held a lifelong fascination with magic and illusion that began when his father demonstrated a trick to him. He wrote for a magic magazine in high school and worked in a department store demonstrating magic tricks while he was at the University of Chicago. Gardner's first published writing (at the age of fifteen) was a magic trick in \"The Sphinx\", the official magazine of the Society of American Magicians. He focused mainly on micromagic (table or close-up magic) and, from the 1930s on, published a significant number of original contributions to this secretive field. Magician Joe M. Turner said, \"The Encyclopedia of Impromptu Magic\", which Gardner wrote in 1985, \"is guaranteed to show up in any poll of magicians' favorite magic books.\" His first magic book for the general public, \"Mathematics, Magic and Mystery\" (Dover, 1956), is still considered a classic in the field. He was well known for his innovative tapping and spelling effects, with and without playing cards, and was most proud of the effect he called the \"Wink Change\".\nMany of Gardner's lifelong friends were magicians. These included William Simon who introduced Gardner to Charlotte Greenwald, whom he married in 1952, Dai Vernon, Jerry Andrus, statistician Persi Diaconis, and polymath Raymond Smullyan. Gardner considered fellow magician James Randi his closest friend. Diaconis and Smullyan like Gardner straddled the two worlds of mathematics and magic. Mathematics and magic were frequently intertwined in Gardner's work. One of his earliest books, \"Mathematics, Magic and Mystery\" (1956), was about mathematically based magic tricks. Mathematical magic tricks were often featured in his \"Mathematical Games\" column\u2013for example, his August 1962 column was titled \"A variety of diverting tricks collected at a fictitious convention of magicians.\" From 1998 to 2002 he wrote a monthly column on magic tricks called \"Trick of the Month\" in The Physics Teacher, a journal published by the American Association of Physics Teachers.\nIn 1999 \"Magic magazine\" named Gardner one of the \"100 Most Influential Magicians of the Twentieth Century\". In 2005 he received a 'Lifetime Achievement Fellowship' from the Academy of Magical Arts. The last work to be published during his lifetime was a magic trick in the May 2010 issue of \"\".\nTheism and religion.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nI am a philosophical theist. I believe in a personal God, and I believe in an afterlife, and I believe in prayer, but I don't believe in any established religion. This is called philosophical theism. ... Philosophical theism is entirely emotional. As Kant said, he destroyed pure reason to make room for faith.\n\u2013 Martin Gardner, 2008\nGardner was raised as a Methodist\u2014his mother was very religious\u2014but rejected established religion as an adult. He considered himself a philosophical theist and a fideist. He believed in a personal God, in an afterlife, and prayer, but rejected established religion. Nevertheless, he had an abiding fascination with religious belief. In his autobiography, he stated: \"When many of my fans discovered that I believed in God and even hoped for an afterlife, they were shocked and dismayed ... I do not mean the God of the Bible, especially the God of the Old Testament, or any other book that claims to be divinely inspired. For me God is a \"Wholly Other\" transcendent intelligence, impossible for us to understand. He or she is somehow responsible for our universe and capable of providing, how I have no inkling, an afterlife.\"\nGardner described his own belief as philosophical theism inspired by the works of philosopher Miguel de Unamuno. While eschewing systematic religious doctrine, he retained a belief in God, asserting that reason or science cannot confirm or disconfirm this belief. At the same time, he was skeptical of claims that any god has communicated with human beings through spoken or telepathic revelation or through miracles in the natural world. Gardner has been quoted as saying that he regarded parapsychology and other research into the paranormal as tantamount to \"tempting God\" and seeking \"signs and wonders\". He stated that while he would expect tests on the efficacy of prayers to be negative, he would not rule out \"a priori\" the possibility that unknown paranormal forces may allow prayers to influence the physical world.\nGardner wrote repeatedly about what public figures such as Robert Maynard Hutchins, Mortimer Adler, and William F. Buckley, Jr. believed and whether their beliefs were logically consistent. He sometimes attacked prominent religious figures such as Mary Baker Eddy because their claims were unsupportable. His semi-autobiographical novel \"The Flight of Peter Fromm\" depicts a traditionally Protestant Christian struggling with his faith, examining 20th-century scholarship and intellectual movements and ultimately rejecting Christianity while remaining a theist.\nGardner said that he suspected that the fundamental nature of human consciousness may not be knowable or discoverable unless perhaps a physics more profound than (\"underlying\") quantum mechanics is someday developed. In this regard, he said, he belonged to \"a group of thinkers known as the 'mysterians'.\" His philosophical views, in general, are described and defended in his book \"The Whys of a Philosophical Scrivener\" (1983, revised 1999).\nAnnotated works.\nGardner was considered a leading authority on Lewis Carroll. His annotated version of \"Alice's Adventures in Wonderland\" and \"Through the Looking Glass\", explaining the many mathematical riddles, wordplay, and literary references found in the Alice books, was first published as \"The Annotated Alice\" (Clarkson Potter, 1960). Sequels were published with new annotations as \"More Annotated Alice\" (Random House, 1990), and finally as \"The Annotated Alice: The Definitive Edition\" (Norton, 1999), combining notes from the earlier editions and new material. The original book arose when Gardner found the Alice books \"sort of frightening\" when he was young, but found them fascinating as an adult. He felt that someone ought to annotate them, and suggested to a publisher that Bertrand Russell be asked; when the publisher was unable to get past Russell's secretary, Gardner was asked to take on the project himself.\nThere had long been annotated books written by scholars for other scholars, but Gardner was the first to write such a work for the general public, and soon many other writers followed his lead. Gardner himself went on to produce annotated editions of G. K. Chesterton's \"The Innocence Of Father Brown\" and \"The Man Who Was Thursday\", as well as of celebrated poems including \"The Rime of the Ancient Mariner\", \"Casey at the Bat\", \"The Night Before Christmas\", and \"The Hunting of the Snark\".\nNovels and short stories.\nGardner wrote two novels. He was a fan of the Oz books written by L. Frank Baum, and in 1998 he published \"Visitors from Oz\", based on the characters in Baum's various Oz books. Gardner was a founding member of the International Wizard of Oz Club, and winner of its 1971 L. Frank Baum Memorial Award. His other novel was \"The Flight of Peter Fromm\" (1973), which reflected his lifelong fascination with religious belief and the problem of faith.\nHis short stories were collected in \"The No-Sided Professor and Other Tales of Fantasy, Humor, Mystery, and Philosophy\" (1987).\nAutobiography.\nAt the age of 95 Gardner wrote \"Undiluted Hocus-Pocus: The Autobiography of Martin Gardner\". He was living in a one-room apartment in Norman, Oklahoma and, as was his custom, wrote it on a typewriter and edited it using scissors and rubber cement. He took the title from a poem, a so-called grook, by his good friend Piet Hein, which perfectly expresses Gardner's abiding sense of mystery and wonder about existence.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWord play.\nGardner's interest in wordplay led him to conceive of a magazine on recreational linguistics. In 1967 he pitched the idea to Greenwood Periodicals and nominated Dmitri Borgmann as editor. The resulting journal, \"Word Ways\", carried many of his articles\u2014some of them posthumously\u2014until publication ceased in 2020. He also wrote a \"Puzzle Tale\" column for \"Asimov's Science Fiction\" magazine from 1977 to 1986. Gardner was a member of the all-male literary banqueting club the Trap Door Spiders, which served as the basis of Isaac Asimov's fictional group of mystery solvers, the Black Widowers.\nPen names.\nGardner often used pen names. In 1952, while working for the children's magazine \"Humpty Dumpty\", he contributed stories written by \"Humpty Dumpty Jnr\". For several years starting in 1953 he was a managing editor of \"Polly Pigtails\", a magazine for young girls, and also wrote under that name. His \"Annotated Casey at the Bat\" (1967) included a parody of the poem, attributed to \"Nitram Rendrag\" (his name spelled backwards). Using the pen name \"Uriah Fuller\", he wrote two books attacking the alleged psychic Uri Geller. In later years, Gardner often wrote parodies of his favorite poems under the name \"Armand T. Ringer\", an anagram of his name. In 1983 one George Groth panned Gardner's book \"The Whys of a Philosophical Scrivener\" in the \"New York Review of Books\". Only in the last line of the review was it revealed that George Groth was Martin Gardner himself.\nIn his January 1960 \"Mathematical Games\" column, Gardner introduced the fictitious \"Dr. Matrix\" and wrote about him often over the next two decades. Dr. Matrix was not exactly a pen name, although Gardner did pretend that everything in these columns came from the fertile mind of the good doctor. Then in 1979 Dr. Matrix himself published an article in the quite respectable \"Two-Year College Mathematics Journal\". It was called \"Martin Gardner: Defending the Honor of the Human Mind\" and contained a biography of Gardner and a history of his \"Mathematical Games\" column. It would be a further decade before Martin published an article in such a mathematics journal under his own name.\nPhilosophy of mathematics.\nGardner wrote on the philosophy of mathematics. He wrote negative reviews of \"The Mathematical Experience\" by Philip J. Davis and Reuben Hersh and \"What Is Mathematics, Really?\" by Hersh, both of which were critical of aspects of mathematical Platonism, and the first of which was well received by the mathematical community. While Gardner was often perceived as a hard-core Platonist, his reviews demonstrated some formalist tendencies. Gardner maintained that his views are widespread among mathematicians, but Hersh has countered that in his experience as a professional mathematician and speaker, this is not the case.\nMathematics education.\nIn the August 1998 edition of\u00a0Scientific American, Gardner wrote his final piece for\u00a0Scientific American\u00a0titled, \"A Quarter Century of Recreational Mathematics.\" \u00a0In it he wrote,\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;For 40 years I have done my best to convince educators that recreational math should be incorporated into the standard curriculum. It should be regularly introduced as a way to interest young students in the wonders of mathematics. So far, though, movement in this direction has been glacial.\nHe recalls how as a young boy a math teacher had scolded him for working on a bit of recreational mathematics and laments at how wrongheaded this attitude is. He notes that the magazine\u00a0\"Mathematics Teacher\"\u00a0published by the\u00a0National Council of Teachers of Mathematics, and specially dedicated to improving mathematics instruction for grades 8\u201314,\u00a0often has articles on recreational topics but that most teachers do not use them.\nMartin Gardner was also frustrated by the fact that the history curriculum rarely featured scientists and mathematicians. In a New York Times review of Stanislaw Ulam's autobiographical book, \"Adventures Of a Mathematician\", he said,\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Biographical history, as taught in our public schools, is still largely a history of boneheads: ridiculous kings and queens, paranoid political leaders, compulsive voyagers, ignorant generals\u2014the flotsam and jetsam of historical currents. The men who radically altered history, the great creative scientists and mathematicians, are seldom mentioned if at all.\nUlam has never ceased to be amazed by \u201chow a few scribbles on a blackboard \u2026 could change the course of human affairs.\u201d That this kind of symbol manipulation, in the hands of absent\u2010minded intellects, can shape history for both good and evil is the apocalyptic center of Ulam's story.\nBehind the scenes, invisible to all but a few, are the discoverers of these curious patterns in the cosmic carpet. They scribble their hieroglyphics on the back of a menu and men go to the moon, harness the atom, crack the genetic code, transform the planet's face.\nLegacy and awards.\nThe numerous awards Gardner received include:\nThe Mathematical Association of America has established a Martin Gardner Lecture to be given each year on the last day of MAA MathFest, the summer meeting of the MAA. The first annual lecture, \"Recreational Mathematics and Computer Science: Martin Gardner's Influence on Research\", was given by Erik Demaine of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology on Saturday, August 3, 2019, at MathFest in Cincinnati. The 2021 lecture \"https://\" was virtual and was given by Doris Schattschneider.\nThere are eight bricks honoring Gardner in the Paul R. Halmos Commemorative Walk, installed by The Mathematical Association of America (MAA) at their Conference Center in Washington, D.C. Gardner has an Erd\u0151s number of 1.\nGathering 4 Gardner.\nMartin Gardner continued to write up until his death in 2010, and his community of fans grew to span several generations. Moreover, his influence was so broad that many of his fans had little or no contact with each other. This led Atlanta entrepreneur and puzzle collector Tom Rodgers to the idea of hosting a weekend gathering celebrating Gardner's contributions to recreational mathematics, rationality, magic, puzzles, literature, and philosophy. Although Gardner was famously shy, and would usually decline an honor if it required him to make a personal appearance, Rogers persuaded him to attend the first such \"Gathering 4 Gardner\" (G4G), held in Atlanta in January 1993.\nA second such get-together was held in 1996, again with Gardner in attendance. A video was made for the CBC Television program \"The Nature of Things with David Suzuki\". It featured Gardner along with many members of his circle and was called \"Martin Gardner: Mathemagician\" and broadcast on March 14, 1996. At this point Rogers and his friends decided to make the gathering a regular, bi-annual event. Participants over the years have ranged from long-time Gardner friends such as John Horton Conway, Elwyn Berlekamp, Ronald Graham, Donald Coxeter, and Richard K. Guy, to newcomers like mathematician and mathematical artist Erik Demaine, mathematical video maker Vi Hart, and Fields Medalist Manjul Bhargava.\nThe attendees at G4G include magicians, mathematicians, jugglers, philosophers, scientific skeptics, fans of Lewis Carroll, puzzle collectors, fans of Conway's game of life, Rubic's cubers, chess masters, and any other topic that Gardner was interested in or had written about.\nThe first gathering in 1993 was G4G1 and the 1996 event was G4G2. Since then it has been in even-numbered years. The 2018 event was G4G13. Because of the COVID-19 pandemic, the G4G14 event was not held until 2022. Two years later G4G15 took place. All G4Gs up to 2024 have been in Atlanta.\nBibliography.\nIn a publishing career spanning 80 years (1930\u20132010), Gardner authored or edited over 100 books and countless articles, columns and reviews. A comprehensive bibliography of his works was published in 2023 by Dana Richards, with a foreword by Donald Knuth.\nHe was a frequent contributor to \"The New York Review of Books\".\nAll Gardner's works were non-fiction except for two novels\u00a0\u2013 \"The Flight of Peter Fromm\" (1973) and \"Visitors from Oz\" (1998)\u00a0\u2013 and two collections of short pieces\u00a0\u2013 \"The Magic Numbers of Dr. Matrix\" (1967, 1985) and \"The No-Sided Professor\" (1987).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20436", "revid": "43901784", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20436", "title": "MIDI timecode", "text": "SMPTE timecode as MIDI messages\nMIDI time code (MTC) embeds the same timing information as standard SMPTE timecode as a series of small 'quarter-frame' MIDI messages. There is no provision for the user bits in the standard MIDI time code messages, and messages are used to carry this information instead. The quarter-frame messages are transmitted in a sequence of eight messages, thus a complete timecode value is specified every two frames. If the MIDI data stream is running close to capacity, the MTC data may arrive a little behind schedule which has the effect of introducing a small amount of jitter. In order to avoid this it is ideal to use a completely separate MIDI port for MTC data. Larger full-frame messages, which encapsulate a frame worth of timecode in a single message, are used to locate to a time while timecode is not running.\nUnlike standard SMPTE timecode, MIDI timecode's quarter-frame, and full-frame messages carry a two-bit flag value that identifies the rate of the timecode, specifying it as either:\nMTC distinguishes between film speed and video speed only by the rate at which timecode advances, not by the information contained in the timecode messages; thus, 29.97 frame/s dropframe is represented as 30 frame/s dropframe at 0.1% pulldown.\nMTC allows the synchronisation of a sequencer or DAW with other devices that can synchronise to MTC or for these devices to 'slave' to a tape machine that is striped with SMPTE. For this to happen a SMPTE to MTC converter needs to be employed. It is possible for a tape machine to synchronise to an MTC signal (if converted to SMPTE) if the tape machine is able to 'slave' to incoming timecode via motor control, which is a rare feature.\nTime code format.\nThe MIDI time code is 32 bits long, of which 24 are used, while 8 bits are unused and always zero. Because the full-time code messages require that the most significant bits of each byte are zero (valid MIDI data bytes), there are really only 28 available bits and 4 spare bits.\nLike most audiovisual timecodes such as SMPTE time code, it encodes only time of day, repeating each 24 hours. Time is given in units of hours, minutes, seconds, and frames. There may be 24, 25, or 30 frames per second.\nUnlike most other timecodes, the components are encoded in straight binary, not binary-coded decimal.\nEach component is assigned one byte:\n* codice_2: 24 frames/s\n* codice_3: 25 frames/s\n* codice_4: 29.97 frames/s (SMPTE drop-frame timecode)\n* codice_5: 30 frames/s\nFull time code.\nWhen there is a jump in the time code, a single full-time code is sent to synchronize attached equipment. This takes the form of a special global system exclusive message:\n codice_9\nThe manufacturer ID of codice_10 indicates a real-time universal message, the channel of codice_10 indicates it is a global broadcast. The following ID of codice_12 identifies this is a time code type message, and the second codice_12 indicates it is a full-time code message. The 4 bytes of time code follow. Although MIDI is generally little-endian, the 4 time code bytes follow in big-endian order, followed by a codice_14 \"end of exclusive\" byte.\nAfter a jump, the time clock stops until the first following quarter-frame message is received.\nQuarter-frame messages.\nWhen the time is running continuously, the 32-bit time code is broken into 8 4-bit pieces, and one piece is transmitted each quarter frame. I.e. 96\u2014120 times per second, depending on the frame rate. Since it takes eight quarter frames for a complete time code message, the complete SMPTE time is updated every two frames. A quarter-frame message consists of a status byte of 0xF1, followed by a single 7-bit data value: 3 bits to identify the piece, and 4 bits of partial time code. When time is running forward, the piece numbers increment from 0\u20137; with the time that piece 0 is transmitted is the coded instant, and the remaining pieces are transmitted later.\nIf the MIDI data stream is being rewound, the piece numbers count backward. Again, piece 0 is transmitted at the coded moment.\nThe time code is divided little-endian as follows:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20437", "revid": "32191395", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20437", "title": "Mass transfer", "text": "Net movement of mass from one location, phase, etc. to another\nMass transfer is the net movement of mass from one location (usually meaning stream, phase, fraction, or component) to another. Mass transfer occurs in many processes, such as absorption, evaporation, drying, precipitation, membrane filtration, and distillation. Mass transfer is used by different scientific disciplines for different processes and mechanisms. The phrase is commonly used in engineering for physical processes that involve diffusive and convective transport of chemical species within physical systems.\nSome common examples of mass transfer processes are the evaporation of water from a pond to the atmosphere, the purification of blood in the kidneys and liver, and the distillation of alcohol. In industrial processes, mass transfer operations include separation of chemical components in distillation columns, absorbers such as scrubbers or stripping, adsorbers such as activated carbon beds, and liquid-liquid extraction. Mass transfer is often coupled to additional transport processes, for instance in industrial cooling towers. These towers couple heat transfer to mass transfer by allowing hot water to flow in contact with air. The water is cooled by expelling some of its content in the form of water vapour.\nAstrophysics.\nIn astrophysics, mass transfer is the process by which matter gravitationally bound to a body, usually a star, fills its Roche lobe and becomes gravitationally bound to a second body, usually a compact object (white dwarf, neutron star or black hole), and is eventually accreted onto it. It is a common phenomenon in binary systems, and may play an important role in some types of supernovae and pulsars.\nChemical engineering.\nMass transfer finds extensive application in chemical engineering problems. It is used in reaction engineering, separations engineering, heat transfer engineering, and many other sub-disciplines of chemical engineering like electrochemical engineering.\nThe driving force for mass transfer is usually a difference in chemical potential, when it can be defined, though other thermodynamic gradients may couple to the flow of mass and drive it as well. A chemical species moves from areas of high chemical potential to areas of low chemical potential. Thus, the maximum theoretical extent of a given mass transfer is typically determined by the point at which the chemical potential is uniform. For single phase-systems, this usually translates to uniform concentration throughout the phase, while for multiphase systems chemical species will often prefer one phase over the others and reach a uniform chemical potential only when most of the chemical species has been absorbed into the preferred phase, as in liquid-liquid extraction.\nWhile thermodynamic equilibrium determines the theoretical extent of a given mass transfer operation, the actual rate of mass transfer will depend on additional factors including the flow patterns within the system and the diffusivities of the species in each phase. This rate can be quantified through the calculation and application of mass transfer coefficients for an overall process. These mass transfer coefficients are typically published in terms of dimensionless numbers, often including P\u00e9clet numbers, Reynolds numbers, Sherwood numbers, and Schmidt numbers, among others.\nAnalogies between heat, mass, and momentum transfer.\nThere are notable similarities in the commonly used approximate differential equations for momentum, heat, and mass transfer. The molecular transfer equations of Newton's law for fluid momentum at low Reynolds number (Stokes flow), Fourier's law for heat, and Fick's law for mass are very similar, since they are all linear approximations to transport of conserved quantities in a flow field. \nAt higher Reynolds number, the analogy between mass and heat transfer and momentum transfer becomes less useful due to the nonlinearity of the Navier\u2013Stokes equation (or more fundamentally, the general momentum conservation equation), but the analogy between heat and mass transfer remains good. A great deal of effort has been devoted to developing analogies among these three transport processes so as to allow prediction of one from any of the others.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20446", "revid": "1754504", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20446", "title": "Mayor McCheese", "text": ""}
{"id": "20448", "revid": "36554190", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20448", "title": "Museum of Jurassic Technology", "text": "American museum\nThe Museum of Jurassic Technology at 9341 Venice Boulevard in the Palms district of Los Angeles, California, was founded by David Hildebrand Wilson and Diana Drake Wilson in 1988. While it calls itself \"an educational institution dedicated to the advancement of knowledge and the public appreciation of the Lower Jurassic\", the relevance of the term \"Lower Jurassic\" to the museum's collections is left unexplained, and \"Jurassic Technology\" is likewise undefined (the dawn of technology generally being understood as occurring millions of years after the Jurassic).\nThe museum's collection includes a mixture of artistic, scientific, ethnographic, and historic items, as well as some unclassifiable exhibits; the diversity evokes the cabinets of curiosities that were the 16th-century predecessors of modern natural-history museums. The factual claims of many of the museum's exhibits strain credibility, provoking an array of interpretations.\nDavid Hildebrand Wilson received a MacArthur Foundation fellowship in 2001.\nOn July 8, 2025, a fire broke out in the museum, causing significant smoke damage to several exhibits. The museum reopened in early August 2025.\nOverview.\nThe museum contains an unusual collection of exhibits and objects with varying and uncertain degrees of authenticity. \"New York Times\" critic Edward Rothstein described it as a \"museum about museums\", \"where the persistent question is: what kind of place is this?\" \"Smithsonian\" magazine called it \"a witty, self-conscious homage to private museums of yore . . . when natural history was only barely charted by science, and museums were closer to Renaissance cabinets of curiosity.\" In a similar vein, \"The Economist\" said the museum \"captures a time chronicled in Richard Holmes's recent book \"The Age of Wonder\", when science mingled with poetry in its pursuit of answers to life's mysterious questions.\"\nLawrence Weschler's 1995 book, \"Mr. Wilson's Cabinet of Wonder: Pronged Ants, Horned Humans, Mice on Toast, And Other Marvels of Jurassic Technology\", attempts to explain the mystery of the Museum of Jurassic Technology. Weschler deeply explores the museum through conversations with its founder, David Wilson, and through outside research on several exhibitions. His investigations into the history of certain exhibits led to varying results of authenticity; some exhibits seem to have been created by Wilson's imagination while other exhibits might be suitable for display in a natural history museum. The Museum of Jurassic Technology at its heart, according to Wilson, is \"a museum interested in presenting phenomena that other natural history museums are unwilling to present.\"\nThe museum's introductory slideshow recounts that \"In its original sense, the term, 'museum' meant 'a spot dedicated to the Muses, a place where man's mind could attain a mood of aloofness above everyday affairs'\". In this spirit, the dimly lit atmosphere, wood and glass vitrines, and labyrinthine floorplan lead visitors through an eclectic range of exhibits on art, natural history, history of science, philosophy, and anthropology, with a special focus on the history of museums and the variety of paths to knowledge. The museum attracts approximately 25,000 visitors per year.\nExhibits.\nThe museum maintains more than thirty permanent exhibits, including:\nFrom 1992 to 2006, the museum's Foundation Collection was on display in its Tochtermuseum at the Karl Ernst Osthaus-Museum in Hagen, Germany. This exhibition was part of the Museum of Museums wing at the KEOM, which came into being under the stewardship of director Michael Fehr.\nAuxiliary functions.\nIn 2005, the museum opened its Tula Tea Room, a Russian-style tea room where Georgian tea and accompanying cookies are served, the cost covered by the price of admission. This room is a miniature reconstruction of the study of Tsar Nicolas II from the Winter Palace in St. Petersburg, Russia. The tea room is shared with a number of live doves and other birds.\nThe Borzoi Kabinet Theater screens a series of poetic documentaries produced by the Museum of Jurassic Technology in collaboration with the St. Petersburg\u2013based arts and science collective Kabinet. The series of films, entitled \"A Chain of Flowers\", draws its name from the quotation by Charles Willson Peale: \"The Learner must be led always from familiar objects toward the unfamiliar, guided along, as it were, a chain of flowers into the mysteries of life\". The titles of the films are \"Levsha: The Cross-eyed Lefty from Tula and the Steel Flea\" (2001), \"Obshee Delo: The Common Task\" (2005), \"Bol'shoe Sovietskaia Zatmenie: The Great Soviet Eclipse\" (2008), \"The Book of Wisdom and Lies\" (2011), and \"Language of the Birds\" (2012).\nIn popular culture.\nBesides being the subject of Lawrence Weschler's 1995 book \"Mr. Wilson's Cabinet of Wonder: Pronged Ants, Horned Humans, Mice on Toast, and Other Marvels of Jurassic Technology\", the museum is mentioned in the 2008 novel \"The Museum of Innocence\", by Turkish Nobel-laureate Orhan Pamuk. It is also mentioned in Richard Roberts's young adult science fiction books \"Please Don't Tell My Parents I'm a Supervillain\" (2014) and \"Please Don't Tell My Parents I Saved the World Again\" (2024), in which it's given the alternate origin of having been funded by a wealthy Creationist for the display of proof that humans and dinosaurs lived alongside each other. The character Zoe mentions the museum in the book \u201cTomorrow, and Tomorrow, and Tomorrow\u201d (2022) by Gabrielle Zevin.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20451", "revid": "50404874", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20451", "title": "Men at Work", "text": "Australian rock band\nMen at Work are an Australian rock band formed in Melbourne in 1979. They were best known for breakthrough hits such as \"Down Under\", \"Who Can It Be Now?\", \"Be Good Johnny\", \"Overkill\", and \"It's a Mistake\". Its founding member and frontman is Colin Hay, who performs on lead vocals and guitar. After playing as an acoustic duo with Ron Strykert from 1978 to 1979, Hay formed the group with Strykert playing bass guitar with Jerry Speiser on drums. They were soon joined by Greg Ham on flute, saxophone and keyboards, and John Rees on bass guitar, with Strykert switching back to lead guitar. The group was managed by Russell Depeller, a friend of Hay, whom he met at La Trobe University. This line-up achieved national and international success during the early to mid-1980s.\nIn January 1983, they were the first Australian artists to have a simultaneous No.\u00a01 album and No.\u00a01 single on the United States \"Billboard\" charts: \"Business as Usual\" (released on 9 November 1981) and \"Down Under\" (1981), respectively. With the same works, they achieved the distinction of a simultaneous No.\u00a01 album and No.\u00a01 single on the Australian, New Zealand, and United Kingdom charts. Their second album \"Cargo\" (2 May 1983) was No.\u00a01 in Australia, No.\u00a02 in New Zealand, No.\u00a03 in the US, and No.\u00a08 in the UK. Their third album \"Two Hearts\" (3 April 1985) reached the top\u00a020 in Australia and top\u00a050 in the US.\nThey won the Grammy Award for Best New Artist in 1983, they were inducted into the ARIA Hall of Fame in 1994, and they have sold over 30 million albums worldwide. In May 2001, \"Down Under\" was listed at No.\u00a04 on the APRA Top 30 Australian songs and \"Business as Usual\" appeared in the book \"100 Best Australian Albums\" (October 2010).\nIn 1984, Speiser and Rees were asked to leave the group, leaving Hay, Ham, and Strykert as a trio, accompanied by session musicians. During the recording of the \"Two Hearts\" album, Strykert decided to leave. Soon after the 1985 release of \"Two Hearts\", Ham left also, leaving Hay as the sole remaining member. Hay elected to work as a solo artist shortly thereafter in early 1986, and the Men at Work name was retired.\nFrom 1996 until 2002, Hay and Ham revived the name and toured the world as Men at Work (accompanied by new group members). On 19 April 2012, Ham was found dead at his home from an apparent heart attack.\nIn 2019, Hay once again revived the Men at Work moniker and began touring with another new group of musicians. No other previous Men At Work members are involved in the current revival.\nHistory.\nOrigins.\nThe nucleus of Men at Work formed in Melbourne around June 1979 with Colin Hay on lead vocals and guitar, Ron Strykert on bass guitar, and Jerry Speiser on drums. They were soon joined by Greg Ham on flute, sax and keyboards, and then John Rees on bass guitar, with Strykert switching to lead guitar. Hay had immigrated to Australia in 1967 from Scotland with his family. In 1978, he had formed an acoustic duo with Strykert, which expanded by mid-1979 with the addition of Speiser. Around this time as a side project, keyboardist Greg Sneddon (ex-Alroy Band), a former bandmate of Jerry Speiser, together with Speiser, Hay and Strykert, performed and recorded the music to \"Riff Raff\", a low budget stage musical, upon which Sneddon had worked.\nHay asked Greg Ham to join the group, but Ham hesitated, as he was finishing his music degree. Ultimately, he decided to join the band in October 1979. John Rees, a friend of Jerry, joined soon after. The name Men At Work was thrown into the hat by Colin Hay, and was seconded by Ron Strykert, when a name was required to put on the blackboard outside The Cricketer's Arms Hotel, Richmond. The band built a \"grass roots\" reputation as a pub rock band. In 1980, the group issued their debut single, \"Keypunch Operator\" backed by \"Down Under\", with both tracks co-written by Hay and Strykert. It was \"self-financed\" and appeared on their own independent, M. A. W. label. Australian musicologist, Ian McFarlane, felt the A-side was \"a fast-paced country-styled rocker with a clean sound and quirky rhythm\". Despite not appearing in the top\u00a0100 on the Australian Kent Music Report Singles Chart, by the end of that year the group had \"grown in stature to become the most in-demand and highly paid, unsigned band of the year\".\nIn July 1980, the band performed at the second \"Rock Against Racism\" concert at the Northcote Town Hall in Northcote, Melbourne, along with bands including the Aboriginal band No Fixed Address and Ross Hannaford's Lucky Dog, and feminist circus troupe Wimmin's Circus.\nInternational success \u2013 \"Business as Usual\" and \"Cargo\" (1981\u20131983).\nEarly in 1981 Men at Work signed with CBS Records, the Australian branch of CBS Records International, (which became Sony Music) on the recommendation of Peter Karpin, the label's A&amp;R person. The group's first single with CBS Records in Australia \"Who Can It Be Now?\", was released in June 1981 which reached No.\u00a02 and remained in the chart for 24\u00a0weeks. It had been produced by United States\u2013based Peter McIan, who was also working on their debut album, \"Business as Usual\".\nMcIan, together with the band worked on the arrangements for all the songs that appeared on \"Business As Usual\". Their next single was a re-arranged and \"popified\" version of \"Down Under\". It appeared in October that year and reached No.\u00a01 in November, where it remained for six\u00a0weeks. \"Business as Usual\" was also released in October and went to No.\u00a01 on the Australian Kent Music Report Albums Chart, spending a total of nine\u00a0weeks at the top spot. \"The Canberra Times\"' Garry Raffaele opined that it \"generally stays at a high level, tight and jerky ... There is a delicacy about this music \u2014 and that is not a thing you can say about too many rock groups. The flute and reeds of Greg Ham do much to further that\". McFarlane noted that \"[a]side from the strength of the music, part of the album's appeal was its economy. The production sound was low-key, but clean and uncluttered. Indeed, the songs stood by themselves with little embellishment save for a bright, melodic, singalong quality\".\nBy February the following year both \"Down Under\" and \"Business as Usual\" had reached No.\u00a01 on the respective Official New Zealand Music Charts \u2013 the latter was the first Australian album to reach that peak in New Zealand. Despite its strong Australian and New Zealand showing, and having an American producer (McIan), \"Business as Usual\" was twice rejected by Columbia's US parent company. Thanks to the persistence of Russell Depeller and Karpin, the album was finally released in the US and the United Kingdom in April 1982 \u2013 six months after its Australian release. Their next single, \"Be Good Johnny\", was issued in Australia in April 1982 and reached No.\u00a08 in Australia, and No.\u00a03 in New Zealand.\nMen at Work initially broke through to North American audiences in the western provinces of Canada with \"Who Can It Be Now?\" hitting the top\u00a010 on radio stations in Winnipeg by May 1982. It peaked at No.\u00a08 on the Canadian \"RPM\" Top Singles Chart in July. In August the group toured Canada and the United States to promote the album and related singles, supporting Fleetwood Mac. The band became more popular on Canadian radio in the following months and also started receiving top\u00a040 US airplay by August. In October \"Who Can It Be Now?\" reached No.\u00a01 on the US \"Billboard\" Hot 100, while Canada was one single ahead with \"Down Under\" topping the Canadian charts that same month. In the following month \"Business as Usual\" began a 15-week run at No.\u00a01 on the \"Billboard\" 200.\nWhile \"Who Can It Be Now?\" was still in the top\u00a0ten in the US, \"Down Under\" was finally released in that market. It entered the US charts at No.\u00a079 and ten\u00a0weeks later, it was No.\u00a01. By January 1983 Men at Work had the top album and single in both the US and the UK \u2013 never previously achieved by an Australian act. \"Be Good Johnny\" received moderate airplay in the US; it reached the top\u00a020 in Canada.\n\"Down Under\" gained international media exposure in September 1983 through television coverage of the Australian challenge for the America's Cup yacht trophy in September 1983 when it was adopted as the theme song by the crew of the successful \"Australia II\".\nThe band released their second album, \"Cargo\", in April 1983, which also peaked at No.\u00a01 \u2013 for two\u00a0weeks \u2013 on the Australian charts. In New Zealand it reached No.\u00a02. It had been finished in mid-1982 with McIan producing again, but was held back due to the success of their debut album on the international market, where \"Business as Usual\" was still riding high. \"Cargo\" appeared at No.\u00a03 on the \"Billboard\" 200, and No.\u00a08 in the UK. The lead single, \"Dr. Heckyll &amp; Mr. Jive\" was issued in Australia ahead of the album in October 1982 and reached No.\u00a06, it peaked at No.\u00a028 in the US the following year as the third single in that country. \"Overkill\", followed in March 1983 made it to No.\u00a05 in Australia, and No.\u00a03 in the US. \"It's a Mistake\" reached No.\u00a06 in the US. The band toured the world extensively in 1983.\n\"Two Hearts\" and break-up (1984\u20131986).\nIn 1984, long standing tensions between Hay and Speiser led to a split in the band. Both Rees and Speiser were told they were \"not required\", as Hay, Ham and Strykert used session musicians to record their third album, \"Two Hearts\" (23 April 1985). Hay later attributed the firing to a dispute over the band's manager, Russell Deppler, stating, \"The rhythm section got sacked because they wanted to sack the manager, who was my friend.\" Speiser opined, \"Russell was good for hustling gigs in Melbourne and Sydney but once the band became international and multi-million, the sheep farmer from Warrnambool had no idea.\" Studio musicians included Jeremy Alsop on bass guitar (ex-Ram Band, Pyramid, Broderick Smith Band); and Mark Kennedy on drums (Spectrum, Ayers Rock, Marcia Hines Band). \"Two Hearts\" was produced by Hay and Ham. It was a critical and commercial failure compared to their previous albums and only peaked at No.\u00a016 in Australia, and No.\u00a050 on the US chart. Strykert had left during its production.\nFour tracks were released as singles, \"Everything I Need\" (May 1985), \"Man with Two Hearts\", \"Maria\" (August), and \"Hard Luck Story\" (October); only the lead single charted in Australia (No.\u00a037) and the US (No.\u00a047). The album relied heavily on drum machines and synthesisers, and reduced the presence of Ham's saxophone, giving it a different feel compared to its predecessors. Hay and Ham hired new bandmates, to tour in support of \"Two Hearts\", with Alsop and Kennedy joined by James Black on guitar and keyboards (Mondo Rock, The Black Sorrows). Soon after a third guitarist, Colin Bayley (Mi-Sex), was added and Kennedy was replaced on drums by Chad Wackerman (Frank Zappa). Australian singers Kate Ceberano and Ren\u00e9e Geyer had also worked on the album and performed live as guest vocalists.\nOn 13 July 1985 Men at Work performed three tracks for the Oz for Africa concert (part of the global Live Aid program)\u2014\"Maria\", \"Overkill\", and an unreleased one, \"The Longest Night\". They were broadcast in Australia (on both Seven Network and Nine Network) and on MTV in the US. \"Maria\" and \"Overkill\" were also broadcast by American Broadcasting Company (ABC) during their Live Aid telecast. Ham left during the band's time touring behind the album. The final Men at Work performances during 1985 had jazz saxophonist Paul Williamson (The Black Sorrows), replacing Ham. As of October 1985, the band's official line-up was a sextet of Hay, Alsop, Bayley, Black, Wackerman and Williamson (as pictured on the Australia-only single \"Sail To You\"), but by early 1986 the band was defunct. At that time, Hay started recording his first solo album, \"Looking for Jack\" (January 1987), which had Alsop and Wackerman as session musicians.\nPartial reunion and second break-up (1996\u20132002).\nBy mid-1996, after a ten-year absence, Hay and Ham reformed Men at Work to tour South America. They had enjoyed strong fan support there during their earlier career and demands for a reunion had persisted. The 1996 line up had Stephen Hadley on bass guitar and backing vocals (ex-The Black Sorrows, Paul Kelly Band); Simon Hosford on guitar and backing vocals (Colin Hay backing band); and John Watson on drums (The Black Sorrows). The tour culminated in a performance in S\u00e3o Paulo, which was recorded for the Brazilian release of a live album, \"Brazil '96\", in 1997, which was co-produced by Hay and Ham for Sony Music. It was re-released worldwide in 1998 as \"Brazil\" with a bonus track, \"The Longest Night\", the first new studio track since \"Two Hearts\".\nIn 1997 drummer Tony Floyd replaced Watson but by 1998 the lineup was Hay, Ham, James Ryan (guitar, backing vocals), Rick Grossman (of the Hoodoo Gurus) on bass and Peter Maslen (ex\u2013Boom Crash Opera) on drums. In 1999 Ryan, Grossman and Maslen were out and Hosford and Floyd were back in, along with bassist Stuart Speed. Rodrigo Aravena was brought in on bass in 2000, along with Heta Moses on drums. Moses was replaced by Warren Trout in 2001 as Stephen Hadley returned on bass.\nThe band toured Australia, South America, Europe and the US from 1998 to 2000. Men at Work performed \"Down Under\" at the closing ceremony of the 2000 Summer Olympics in Sydney, alongside Paul Hogan of \"\"Crocodile\" Dundee\" (1986).\nOne of their European tours for mid-2000 was cancelled and the group had disbanded once again by 2002, although Hay and Ham periodically reunited Men at Work with guest musicians (including an appearance in February 2009, when they performed \"Down Under\" as a duo at the Australia Unites Victorian Bushfire Appeal Telethon).\nCopyright lawsuit and the death of Greg Ham.\nIn February 2010, Larrikin Music Publishing won a case against Hay and Strykert, their record label (Sony BMG Music Entertainment) and music publishing company (EMI Songs Australia), arising from the uncredited appropriation of \"Kookaburra\", originally written in 1932 by Marion Sinclair, and for which Larrikin owned the publishing rights, as the flute line in the Men at Work song \"Down Under\". In early 2009 the Australian music-themed TV quiz, \"Spicks and Specks\", had posed a question which suggested that \"Down Under\" contained elements of \"Kookaburra\".\nLarrikin, then headed by Norman Lurie, filed suit after Larrikin was sold to another company and had demanded between 40% and 60% of the previous six years of earnings from the song. In February 2010, the judge ruled that \"Down Under\" did contain a flute riff based on \"Kookaburra\" but stipulated that neither was it necessarily the hook nor a substantial part of the hit song (Hay and Strykert had written the track years before the flute riff was added by Ham). In July 2010, a judge ruled that Larrikin should be paid 5% of past (since 2002) and future profits. Ham took the verdict particularly hard, feeling responsible for having performed the flute riff at the centre of the lawsuit and worried that he would only be remembered for copying someone else's music, resulting in depression and anxiety. Ham's body was found in his Carlton North home on 19 April 2012 after he suffered a fatal heart attack at the age of 58.\nPost 2012.\nIn June 2019, Hay toured Europe with a group of Los Angeles\u2013based session musicians under the name Men at Work, despite the band featuring no other original members of the band. The new lineup consisted of Hay (vocals, guitar), Scheila Gonzalez (saxophone, keyboards, vocals, flute), San Miguel Perez (guitar, backing vocals), Yosmel Montejo (bass, backing vocals), Jimmy Branly (drums, percussion) and Cecilia No\u00ebl (backing vocals).\nIn 2021 Australian producer Christian 'Luude' Benson (from the Tasmanian tech house dance duo Choomba) remixed \"Down Under\" as a drum and bass track, which became popular online. Hay re-recorded the vocal for the track's official release, now credited to Luude featuring Colin Hay, with the record charting at number 32 on the UK Singles chart on 7 January 2022 and at number 48 in Australia (on the ARIA Top 50 Singles for the week of 10 January 2022).\nOther projects.\nHay maintained a solo career and has played with Ringo Starr &amp; His All-Starr Band in 2003, 2008 and ongoing since 2018. Strykert relocated to Hobart in 2009 from Los Angeles, and continued to play music and released his first solo album, \"Paradise\", in September that year. He expressed resentment towards Hay, mainly over royalties, but was also arrested for an alleged death threat. Ham remained musically active and played saxophone with the Melbourne-based group The Nudist Funk Orchestra until his death. Rees was a music teacher in Melbourne and also played the violin and bass guitar for the band Beggs 2 Differ. Speiser played drums for the band The Afterburner.\nAwards and nominations.\nARIA Music Awards.\nThe ARIA Music Awards is an annual awards ceremony that recognises excellence, innovation, and achievement across all genres of Australian music. They commenced in 1987. Men at Work were inducted into the Hall of Fame in 1994.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Awards table/styles.css\" /&gt;\n! scope=\"col\" | Year\n! scope=\"col\" | Nominee / work\n! scope=\"col\" | Award\n! scope=\"col\" | Result\nCountdown Australian Music Awards.\n\"Countdown\" is an Australian pop music TV series that aired on national broadcaster ABC-TV from 1974 to 1987, it presented music awards from 1979 to 1987, initially in conjunction with magazine \"TV Week\". The TV Week / Countdown Awards were a combination of popular-voted and peer-voted awards.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Awards table/styles.css\" /&gt;\n! scope=\"col\" | Year\n! scope=\"col\" | Nominee / work\n! scope=\"col\" | Award\n! scope=\"col\" | Result\nGrammy Awards.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Awards table/styles.css\" /&gt;\n! scope=\"col\" | Year\n! scope=\"col\" | Nominee / work\n! scope=\"col\" | Award\n! scope=\"col\" | Result\nOther awards.\nIn August 1983 they were given a Crystal Globe Award for $100 million worth of record business by their US label. That same year in Canada they were awarded a Juno Award for \"International LP of the Year\". Men at Work has sold over 30 million albums worldwide.\nOn 28 May 2001 \"Down Under\" was listed at No.\u00a04 on the APRA Top 30 Australian songs. In October 2010, \"Business as Usual\" was listed in the book, \"100 Best Australian Albums\".\nMembers.\nColin Hay has been the only constant member in all configurations.\nCurrent\nFormer\nCurrent touring members\nFormer touring members\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20452", "revid": "15881234", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20452", "title": "Meconium aspiration syndrome", "text": "Medical condition affecting newborn infants\nMedical condition&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Infobox/styles-images.css\" /&gt;\nMeconium aspiration syndrome (MAS), also known as neonatal aspiration of meconium, is a medical condition affecting newborn infants. It describes the spectrum of disorders and pathophysiology of newborns born in meconium-stained amniotic fluid (MSAF) and have meconium within their lungs. Therefore, MAS has a wide range of severity depending on what conditions and complications develop after parturition. Furthermore, the pathophysiology of MAS is multifactorial and extremely complex which is why it is the leading cause of morbidity and mortality in term infants.\nThe word \"meconium\" is derived from the Greek word \"m\u0113k\u014dnion\" meaning \"juice from the opium poppy\" as the sedative effects it had on the foetus were observed by Aristotle.\nMeconium is a sticky dark-green substance which contains gastrointestinal secretions, amniotic fluid, bile acids, bile, blood, mucus, cholesterol, pancreatic secretions, lanugo, vernix caseosa and cellular debris. Meconium accumulates in the foetal gastrointestinal tract throughout the third trimester of pregnancy and it is the first intestinal discharge released within the first 48 hours after birth. Notably, since meconium and the whole content of the gastrointestinal tract is located 'extracorporeally,' its constituents are hidden and normally not recognised by the foetal immune system.\nFor the meconium within the amniotic fluid to successfully cause MAS, it has to enter the respiratory system during the period when the fluid-filled lungs transition into an air-filled organ capable of gas exchange.\nCauses.\nThe main theories of meconium passage into amniotic fluid are caused by fetal maturity or from foetal stress as a result of hypoxia or infection. Other factors that promote the passage of meconium \"in utero\" include placental insufficiency, maternal hypertension, pre-eclampsia and maternal drug use of tobacco and cocaine. However, the exact mechanism for meconium passage into the amniotic fluid is not completely understood and it may be a combination of several factors.\nMeconium passage as a result of foetal distress.\nThere may be an important association between foetal distress and hypoxia with MSAF. It is believed that foetal distress develops into foetal hypoxia causing the foetus to defecate meconium resulting in MSAF and then perhaps MAS. Other stressors which causes foetal distress, and therefore meconium passage, includes when umbilical vein oxygen saturation is below 30%.\nFoetal hypoxic stress during parturition can stimulate colonic activity, by enhancing intestinal peristalsis and relaxing the anal sphincter, which results in the passage of meconium. Then, because of intrauterine gasping or from the first few breaths after delivery, MAS may develop. Furthermore, aspiration of thick meconium leads to obstruction of airways resulting in a more severe hypoxia.\nThe association between foetal distress and meconium passage is not a definite cause-effect relationship as over &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;3\u20444 of infants with MSAF are vigorous at birth and do not have any distress or hypoxia. Additionally, foetal distress occurs frequently without the passage of meconium as well.\nMeconium passage as a result of foetal maturity.\nAlthough meconium is present in the gastrointestinal tract early in development, MSAF rarely occurs before 34 weeks gestation.\nPeristalsis of the foetal intestines is present as early as 8 weeks gestation and the anal sphincter develops at about 20\u201322 weeks. The early control mechanisms of the anal sphincter are not well understood, however there is evidence that the foetus does defecate routinely into the amniotic cavity even in the absence of distress. The presence of fetal intestinal enzymes have been found in the amniotic fluid of women who are as early as 14\u201322 weeks pregnant. Thus, suggesting there is free passage of the intestinal contents into the amniotic fluid.\nMotilin is found in higher concentrations in post-term than pre-term foetal gastrointestinal tracts. Similarly, intestinal parasympathetic innervation and myelination also increases in later gestations. Therefore, the increased incidence of MAS in post-term pregnancies may reflect the maturation and development of the peristalsis within the gastrointestinal tract in the newborn.\nPathophysiology.\nAs MAS describes a spectrum of disorders of newborns born through MSAF, without any congenital respiratory disorders or other underlying pathology, there are numerous hypothesised mechanisms and causes for the onset of this syndrome. Long-term consequences may arise from these disorders, for example, infants that develop MAS have higher rates of developing neurodevelopmental defects due to poor respiration.\nAirway obstruction.\nIn the first 15 minutes of meconium aspiration, there is obstruction of larger airways which causes increased lung resistance, decreased lung compliance, acute hypoxemia, hypercapnia, atelectasis and respiratory acidosis. After 60 minutes of exposure, the meconium travels further down into the smaller airways. Once within the terminal bronchioles and alveoli, the meconium triggers inflammation, pulmonary edema, vasoconstriction, bronchoconstriction, collapse of airways and inactivation of surfactant.\nFoetal hypoxia.\nThe lung areas which do not or only partially participate in ventilation, because of obstruction and/or destruction, will become hypoxic and an inflammatory response may consequently occur. Partial obstruction will lead to air trapping and hyperinflation of certain lung areas and pneumothorax may follow. Chronic hypoxia will lead to an increase in pulmonary vascular smooth muscle tone and persistent pulmonary hypertension causing respiratory and circulatory failure.\nInfection.\nMicroorganisms, most commonly Gram-negative rods, and endotoxins are found in samples of MSAF at a higher rate than in clear amniotic fluid, for example 46.9% of patients with MSAF also had endotoxins present. A microbial invasion of the amniotic cavity (MIAC) is more common in patients with MSAF and this could ultimately lead to an intra-amniotic inflammatory response. MIAC is associated with high concentrations of cytokines (such as IL-6), chemokines (such as IL-8 and monocyte chemoattractant protein-1), complement, phospholipase A2 and matrix-degrading enzymes. Therefore, these aforementioned mediators within the amniotic fluid during MIAC and intra-amniotic infection could, when aspirated \"in\" \"utero\", induce lung inflammation within the foetus.\nPulmonary inflammation.\nMeconium has a complex chemical composition, so it is difficult to identify a single agent responsible for the several diseases that arise. As meconium is stored inside the intestines, and is partly unexposed to the immune system, when it becomes aspirated the innate immune system recognises as a foreign and dangerous substance. The immune system, which is present at birth, responds within minutes with a low specificity and no memory in order to try to eliminate microbes. Meconium perhaps leads to chemical pneumonitis as it is a potent activator of inflammatory mediators which include cytokines, complement, prostaglandins and reactive oxygen species.\nMeconium is a source of pro-inflammatory cytokines, including tumour necrosis factor (TNF) and interleukins (IL-1, IL-6, IL-8), and mediators produced by neutrophils, macrophages and epithelial cells that may injure the lung tissue directly or indirectly. For example, proteolytic enzymes are released from neutrophilic granules and these may damage the lung membrane and surfactant proteins. Additionally, activated leukocytes and cytokines generate reactive nitrogen and oxygen species which have cytotoxic effects. Oxidative stress results in vasoconstriction, bronchoconstriction, platelet aggregation and accelerated cellular apoptosis. Recently, it has been hypothesised that meconium is a potent activator of toll-like receptor (TLRs) and complement, key mediators in inflammation, and may thus contribute to the inflammatory response in MAS.\nMeconium contains high amounts of phospholipase A2 (PLA2), a potent proinflammatory enzyme, which may directly (or through the stimulation of arachidonic acid) lead to surfactant dysfunction, lung epithelium destruction, tissue necrosis and an increase in apoptosis. Meconium can also activate the coagulation cascade, production of platelet-activating factor (PAF) and other vasoactive substances that may lead to destruction of capillary endothelium and basement membranes. Injury to the alveolocapillary membrane results in leakage of liquid, plasma proteins, and cells into the interstitium and alveolar spaces.\nSurfactant inactivation.\nSurfactant is synthesised by type II alveolar cells and is made of a complex of phospholipids, proteins and saccharides. It functions to lower surface tension (to allow for lung expansion during inspiration), stabilise alveoli at the end of expiration (to prevent alveolar collapse) and prevents lung oedema. Surfactant also contributes to lung protection and defence as it is also an anti-inflammatory agent. Surfactant enhances the removal of inhaled particles and senescent cells away from the alveolar structure.\nThe extent of surfactant inhibition depends on both the concentration of surfactant and meconium. If the surfactant concentration is low, even very highly diluted meconium can inhibit surfactant function whereas, in high surfactant concentrations, the effects of meconium are limited. Meconium may impact surfactant mechanisms by preventing surfactant from spreading over the alveolar surface, decreasing the concentration of surfactant proteins (SP-A and SP-B), and by changing the viscosity and structure of surfactant. Several morphological changes occur after meconium exposure, the most notable being the detachment of airway epithelium from stroma and the shedding of epithelial cells into the airway. These indicate a direct detrimental effect on lung alveolar cells because of the introduction of meconium into the lungs.\nPersistent Pulmonary Hypertension.\nPersistent pulmonary hypertension (PPHN) is the failure of the foetal circulation to adapt to extra-uterine conditions after birth. PPHN is associated with various respiratory diseases, including MAS (as 15-20% of infants with MAS develop PPHN), but also pneumonia and sepsis. A combination of hypoxia, pulmonary vasoconstriction and ventilation/perfusion mismatch can trigger PPHN, depending on the concentration of meconium within the respiratory tract. PPHN in newborns is the leading cause of death in MAS.\nApoptosis.\nApoptosis is an important mechanism in the clearance of injured cells and in tissue repair, however too much apoptosis may cause harm, such as acute lung injury. Meconium induces apoptosis and DNA cleavage of lung airway epithelial cells, this is detected by the presence of fragmented DNA within the airways and in alveolar epithelial nuclei. Meconium induces an inflammatory reaction within the lungs as there is an increase of autophagocytic cells and levels of caspase 3 after exposure. After 8 hours of meconium exposure, in rabbit foetuses, the total amount of apoptotic cells is 54%. Therefore, the majority of meconium-induced lung damage may be due to the apoptosis of lung epithelium.\nDiagnosis.\nRespiratory distress in an infant born through the darkly coloured MSAF as well as meconium obstructing the airways is usually sufficient to diagnose MAS. Additionally, newborns with MAS can have other types of respiratory distress such as tachypnea and hypercapnia. Sometimes it is hard to diagnose MAS as it can be confused with other diseases that also cause respiratory distress, such as pneumonia. Additionally, X-rays and lung ultrasounds can be quick, easy and cheap imaging techniques to diagnose lung diseases like MAS.\nPrevention.\nIn general, the incidence of MAS has been significantly reduced over the past two decades as the number of post-term deliveries has minimized.\nPrevention during pregnancy.\nPrevention during pregnancy may include amnioinfusion and antibiotics but the effectiveness of these treatments are questionable.\nPrevention during parturition.\nAs previously mentioned, oropharyngeal and nasopharyngeal suctioning is not an ideal preventative treatment for both vigorous and depressed (not breathing) infants.\nTreatment.\nMost infants born through MSAF do not require any treatments (other than routine postnatal care) as they show no signs of respiratory distress, as only approximately 5% of infants born through MSAF develop MAS. However, infants which do develop MAS need to be admitted to a neonatal unit where they will be closely observed and provided any treatments needed. Observations include monitoring heart rate, respiratory rate, oxygen saturation and blood glucose (to detect worsening respiratory acidosis or the development of hypoglycemia). In general, treatment of MAS is more supportive in nature.\nAssisted ventilation techniques.\nTo clear the airways of meconium, tracheal suctioning can be used however, the efficacy of this method is in question and it can cause harm.\nIn cases of MAS, there is a need for supplemental oxygen for at least 12 hours in order to maintain oxygen saturation of haemoglobin at 92% or more. The severity of respiratory distress can vary significantly between newborns with MAS, as some require minimal or no supplemental oxygen requirement and, in severe cases, mechanical ventilation may be needed. The desired oxygen saturation is between 90 and 95% and PaO2 may be as high as 90mmHg. In cases where there is thick meconium deep within the lungs, mechanical ventilation may be required. In extreme cases, extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) may be utilised in infants who fail to respond to ventilation therapy. While on ECMO, the body can have time to absorb the meconium and for all the associated disorders to resolve. There has been an excellent response to this treatment, as the survival rate of MAS while on ECMO is more than 94%.\nVentilation of infants with MAS can be challenging and, as MAS can affect each individual differently, ventilation administration may need to be customised. Some newborns with MAS can have homogenous lung changes and others can have inconsistent and patchy changes to their lungs. It is common for sedation and muscle relaxants to be used to optimise ventilation and minimise the risk of pneumothorax associated with dyssynchronous breathing.\nInhaled nitric oxide.\nInhaled nitric oxide (iNO) acts on vascular smooth muscle causing selective pulmonary vasodilation. This is ideal in the treatment of PPHN as it causes vasodilation within ventilated areas of the lung thus, decreasing the ventilation-perfusion mismatch and thereby, improves oxygenation. Treatment utilising iNO decreases the need for ECMO and mortality in newborns with hypoxic respiratory failure and PPHN as a result of MAS. However, approximately 30-50% of infants with PPHN do not respond to iNO therapy.\nAntiinflammatories.\nAs inflammation is such a huge issue in MAS, treatment has consisted of anti-inflammatories.\nGlucocorticoids.\nGlucocorticoids have a strong anti-inflammatory activity and works to reduce the migration and activation of neutrophils, eosinophils, mononuclear cells, and other cells. They reduce the migration of neutrophils into the lungs ergo, decreasing their adherence to the endothelium. Thus, there is a reduction in the action of mediators released from these cells and therefore, a reduced inflammatory response.\nGlucocorticoids also possess a genomic mechanism of action in which, once bound to a glucocorticoid receptor, the activated complex moves into the nucleus and inhibits transcription of mRNA. Ultimately, effecting whether various proteins get produced or not. Inhibiting the transcription of nuclear factor (NF-\u03baB) and protein activator (AP-1) attenuates the expression of pro-inflammatory cytokines (IL-1, IL-6, IL-8 and TNF etc.), enzymes (PLA2, COX-2, iNOs etc.) and other biologically active substances. The anti-inflammatory effect of glucocorticoids is also demonstrated by enhancing the activity of lipocortines which inhibit the activity of PLA2 and therefore, decrease the production of arachidonic acid and mediators of lipoxygenase and cyclooxygenase pathways.\nAnti-inflammatories need to be administered as quickly as possible as the effect of these drugs can diminish even just an hour after meconium aspiration. For example, early administration of dexamethasone significantly enhanced gas exchange, reduced ventilatory pressures, decreased the number of neutrophils in the bronchoalveolar area, reduced oedema formation and oxidative lung injury. However, glucocorticoids may increase the risk of infection and this risk increases with the dose and duration of glucocorticoid treatment. Other issues can arise, such as aggravation of diabetes mellitus, osteoporosis, skin atrophy and growth retardation in children.\nInhibitors of phosphodiesterase.\nPhosphodiesterases (PDE) degrades cAMP and cGMP and, within the respiratory system of a newborn with MAS, various isoforms of PDE may be involved due to their pro-inflammatory and smooth muscle contractile activity. Therefore, non-selective and selective inhibitors of PDE could potentially be used in MAS therapy. However, the use of PDE inhibitors can cause cardiovascular side effects. Non-selective PDE inhibitors, such as methylxanthines, increase concentrations of cAMP and cGMP in the cells leading to bronchodilation and vasodilation. Additionally, methylxanthines decreases the concentrations of calcium, acetylcholine and monoamines, this controls the release of various mediators of inflammation and bronchoconstriction, including prostaglandins. Selective PDE inhibitors target one subtype of phosphodiesterase and in MAS the activities of PDE-3, PDE-4, PDE-5 and PDE-7 may become enhanced. For example, Milrinone (a selective PDE3 inhibitor) improved oxygenation and survival of neonates with MAS.\nInhibitors of cyclooxygenase.\nArachidonic acid is metabolised, via cyclooxygenase (COX) and lipoxygenase, to various substances including prostaglandins and leukotrienes, which exhibit potent pro-inflammatory and vasoactive effects. By inhibiting COX, and more specifically COX-2, (either through selective or non-selective drugs) inflammation and oedema can be reduced. However, COX inhibitors may induce peptic ulcers and cause hyperkalemia and hypernatremia. Additionally, COX inhibitors have not shown any great response in the treatment of MAS.\nAntibiotics.\nMeconium is typically sterile however, it can contain various cultures of bacteria so appropriate antibiotics may need to be prescribed.\nSurfactant treatment.\nLung lavage with diluted surfactant has potential benefits depending on how early it is given in newborns with MAS. This treatment shows promise as it has an effect on air leaks, pneumothorax, the need for ECMO and death. Early intervention and using it on newborns with mild MAS is more effective. However, there are risks as a large volume of fluid instillation to the lung of a newborn can be dangerous (particularly in cases of severe MAS with pulmonary hypertension) as it can exacerbate hypoxia and lead to mortality.\nPrevious treatments.\nOriginally, it was believed that MAS developed as a result of the meconium being a physical blockage of the airways. Thus, to prevent newborns, who were born through MSAF, from developing MAS, suctioning of the oropharyngeal and nasopharyngeal area before delivery of the shoulders followed by tracheal aspiration was utilised for 20 years. This treatment was believed to be effective as it was reported to significantly decrease the incidence of MAS compared to those newborns born through MSAF who were not treated. This claim was later disproved and future studies concluded that oropharyngeal and nasopharyngeal suctioning, before delivery of the shoulders in infants born through MSAF, does not prevent MAS or its complications. In fact, it can cause more issues and damage (e.g. mucosal damage), thus it is not a recommended preventative treatment. Suctioning may not significantly reduce the incidence of MAS as meconium passage and aspiration may occur \"in-utero.\" Thereby making the suctioning redundant and useless as the meconium may already be deep within the lungs at the time of birth.\nHistorically, amnioinfusion has been used when MSAF was present, which involves a transcervical infusion of fluid during labour. The idea was to dilute the thick meconium to reduce its potential pathophysiology and reduce cases of MAS, since MAS is more prevalent in cases of thick meconium. However, there are associated risks, such as umbilical cord prolapse and prolongation of labour. The UK National Institute of Health and Clinical Excellence (NICE) Guidelines recommend against the use of amnioinfusion in women with MSAF.\nPrevalence.\n1 in every 7 pregnancies have MSAF and, of these cases, approximately 5% of these infants develop MAS. MSAF is observed 23-52% in pregnancies at 42 weeks. Therefore, the frequency of MAS increases as the length of gestation increases, such that the prevalence is greatest in post-term pregnancies. Conversely, preterm births are not frequently associated with MSAF (only approximately 5% in total contain MSAF). The rate of MAS declines in populations where labour is induced in women that have pregnancies exceeding 41 weeks. There are many suspected pre-disposing factors that are thought to increase the risk of MAS. For example, the risk of MSAF is higher in African American, African and Pacific Islander mothers, compared to mothers from other ethnic groups.\nFuture research.\nResearch is being focused on developing both a successful method for preventing MAS as well as an effective treatment. For example, investigations are being made in the efficiency of anti-inflammatory agents, surfactant replacement therapy and antibiotic therapy. More research needs to be conducted on the pharmacological properties of, for example, glucocorticoids, including dosages, administration, timing or any drug interactions. Additionally, there is still research being conducted on whether intubation and suctioning of meconium in newborns with MAS is beneficial, harmful or is simply a redundant and outdated treatment. In general, there is still no generally accepted therapeutic protocol and effective treatment plan for MAS.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20453", "revid": "47813289", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20453", "title": "Meconium", "text": "Earliest feces of a mammalian infant\nMedical condition&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Infobox/styles-images.css\" /&gt;\nMeconium is the earliest stool of a mammalian infant resulting from defecation. Unlike later feces, meconium is composed of materials ingested during the time the infant spends in the uterus: intestinal epithelial cells, lanugo, mucus, amniotic fluid, bile, and water. Meconium, unlike later feces, is viscous and sticky like tar \u2013 its color usually being a very dark olive green and it is almost odorless. When diluted in amniotic fluid, it may appear in various shades of green, brown, or yellow. It should be completely passed by the end of the first few days after birth, with the stools progressing toward yellow (digested milk).\nClinical significance.\nMeconium in amniotic fluid.\nMeconium is normally retained in the infant's bowel until after birth, but sometimes it is expelled into the amniotic fluid prior to birth or during labor and delivery. The stained amniotic fluid is recognized by medical staff as a possible sign of fetal distress. Some post-dates pregnancies (when they are more than 40 weeks pregnant) may also have meconium-stained amniotic fluid without fetal distress. Medical staff may aspirate the meconium from the nose and mouth of a newborn immediately after delivery in the event the baby shows signs of respiratory distress to decrease the risk of meconium aspiration syndrome, which can occur in meconium-stained amniotic fluid.\nMost of the time that the amniotic fluid is stained with meconium, it will be homogeneously distributed throughout the fluid, making it brown. This indicates that the fetus passed the meconium some time ago such that sufficient mixing occurred as to establish the homogeneous mixture. Terminal meconium occurs when the fetus passes the meconium a short enough time before birth/cesarean section that the amniotic fluid remains clear, but individual clumps of meconium are in the fluid.\nFailure to pass meconium.\nThe failure to pass meconium is a symptom of several diseases including Hirschsprung's disease and cystic fibrosis.\nThe meconium sometimes becomes thickened and congested in the intestines, a condition known as meconium ileus. Meconium ileus is often the first sign of cystic fibrosis. In cystic fibrosis, the meconium can form a bituminous black-green mechanical obstruction in a segment of the ileum. Beyond this, there may be a few separate grey-white globular pellets. Below this level, the bowel is a narrow and empty micro-colon. Above the level of the obstruction, there are several loops of hypertrophied bowel distended with fluid. No meconium is passed, and abdominal distension and vomiting appear soon after birth. About 20% of cases of cystic fibrosis present with meconium ileus, while approximately 20% of one series of cases of meconium ileus did not have cystic fibrosis. The presence of meconium ileus is not related to the severity of the cystic fibrosis. The obstruction can be relieved in a number of ways.\nMeconium ileus should be distinguished from meconium plug syndrome, in which a tenacious mass of mucus prevents the meconium from passing and there is no risk of intestinal perforation. Meconium ileus has a significant risk of intestinal perforation. In a barium enema, meconium plug syndrome shows a normal or dilated colon as compared to micro-colon in meconium ileus.\nTesting meconium for drugs.\nMeconium can be tested for various drugs, to check for \"in utero\" exposure. Using meconium, a Canadian research group showed that by measuring a by-product of alcohol, fatty acid ethyl esters (FAEE), they could objectively detect excessive maternal alcohol consumption during pregnancy. \nIn the US, the results of meconium testing may be used by child protective services and other law enforcement agencies if the capacity of the parents to look after their child is in question. Meconium can also be analyzed to detect the tobacco use of mothers during their pregnancy, which is commonly under-reported.\nSterility.\nThe issue of whether meconium is sterile remains debated and is an area of ongoing research. Although some researchers have reported evidence of bacteria in meconium, this has not been consistently confirmed. Other researchers have raised questions about whether these findings may be due to contamination after sample collection and that meconium is, in fact, sterile until after birth. Further researchers have hypothesized that there may be bacteria in the womb, but these are a normal part of pregnancy and could have an important role in shaping the developing immune system and are not harmful to the baby.\nEtymology.\nThe Latin term \"meconium\" derives from Greek , \"m\u0113k\u014dnion\", a diminutive of , \"m\u0113k\u014dn\" 'poppy', in reference either to its tar-like appearance that may resemble some raw opium preparations or to Aristotle's belief that it induces sleep in the fetus.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20454", "revid": "6012230", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20454", "title": "Montreux Convention Regarding the Regime of the Straits", "text": "1936 treaty on the regime of the Straits\nThe (Montreux) Convention regarding the Regime of the Straits, often known simply as the Montreux Convention, is an international agreement governing the Bosporus and Dardanelles straits in Turkey. Signed on 20 July 1936 at the Montreux Palace in Switzerland, it went into effect on 9 November 1936, addressing the long running Straits Question over who should control the strategically vital link between the Black and Mediterranean seas.\nThe Montreux Convention regulates maritime traffic through the Bosporus and Dardanelles straits in Turkey. It guarantees \"complete freedom\" of passage for all civilian vessels in times of peace. In peacetime, military vessels are limited in number, tonnage and weaponry, with specific provisions governing their mode of entry and duration of stay. If they want to pass through the Strait, warships must provide advance notification to the Turkish authorities, which, in turn, must inform the parties to the convention. In wartime, if Turkey is not involved in the conflict, warships of the nations at war may not pass through the Straits, except when returning to their base. When Turkey is at war, or feels threatened by a war, it may take any decision about the passage of warships as it sees fit. The United States is not a signatory to the Convention.\nWhile it was designed for a particular geopolitical context, and remains unchanged since its adoption, the Montreux Convention has endured as a \"solid example of a rules-based international order\", since most of its terms are still followed.\nBackground.\nThe convention was one of a series of agreements in the 19th and 20th centuries that sought to address the long-running Straits Question of who should control the strategically vital link between the Black Sea and Mediterranean Sea. In 1923, the Treaty of Lausanne had demilitarised the Dardanelles and opened the Straits to unrestricted civilian and military traffic under the supervision of the International Straits Commission of the League of Nations.\nBy the late 1930s, the strategic situation in the Mediterranean had altered with the rise of Fascist Italy, which controlled the Greek-inhabited Dodecanese islands off the west coast of Turkey and had constructed fortifications on Rhodes, Leros and Kos. The Turks feared that Italy would seek to exploit access to the Straits to expand its power into Anatolia and the Black Sea region. There were also fears of Bulgarian rearmament. Although Turkey was not legally permitted to refortify the Straits, it nonetheless did so secretly.\nIn April 1935, the Turkish government dispatched a lengthy diplomatic note to the signatories of the Treaty of Lausanne proposing a conference to agree a new regime for the Straits and requested that the League of Nations authorise the reconstruction of the Dardanelles forts. In the note, Turkish Foreign Minister Tevfik R\u00fc\u015ft\u00fc Aras explained that the international situation had changed greatly since 1923. Europe had then been moving towards disarmament and an international guarantee to defend the Straits. The Abyssinia Crisis of 1934\u20131935, the denunciation by Germany of the Treaty of Versailles and international moves towards rearmament meant that \"the only guarantee intended to guard against the total insecurity of the Straits has just disappeared in its turn\". Indeed, Aras said that \"the Powers most closely concerned are proclaiming the existence of a threat of general conflagration\". The key weaknesses of the present regime were that the machinery for collective guarantees were too slow and ineffective, and there was no contingency for a general threat of war and no provision for Turkey to defend itself. Turkey was therefore prepared to enter into negotiations with a view to concluding, in the near future, agreements for regulation of the Straits with essential security provisions for the inviolability of Turkey's territory, and also for continued development of commercial navigation between the Mediterranean and the Black Sea.\nThe response to the note was generally favourable; Australia, Bulgaria, France, Germany, Greece, Japan, Romania, the Soviet Union, Turkey, the United Kingdom and Yugoslavia attended negotiations at Montreux, Switzerland, which began on 22 June 1936. Two major powers were notably absent: Italy, whose aggressively expansionist policies had prompted the conference, refused to attend, and the increasingly isolationist United States declined even to send an observer.\nTurkey, the United Kingdom and the Soviet Union each put forward their own set of proposals, each aimed chiefly at protecting the proponent's own interests. The British favoured the continuation of a relatively restrictive approach, the Turks sought a more liberal regime that reasserted their control over the Straits, and the Soviets proposed a regime that would guarantee absolute freedom of passage. The British, supported by France, sought to exclude the Soviet fleet from the Mediterranean Sea, where it might threaten the vital shipping lanes to India, Egypt and the Far East. In the end, the British conceded some of their requests, but the Soviets succeeded in ensuring that the Black Sea countries, including the Soviet Union, were given exemptions from the military restrictions imposed on non-Black Sea nations. The agreement was ratified by all of the conference attendees with the exception of Germany, which had not been a signatory to the Treaty of Lausanne, and with reservations by Japan, and came into force on 9 November 1936; it was registered with the \"League of Nations Treaty Series\" on 11 December 1936.\nBritain's willingness to make concessions has been attributed to a desire to avoid Turkey being driven to ally itself with or to fall under the influence of Adolf Hitler or Benito Mussolini. It was thus the first in a series of steps by Britain and France to ensure that Turkey would either remain neutral or tilt towards the Western Allies in the event of any future conflict with the Axis.\nTerms.\nAs mentioned in its preamble, the Convention replaced the terms of the Lausanne Treaty of 1923 regarding the Straits. This had dictated the demilitarisation of the Greek islands of Lemnos and Samothrace, along with the demilitarisation of the Sea of Marmara and the Bosporus, the Dardanelles, and the Turkish islands of \u0130mroz, Bozcaada and Tav\u015fan.\nThe Convention consists of 29 Articles, four annexes and one protocol. Articles 2\u20137 consider the passage of merchant ships. Articles 8\u201322 consider the passage of war vessels. The key principle \u2014 freedom of passage and navigation \u2014 is laid out in articles 1 and 2. Article 1 provides, \"The High Contracting Parties recognise and affirm the principle of freedom of passage and navigation by sea in the Straits\". Article 2 states, \"In time of peace, merchant vessels shall enjoy complete freedom of passage and navigation in the Straits, by day and by night, under any flag with any kind of cargo\".\nThe International Straits Commission was abolished, thereby allowing the full resumption of Turkish military control over the Straits and the refortification of the Dardanelles. Turkey was authorised to close the Straits to all foreign warships during a war or when it was threatened by aggression. Also, Turkey was authorised to refuse transit from merchant ships belonging to countries at war with it.\nA number of highly specific restrictions in Article 14 and 18 were imposed on what type of warships are allowed passage. Non-Black Sea powers wishing to send a vessel must notify Turkey 15 days prior to the requested passing, and Black Sea states must notify 8 days prior to passage. Also, no more than nine foreign warships, with a total aggregate tonnage of 15,000 tons, may pass at any one time. Furthermore, no single ship heavier than 10,000 tonnes can pass. An aggregate tonnage of all non-Black Sea warships in the Black Sea must be no more than 45,000 tons, with no one nation exceeding 30,000 tons at any given time, and they are permitted to stay in the Black Sea for at most 21 days. Only Black Sea states may transit capital ships of any tonnage, escorted by no more than two destroyers. Any revision to articles 14 and 18 requires 3/4 majority of signatory countries and must include Turkey.\nUnder Article 12, Black Sea states are also allowed to send submarines through the Straits with prior notice as long as the vessels have been constructed, purchased or sent for repair outside the Black Sea. The less restrictive rules applicable to Black Sea states were agreed as effectively a concession to the Soviet Union, the only Black Sea state other than Turkey with any significant number of capital ships or submarines. The passage of civil aircraft between the Mediterranean and the Black seas is permitted only along routes authorised by the Turkish government.\nIn time of war, Turkey not being belligerent, warships of belligerent Powers shall not pass, except to return to their base. (art. 19)\nImplementation.\nThe terms of the convention were largely a reflection of the international situation in the mid-1930s. They largely served Turkish and Soviet interests by enabling Turkey to regain military control of the Straits and assuring Soviet dominance of the Black Sea. Although the Convention restricted the Soviets' ability to send naval forces into the Mediterranean Sea \u2014 satisfying British concerns about Soviet intrusion into what was considered a British sphere of influence \u2014 it also ensured that outside powers could not exploit the Straits to threaten the Soviet Union. \nWorld War II.\nThis feature was to have significant repercussions during World War II; the Montreux regime prevented the Axis powers from sending naval forces through the Straits to attack the Soviet Union. The Axis powers, thereby, were severely limited in naval capability for their Black Sea campaigns, relying principally on small vessels transported overland by rail and canal networks. Six U-boats of the German 30th U-boat Flotilla reached the Black Sea in 1942 after a transport from North Sea via Elbe, over land and the Danube to be operated from the harbours of Constan\u0163a and Feodosiya from 1942 to 1944. \nAuxiliary vessels and armed merchant ships comprised a grey area, though, and the transit of such Axis vessels through the straits led to friction between the Allies and Turkey. After a number of German auxiliary ships had been permitted to transit the Straits, repeated protests from Moscow and London prompted the Turkish government to ban passage of \"suspicious\" Axis ships from June 1944.\nAircraft carriers.\nAlthough the Montreux Convention is cited by the Turkish government as prohibiting aircraft carriers from transiting the Straits, the treaty actually contains no explicit prohibition on aircraft carriers. However, modern aircraft carriers are heavier than the 15,000-ton limit imposed on warships, which makes it impossible for non\u2013Black Sea powers to transit modern aircraft carriers through the Straits.\nUnder Article 11, Black Sea states are permitted to transit capital ships of any tonnage through the straits, but Annex II specifically excludes aircraft carriers from the definition of capital ship. In 1936, it was common for battleships to carry observation aircraft. Therefore, aircraft carriers were defined as ships that were \"designed or adapted primarily for the purpose of carrying and operating aircraft at sea\". The inclusion of aircraft on any other ship does not classify it as an aircraft carrier.\nThe Soviet Union designated its \"Kiev\"-class and \"Kuznetsov\"-class ships as \"aircraft-carrying cruisers\" because the ships were armed with P-500 and P-700 cruise missiles, which also form the main armament of the \"Slava\"-class cruiser and the \"Kirov\"-class battlecruiser. The result was that the Soviet Navy could send its aircraft-carrying cruisers through the Straits in compliance with the convention, but at the same time, the Convention denied access to NATO aircraft carriers, which exceeded the 15,000-ton limit. While the Soviet Union built its aircraft-carrying cruisers in the Black Sea, neither the Soviet Union nor Russia has ever based them in the Black Sea.\nTurkey chose to accept the designation of the Soviet aircraft carrying cruisers as aircraft cruisers, as any revision of the convention could leave Turkey with less control over the Straits, and the UN Convention on the Law of the Sea had already established a more liberal passage through other straits. By allowing the Soviet aircraft-carrying cruisers to transit the Straits, Turkey could leave the more restrictive Montreux Convention in place.\nControversies.\nIstanbul Canal.\nIf it comes to fruition, the long-proposed Istanbul Canal (Kanal Istanbul) project could, according to Turkey, circumvent the Montreux Convention in the 21st century and allow greater Turkish autonomy with respect to the passage of military ships, which are limited in number, tonnage, and weaponry, from the Black Sea to the Sea of Marmara. The canal project would involve building a artificial waterway through Thrace to connect the Sea of Marmara with the Black Sea. That route would run nearly parallel to the Bosporus, but ships transiting it would arguably not be subject to the terms of the Montreux Convention. Currently, the Dardanelles is heavily congested with shipping and there are long waits to pass through the Bosporus. The Canal project's stated purposes are to speed up shipping and boost revenue by providing an alternate maritime route.\nIn January 2018, the Turkish Prime Minister and a former Transport Minister, Binali Y\u0131ld\u0131r\u0131m, announced that the Canal would not be subject to the terms of the Montreux Convention. That announcement was received negatively by the Russian media and government, and many have disputed the Turkish government's interpretation of the convention.\nSoviet Union.\nThe convention was repeatedly challenged by the Soviet Union during World War II and the Cold War. As early as 1939, Joseph Stalin sought to reopen the Straits Question and proposed joint Turkish and Soviet control of the Straits, complaining that \"a small state [Turkey] supported by Great Britain held a great state by the throat and gave it no outlet\". After the Molotov\u2013Ribbentrop Pact was signed by the Soviet Union and Nazi Germany, Soviet Foreign Minister Vyacheslav Molotov informed his German counterparts that the Soviet Union wished to take military control of the Straits and to establish its own military base there.\nThe Soviets returned to the issue in 1945 and 1946, demanding a revision of the Montreux Convention at a conference excluding most of its signatories; their demands included a permanent Soviet military presence and joint control of the Straits. These demands were firmly rejected by Turkey, despite an ongoing Soviet \"strategy of tension\". For several years after World War II, the Soviets exploited the restriction on the number of foreign warships by ensuring that one of theirs was always in the Straits, thus effectively blocking any state other than Turkey from sending warships through the Straits. Soviet pressure expanded into a full demand to revise the Montreux Convention, which led to the 1946 Turkish Straits crisis and Turkey abandoning its policy of neutrality. In 1947, Turkey became the recipient of US military and economic assistance under the Truman Doctrine of containment and joined NATO along with Greece, in 1952.\nUnited States.\nThe United States has not signed the convention but has generally complied with it. The passage of US warships through the Straits has also raised controversy, as the convention forbids the transit of non-Black Sea nations' warships with guns of a calibre larger than . In the 1960s, the US sent warships carrying 420\u00a0mm calibre ASROC missiles through the Straits, prompting Soviet protests. The Turkish government rejected Soviet complaints, pointing out that guided missiles were not guns and that, since such weapons had not existed at the time of the convention, they were not restricted.\nAccording to Jason Ditz of Antiwar.com, the Montreux Convention is an obstacle to a US naval buildup in the Black Sea because of the stipulations regulating warship traffic by nations not sharing a Black Sea coastline. The US thinktank Stratfor has suggested that those stipulations place Turkey's relationship to the US and its obligations as a NATO member in conflict with Russia and the regulations of the Montreux Convention.\nMilitarisation of Greek islands.\nThe Convention annulled the terms of the earlier Lausanne Treaty on the Straits, including the demilitarisation of the Greek islands of Lemnos and Samothrace. Turkey recognised Greece's right to militarise them via a letter sent to the Greek Prime Minister on 6 May 1936 by the Turkish Ambassador in Athens, Ru\u015fen E\u015fref. The Turkish government reiterated this position when the Turkish Minister for Foreign Affairs, R\u00fc\u015ftu Aras, in his address to the Turkish National Assembly on the occasion of the ratification of the Montreux Treaty, recognised Greece's legal right to deploy troops on Lemnos and Samothrace with the following statement: \"The provisions pertaining to the islands of Lemnos and Samothrace, which belong to our neighbour and friendly country Greece and were demilitarised in application of the 1923 Lausanne Treaty, were also abolished by the new Montreux Treaty, which gives us great pleasure\".\nAs the relationship between Greece and Turkey deteriorated over the following decades, Turkey denied that the treaty affected the Greek islands and sought to bring back into force the relevant part of the Lausanne Treaty on the Straits.\n1994 reforms.\nThe United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS), which entered into force in November 1994, has prompted calls for the Montreux Convention to be revised and adapted to make it compatible with UNCLOS's regime governing straits used for international navigation. However, Turkey's longstanding refusal to sign UNCLOS has meant that Montreux remains in force without further amendments. Furthermore, even if Turkey ratified UNCLOS, the Montreux Convention would continue to govern passage in the Straits given its status as a \"long-standing international convention\" under Article 35(c) of UNCLOS.\nThe safety of vessels passing through the Bosporus has become more of a concern in recent years as the volume of traffic has increased greatly since the convention was signed: from 4,500 ships passing through in 1934 to 49,304 by 1998. As well as the obvious environmental concerns, the Straits bisect the city of Istanbul, with over 14 million people living on its shores, and so maritime incidents in the Straits pose a considerable risk to public safety. The Convention does not, however, make any provision for the regulation of shipping for the purposes of safety or environmental protection. In January 1994, the Turkish government adopted new \"Maritime Traffic Regulations for the Turkish Straits and the Marmara Region\" to introduce a new regulatory regime \"to ensure the safety of navigation, life and property and to protect the environment in the region\" but without violating the Montreux principle of free passage. The new regulations provoked controversy when Russia, Greece, Cyprus, Romania, Ukraine and Bulgaria raised objections. However, they were approved by the International Maritime Organisation on the grounds that they were not intended to prejudice \"the rights of any ship using the Straits under international law\". The regulations were revised in November 1998 to address Russian concerns.\nRusso-Ukrainian War.\nAfter the Russian invasion of Ukraine on 24 February 2022, the Ukrainian government appealed to Turkey to exercise its authority under the Montreux Convention to limit the transit of Russian warships from the Mediterranean to the Black Sea. At least six Russian warships and a submarine had crossed the Turkish straits in February. After initial reluctance, attributed to the country's close ties with both Russia and Ukraine, Turkish Foreign Minister Mevl\u00fct \u00c7avu\u015fo\u011flu announced on 27 February that his government would legally recognise the Russian invasion as a \"war\", which provides grounds for implementing the convention with respect to military vessels. This blockage of naval vessels also applies to NATO powers who cannot now move their vessels from the Mediterranean to the Black Sea. However, \u00c7avu\u015fo\u011flu reiterated that pursuant to the terms of the agreement, Turkey cannot block Russian warships based in the Black Sea from returning to their registered base. Around 27\u201328 February, Turkey refused permission for three out of four Russian warships to enter the Black Sea as their home base was not on the Black Sea.\nUp until 2022, Russia had deployed its \"Kilo\"-class submarines from the Black Sea to the Mediterranean, arguing that these vessels were ultimately destined for \"maintenance\" at facilities in the Baltic Sea. There was criticism of this since the submarines would then remain deployed in the Mediterranean for an extensive period of time. Since this was becoming more difficult to justify, one analysis in May 2022 suggested that the Russians may have found a work-around to the problem, potentially using the country's internal waterways to permit transit to vessels up to the size of the \"Kilo\"-class boats between the Black Sea and the Baltic. The ability to use the internal waterways to facilitate such a transit has yet to be confirmed.\nTwo Russian Federation ships (the missile cruiser \"Varyag\", the flagship of the Russian Pacific Fleet, and \"Admiral Tributs\", a large anti-submarine destroyer) waited in the Mediterranean seeking to enter the Black Sea for nine months. In October 2022, they were refused permission and left the Mediterranean Sea through the Suez Canal.\nOn 2 January 2024 Turkey refused passage through the strait to two minehunters donated by the British Royal Navy to the Ukrainian Navy pursuant to the Convention.\nExplanatory notes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20455", "revid": "6689490", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20455", "title": "Michael Jordan", "text": "American former basketball player (born 1963)\nMichael Jeffrey Jordan (born February 17, 1963), also known by his initials MJ, is an American former professional basketball player and current businessman, who is a minority owner of the Charlotte Hornets of the National Basketball Association (NBA). He played 15 seasons in the NBA between 1984 and 2003, winning six NBA championships with the Chicago Bulls. Widely considered to be one of the greatest players of all time, he was integral in popularizing basketball and the NBA around the world in the 1980s and 1990s. He is one of the world's richest celebrities, with a $3.8\u00a0billion net worth as of 2025.\nJordan played college basketball with the North Carolina Tar Heels. As a freshman, he was a member of the Tar Heels' national championship team in 1982. Jordan joined the Bulls in 1984 as the third overall draft pick and emerged as a league star, entertaining crowds with his prolific scoring while gaining a reputation as one of the best defensive players. His leaping ability, demonstrated by performing slam dunks from the free-throw line in Slam Dunk Contests, earned him the nicknames \"Air Jordan\" and \"His Airness\". Jordan won his first NBA title with the Bulls in 1991 and followed that with titles in 1992 and 1993, securing a three-peat. Citing physical and mental exhaustion from basketball and superstardom, Jordan abruptly retired before the 1993\u201394 NBA season to play Minor League Baseball in the Chicago White Sox organization. He returned to the Bulls in 1995 and led them to three more championships in 1996, 1997, and 1998, as well as a then-record 72 regular season wins in the 1995\u201396 NBA season. Jordan retired for the second time in 1999, returning for two NBA seasons from 2001 to 2003 as a member of the Washington Wizards. He was selected to play for the United States national team during his college and NBA careers, winning four gold medals\u2014at the 1983 Pan American Games, 1984 Summer Olympics, 1992 Tournament of the Americas and 1992 Summer Olympics\u2014while also being undefeated.\nJordan's individual accolades include six NBA Finals Most Valuable Player (MVP) awards, 10 NBA scoring titles (both all-time records), five NBA MVP awards, 10 All-NBA First Team designations, nine All-Defensive First Team honors, 14 NBA All-Star Game selections, and three NBA All-Star Game MVP awards. He holds the NBA records for career regular season scoring average (30.1 points per game) and career playoff scoring average (33.4 points per game). He is one of only eight players to achieve the basketball Triple Crown. In 1999, Jordan was named the 20th century's greatest North American athlete by ESPN and was second to Babe Ruth on the Associated Press' list of athletes of the century. Jordan was twice inducted into the Naismith Memorial Basketball Hall of Fame, once in 2009 for his individual career, and in 2010 as part of the 1992 United States men's Olympic basketball team (\"The Dream Team\"). The trophy for the NBA Most Valuable Player Award is named in his honor.\nOne of the most effectively marketed athletes ever, Jordan made many product endorsements. He fueled the success of Nike's Air Jordan sneakers, which were introduced in 1984 and remain popular. Jordan starred as himself in the live-action/animation hybrid film \"Space Jam\" (1996) and was the focus of the Emmy-winning documentary series \"The Last Dance\" (2020). He became part-owner and head of basketball operations for the Charlotte Hornets (then named the Bobcats) in 2006 and bought a controlling interest in 2010, before selling his majority stake in 2023. Jordan is a co-owner of 23XI Racing in the NASCAR Cup Series. In 2014, he became the first billionaire player in NBA history. In 2016, President Barack Obama awarded Jordan the Presidential Medal of Freedom.\nEarly life.\nMichael Jeffrey Jordan was born at Cumberland Hospital in Fort Greene, Brooklyn, New York City, on February 17, 1963, to bank employee Deloris (n\u00e9e Peoples) and equipment supervisor James R. Jordan Sr.. He has two older brothers, James Jr. and Larry, as well as an older sister named Deloris and a younger sister named Roslyn. Jordan and his siblings were raised Methodist.\nIn 1968, the family moved to Wilmington, North Carolina. Jordan attended Emsley A. Laney High School, where he played basketball, baseball, and football. He tried out for the basketball varsity team during his sophomore year, but at a height of , he was deemed too short. Motivated to prove his worth, Jordan became the star of Laney's junior varsity team and tallied some 40-point games. The following summer, he grew and trained rigorously. Upon earning a spot on the varsity roster, Jordan averaged more than 25 points per game (ppg) over his final two seasons of high school play. He also adopted his signature jersey number, 23. As a senior, he was selected for the 1981 McDonald's All-American Game and scored 30 points, after averaging 26.8 ppg, 11.6 rebounds (rpg), and 10.1 assists per game (apg) for the season.\nJordan was recruited by numerous college basketball programs, including Duke, North Carolina, South Carolina, Syracuse, Virginia, and Clemson. He reportedly most strongly considered recruiting efforts from North Carolina, NC State, and Maryland before, in 1980, he accepted a basketball scholarship to the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, where he majored in cultural geography. He chose this field of study because of its relationship to meteorology, as Jordan was interested in a career as a meteorologist.\nCollege career.\nAs a freshman under coach Dean Smith\u2019s team-oriented system, Jordan was named ACC Freshman of the Year after averaging 13.4 points per game on 53.4% shooting\u2014ranking 10th in scoring and sixth in field goal percentage in the conference. He made the game-winning jump shot in the 1982 NCAA Championship game against Georgetown, which was led by future NBA rival Patrick Ewing. Jordan later described this shot as the major turning point in his basketball career. During his sophomore and junior seasons, Jordan consistently ranked among the ACC's elite, finishing either 1st or 2nd in both total points and points per game, while also placing in the top 10 in field goal percentage and free throw percentage. In his three seasons with the Tar Heels, Jordan averaged 17.7 ppg on 54.0% shooting and added 5.0 rpg and 1.8 apg.\nJordan was selected by consensus to the NCAA All-American First Team in both his sophomore (1983) and junior (1984) seasons. After winning the Naismith and the Wooden College Player of the Year awards in 1984, Jordan left North Carolina a year before his scheduled graduation to enter the 1984 NBA draft. Jordan returned to North Carolina to complete his degree in 1986, when he graduated with a Bachelor of Arts degree in geography. In 2002, Jordan was selected to the ACC 50th Anniversary men's basketball team and named the greatest athlete in ACC history.\nProfessional career.\nChicago Bulls (1984\u20131993; 1995\u20131998).\nEarly NBA years (1984\u20131987).\nThe Chicago Bulls selected Jordan with the third overall pick of the 1984 NBA draft after Hakeem Olajuwon (Houston Rockets) and Sam Bowie (Portland Trail Blazers). One of the primary reasons why Jordan was not drafted sooner was because the first two teams were in need of a center. Trail Blazers general manager Stu Inman contended that it was not a matter of drafting a center but more a matter of taking Bowie over Jordan, in part because Portland already had Clyde Drexler, who was a guard with similar skills to Jordan. Citing Bowie's injury-laden college career, ESPN named the Blazers' choice of Bowie as the worst draft pick in North American professional sports history.\nJordan made his NBA debut at Chicago Stadium on October 26, 1984, and scored 16 points. In 2021, a ticket stub from the game sold at auction for $264,000, setting a record for a collectible ticket stub. During his rookie 1984\u201385 season with the Bulls, Jordan averaged 28.2 ppg on 51.5% shooting. He helped the Bulls improve from 27\u201355 to 38\u201344 and qualify for the postseason for the first time since the 1980\u201381 season. Jordan quickly became a fan favorite even in opposing arenas. Roy S. Johnson of \"The New York Times\" described Jordan as \"the phenomenal rookie of the Bulls\" in November, and he appeared on the cover of \"Sports Illustrated\" with the heading \"A Star Is Born\" in December. The fans voted in Jordan as an All-Star starter during his rookie season. Controversy arose before the 1985 NBA All-Star Game when word surfaced that several veteran players, led by Isiah Thomas, were upset by the amount of attention Jordan was receiving. This led to a so-called \"freeze-out\" on Jordan, where players refused to pass the ball to him. The controversy left Jordan relatively unaffected when he returned to regular season play, and he would go on to be voted the NBA Rookie of the Year. The Bulls lost to the Milwaukee Bucks in four games in the first round of the playoffs.\nAn often-cited moment was on August 26, 1985, when Jordan shook the arena during a Nike exhibition game in Trieste, Italy, by shattering the glass of the backboard with a dunk. The moment was filmed and is often referred to as an important milestone in Jordan's rise. The shoes Jordan wore during the game were auctioned in August 2020 for $615,000, a record for a pair of sneakers. Jordan's 1985\u201386 season was cut short when he broke his foot in the third game of the year, causing him to miss 64 games. The Bulls made the playoffs despite Jordan's injury and a 30\u201352 record, at the time the fifth-worst record of any team to qualify for the playoffs in NBA history. Jordan recovered in time to participate in the postseason and performed well upon his return. On April 20 at the Boston Garden, in Game 2 of the First Round, a 135\u2013131 double overtime loss to the eventual NBA champion Boston Celtics, Jordan scored a playoff career-high 63 points, breaking Elgin Baylor's single-game playoff scoring record. The Celtics team, though, swept the series in three games.\nJordan completely recovered in time for the 1986\u201387 season, and had one of the most prolific scoring seasons in NBA history; he became the only player other than Wilt Chamberlain to score 3,000 points in a season, averaging a league-high 37.1 ppg on 48.2% shooting. Jordan also demonstrated his defensive prowess, as he became the first player in NBA history to record 200 steals and 100 blocked shots in a season. Despite Jordan's success, Magic Johnson won the NBA Most Valuable Player Award. The Bulls reached 40 wins, and advanced to the playoffs for the third consecutive year but were again swept by the Celtics.\nPistons roadblock (1987\u20131990).\nJordan led the league in scoring during the 1987\u201388 season, averaging 35.0 ppg on 53.5% shooting, and won his first league MVP Award. He was named the NBA Defensive Player of the Year after averaging 1.6 blocks per game (bpg), a league-high 3.1 steals per game (spg), and leading the Bulls defense to the fewest points per game allowed in the league. The Bulls finished 50\u201332, and made it past the first round of the playoffs for the first time in Jordan's career, as they defeated the Cleveland Cavaliers in five games. In the Eastern Conference Semifinals, the Bulls lost in five games to the more experienced Detroit Pistons, who were led by Isiah Thomas and a group of physical players known as the \"\".\nIn the 1988\u201389 season, Jordan again led the league in scoring, averaging 32.5 ppg on 53.8% shooting from the field, along with 8.0 rpg and 8.0 apg. During the season, Jordan expressed his frustration over the Bulls' offense with head coach Doug Collins, who then put Jordan at point guard. In his time as a point guard, Jordan had 10 triple-doubles in 11 games, with averages of 33.6 ppg, 11.4 rpg, and 10.8 apg.\nThe Bulls finished with a 47\u201335 record, and advanced to the Eastern Conference Finals, defeating the Cavaliers and New York Knicks along the way. The Cavaliers series included a career highlight for Jordan when he hit \"The Shot\" over Craig Ehlo at the buzzer in the fifth and final game of the series. In the Eastern Conference Finals, the Pistons again defeated the Bulls, this time in six games, by utilizing their \"Jordan Rules\" method of guarding Jordan, which consisted of double and triple teaming him every time he touched the ball.\nThe Bulls entered the 1989\u201390 season as a team on the rise, with their core group of Jordan and young improving players like Scottie Pippen and Horace Grant, and under the guidance of new coach Phil Jackson. On March 28, 1990, Jordan scored a career-high 69 points in a 117\u2013113 road win over the Cavaliers. He averaged a league-leading 33.6 ppg on 52.6% shooting, to go with 6.9 rpg and 6.3 apg, in leading the Bulls to a 55\u201327 record. They again advanced to the Eastern Conference Finals after beating the Bucks and Philadelphia 76ers; despite pushing the series to seven games, the Bulls lost to the Pistons for the third consecutive season.\nFirst three-peat (1991\u20131993).\nAfter the Bulls' previous losses to the Pistons, Phil Jackson, along with assistant coach Tex Winter, focused on implementing the triangle offense to counteract the Pistons' defense and other teams that heavily targeted Jordan. This system, however, required Jordan to adjust his playing style. In his book \"Eleven Rings\", Jackson recalled, \"I was planning to ask Michael to reduce the number of shots he took so that other members of the team could get more involved in the offense. I knew this would be a challenge for him.\" In \"The Last Dance\", Jordan admitted he was initially reluctant to back the system. Nevertheless, he eventually embraced the change, which led to success for the team.\nIn the 1990\u201391 season, Jordan won his second MVP award after averaging 31.5 ppg on 53.9% shooting, 6.0 rpg, and 5.5 apg for the regular season. The Bulls finished in first place in their division for the first time in sixteen years and set a franchise record with 61 wins in the regular season. With Scottie Pippen developing into an All-Star, the Bulls had elevated their play. The Bulls defeated the New York Knicks and the Philadelphia 76ers in the opening two rounds of the playoffs. They advanced to the Eastern Conference Finals where their rival, the Detroit Pistons, awaited them; this time, the Bulls beat the Pistons in a four-game sweep.\nThe Bulls advanced to the Finals for the first time in franchise history to face the Los Angeles Lakers. The Bulls won the series in five games, and compiled a 15\u20132 playoff record along the way. Perhaps the best-known moment of the series came in Game 2 when, attempting a dunk, Jordan avoided a potential Sam Perkins block by switching the ball from his right hand to his left in mid-air to lay the shot into the basket. In his first Finals appearance, Jordan had 31.2 ppg on 56% shooting from the field, 11.4 apg, 6.6 rpg, 2.8 spg, and 1.4 bpg. Jordan won his first NBA Finals MVP award and cried while holding the Finals trophy.\nJordan and the Bulls continued their dominance in the 1991\u201392 season, establishing a 67\u201315 record, topping their franchise record from the 1990\u201391 campaign. Jordan won his second consecutive MVP award with averages of 30.1 ppg, 6.4 rpg, and 6.1 apg on 52% shooting. After winning a physical seven-game series over the New York Knicks in the second round of the playoffs and finishing off the Cleveland Cavaliers in the Conference Finals in six games, the Bulls met Clyde Drexler and the Portland Trail Blazers in the Finals. The media, hoping to recreate a Magic\u2013Bird rivalry, highlighted the similarities between \"Air\" Jordan and Clyde \"The Glide\" during the pre-Finals hype.\nIn a Game 1 victory, Jordan scored a Finals-record 35 points in the first half, including a record-setting six three-point field goals. After the sixth three-pointer, he jogged down the court shrugging as he looked courtside. Marv Albert, who broadcast the game, later stated that it was as if Jordan was saying: \"I can't believe I'm doing this.\" The Bulls went on to defeat the Blazers in six games. Jordan was named Finals MVP for the second year in a row, and finished the series averaging 35.8 ppg, 4.8 rpg, and 6.5 apg, while shooting 52.6% from the floor.\nIn the 1992\u201393 season, despite a 32.6 ppg, 6.7 rpg, and 5.5 apg campaign, including a second-place finish in Defensive Player of the Year voting, Jordan's streak of consecutive MVP seasons ended, as he lost the award to his friend Charles Barkley, upsetting him. Jordan and the Bulls met Barkley and his Phoenix Suns in the 1993 NBA Finals. The Bulls won their third NBA championship on a game-winning shot by John Paxson and a last-second block by Horace Grant, but Jordan was once again Chicago's leader. He averaged a Finals-record 41.0 ppg during the six-game series, and became the first player in NBA history to win three consecutive Finals MVP awards. Jordan scored more than 30 points in every game of the series, including 40 or more points in four consecutive games. With his third Finals triumph, Jordan capped off a seven-year run where he attained seven scoring titles and three championships, but there were signs that Jordan was tiring of his massive celebrity and all of the non-basketball hassles in his life.\nFirst retirement and stint in Minor League Baseball (1993\u20131995).\nOn October 6, 1993, Jordan announced his retirement, saying that he lost his desire to play basketball. He later said that the murder of his father three months earlier helped shape his decision. James R. Jordan Sr. was murdered on July 23, 1993, at a highway rest area in Lumberton, North Carolina, by two teenagers, Daniel Green and Larry Martin Demery, who carjacked his Lexus. His body, dumped in a South Carolina swamp, was not discovered until August 3. Green and Demery were sentenced to life imprisonment. However, in \"The Last Dance\", Jordan stated that he retired due to physical and mental exhaustion from basketball and superstardom.\nJordan was close to his father; as a child, Jordan imitated the way his father stuck out his tongue while absorbed in work. Jordan later adopted it as his own signature, often displaying it as he drove to the basket. In 1996, Jordan founded a Chicago-area Boys &amp; Girls Club and dedicated it to his father. In his 1998 autobiography \"For the Love of the Game\", Jordan wrote that he was preparing for retirement as early as the summer of 1992. The added exhaustion due to the \"Dream Team\" run in the 1992 Summer Olympics solidified Jordan's feelings about the game and his celebrity status. Jordan's announcement sent shock waves throughout the NBA and appeared on the front pages of newspapers around the world.\nJordan further surprised the sports world by signing a Minor League Baseball (MiLB) contract with the Chicago White Sox on February 7, 1994. He reported to spring training in Sarasota, Florida, and was assigned to the team's minor league system on March 31. Jordan said that this decision was made to pursue the dream of his late father, who always envisioned his son as a Major League Baseball (MLB) player. The White Sox were owned by Bulls owner Jerry Reinsdorf, who continued to honor Jordan's basketball contract during the years he played baseball.\nIn 1994, Jordan played for the Birmingham Barons, a Double-A minor league affiliate of the Chicago White Sox, batting .202 with three home runs, 51 runs batted in, 30 stolen bases, 114 strikeouts, 51 bases on balls, and 11 errors. His strikeout total led the team and his games played tied for the team lead. His 30 stolen bases were second on the team only to Doug Brady. Jordan also appeared for the Scottsdale Scorpions in the 1994 Arizona Fall League, batting .252 against the top prospects in baseball. On November 1, 1994, his No. 23 was retired by the Bulls in a ceremony that included the erection of a permanent sculpture known as \"The Spirit\" outside the new United Center.\nReturn to the NBA (1995).\nThe Bulls went 55\u201327 in 1993\u201394 without Jordan in the lineup and lost to the New York Knicks in the second round of the playoffs. In March 1995, Jordan decided to quit baseball because he feared he might become a replacement player during the Major League Baseball strike. During the 1994\u201395 season, Jordan returned to the Bulls midway through the season. On March 18, 1995, Jordan announced his comeback to the NBA in a two-word press release: \"I'm back.\" The next day, Jordan took to the court with the Bulls to face the Indiana Pacers in Indianapolis, scoring 19 points. The game had the highest Nielsen rating of any regular season NBA game since 1975. Although he could have worn his original number even though the Bulls retired it, Jordan wore No. 45, his baseball number.\nDespite his 18-month hiatus from the NBA, Jordan played well, making a game-winning jump shot against Atlanta in his fourth game back. He scored 55 points in his next game, against the New York Knicks at Madison Square Garden on March 28, 1995. Boosted by Jordan's comeback, the Bulls went 13\u20134 to make the playoffs and advanced to the Eastern Conference Semifinals against the Orlando Magic. At the end of Game 1, Orlando's Nick Anderson stripped Jordan from behind, leading to the game-winning basket for the Magic; he later commented that Jordan \"didn't look like the old Michael Jordan\", and said, \"No. 45 doesn't explode like No. 23 used to\".\nJordan responded by scoring 38 points in the next game, which Chicago won. Before the game, Jordan decided that he would immediately resume wearing his former No. 23. The Bulls were fined $25,000 for failing to report the impromptu number change to the NBA. Jordan was fined an additional $5,000 for opting to wear white sneakers when the rest of the Bulls wore black. He averaged 31 ppg in the playoffs, but Orlando won the series in six games.\nSecond three-peat (1996\u20131998).\nJordan was motivated by the playoff defeat, and he trained aggressively for the 1995\u201396 season. The Bulls were strengthened by the addition of rebound specialist Dennis Rodman, and the team dominated the league, starting the season at 41\u20133. The Bulls finished with the best regular season record in NBA history, 72\u201310, a mark broken two decades later by the 2015\u201316 Golden State Warriors. Jordan led the league in scoring with 30.4 ppg, and he won the league's regular season and All-Star Game MVP awards.\nIn the playoffs, the Bulls lost only three games in four series (Miami Heat 3\u20130, New York Knicks 4\u20131, and Orlando Magic 4\u20130), as they defeated the Seattle SuperSonics 4\u20132 in the NBA Finals to win their fourth championship. The series was one of the tougher ones for Jordan as he had a 41.5% field goal percentage, and his scoring average dropped nearly nine points from his average during the rest of the playoffs. Nevertheless, Jordan was named Finals MVP for a record fourth time; he achieved only the second sweep of the MVP awards in the All-Star Game, regular season, and NBA Finals after Willis Reed in the 1969\u201370 season. Upon winning the championship, his first since his father's murder, Jordan reacted emotionally, clutching the game ball and crying on the locker room floor.\nIn the 1996\u201397 season, the Bulls stood at a 69\u201311 record but ended the season by losing their final two games to finish the year 69\u201313, missing out on a second consecutive 70-win season. The Bulls again advanced to the Finals, where they faced the Utah Jazz. That team included Karl Malone, who had beaten Jordan for the NBA MVP award in a tight race (986\u2013957). The series against the Jazz featured two of the more memorable clutch moments of Jordan's career. He won Game 1 for the Bulls with a buzzer-beating jump shot. In Game 5, with the series tied 2\u20132, Jordan played despite being feverish and dehydrated from a stomach virus or food poisoning, likely caused by a pizza ordered the night before. Jordan eventually claimed it was food poisoning in the 2020 docuseries \"The Last Dance\". In what is known as \"The Flu Game\", Jordan scored 38 points, including the game-winning three-pointer with 25 seconds remaining. The Bulls won 90\u201388 and went on to win the series in six games. For the fifth time in as many Finals appearances, Jordan received the Finals MVP award. During the 1997 NBA All-Star Game, he posted the first triple-double in All-Star Game history in a victorious effort, but the MVP award went to Glen Rice.\nThe Bulls compiled a 62\u201320 record in the 1997\u201398 season. Jordan led the league with 28.7 ppg, securing his fifth regular season MVP award, plus honors for All-NBA First Team, First Defensive Team, and the All-Star Game MVP. The Bulls won the Eastern Conference Championship for a third straight season, including surviving a seven-game series with the Indiana Pacers in the Eastern Conference Finals; it was the first time Jordan had played in a Game 7 since the 1992 Eastern Conference Semifinals with the New York Knicks. After winning, they moved on for a rematch with the Jazz in the Finals.\nThe Bulls returned to the Delta Center for Game 6 on June 14, 1998, leading the series 3\u20132. Jordan executed a series of plays, considered to be one of the greatest clutch performances in NBA Finals history. With 41.9 seconds remaining and the Bulls trailing 86\u201383, Phil Jackson called a timeout. When play resumed, Jordan received the inbound pass, drove to the basket, and sank a shot over several Jazz defenders, cutting Utah's lead to 86\u201385. The Jazz brought the ball upcourt and passed the ball to Malone, who was set up in the low post and was being guarded by Rodman. Malone jostled with Rodman and caught the pass, but Jordan cut behind him and stole the ball out of his hands.\nJordan then dribbled down the court and paused, eyeing his defender, Jazz guard Bryon Russell. With 10 seconds remaining, Jordan started to dribble right, then crossed over to his left, possibly pushing off Russell, although the officials did not call a foul. With 5.2 seconds left, Jordan made the climactic shot of his Bulls career, a top-key jumper over a stumbling Russell to give Chicago an 87\u201386 lead. Afterwards, the Jazz' John Stockton narrowly missed a game-winning three-pointer, and the buzzer sounded as Jordan and the Bulls won their sixth NBA championship, achieving a second three-peat in the decade. Once again, Jordan was voted Finals MVP for a record sixth time, having led all scorers by averaging 33.5 ppg, including 45 in the deciding Game 6. The 1998 Finals holds the highest television rating of any Finals series, and Game 6 holds the highest television rating of any game in NBA history.\nSecond retirement (1999\u20132001).\nWith Phil Jackson's contract expiring, the pending departures of Scottie Pippen and Dennis Rodman looming, and being in the latter stages of an owner-induced lockout of NBA players, Jordan retired for the second time on January 13, 1999. On January 19, 2000, Jordan returned to the NBA not as a player but as part owner and president of basketball operations for the Washington Wizards. Jordan's responsibilities with the Wizards were comprehensive, as he controlled all aspects of the Wizards' basketball operations, and had the final say in all personnel matters; opinions of Jordan as a basketball executive were mixed. He managed to purge the team of several highly paid, unpopular players (like forward Juwan Howard and point guard Rod Strickland) but used the first pick in the 2001 NBA draft to select high school student Kwame Brown, who did not live up to expectations and was traded away after four seasons.\nDespite his January 1999 claim that he was \"99.9% certain\" he would never play another NBA game, Jordan expressed interest in making another comeback in the summer of 2001, this time with his new team. Inspired by the NHL comeback of his friend Mario Lemieux the previous winter, Jordan spent much of the spring and summer of 2001 in training, holding several invitation-only camps for NBA players in Chicago. Jordan hired his old Chicago Bulls head coach, Doug Collins, as Washington's coach for the upcoming season, a decision that many saw as foreshadowing another Jordan return.\nWashington Wizards (2001\u20132003).\nOn September 25, 2001, Jordan announced his return to the NBA to play for the Washington Wizards, indicating his intention to donate his salary as a player to a relief effort for the victims of the September 11 attacks. In an injury-plagued 2001\u201302 season, Jordan led the team in scoring (22.9 ppg), assists (5.2 apg), and steals (1.4 spg), and was an MVP candidate, as he led the Wizards to a winning record and playoff contention; Jordan would eventually finish 13th in the MVP ballot. After he suffered torn cartilage in his right knee, and subsequent knee soreness, the Wizards missed the playoffs, and Jordan's season ended after only 60 games, the fewest he had played in a regular season since playing 17 games after returning from his first retirement during the 1994\u201395 season. Jordan started 53 of his 60 games for the season, averaging 24.3 ppg, 5.4 apg, and 6.0 rpg, and shooting 41.9% from the field in his 53 starts. His last seven appearances were in a reserve role, in which he averaged just over 20 minutes per game. The Wizards finished the season with a 37\u201345 record, an 18-game improvement.\nPlaying in his 14th and final NBA All-Star Game in 2003, Jordan passed Kareem Abdul-Jabbar as the all-time leading scorer in All-Star Game history, a record since broken by Kobe Bryant and LeBron James. That year, Jordan was the only Washington player to play in all 82 games, starting in 67 of them as he came off the bench in 15. Jordan averaged 20.0 ppg, 6.1 rpg, 3.8 assists, and 1.5 spg per game. He also shot 45% from the field, and 82% from the free-throw line. Although Jordan turned 40 during the season, he scored 20 or more points 42 times, 30 or more points nine times, and 40 or more points three times. On February 21, 2003, Jordan became the first 40-year-old to tally 43 points in an NBA game. During his stint with the Wizards, all of Jordan's home games at the MCI Center were sold out and the Wizards were the second most-watched team in the NBA, averaging 20,172 fans a game at home and 19,311 on the road. Jordan's final two seasons did not result in a playoff appearance for the Wizards, and he was often unsatisfied with the play of those around him. At several points, Jordan openly criticized his teammates to the media, citing their lack of focus and intensity, notably that of Kwame Brown, the number-one draft pick in the 2001 NBA draft.\nFinal retirement (2003).\nWith the recognition that 2002\u201303 would be Jordan's final season, tributes were paid to him throughout the NBA. In his final game at the United Center in Chicago, which was his old home court, Jordan received a four-minute standing ovation. The Miami Heat retired the No. 23 jersey on April 11, 2003, even though Jordan never played for the team. At the 2003 All-Star Game, Jordan was offered a starting spot from Tracy McGrady and Allen Iverson but refused both; he accepted the spot of Vince Carter. Jordan played in his final NBA game on April 16, 2003, in Philadelphia. After scoring 13 points in the game, Jordan went to the bench with 4 minutes and 13 seconds left in the third quarter and his team trailing the Philadelphia 76ers 75\u201356. Just after the start of the fourth quarter, the First Union Center crowd began chanting \"We want Mike!\" After much encouragement from coach Doug Collins, Jordan finally rose from the bench and re-entered the game, replacing Larry Hughes with 2:35 remaining. At 1:45, Jordan was intentionally fouled by the 76ers' Eric Snow, and stepped to the line to make both free throws. After the second foul shot, the 76ers in-bounded the ball to rookie John Salmons, who in turn was intentionally fouled by Bobby Simmons one second later, stopping time so that Jordan could return to the bench. He received a three-minute standing ovation from his teammates, his opponents, the officials, and the crowd of 21,257 fans.\nNational team career.\nJordan made his debut as a college player for the U.S. national basketball team at the 1983 Pan American Games in Caracas, Venezuela. He led the team in scoring with 17.3 ppg as the U.S., coached by Jack Hartman, won the gold medal. The following year, Jordan won another gold medal in the 1984 Summer Olympics. The 1984 U.S. team was coached by Bob Knight and featured young players such as Patrick Ewing, Sam Perkins, Chris Mullin, Steve Alford, and Wayman Tisdale. Jordan led the team in scoring, averaging 17.1 ppg for the tournament.\nIn 1992, Jordan, now an NBA player, was a member of the \"Dream Team\", which included Larry Bird and Magic Johnson. The team won gold in the 1992 Tournament of the Americas, and the 1992 Summer Olympics. Jordan was the only player to start all eight games in the Olympics. He averaged 14.9 ppg on 45% shooting from the field and 68% from the free-throw line, and was second on the team in scoring. He was undefeated in the four tournaments he played for the U.S. national team, and won all 30 games he took part in.\nPlayer profile.\nJordan was a shooting guard who could also play as a small forward, the position he would primarily play during his second return to professional basketball with the Washington Wizards. Jordan was known as a strong clutch performer. With the Bulls, he decided 25 games with field goals or free throws in the last 30 seconds, including two NBA Finals games and five other playoff contests. His competitiveness was visible in his prolific trash talk and well-known work ethic. Jordan often used perceived slights to fuel his performances. Sportswriter Wright Thompson described him as \"a killer, in the Darwinian sense of the word, immediately sensing and attacking someone's weakest spot\". As the Bulls organization built the franchise around Jordan, management had to trade away players who were not \"tough enough\" to compete with him in practice. To improve his defense, Jordan spent hours studying film of opponents. On offense, he relied more on instinct and improvization. Jordan's fierce competitiveness greatly impacted his teammates, sometimes motivating them but also leading to tension and alienation.\nNoted as a durable player, Jordan did not miss four or more games while active for a full season from 1986\u201387 to 2001\u201302, when he injured his right knee. Of the 15 seasons Jordan was in the NBA, he played all 82 regular season games nine times. Jordan has frequently cited David Thompson, Walter Davis, and Jerry West as influences. Confirmed at the start of his career, and possibly later on, Jordan had a special \"Love of the Game Clause\" written into his contract, which was unusual at the time, and allowed him to play basketball against anyone at any time, anywhere.\nJordan had a versatile offensive game and was capable of aggressively driving to the basket as well as drawing fouls from his opponents at a high rate. His 8,772 free throw attempts are the 11th-highest total in NBA history. Early in Jordan's career, he weighed around and was more athletic in terms of play style. As his career progressed, Jordan developed the ability to post up his opponents and score with his trademark fadeaway jump shot, using his leaping ability to avoid block attempts. According to Hubie Brown, this move alone made Jordan nearly unstoppable. Around this time, he bulked up to to adapt to the increased physicality of NBA defenses during the 1990s, sacrificing some athleticism for added strength in the post. Despite media criticism by some as a selfish player early in his career, Jordan was willing to defer to this teammates, with a career average of 5.3 apg and a season-high of 8.0 apg. For a guard, Jordan was also a good rebounder, finishing with 6.2 rpg. Defensively, he averaged 2.3 spg and 0.8 bpg.\nThe three-point field goal was not Jordan's strength, especially in his early years. Later on in his career, Jordan improved his three-point shooting, and finished his career with a three-point field goal percentage of 32%. His best years shooting from three were the 1989\u201390 and 1992\u201393 seasons, where he shot 37% and 35% from three, respectively (Jordan did shoot higher percentages from 1994 to 1997, but in those years, the three-point line was temporarily moved inwards). \nOverall, Jordan's effective field goal percentage was 51%, and he had six seasons with at least 50% shooting, five of which were consecutive (1988\u20131992). Jordan also shot 51% and 50% from the field, and 30% and 33% from three-point range, throughout his first and second retirements, respectively, finishing his Bulls career with 31.5 points per game on 50.5 FG% shooting and his overall career with 49.7 FG% shooting.\nIn 1988, Jordan was honored with the NBA Defensive Player of the Year and Most Valuable Player awards. No NBA player had previously won both awards in their career. He also set both seasonal and career records for blocked shots by a guard, and combined this with his ball-thieving ability to become a standout defensive player. Despite his defensive prowess, the 1988 season has come under scrutiny due to the large discrepancy between Jordan's steals' numbers at home versus on the road. Such stat inflation was common, and a 2024 study by Tom Haberstroh found that there were games where Jordan was often credited with steals that could not have happened. For example, in one game, he was credited with more steals than the opposing team had live-ball turnovers. Jordan ranks fourth in NBA history in total steals with 2,514, trailing John Stockton, Jason Kidd and Chris Paul. Jerry West often stated that he was more impressed with Jordan's defensive contributions than his offensive ones. Doc Rivers declared Jordan \"the best superstar defender in the history of the game\".\nJordan was known to have strong eyesight. Broadcaster Al Michaels said that Jordan was able to read baseball box scores on a television clearly from about away. During the 2001 NBA Finals, Phil Jackson compared Jordan's dominance to Shaquille O'Neal, stating: \"Michael would get fouled on every play and still have to play through it and just clear himself for shots instead and would rise to that occasion.\"\nLegacy.\nJordan's talent was clear from his first NBA season; by November 1984, he was being compared to Julius Erving. Larry Bird said that rookie Jordan was the best player he ever saw, and that Jordan was \"one of a kind\", and comparable to Wayne Gretzky as an athlete. In his first game in Madison Square Garden against the New York Knicks, Jordan received a near minute-long standing ovation. After Jordan established the single game playoff record of 63 points against the Boston Celtics on April 20, 1986, Bird described him as \"God disguised as Michael Jordan\".\nJordan led the NBA in scoring in 10 seasons (NBA record) and tied Wilt Chamberlain's record of seven consecutive scoring titles. Jordan was a fixture of the NBA All-Defensive First Team, making the roster nine times (NBA record shared with Gary Payton, Kevin Garnett, and Kobe Bryant). He also holds the top career regular season and playoff scoring averages of 30.1 and 33.4 ppg, respectively. By 1998, the season of his Finals-winning shot against the Jazz, he was well known throughout the league as a clutch performer. In the regular season, Jordan was the Bulls' primary threat in the final seconds of a close game and in the playoffs; he would always ask for the ball at crunch time. Jordan's total of 5,987 points in the playoffs is the second-highest among NBA career playoff scoring leaders. He scored 32,292 points in the regular season, placing him fifth on the NBA all-time scoring list behind LeBron James, Kareem Abdul-Jabbar, Karl Malone, and Bryant.\nWith five regular season MVPs (tied for second place with Bill Russell\u2014only Abdul-Jabbar has won more, with six), six Finals MVPs (NBA record), and three NBA All-Star Game MVPs, Jordan is among the most decorated players in NBA history. He finished among the top three in regular season MVP voting 10 times. Jordan was named one of the 50 Greatest Players in NBA History in 1996, and selected to the NBA 75th Anniversary Team in 2021. He is one of only eight players in history to achieve the basketball Triple Crown\u2014winning an NCAA championship, an NBA championship, and an Olympic gold medal (doing so twice with the 1984 and 1992 U.S. men's basketball teams). Since 1976, the year of the ABA\u2013NBA merger, Jordan and Pippen are the only two players to win six NBA Finals playing for one team. In the All-Star Game fan ballot, Jordan received the most votes nine times.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"There's Michael Jordan and then there is the rest of us.\"\n\u2014Magic Johnson\nHarry Edwards, considered the father of the field of sociology of sport, referred to Jordan as representing the highest level of human achievement comparable to Gandhi, Einstein, or Michelangelo. Many of Jordan's contemporaries have said that he is the greatest basketball player of all time. In 1999, an ESPN survey of journalists, athletes and other sports figures ranked Jordan the greatest North American athlete of the 20th century. Jordan placed second to Babe Ruth in the Associated Press' December 1999 list of 20th century athletes. The Associated Press also voted Jordan the greatest basketball player of the 20th century. He has also appeared on the front cover of \"Sports Illustrated\" a record 50 times. In the September 1996 issue of \"Sport\", which was the publication's 50th-anniversary issue, Jordan was named the greatest athlete of the past 50 years.\nJordan's athletic leaping ability, highlighted in his back-to-back Slam Dunk Contest championships in 1987 and 1988, is credited by many people with having influenced a generation of young players. Several NBA players, including James and Dwyane Wade, have stated that they considered Jordan as their role model while they were growing up. Commentators have also dubbed a number of players \"the next Michael Jordan\" upon their entry to the NBA, including Penny Hardaway, Grant Hill, Allen Iverson, Bryant, Vince Carter, James, and Wade. Jordan's jersey number, 23, also became iconic; numerous subsequent NBA players have worn it to pay tribute to him, including James, Metta Sandiford-Artest, and Anthony Davis. \nAlthough Jordan was a well-rounded player, his \"Air Jordan\" image is also often credited with inadvertently decreasing the jump shooting skills, defense, and fundamentals of young players, a fact Jordan himself has lamented, saying: \"I think it was the exposure of Michael Jordan; the marketing of Michael Jordan. Everything was marketed towards the things that people wanted to see, which was scoring and dunking. That Michael Jordan still played defense and an all-around game, but it was never really publicized.\" During his heyday, Jordan did much to increase the status of the game; television ratings increased only during his time in the league. The popularity of the NBA in the U.S. declined after his last title. As late as 2022, NBA Finals television ratings had not returned to the level reached during his last championship-winning season.\nIn August 2009, the Naismith Memorial Basketball Hall of Fame opened a Michael Jordan exhibit. When Jordan was accepted into the Hall of Fame, he selected Class of 1996 member David Thompson to present him. As Jordan would explain during his induction speech in September 2009, he was not a fan of the Tar Heels when growing up in North Carolina but greatly admired Thompson, who played for the rival NC State Wolfpack. Several former Bulls teammates were in attendance at the induction, including Scottie Pippen, Dennis Rodman, Charles Oakley, Ron Harper, Steve Kerr, and Toni Kuko\u010d, as were former coaches Dean Smith and Doug Collins. His emotional reaction during his speech when Jordan began to cry was captured by Associated Press photographer Stephan Savoia and would later go viral on social media as the \"Crying Jordan\" meme. In 2016, President Barack Obama honored Jordan with the Presidential Medal of Freedom. In October 2021, he was named to the NBA 75th Anniversary Team. In September 2022, Jordan's jersey in which he played the opening game of the 1998 NBA Finals was sold for $10.1\u00a0million, making it the most expensive game-worn sports memorabilia in history. In December 2022, the NBA unveiled a new MVP trophy, named in Jordan's honor, to be awarded beginning with the 2022\u201323 season, which replaced the original trophy, named in honor of former NBA commissioner Maurice Podoloff.\nAwards and honors.\nNBA\nUSA Basketball\nNCAA\nHigh school\nHalls of Fame\nMedia\nNational\nState/local\nPost-retirement.\nAfter his third retirement, Jordan assumed that he would be able to return to his position as Director of Basketball Operations with the Wizards. Jordan's previous tenure had produced mixed results and may have also influenced the trade of Richard \"Rip\" Hamilton for Jerry Stackhouse, although Jordan was not technically Director of Basketball Operations in 2002. On May 7, 2003, Wizards owner Abe Pollin fired Jordan from the role. Jordan later stated that he felt betrayed, and that if he had known he would be fired upon retiring, he never would have come back to play for the Wizards.\nOver the next few years, Jordan played golf in celebrity charity tournaments and spent time with his family in Chicago. He also promoted his Jordan Brand clothing line and rode motorcycles. Since 2004, Jordan has owned Michael Jordan Motorsports, a professional closed-course motorcycle road racing team that competed with two Suzukis in the premier Superbike championship sanctioned by the American Motorcyclist Association (AMA) until the end of the 2013 season.\nCharlotte Bobcats/Hornets.\nOn June 15, 2006, Jordan bought a minority stake in the Charlotte Bobcats (known as the Hornets since 2013), becoming the team's second-largest shareholder behind majority owner Robert L. Johnson. As part of the deal, Jordan took full control over the basketball side of the operation, with the title Managing Member of Basketball Operations. Despite his previous success as an endorser, Jordan made an effort not to be included in Charlotte's marketing campaigns. A decade earlier, he had made a bid to become part-owner of Charlotte's original NBA team, the Charlotte Hornets, but talks collapsed when owner George Shinn refused to give Jordan complete control of basketball operations.\nIn February 2010, it was reported that Jordan was seeking majority ownership of the Bobcats. Jordan and former Houston Rockets president George Postolos were the leading contenders for ownership of the team. On February 27, the Bobcats announced that Johnson had reached an agreement with Jordan and his group, MJ Basketball Holdings, to buy the team from Johnson pending NBA approval. On March 17, the NBA Board of Governors unanimously approved Jordan's purchase, making him the first former player to become the majority owner of an NBA team, and the league's only African-American majority owner.\nDuring the 2011 NBA lockout, \"The New York Times\" wrote that Jordan led a group of 10 to 14 hardline owners who wanted to cap the players' share of basketball-related income at 50 percent and as low as 47. Journalists observed that, during the labor dispute in 1998, Jordan told Washington Wizards then-owner Abe Pollin: \"If you can't make a profit, you should sell your team.\" Jason Whitlock of FoxSports.com called Jordan \"a hypocrite sellout who can easily betray the very people who made him a billionaire global icon\" for wanting \"current players to pay for his incompetence\". He cited Jordan's executive decisions to draft disappointing players Kwame Brown and Adam Morrison.\nDuring the 2011\u201312 NBA season that was shortened to 66 games by the lockout, the Bobcats posted a 7\u201359 record. The team closed out the season with a 23-game losing streak; their .106 winning percentage was the worst in NBA history. Before the next season, Jordan said: \"I'm not real happy about the record book scenario last year. It's very, very frustrating.\"\nDuring the 2019 NBA offseason, Jordan sold a minority piece of the Hornets to Gabe Plotkin and Daniel Sundheim, retaining the majority for himself, as well as the role of chairman. In 2023, Jordan finalized the sale of his majority stake to Plotkin and Rick Schnall, ending his 13-year tenure as majority owner, although he kept a minority stake. The sale was officially completed in August 2023 for approximately $3\u00a0billion, more than 10 times the $275\u00a0million Jordan had paid for the team.\n23XI Racing.\nOn September 21, 2020, Jordan and NASCAR driver Denny Hamlin announced they would be fielding a NASCAR Cup Series team with Bubba Wallace driving, beginning competition in the 2021 season. On October 22, the team's name was confirmed to be 23XI Racing (pronounced twenty-three eleven) and the team's entry would bear No. 23. After the team's inaugural season, it added a second car with No. 45, driven by Kurt Busch in 2022 and Tyler Reddick in 2023. Ty Gibbs, John Hunter Nemechek, and Daniel Hemric also drove for 23XI as substitutes during the 2022 season. The team fielded a third car, No. 67, driven by Travis Pastrana in the 2023 Daytona 500. Reddick won the 2024 NASCAR Cup Series regular season championship, the first for the team. 23XI Racing acquired a third charter from the defunct Stewart-Haas Racing, the No. 35 driven by Riley Herbst beginning in 2025. Jordan, Hamlin, and his team, along with Front Row Motorsports sued NASCAR in October 2024 over the new charter agreements.\nPersonal life.\nRelationships.\nJordan married Juanita Vanoy at A Little White Wedding Chapel in Las Vegas on September 2, 1989. They had three children: Jeffrey, Marcus, and Jasmine. The Jordans filed for divorce on January 4, 2002, citing irreconcilable differences, but reconciled shortly thereafter. They again filed for divorce and were granted a dissolution of marriage on December 29, 2006, commenting that the decision was made \"mutually and amicably\". It is reported that Juanita received a $168\u00a0million settlement (equivalent to $ million in 2024), the largest celebrity divorce settlement on public record at the time.\nIn 1991, Jordan purchased a lot in Highland Park, Illinois, where he planned to build a 56,000-square-foot (5,200\u00a0m2) mansion. It was completed in 1995. Jordan listed the mansion for sale in 2012. He also owns homes in North Carolina and Jupiter Island, Florida.\nOn July 21, 2006, a judge in Cook County, Illinois, determined that Jordan did not owe his alleged former lover Karla Knafel $5\u00a0million in a breach of contract claim. Jordan had allegedly paid Knafel $250,000 to keep their relationship a secret. Knafel claimed Jordan promised her $5\u00a0million for remaining silent and agreeing not to file a paternity suit after Knafel learned she was pregnant in 1991; a DNA test showed that Jordan was not the father of the child.\nJordan proposed to his longtime girlfriend, Cuban-American model Yvette Prieto, on Christmas 2011, and they were married on April 27, 2013, at Bethesda-by-the-Sea Episcopal Church. It was announced on November 30, 2013, that the two were expecting their first child together. On February 11, 2014, Prieto gave birth to identical twin daughters named Victoria and Ysabel. In 2019, Jordan became a grandfather when his daughter Jasmine gave birth to a son, whose father is professional basketball player Rakeem Christmas.\nGambling.\nDuring the 1993 NBA playoffs, Jordan was seen gambling in Atlantic City. The previous year, he admitted that he had to cover $57,000 in gambling losses, and author Richard Esquinas wrote a book in 1993 claiming he had won $1.25\u00a0million from Jordan on the golf course. \nIn 2005, Jordan discussed his gambling with Ed Bradley of \"60 Minutes\" and admitted that he made reckless decisions: Yeah, I've gotten myself into situations where I would not walk away and I've pushed the envelope. Is that compulsive? Yeah, it depends on how you look at it. If you're willing to jeopardize your livelihood and your family, then yeah. When Bradley asked him if his gambling ever got to the level where it jeopardized his livelihood or family, Jordan replied: \"No.\" David Stern, the commissioner of the NBA, denied in 1995 and 2006 that Jordan's 1993 retirement was a secret suspension by the league for gambling, but the rumor spread widely. In 2010, Ron Shelton, director of \"Jordan Rides the Bus\", said that he began working on the documentary believing that the NBA had suspended him, but that research \"convinced [him it] was nonsense\".\nMedia figure and business interests.\nEndorsements.\nJordan is one of the most marketed sports figures in history. He has been a major spokesman for such brands as Nike, Coca-Cola, Chevrolet, Gatorade, McDonald's, Ball Park Franks, Rayovac, Wheaties, Hanes, and MCI. Early in his career, Jordan appeared in an anti-drug advertisement sponsored by McDonald's. Jordan has appeared in over 20 commercials for Gatorade since 1991, including the \"Be Like Mike\" commercials in which a song was sung by children wishing to be like Jordan. \nNike created a signature shoe for Jordan, called the Air Jordan, in 1984. One of his more popular commercials for the shoe involved Spike Lee playing the part of Mars Blackmon: Lee, as Blackmon, attempted to find the source of Jordan's abilities and became convinced that \"it's gotta be the shoes\". The hype and demand for the shoes brought on a spate of \"shoe-jackings\", in which people were robbed of their sneakers at gunpoint. Subsequently, Nike spun off the Jordan line into its own division named the \"Jordan Brand\", with athletes and celebrities as endorsers. The brand has also sponsored college sports programs such as those of North Carolina, UCLA, California, Oklahoma, Florida, Georgetown, and Marquette.\nJordan also has been associated with the Looney Tunes cartoons. A Nike commercial shown during 1992's Super Bowl XXVI featured Jordan and Bugs Bunny playing basketball. This commercial inspired the 1996 live action/animated film \"Space Jam\", which starred Jordan and Bugs in a story set during the former's first retirement from basketball. They have subsequently appeared together in several commercials for MCI. Jordan also made an appearance in the music video for Michael Jackson's \"Jam\" (1992).\nSince 2008, Jordan's yearly income from endorsements is estimated at over $40 million. When his power at the ticket gates was at its highest point, the Bulls regularly sold out both their home and road games. Due to this, Jordan set records in player salary by signing annual contracts worth in excess of US$30\u00a0million per season. An academic study found that his first NBA comeback resulted in an increase in the market capitalization of his client firms of more than $1\u00a0billion.\nMost of Jordan's endorsement deals, including his first deal with Nike, were engineered by his agent, David Falk. Jordan has described Falk as \"the best at what he does\" and that \"marketing-wise, he's great. He's the one who came up with the concept of 'Air Jordan'.\"\nBusiness ventures.\nIn June 2010, Jordan was ranked by \"Forbes\" as the 20th-most-powerful celebrity in the world, with $55\u00a0million earned between June 2009 and June 2010. According to \"Forbes\", Jordan Brand generates $1\u00a0billion in sales for Nike. In June 2014, Jordan was named the first NBA player to become a billionaire, after he increased his stake in the Charlotte Hornets from 80% to 89.5%. Jordan was honored with the \"Charlotte Business Journal\"'s Business Person of the Year for 2014. In 2017, he became a part owner of the Miami Marlins of Major League Baseball.\n\"Forbes\" designated Jordan as the athlete with the highest career earnings in 2017. From his Jordan Brand income and endorsements, Jordan's 2015 income was an estimated $110\u00a0million, the most of any retired athlete. As of 2025[ [update]], his net worth is estimated at $3.8\u00a0billion by \"Forbes\", making him the fourth-richest African-American, and one of the richest celebrities.\nJordan co-owns an automotive group which bears his name. The company has a Nissan dealership in Durham, North Carolina, acquired in 1990, and formerly had a Lincoln\u2013Mercury dealership from 1995 until its closure in 2009. The company also owned a Nissan franchise in Glen Burnie, Maryland. The restaurant industry is another business interest of Jordan's. Restaurants he has owned include a steakhouse in New York City's Grand Central Terminal; that restaurant closed in 2018. Jordan is the majority investor in a golf course, Grove XXIII in Hobe Sound, Florida.\nIn September 2020, Jordan became an investor and advisor for DraftKings.\nPhilanthropy.\nFrom 2001 to 2014, Jordan hosted an annual golf tournament, the Michael Jordan Celebrity Invitational, that raised money for various charities. In 2006, Jordan and his wife Juanita pledged $5\u00a0million to Chicago's Hales Franciscan High School. The Jordan Brand has made donations to Habitat for Humanity and a Louisiana branch of the Boys &amp; Girls Clubs of America.\nThe Make-A-Wish Foundation named Jordan its Chief Wish Ambassador in 2008. In 2013, he granted his 200th wish for the organization. As of 2019, Jordan has raised more than $5\u00a0million for the Make-A-Wish Foundation. In 2023, he donated $10 million to the organization for his 60th birthday.\nIn 2015, Jordan donated a settlement of undisclosed size from a lawsuit against supermarkets that had used his name without permission to 23 different Chicago charities. In 2017, Jordan gave $7\u00a0million to fund two Novant Health Michael Jordan Family Clinics in Charlotte, North Carolina, his biggest donation to that point. The following year, after Hurricane Florence damaged parts of North Carolina, Jordan donated $2\u00a0million to relief efforts. He gave $1\u00a0million to aid the Bahamas' recovery following Hurricane Dorian in 2019.\nAmidst the public uproar about the police shootings of two African-American men, Alton Sterling and Philando Castile, and two deadly attacks against police officers in Dallas and Baton Rouge, Jordan made $1 million donations to the NAACP Legal Defense Fund and the Institute for Community-Police Relations. Jordan says the goal is to \"build trust and respect between communities and law enforcement.\" He also said: I can no longer stay silent. We need to find solutions that ensure people of color receive fair and equal treatment AND that police officers \u2013 who put their lives on the line every day to protect us all \u2013 are respected and supported.\nOn June 5, 2020, in the wake of the protests following the murder of George Floyd, Jordan and his brand announced in a joint statement that they would be donating $100\u00a0million over the next 10 years to organizations dedicated to \"ensuring racial equality, social justice and greater access to education\". In February 2021, Jordan funded two Novant Health Michael Jordan Family Clinics in New Hanover County, North Carolina, by giving $10\u00a0million. In 2024, he funded the opening of another Novant Health Clinic, this time in Wilmington.\nFilm and television.\nJordan played himself in the 1996 comedy film \"Space Jam\". The film received mixed reviews, but it was a box office success, making $230\u00a0million worldwide, and earned more than $1\u00a0billion through merchandise sales.\nIn 2000, Jordan was the subject of an IMAX documentary about his career with the Chicago Bulls, especially the 1998 NBA playoffs, titled \"Michael Jordan to the Max\". Two decades later, the same period of Jordan's life was covered in much greater and more personal detail by the Emmy Award-winning \"The Last Dance\", a 10-part TV documentary which debuted on ESPN in 2020. \"The Last Dance\" relied heavily on about 500 hours of candid film of Jordan's and his teammates' off-court activities which an NBA Entertainment crew had shot during the 1997\u201398 NBA season for use in a documentary. The project was delayed for many years because Jordan had not yet given his permission for the footage to be used. Jordan was interviewed at three homes associated with the production and did not want cameras in his home or on his plane, as according to director Jason Hehir \"there are certain aspects of his life that he wants to keep private\". Jordan appeared in the 2022 miniseries \"The Captain\", which follows the life and career of Derek Jeter.\nIn May 2025, Jordan was announced as a special contributor for the NBA on NBC commentary team.\nBooks.\nJordan has authored several books:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20458", "revid": "46850707", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20458", "title": "Musicology", "text": "Scholarly study of music\nMusicology is the academic, research-based study of music, as opposed to musical composition or performance. Musicology research combines and intersects with many fields, including psychology, sociology, acoustics, neurology, natural sciences, formal sciences and computer science.\nMusicology is traditionally divided into three branches: music history, systematic musicology, and ethnomusicology. Historical musicologists study the history of musical traditions, the origins of works, and the biographies of composers. Ethnomusicologists draw from anthropology (particularly field research) to understand how and why people make music. Systematic musicology includes music theory, aesthetics, pedagogy, musical acoustics, the science and technology of musical instruments, and the musical implications of physiology, psychology, sociology, philosophy and computing. Cognitive musicology is the set of phenomena surrounding the cognitive modeling of music. When musicologists carry out research using computers, their research often falls under the field of computational musicology. Music therapy is a specialized form of applied musicology which is sometimes considered more closely affiliated with health fields, and other times regarded as part of musicology proper.\nBackground.\nThe word \"musicology\" comes from Greek 'music' and , 'domain of study'.\nThe 19th-century philosophical trends that led to the re-establishment of formal musicology education in German and Austrian universities had combined methods of systematization with evolution. These models were established not only in the field of physical anthropology, but also cultural anthropology. This was influenced by Hegel's ideas on ordering \"phenomena\" which can be understood &amp; distinguished from \"simple\" to \"complex\" stages of evolution. They are further classified into \"primitive\" &amp; \"developed\" sections; whereas the particular stages of history are understood &amp; distinguished as \"ancient\" to \"modern\". Comparative methods became more widespread in musicology beginning around 1880.\nParent disciplines.\nThe parent disciplines of musicology include:\nMusicology also has two central, practically oriented sub-disciplines with no parent discipline: performance practice and research, and the theory, analysis and composition of music. The disciplinary neighbors of musicology address other forms of art, performance, ritual, and communication, including the history and theory of the visual and plastic arts and architecture; linguistics, literature and theater; religion and theology; and sport. Musical knowledge is applied within medicine, education and music therapy\u2014which, effectively, are parent disciplines of applied musicology.\nSubdisciplines.\nHistorical musicology.\nMusic history or historical musicology is concerned with the composition, performance, reception and criticism of music over time. Historical studies of music are for example concerned with a composer's life and works, the developments of styles and genres (such as baroque concertos), the social function of music for a particular group of people, (such as court music), or modes of performance at a particular place and time (such as Johann Sebastian Bach's choir in Leipzig). Like the comparable field of art history, different branches and schools of historical musicology emphasize different types of musical works and approaches to music. There are also national differences in various definitions of historical musicology. In theory, \"music history\" could refer to the study of the history of any type or genre of music, such as the music of India or rock music. In practice, these research topics are more often considered within ethnomusicology and \"historical musicology\" is typically assumed to imply Western Art music of the European tradition.\nThe methods of historical musicology include source studies (especially manuscript studies), palaeography, philology (especially textual criticism), style criticism, historiography (the choice of historical method), musical analysis (analysis of music to find \"inner coherence\") and iconography. The application of musical analysis to further these goals is often a part of music history, though pure analysis or the development of new tools of music analysis is more likely to be seen in the field of music theory. Music historians create a number of written products, ranging from journal articles describing their current research, new editions of musical works, biographies of composers and other musicians, book-length studies or university textbook chapters or entire textbooks. Music historians may examine issues in a close focus, as in the case of scholars who examine the relationship between words and music for a given composer's art songs. On the other hand, some scholars take a broader view and assess the place of a given type of music, such as the symphony in society using techniques drawn from other fields, such as economics, sociology or philosophy.\nNew musicology.\n\"New musicology\" is a term applied since the late 1980s to a wide body of work emphasizing cultural study, analysis and criticism of music. Such work may be based on feminist, gender studies, queer theory or postcolonial theory, or the work of Theodor W. Adorno. Although New Musicology emerged from within historical musicology, the emphasis on cultural study within the Western art music tradition places New Musicology at the junction between historical, ethnological and sociological research in music.\nNew musicology was a reaction against traditional historical musicology, which according to Susan McClary, \"fastidiously declares issues of musical signification off-limits to those engaged in legitimate scholarship.\" Charles Rosen, however, retorts that McClary, \"sets up, like so many of the 'new musicologists', a straw man to knock down, the dogma that music has no meaning, and no political or social significance.\" Today, many musicologists no longer distinguish between musicology and new musicology since it has been recognized that many of the scholarly concerns once associated with new musicology already were mainstream in musicology, so that the term \"new\" no longer applies.\nEthnomusicology.\nEthnomusicology, formerly comparative musicology, is the study of music in its cultural context. It is often considered the anthropology or ethnography of music. Jeff Todd Titon has called it the study of \"people making music\". Although it is most often concerned with the study of non-Western music, it also includes the study of Western music from an anthropological or sociological perspective, cultural studies and sociology as well as other disciplines in the social sciences and humanities. Some ethnomusicologists primarily conduct historical studies, but the majority are involved in long-term participant observation or combine ethnographic, musicological, and historical approaches in their fieldwork. Therefore, ethnomusicological scholarship can be characterized as featuring a substantial, intensive fieldwork component, often involving long-term residence within the community studied. Closely related to ethnomusicology is the emerging branch of sociomusicology. For instance, Ko (2011) proposed the hypothesis of \"Biliterate and Trimusical\" in Hong Kong sociomusicology.\nPopular music studies.\nPopular music studies, known, \"misleadingly\", as \"popular musicology\", emerged in the 1980s as an increasing number of musicologists, ethnomusicologists and other varieties of historians of American and European culture began to write about popular music past and present. The first journal focusing on popular music studies was \"Popular Music\" which began publication in 1981. The same year an academic society solely devoted to the topic was formed, the International Association for the Study of Popular Music. The association's founding was partly motivated by the interdisciplinary agenda of popular musicology though the group has been characterized by a polarized 'musicological' and 'sociological' approach also typical of popular musicology.\nMusic theory, analysis and composition.\nMusic theory is a field of study that describes the elements of music and includes the development and application of methods for composing and for analyzing music through both notation and, on occasion, musical sound itself. Broadly, theory may include any statement, belief or conception of or about music (Boretz, 1995). A person who studies or practices music theory is a music theorist.\nSome music theorists attempt to explain the techniques composers use by establishing rules and patterns. Others model the experience of listening to or performing music. Though extremely diverse in their interests and commitments, many Western music theorists are united in their belief that the acts of composing, performing and listening to music may be explicated to a high degree of detail (this, as opposed to a conception of musical expression as fundamentally ineffable except in musical sounds). Generally, works of music theory are both descriptive and prescriptive, attempting both to define practice and to influence later practice.\nMusicians study music theory to understand the structural relationships in the (nearly always notated) music. Composers study music theory to understand how to produce effects and structure their own works. Composers may study music theory to guide their precompositional and compositional decisions. Broadly speaking, music theory in the Western tradition focuses on harmony and counterpoint, and then uses these to explain large scale structure and the creation of melody.\nMusic psychology.\nMusic psychology applies the content and methods of psychology to understand how music is created, perceived, responded to, and incorporated into individuals' and societies' daily lives. Its primary branches include cognitive musicology, which emphasizes the use of computational models for human musical abilities and cognition, and the cognitive neuroscience of music, which studies the way that music perception and production manifests in the brain using the methodologies of cognitive neuroscience. While aspects of the field can be highly theoretical, much of modern music psychology seeks to optimize the practices and professions of music performance, composition, education and therapy.\nPerformance practice and research.\nPerformance practice draws on many of the tools of historical musicology to answer the specific question of how music was performed in various places at various times in the past. Although previously confined to early music, recent research in performance practice has embraced questions such as how the early history of recording affected the use of vibrato in classical music or instruments in Klezmer.\nWithin the rubric of musicology, performance practice tends to emphasize the collection and synthesis of evidence about how music should be performed. The important other side, learning how to sing authentically or perform a historical instrument is usually part of conservatory or other performance training. However, many top researchers in performance practice are also excellent musicians.\nMusic performance research (or music performance science) is strongly associated with music psychology. It aims to document and explain the psychological, physiological, sociological and cultural details of how music is actually performed (rather than how it should be performed). The approach to research tends to be systematic and empirical and to involve the collection and analysis of both quantitative and qualitative data. The findings of music performance research can often be applied in music education.\nEducation and careers.\nMusicologists in tenure track professor positions typically hold a PhD in musicology. In the 1960s and 1970s, some musicologists obtained professor positions with an MA as their highest degree, but in the 2010s, the PhD is the standard minimum credential for tenure track professor positions. As part of their initial training, musicologists typically complete a BMus or a BA in music (or a related field such as history) and in many cases an MA in musicology. Some individuals apply directly from a bachelor's degree to a PhD, and in these cases, they may not receive an MA. In the 2010s, given the increasingly interdisciplinary nature of university graduate programs, some applicants for musicology PhD programs may have academic training both in music and outside of music (e.g., a student may apply with a BMus and an MA in psychology). In music education, individuals may hold an M.Ed and an Ed.D.\nMost musicologists work as instructors, lecturers or professors in colleges, universities or conservatories. The job market for tenure track professor positions is very competitive. Entry-level applicants must hold a completed PhD or the equivalent degree and applicants to more senior professor positions must have a strong record of publishing in peer-reviewed journals. Some PhD-holding musicologists are only able to find insecure positions as sessional lecturers. The job tasks of a musicologist are the same as those of a professor in any other humanities discipline: teaching undergraduate and/or graduate classes in their area of specialization and, in many cases some general courses (such as Music Appreciation or Introduction to Music History); conducting research in their area of expertise, publishing articles about their research in peer-reviewed journals, authors book chapters, books or textbooks; traveling to conferences to give talks on their research and learn about research in their field; and, if their program includes a graduate school, supervising MA and PhD students, giving them guidance on the preparation of their theses and dissertations. Some musicology professors may take on senior administrative positions in their institution, such as Dean or Chair of the School of Music.\nWomen in music.\nThe vast majority of major musicologists and music historians from past generations have been men, as in the 19th century and early 20th century; women's involvement in teaching music was mainly in elementary and secondary music teaching. Nevertheless, some women musicologists have reached the top ranks of the profession. Carolyn Abbate (born 1956) is an American musicologist who did her PhD at Princeton University. She has been described by the \"Harvard Gazette\" as \"one of the world's most accomplished and admired music historians\".\nSusan McClary (born 1946) is a musicologist associated with new musicology who incorporates feminist music criticism in her work. McClary holds a PhD from Harvard University. One of her best known works is \"Feminine Endings\" (1991), which covers musical constructions of gender and sexuality, gendered aspects of traditional music theory, gendered sexuality in musical narrative, music as a gendered discourse and issues affecting women musicians.\nOther notable women scholars include:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;"}
{"id": "20459", "revid": "279219", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20459", "title": "Film junket", "text": ""}
{"id": "20460", "revid": "11555324", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20460", "title": "Film promotion", "text": "Practice of promotion specifically in the film industry\nFilm promotion is the practice of promotion specifically in the film industry, and usually occurs in coordination with the process of film distribution. Sometimes this is called the press junket or film junket. Film promotion generally includes press releases, advertising campaigns, merchandising, franchising, media, and interviews with the key people involved in making the film, such as the film's actors and directors. This process is an important part of any release because of the inherent high financial risk; film studios will invest in expensive marketing campaigns to maximize revenue early in the release cycle. Marketing budgets tend to equal about half the production budget. Publicity is generally handled by the distributor and exhibitors.\nTechniques.\nIn theaters/cinemas.\nTrailers are a mainstay of film promotion because they are delivered directly to movie-goers. These trailers are presented to the public at a movie theater or on the television at home. Generally, they tell the story of the movie in a highly condensed fashion, compressing maximum appeal into two and a half minutes. \nPromotional tours and interviews.\nFilm actors, directors, and producers appear for television, cable, radio, print, and online media interviews, which can be conducted in person or remotely. During film production, these can take place \"on set\". After the film's premiere, key personnel make appearances in major market cities or participate remotely via satellite videoconference or telephone. The purpose of interviews is to encourage journalists to publish stories about their \"exclusive interviews\" with the film's stars, thereby creating \"marketing buzz\" around the film and stimulating audience interest in watching the film.\nWhen it comes to feature films picked up by a major film studio for international distribution, promotional tours are notoriously grueling. Key cast and crew are often contracted to travel to several major cities around the world to promote the film and sit for dozens of interviews. In every interview, they are supposed to stay \"on message\" by energetically expressing their enthusiasm for the film in a way that appears candid, fun, and fresh. They are expected to disclose just enough behind-the-scenes information about the filmmaking process or the filmmakers' artistic vision to make each journalist feel like he or she got a nice scoop, while at the same time tactfully avoiding disclosure of anything embarrassing, humiliating, or truly negative that may be detrimental to the film's box office gross and profit or influence a critic's review as well as the public's opinion.\nAudience research.\nThere are seven distinct types of research conducted by film distributors in connection with domestic theatrical releases, according to \"Marketing to Moviegoers: Second Edition.\" Such audience research can cost $1 million per film, especially when scores of TV advertisements are tested and re-tested. The bulk of research is done by major studios for the roughly 170 major releases they mount each year that are supported by tens of millions of advertising buys for each film. Independent film distributors, which typically spend less than $10 million in media buys per film, don\u2019t have the budget or breadth of advertising materials to analyze, so they spend little or nothing on pre-release audience research.\nWhen audience research is conducted for domestic theatrical release, it involves these areas:\nMarketing can play a big role in whether or not a film gets the green light. Audience research is a strong factor in determining the ability of a film to sell in theaters, which is ultimately how films make their money. As part of a movie's marketing strategy, audience research comes into account as producers create promotional materials. These promotional materials consistently change and evolve as a direct consequence of audience research up until the film opens in theaters.\nIBIS made a study with information using 97% of America's economy regarding the market size of movie and Video production. They calculated that the United States market size, measured by revenue of the Movie &amp; Video Production industry, is $18.2bn in 2022.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20461", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20461", "title": "Motherland", "text": ""}
{"id": "20462", "revid": "14965160", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20462", "title": "Middle Congo", "text": ""}
{"id": "20463", "revid": "13017487", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20463", "title": "Miltiades (disambiguation)", "text": "Miltiades the Younger (c. 550 \u2013 489 BC) was tyrant of the Thracian Chersonese and the Athenian commanding general in the Battle of Marathon.\nMiltiades may also refer to:\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "20465", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20465", "title": "Mountain Dulcimer", "text": ""}
{"id": "20468", "revid": "525927", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20468", "title": "Maggie Out", "text": "Anti-Margaret Thatcher Chant based on Oggy Oggy Oggy\n\"Maggie Out\" was a chant popular during the miners' strike, student grant protests, poll tax protests and other public demonstrations that fell within the time when Margaret Thatcher was the prime minister of the United Kingdom.\nLyrics.\nThe chant called for her to be removed from that role. It was referred to, in that context, during a parliamentary session in 1982. \nWhen Margaret Thatcher felt compelled to resign some people had memories of chanting it for thirteen years. People were passionate about this group activity and associated it with varied political struggles from that time.\nIt is a variant of the \"Oggy Oggy Oggy, Oi Oi Oi\" chant. When used in that format, the lyrics were:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe Larks produced a track called \"Maggie, Maggie, Maggie (Out, Out, Out)\" which was included on the Miners' Benefit LP \"Here We Go\" on Sterile Records.\nUpon Thatcher's resignation, groups of opponents gathered at Downing Street, chanting a variation \u2013 replacing the word \"out\" with \"gone\".\nFollowing the death of Thatcher on 8 April 2013, this chant was revived in the format of \"Maggie, Maggie Maggie (Dead, Dead, Dead)\" at celebratory parties held in Glasgow, London and Reading.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20469", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20469", "title": "M25 motorway", "text": "Orbital motorway around Greater London\nThe M25 or London Orbital Motorway is a major ring road encircling most of Greater London. The motorway is one of the most important roads in the UK and one of the busiest. Margaret Thatcher opened the final section in 1986, making the M25 the longest ring road in Europe upon opening. The Dartford Crossing completes the orbital route but is not classed as motorway; it is classed as a trunk road and designated as the A282. In some cases, including notable legal contexts such as the Communications Act 2003, the M25 is used as a \"de facto\" alternative boundary for Greater London.\nIn the 1944 \"Greater London Plan\", Patrick Abercrombie proposed an orbital motorway around London. This evolved into the London Ringways project in the early 1960s, and by 1966, planning had started on two projects, Ringway 3 to the north and Ringway 4 to the south. By the time the first sections opened in 1975, it was decided the ringways would be combined into a single orbital motorway. The M25 was one of the first motorway projects to consider environmental concerns and almost 40 public inquiries took place. The road was built as planned despite some protests that included the section over the North Downs and around Epping Forest which required an extension of the Bell Common Tunnel.\nAlthough the M25 was popular during construction, it quickly became apparent that there was insufficient traffic capacity. Because of the public inquiries, several junctions merely served local roads where office and retail developments were built, attracting even more traffic onto the M25 than it was designed for. The congestion has led to traffic management schemes that include variable speed limit and smart motorway. Since opening, the M25 has been progressively widened, particularly near Heathrow Airport where it is a dual six-lane carriageway.\nDescription.\nRoute.\nThe M25 almost completely encircles Greater London and passes briefly through it, in the east and west. Junctions 1A\u20135 are in Kent, 6\u201313 are in Surrey, 14 and a small part of 15 are in Hillingdon, Greater London, 15\u201316 are in Buckinghamshire, 17\u201324 are in Hertfordshire, 25 is in Enfield, Greater London and 26\u201331 are in Essex. Law enforcement on the road is carried out by an integrated group made up of the Metropolitan, Thames Valley, Essex, Kent, Hertfordshire and Surrey police services. Primary destinations signed ahead on the motorway include the Dartford Crossing, Sevenoaks, Gatwick Airport, Heathrow Airport, Watford, Stansted Airport and Brentwood.\nTo the east of London the two ends of the M25 are joined to complete a loop by the non-motorway A282 Dartford Crossing of the River Thames between Thurrock and Dartford. The crossing consists of twin two-lane tunnels and the four-lane QE2 (Queen Elizabeth II) bridge, with a main span of . Passage across the bridge or through the tunnels is subject to a charge between 6 am and 10 pm, its level depending on the kind of vehicle. The road is not under motorway regulations so that other traffic can cross the Thames east of the Woolwich Ferry; the only crossing further to the east is a passenger ferry between Gravesend, Kent, and Tilbury, Essex.\nAt junction 5, the clockwise carriageway of the M25 is routed off the main north\u2013south dual carriageway onto the main east\u2013west dual carriageway with the main north\u2013south carriageway becoming the A21. In the opposite direction, to the east of the point where the M25 diverges from the main east\u2013west carriageway, that carriageway becomes the M26 motorway. From here to junction 8, the M25 follows the edge of the North Downs close to several historic buildings such as Chevening, Titsey Place, Hever Castle and Chartwell. The interchange with the M23 motorway near Reigate is a four-level stack; one of only a few examples in Britain. Past this, the M25 runs close to the Surrey Hills National Landscape.\nTo the west, the M25 passes close to the edge of Heathrow Airport, and within sight of Windsor Castle. North of this, it goes under the Chalfont Viaduct railway bridge, completed in 1906, which carries the Chiltern Main Line. Red kites can often be seen overhead to the north of this, up to junction 21. The northern section of the M25 passes close to All Saints Pastoral Centre near London Colney, Waltham Abbey and Copped Hall. This section also features two cut-and-cover tunnels, including the Bell Common Tunnel. The north-eastern section of the motorway passes close to North Ockendon, the only settlement of Greater London situated outside the M25. It then runs close to the Rainham Marshes Nature Reserve before reaching the northern end of the Dartford Crossing.\nIn 2004, following an opinion poll, the London Assembly proposed aligning the Greater London boundary with the M25. \"Inside the M25\" and \"outside/beyond the M25\" are colloquial, looser alternatives to \"Greater London\" sometimes used in haulage. The Communications Act 2003 explicitly uses the M25 as the boundary in requiring a proportion of television programmes to be made outside the London area; it states a requirement of \"a suitable proportion of the programmes made in the United Kingdom\" to be made \"in the United Kingdom outside the M25 area\", defined in Section 362 as \"the area the outer boundary of which is represented by the London Orbital Motorway (M25)\".\nSections of the M25 form part of two long-distance E-roads, designated by the United Nations Economic Commission for Europe. The E15, which runs from Inverness to Algeciras, follows the M25 and A282 clockwise from the A1(M) at junction 23 to the M20 at junction 3; while the E30 Cork to Omsk route runs from the M4 at junction 15, clockwise to the A12 at junction 28. The United Kingdom is formally part of the E-roads network but, unlike in other countries, these routes are not marked on any road signs.\nFeatures.\nThe M25 was originally built mostly as a dual three-lane motorway. Much of this has since been widened to dual four lanes for almost half, to a dual five-lanes section between junctions 12 and 14 and a dual six-lane section between junctions 14 and 15. Further widening is in progress of minor sections with plans for smart motorways in many others.\nTwo motorway service areas are on the M25, and two others are directly accessible from it. Those on the M25 are Clacket Lane between junctions 5 and 6 (in the south-east) and Cobham between junctions 9 and 10 (in the south-west). Those directly accessible from it are South Mimms off junction 23 (to the north of London) and Thurrock off junction 31 (to the east of London).\nAs is common with other motorways, the M25 is equipped with emergency (\"SOS\") telephones. These connect to two National Highways operated control centres at Godstone (for junctions 1 to 15 inclusive) and South Mimms (for 16\u201331). The Dartford Crossing has a dedicated control centre. There is an extensive network of closed-circuit television (CCTV) on the motorway so incidents can be easily identified and located. A number of 4\u00d74 vehicles patrol the motorway, attempting to keep traffic moving where possible, and assisting the local police. They can act as a rolling roadblock when there are obstacles on the road.\nWhen completed, the M25 only had street lighting for of its length. Originally, low pressure sodium (SOX) lighting was the most prominent technology used, but this has been gradually replaced with high-pressure sodium (SON) lighting. the motorway has more than 10,000 streetlights. The M25 has a number of pollution control valves along its length, which can shut off drainage in the event of a chemical or fuel spill.\nHistory.\nPlans.\nThe idea of a general bypass around London was first proposed early in the 20th century. An outer orbital route around the capital had been suggested in 1913, and was re-examined as a motorway route in Sir Charles Bressey's and Sir Edwin Lutyens' \"The Highway Development Survey, 1937\". Sir Patrick Abercrombie's \"County of London Plan, 1943\" and \"Greater London Plan, 1944\" proposed a series of five roads encircling the capital. The northern sections of the M25 follow a similar route to the Outer London Defence Ring, a concentric series of anti-tank defences and pillboxes designed to slow down a potential German invasion of the capital during World War II. This was marked as the D Ring on Abercombie's plans. Following the war, 11 separate county councils told the Ministry of Transport that an orbital route was \"first priority\" for London.\nPlans stalled because the route was planned to pass through several urban areas, which attracted criticism. The original D Ring through northwest London was intended to be a simple upgrade of streets. In 1951, Middlesex County Council planned a route for the orbital road through the county, passing through Eastcote and west of Bushey, connecting with the proposed M1 motorway, but it was rejected by the Ministry two years later. An alternative route via Harrow and Ealing was proposed, but this was abandoned after the council revealed the extent of property demolition required.\nIn 1964, the London County Council announced the London Ringways plan, to consist of four concentric motorway rings around London. The following year, the transport minister Barbara Castle announced that the D Ring would be essential to build. The component parts of what became the M25 came from Ringway 3 / M16 motorway in the north and Ringway 4 in the south.\nThe Ringways plan was controversial owing to the destruction required for the inner two ring roads, (Ringway 1 and Ringway 2). Parts of Ringway 1 were constructed (including the West Cross Route), despite stiff opposition, before the overall plan was postponed in February 1972. In April 1973, the Greater London Council elections resulted in a Labour Party victory; the party then formally announced the cancellation of the Ringways running inside Greater London. This did not affect the routes that would become the M25, because they were planned as central government projects from the outset.\nConstruction.\nThere was no individual public inquiry into the M25 as a whole. Each section was presented to planning authorities in its own right and was individually justified, with 39 separate public inquiries relating to sections of the route. The need for the ministry to negotiate with local councils meant that more junctions with local traffic were built than originally proposed. A report in 1981 showed that the M25 had the potential to attract office and retail development along its route, negating the proposed traffic improvements and making Central London a less desirable place to work. None of the motorway was prevented from being built by objections at the public inquiries. However, as a consequence of the backlash against the Ringways, and criticism at the public inquiries, the motorway was built with environmental concerns in mind. New features included additional earth mounds, cuttings and fences that reduced noise, and over two million trees and shrubs to hide the view of the road.\nConstruction of parts of the two outer ring roads, Ringways 3 and 4, began in 1973. The first section, between South Mimms and Potters Bar in Hertfordshire (junctions 23 to 24) opened in September 1975. It was provisionally known as the M16 and was given the temporary general-purpose road designation A1178. A section of the North Orbital Road between Rickmansworth and Hunton Bridge was proposed in 1966, with detailed planning in 1971. The North Orbital Extension was given the go-ahead in January 1973, from Maple Cross. It was , and was to cost \u00a36.5million. The road was constructed to motorway standards and opened on Thursday 26 February 1976, as a section of the A405. It eventually became part of the M25's route. The section to the south, from Heathrow Airport to Rickmansworth had five separate routes proposed when a public inquiry was launched in 1974. The Department of Transport sent out 15,000 questionnaires about the preferred route, with 5,000 replies. A route was fixed in 1978, with objections delaying the start of construction in 1982.\nThe southern section of what became the M25 through Surrey and Kent was first conceived to be an east\u2013west road south of London to relieve the A25, and running parallel to it, with its eastern end following the route of what is now the M26. It was originally proposed as an all-purpose route, but was upgraded to motorway standard in 1966. It was the first section of the route announced as M25 from the beginning. The first section from Godstone to Reigate (junctions 6 to 8) was first planned in 1966 and opened in February 1976. A section of Ringway 3 south of the river between Dartford and Swanley (junctions 1 to 3) was constructed between May 1974 and April 1977.\nIn 1975, following extensive opposition to some parts of Ringway 3 through Middlesex and South London, the transport minister John Gilbert announced that the north section of Ringway 3 already planned would be combined with the southern section of Ringway 4, forming a single orbital motorway to be known as the M25, and the M16 designation was dropped. This scheme required two additional sections to join what were two different schemes, from Swanley to Sevenoaks in the south-east and Hunton Bridge to Potters Bar in the north-west. The section of Ringway 3 west of South Mimms anti-clockwise around London to Swanley in Kent was cancelled.\nThe section from Potters Bar to the Dartford Tunnel was constructed in stages from June 1979 onwards, with the final section between Waltham Cross (junction 25) to Theydon Garnon (junction 27) opening in January 1984. This section, running through Epping Forest, attracted opposition and protests. In 1973, local residents had parked combine harvesters in Parliament Square in protest against the road, draped with large banners reading \"Not Epping Likely\". As a consequence of this, the Bell Common Tunnel that runs in this area is twice as long as originally proposed.\nThe most controversial section of the M25 was that between Swanley and Sevenoaks (junctions 3 to 5) in Kent across the Darenth Valley, Badgers Mount and the North Downs. An 1,800-member group named Defend Darenth Valley and the North Downs Action Group (DANDAG) argued that the link was unnecessary, it would damage an Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty and it would be primarily used by local traffic as a bypass for the old A21 road between Farnborough and Sevenoaks. After a length inquiry process, chaired by George Dobry QC, the transport minister Kenneth Clarke announced the motorway would be built as proposed.\nThe section from the M40 motorway to the 1970s North Orbital Road construction (junctions 16 to 17) opened in January 1985. The route under the Chalfont Viaduct meant the motorway was restricted to a width of three lanes in each direction.\nThe Prime Minister, Margaret Thatcher, officially opened the M25 on 29 October 1986, with a ceremony in the section between junctions 22 to 23 (London Colney and South Mimms). To avoid the threat of road protesters, the ceremony was held a quarter of a mile from the nearest bridge. The total estimated cost of the motorway was around \u00a31billion. It required of concrete, of asphalt and involved the removal of of spoil. Upon completion, it was the longest orbital motorway in the world at . At the opening ceremony, Thatcher announced that had been constructed while the Conservative Party were in office, calling it \"a splendid achievement for Britain\". A 58-page brochure was published, commemorating the completion of the motorway.\nOperational history.\nThe M25 was initially popular with the public. In the 1987 general election, the Conservatives won in every constituency that the motorway passed through, in particular gaining Thurrock from Labour. Coach tours were organised for a trip around the new road. However, it quickly became apparent that the M25 suffered from chronic congestion. A report in \"The Economist\" said it \"had taken 70 years to plan [the motorway], 12 to build it and just one to find it was inadequate\". Thatcher rebuked the negative response, calling it \"carping and criticism\".\nTraffic levels quickly exceeded the maximum design capacity. Two months before it opened, the government admitted that the three-lane section between junctions 11 and 13 was inadequate and that it would have to be widened to four. In 1990, the Secretary of State for Transport announced plans to widen the whole of the M25 to four lanes. By 1993, the motorway, designed for a maximum of 88,000vehicles per day, was carrying 200,000. At that time, the M25 carried 15% of UK motorway traffic and there were plans to add six lanes to the section from junctions 12 to 15, as well as widening the rest of the motorway to four lanes.\nIn parts, particularly the western third, that plan went ahead. Again, however, plans to widen further sections to eight lanes (four each way) were scaled back in 2009 in response to rising costs. The plans were reinstated in the agreed Highways Agency 2013\u201314 business plan.\nIn June 1992, the Department for Transport (DfT) announced a proposal to widen the section close to Heathrow Airport to fourteen lanes by way of three additional link roads. That attracted fierce opposition from anti-motorway protesters who were critical of the Newbury Bypass and other schemes, but also from local authorities. Surrey County Council led a formal objection to the widening scheme, and it was cancelled shortly afterwards. In 1994, the Standing Advisory Committee on Trunk Road Appraisal published a report saying that \"the M25 experience most probably does ... serve as an example of a case where roads generate traffic\" and that further improvements to the motorway were counter-productive. In April 1995, the Transport Minister Brian Mawhinney announced that the Heathrow link roads would be scrapped.\nIn 1995, a contract was awarded to widen the section between junctions 8 and 10 from six to eight lanes at a cost of \u00a393.4million, and a Motorway Incident Detection and Automatic Signalling (MIDAS) system was introduced from junction 10 to junction 15 in 1995, at a cost of \u00a313.5M. That was extended to junction 16 in 2002, at a cost of \u00a311.7M. The system consists of a distributed network of traffic and weather sensors, speed cameras and variable-speed signs, that control traffic speeds with little human supervision. It has improved traffic flow slightly, reducing the amount of start-stop driving.\nAfter Labour won the 1997 election, the road budget was cut from \u00a36billion to \u00a31.4billion. However, the DfT announced new proposals to widen the section between junction 12 (M3) and junction 15 (M4) to 12 lanes. At the Heathrow Terminal 5 public inquiry, a Highways Agency official said that the widening was needed to accommodate traffic to the proposed new terminal, but the transport minister said that no such evidence had been given. Environmental groups objected to the decision to go ahead with a scheme to create the widest motorways in the UK, without holding a public inquiry. Friends of the Earth claimed the real reason for the widening was to support Terminal 5. The decision was again deferred. A ten-lane scheme was announced in 1998, and the \u00a3148million 'M25 Jct 12 to 15 Widening' contract was awarded to Balfour Beatty in 2003. The scheme was completed in 2005, with dual-five lanes between junctions 12 and 14 and dual-six lanes from junctions 14 to 15.\nIn 2007, junction 25 (A10/Waltham Cross) was remodelled to increase capacity. The nearby Holmesdale Tunnel was widened to three lanes in an easterly direction, and an additional left-turn lane added from the A10 onto the motorway. The total cost was \u00a375million.\nWork to widen the exit slip-roads in both directions at junction 28 (A12 / A1023) was completed in 2008. That was designed to reduce the amount of traffic queuing on the slip roads at busy periods, particularly traffic from the clockwise M25 joining the northbound A12. In 2018, a new scheme was proposed, because the junction had reached capacity, accommodating over 7,500vehicles per hour. The scheme involved building a two-lane link road between the M25 and the A12. The work was expected to be completed around 2021/22.\nWidening.\nIn 2006, the Highways Agency proposed widening of the M25 from six to eight lanes, between junctions 5 and 6, and 16 to 30, as part of a Design, Build, Finance and Operate (DBFO) project. A shortlist of contractors was announced in October 2006 for the project, which was expected to cost \u00a34.5billion. Contractors were asked to resubmit their bids in January 2008, and in June 2009 the new transport minister indicated that the cost had risen to \u00a35.5billion and the benefit to cost ratio had dropped considerably. In January 2009 the government announced that plans to widen the sections from junctions 5 to 7 and 23 to 27 had been 'scrapped' and that hard shoulder running would be introduced instead. However, widening to four lanes was reinstated in the 2013\u201314 Highways Agency Business Plan.\nIn 2009, a \u00a36.2billion M25 DBFO private finance initiative contract was awarded to Connect Plus to widen the sections between junctions 16 to 23 and 27 to 30, and maintain the M25 and the Dartford Crossing for a 30-year period.\nWork to widen the section between junctions 16 (M40) and 23 (A1(M)) to dual four lanes started in July 2009 at an estimated cost of \u00a3580million. The junction 16 to 21 (M1) section was completed by July 2011 and the junction 21 to 23 by June 2012. Works to widen the junctions 27 (M11) to 30 (A13) section to dual four lanes also started in July 2009. The junction 27 to 28 (A12) section was completed in July 2010, and the junction 28 to 29 (A127) in June 2011, and finally the junction 29 to 30 (A13) section opened in May 2012.\nWork to introduce smart motorway technology and permanent hard shoulder running on two sections of the M25 began in 2013. The first section between junctions 5 (A21/M26) and 7 (M23) started construction in May 2013 with the scheme being completed and opened in April 2014. The second section, between junctions 23 (A1/A1(M)) and 27 (M11), began construction in February 2013 and was completed and opened in November 2014.\nIn December 2016, Highways England completed the capacity project at junction 30 (Thurrock) as part of the Thames Gateway Delivery Plan. The \u00a3100million scheme included widening the M25 to four lanes, adding additional link roads, and improvements to drainage.\nWork began to widen the M25 and A3 around junction 10 in November 2022. The project is intended to limit congestion at the junction and allow traffic to proceed more safely. However, these plans caused concerns about the amount of woodland that would be required.\nIn March 2024, National Highways announced the first all-day closure of the M25 in its operational history. The motorway was closed between junctions 10 and 11 from 15\u201318 March in order to remove a bridleway bridge. The road was closed completely for two other occasions that year, with a final two closures scheduled for 2025.\nTraffic.\nThe M25 is one of Europe's busiest motorways. In 2003, a maximum of 196,000vehicles a day were recorded just south of Heathrow, between junctions 13 and 14. The stretch between the nearby junctions 14 and 15 consistently records the highest daily traffic counts on the British strategic road network, with the average flow in 2018 being 219,492vehicles (lower than the record peak measured in 2014 of 262,842).\nTraffic on the M25 is monitored by Connect Plus Services on behalf of National Highways. The company operates a series of transportable CCTV cameras that can be easily moved into congestion hotspots, allowing operators to have a clear view of the motorway and so assess what might be done to tackle particular areas of congestion. Prior to its liquidation in 2018, Carillion was subcontracted to manage traffic on the M25, delivering live alerts from body-worn cameras via 3G, 4G and Wi-Fi.\nSince 1995, sections of the M25 have been equipped with variable speed limits, which slow traffic in the event of congestion or an obstruction, and help manage the traffic flow. The scheme was originally trialled between junctions 10 and 16, and was made a permanent fixture in 1997.\nThe Dartford Crossing is the only fixed vehicle crossing of the Thames east of Greater London. It is also the busiest crossing in the United Kingdom, and consequently puts pressure on M25 traffic. Users of the crossing do not pay a toll, but rather a congestion charge. The signs at the crossing are the same as those deployed over the London congestion charge zone.\nIn 2009, the Department for Transport published options for a new Lower Thames Crossing to add capacity to the Dartford Crossing, or create a new road and crossing linking to the M2 and M20 motorways. Plans for that stalled, and were cancelled in 2013 by the Mayor of London, Boris Johnson, being replaced by a proposed Gallions Reach Crossing. Initially seen as a straight ferry replacement for the Woolwich Ferry, it was later mooted as a bridge or tunnel. By 2019, the plans had changed, with the Docklands Light Railway to be extended to Thamesmead instead.\nIncidents.\nOn 11 December 1984, nine people died and ten were injured in a multiple-vehicle collision between junctions 5 and 6. Twenty-six vehicles were involved when dense fog descended suddenly.\nOn 16 December 1988, several vehicles were stolen and used as getaway for acts of murder and robbery, using the M25 to quickly move between targets. The M25 Three, including Raphael Rowe, were tried and sentenced to life imprisonment in 1990. Their convictions were overturned in 2000 and Rowe, who studied journalism while in prison, became an investigative journalist for the BBC.\nIn 1996, Kenneth Noye murdered Stephen Cameron in a road rage incident while stopped at traffic lights on an M25 junction in Kent. He was convicted in 2000 and sentenced to life imprisonment. He was released in June 2019.\nIn November 2014, during overnight roadworks, a piece of road surface near junction 9 at Leatherhead failed to set correctly due to rain. This created a pothole in the road and caused a tailback. The Minister for Transport John Hayes criticised the work and the resulting traffic problems.\nThe M25 has had problems with animals and birds on the carriageway. In 2009, the Highways Agency reported that they had been called out several times a week to remove a swan from the motorway around junction 13. There have been several crashes resulting in horses escaping their horseboxes onto the carriageway.\nRacing.\nThe motorway has attracted unofficial, and illegal, motor racing. At the end of the 1980s, before the advent of automated speed enforcement devices, owners of supercars would meet at night at service stations such as South Mimms and conduct time trials. Times below 1 hour were achieved \u2013 an average speed of over 117\u00a0mph (188\u00a0km/h), which included coming to a halt at the Dartford Tunnel road user charge payment booths. The winner received champagne rather than money. The \"Enfield Gazette\" referred to an \"M25 club\", and posters appeared near the M25 advertising the \"First London Cannonball Run\". The racing had mostly disappeared by the end of the 1980s after speed cameras were introduced.\nInsulate Britain protests.\nIn 2021, several sections of the M25 were disrupted after the home energy and insulation campaign group Insulate Britain blocked junctions including Nos.\u00a03 (Swanley), 6 (Godstone), 14 (Heathrow), 20 (Kings Langley) and 31 (Lakeside). A spokesman for the AA said the actions were counterproductive, as they would cause increased vehicle emissions owing to delays, as well having a negative effect on the economy. 92 people were arrested following the first incident on 13 September, followed by a further 70 two days later. Insulate Britain said they would continue to disrupt the M25 until the government responded.\nOn 29 October, two days before the 2021 United Nations Climate Change Conference, Insulate Britain protests blocked traffic from junctions 21 to 22 in Hertfordshire and 28 to 29 in Essex. 19 arrests were made.\nCultural references.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe M25 is a form of social control to ensure disruptive elements in society are neutralised by keeping a significant proportion of them in continual motion.\nWill Self\nThe M25 and the Dartford Crossing are known for frequent traffic jams. This was noticed before the entire road had been completed; at the official opening ceremony Margaret Thatcher complained about \"those who carp and criticise\". The jams have inspired derogatory names, such as \"Britain's Biggest Car Park\" and songs (e.g., Chris Rea's \"The Road to Hell\"). Nevertheless, coach tours around the M25 have continued to run into the 21st century.\nThe M25 plays a role in the comedy-fantasy novel \"Good Omens\", as \"evidence for the hidden hand of Satan in the affairs of Man\". The demon character, Crowley, had manipulated the design of the M25 to resemble a Satanic sigil, and tried to ensure it would anger as many people as possible to drive them off the path of good. The lengthy series of public inquiries for motorways throughout the 1970s, particularly the M25, influenced the opening of \"The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy\", where the Earth is destroyed to make way for a hyperspace bypass.\nThe M25 enjoyed a more positive reputation among ravers in the late 1980s, when this new orbital motorway became a popular route to the parties that took place around the outskirts of London. Its use for these raves inspired the name of the electronic duo Orbital (who originated from just outside the M25 in Sevenoaks).\nIain Sinclair's 2002 book and film \"London Orbital\" is based on a year-long journey around the M25 on foot.\nA piece of graffiti on the Chalfont Viaduct, clearly visible from the M25 and reading \"Give Peas a chance\" (parodying John Lennon's \"Give Peace a Chance\") became popular with the public, attracting its own Facebook group. The message originally read \"Peas\", supposedly the tag of a London graffiti artist; the rest of the wording is reported to have referred to his frequent clashes with the law. In September 2018, after almost 20 years, the graffiti was vandalised and then removed and replaced with the message \"Give Helch a break\". A spokesman for Network Rail sympathised with the requests to restore the \"much-loved graffiti\", but said they do not condone people putting their lives at risk by trespassing.\nJunctions and services.\nData from driver location signs provide carriageway identifier information. The numbers on the signs are kilometres from a point on the north side of the Dartford Crossing, while the letter is \"A\" for the clockwise carriageway and \"B\" for the anticlockwise. They are spaced every .\nThe M25 has been criticised for having too many junctions; 14 of them serve only local roads. In 2016, Edmund King, president of the Automobile Association, attributed congestion on the M25 to excessive junctions. This leads to \"junction hoppers\" who only use the motorway for a short distance before exiting; their difference in speed when entering and leaving the main carriageway causes a domino effect, resulting in all vehicles slowing down. Drivers who only use the M25 to travel a short distance are believed by some to have less overall driving experience, exacerbating traffic and safety issues.\nThe M25 originally opened without any service areas. The first, at South Mimms, was opened by Margaret Thatcher in June 1987, a week before the election. Thatcher admired the practical and no-frills architecture of Charles Forte and praised him in her opening speech. The second, Clacket Lane, was opened by Robert Key, Minister for Roads and Traffic, on 21 July 1993. Construction was delayed as the remains of a Roman villa were found on the site, requiring archaeological research. The other service area between junctions is Cobham, which opened on 13 September 2012.\n!scope=col| miles\n!scope=col| km\n!scope=col| Clockwise exits (A carriageway)\n!scope=col| Junction\n!scope=col| Anti-clockwise exits (B carriageway)\n!scope=col| Opening date\n! scope=row| RiverThames\n! scope=row| J1A\n! scope=row| J1B\n! scope=row| J2\n! scope=row| J3\n! scope=row| J4\n! scope=row| J5\n! scope=row| Services\n! scope=row| J6\n}}CroydonM23\n! scope=row| J7\n}}M23\n! scope=row| J8\n! scope=row| J9\n! scope=row| Services\n! scope=row| J10\n! scope=row| J11\n! scope=row| J12\n! scope=row| J13\n}}(Terminals 4, 5 &amp; Cargo) A3113\n! scope=row| J14\n}} (Terminals 4, 5 &amp; Cargo) A3113\n}} (Terminals 1, 2 &amp; 3)M4 \n! scope=row| J15\n}} (Terminals 1, 2 &amp; 3)The WEST, Slough, ReadingM4\n! scope=row| J16\n! scope=row| J17\n! scope=row| J18\n! scope=row| J19\n! scope=row| J20\n}}M1\n! scope=row| J21\n}}M1\n! scope=row| J21A\n! scope=row| J22\n! scope=row| J23\n! scope=row| J24\n! scope=row| J25\n! scope=row| \"Tunnel\"\n! scope=row| J26\n! scope=row| \"Tunnel\"\n}}, HarlowLondon (N &amp; E)M11\n! scope=row| J27\n}}M11\n! scope=row| J28\n}}, Basildon A127\n! scope=row| J29\n}}, Basildon A127\n! scope=row| J30\n! scope=row| J31\n! scope=row| RiverThames\nReferences.\nExplanatory notes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nGeneral and cited sources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20472", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20472", "title": "Mt. Olympus", "text": ""}
{"id": "20473", "revid": "11292982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20473", "title": "Mohs hardness scale", "text": ""}
{"id": "20474", "revid": "2510232", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20474", "title": "Mohs scale", "text": "Qualitative scale characterizing scratch resistance\nThe Mohs scale ( ) of mineral hardness is a qualitative ordinal scale, from 1 to 10, characterizing scratch resistance of minerals through the ability of harder material to scratch softer material.\nThe scale was introduced in 1812 by the German geologist and mineralogist Friedrich Mohs, in his book (transl.\u2009Attempt at an elementary method for the natural-historical determination and recognition of fossils); it is one of several definitions of hardness in materials science, some of which are more quantitative.\nThe method of comparing hardness by observing which minerals can scratch others is of great antiquity, having been mentioned by Theophrastus in his treatise \"On Stones\", c.\u2009300 BC, followed by Pliny the Elder in his \"Naturalis Historia\", c.\u2009AD 77. The Mohs scale is useful for identification of minerals in the field, but is not an accurate predictor of how well materials endure in an industrial setting.\nReference minerals.\nThe Mohs scale of mineral hardness is based on the ability of one natural sample of mineral to visibly scratch another mineral. Minerals are chemically pure solids found in nature. Rocks are mixtures of one or more minerals. \nDiamond was the hardest known naturally occurring mineral when the scale was designed, and defines the top of the scale, arbitrarily set at 10. The hardness of a material is measured against the scale by finding the hardest material that the given material can scratch, or the softest material that can scratch the given material. For example, if some material is scratched by apatite but not by fluorite, its hardness on the Mohs scale would be between 4 and 5.\nTechnically, \"scratching\" a material for the purposes of the Mohs scale means creating non-elastic dislocations visible to the naked eye. Frequently, materials that are lower on the Mohs scale can create microscopic, non-elastic dislocations on materials that have a higher Mohs number. While these microscopic dislocations are permanent and sometimes detrimental to the harder material's structural integrity, they are not considered \"scratches\" for the determination of a Mohs scale number.\nEach of the ten hardness values in the Mohs scale is represented by a \"reference mineral\", most of which are widespread in rocks.\nThe Mohs scale is an ordinal scale. For example, corundum (9) is twice as hard as topaz (8), but diamond (10) is four times as hard as corundum. The table below shows the comparison with the absolute hardness measured by a sclerometer, with images of the reference minerals in the rightmost column.\nExamples.\nBelow is a table of more materials by Mohs scale. Some of them have a hardness between two of the Mohs scale reference minerals. Some solid substances that are not minerals have been assigned a hardness on the Mohs scale. Hardness may be difficult to determine, or may be misleading or meaningless, if a material is a mixture of multiple substances. For example, granite has been assigned by some sources a Mohs hardness between 6 and 7, but it is a rock made of several minerals, each with its own Mohs hardness. Topaz-rich granite is mainly composed of topaz (Mohs\u00a08), quartz (Mohs\u00a07), orthoclase (Mohs\u00a06), plagioclase (Mohs\u00a06\u20136.5), and mica (Mohs\u00a02\u20134).\nUse.\nDespite its lack of precision, the Mohs scale is relevant for field geologists, who use it to roughly identify minerals using scratch kits. The Mohs scale hardness of minerals can be commonly found in reference sheets.\nMohs hardness is useful in milling. It allows the assessment of which type of mill and grinding medium will best reduce a given product whose hardness is known.\nElectronic manufacturers use the scale for testing the resilience of flat panel display components (such as cover glass for LCDs or encapsulation for OLEDs), as well as to evaluate the hardness of touch screens in consumer electronics.\nComparison with Vickers scale.\nComparison between Mohs hardness and Vickers hardness:\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20475", "revid": "2253358", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20475", "title": "Maktab al-Khidamar", "text": ""}
{"id": "20476", "revid": "1320310467", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20476", "title": "Murray Gell-Mann", "text": "American theoretical physicist (1929\u20132019)\nMurray Gell-Mann (; September 15, 1929\u00a0\u2013 May 24, 2019) was an American theoretical physicist who played a preeminent role in the development of the theory of elementary particles. Gell-Mann introduced the concept of quarks as the fundamental building blocks of the strongly interacting particles, and the renormalization group as a foundational element of quantum field theory and statistical mechanics. Murray Gell-Mann received the 1969 Nobel Prize in Physics for his contributions and discoveries concerning the classification of elementary particles and their interactions. \nGell-Mann played key roles in developing the concept of chirality in the theory of the weak interactions and spontaneous chiral symmetry breaking in the strong interactions, which controls the physics of the light mesons. In the 1970s he was a co-inventor of quantum chromodynamics (QCD) which explains the confinement of quarks in mesons and baryons and forms a large part of the Standard Model of elementary particles and forces. \nLife and education.\nGell-Mann was born in Lower Manhattan to a family of Jewish immigrants from the Austro-Hungarian Empire, specifically from Czernowitz in present-day Ukraine. His parents were Pauline (n\u00e9e Reichstein) and Arthur Isidore Gelman, who taught English as a second language. Gell-Mann married J. Margaret Dow in 1955; they had a daughter and a son. Margaret died in 1981, and in 1992 he married Marcia Southwick, whose son became his stepson.\nPropelled by an intense boyhood curiosity and love for nature and mathematics, he graduated valedictorian from the Columbia Grammar &amp; Preparatory School aged 14 and subsequently entered Yale College as a member of Jonathan Edwards College. At Yale, he participated in the William Lowell Putnam Mathematical Competition and was on the team representing Yale University (along with Murray Gerstenhaber and Henry O. Pollak) that won the second prize in 1947.\nGell-Mann graduated from Yale with a bachelor's degree in physics in 1948 and intended to pursue graduate studies in physics. He sought to remain in the Ivy League for his graduate education and applied to Princeton University as well as Harvard University. He was rejected by Princeton and accepted by Harvard, but the latter institution was unable to offer him needed financial assistance. He was then accepted by the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) and received a letter from Victor Weisskopf urging him to attend MIT and become Weisskopf's research assistant. This would provide Gell-Mann with the financial assistance he required. Unaware of MIT's eminent status in physics research, Gell-Mann was \"miserable\" and in characteristic dark irony, said he first considered suicide. \nGell-Mann received his Ph.D. in physics from MIT in 1951 after completing a doctoral dissertation, titled \"Coupling strength and nuclear reactions\", under the supervision of Weisskopf. Subsequently, Gell-Mann was a postdoctoral fellow at the Institute for Advanced Study at Princeton in 1951, and a visiting research professor at the University of Illinois at Urbana\u2013Champaign from 1952 to 1953. He was a visiting associate professor at Columbia University and an associate professor at the University of Chicago in 1954\u20131955, before moving to the California Institute of Technology, where he taught from 1955 until he retired in 1993.\nGell-Mann died on May 24, 2019, at his home in Santa Fe, New Mexico.\nProfessional life and controversies.\nGell-Mann was the Robert Andrews Millikan Professor of Theoretical Physics Emeritus at California Institute of Technology as well as a university professor in the physics and astronomy department of the University of New Mexico in Albuquerque, New Mexico, and the Presidential Professor of Physics and Medicine at the University of Southern California. He was a member of the editorial board of the \"Encyclop\u00e6dia Britannica\".\nGell-Mann was on sabbatical at the \"Coll\u00e8ge de France\" for the academic year 1958\u20131959. Gell-Mann spent several periods at CERN, the laboratories of the European Organization for Nuclear Research in Geneva, Switzerland, including time as a fellow of the John Simon Guggenheim Memorial Foundation fellow.\nIn 1972, he was on CERN\u2019s payroll as visiting professor. That same year, Gell-Mann was criticized for his involvement with JASON, a scientific advisory group that supported the U.S. Department of Defense during the Vietnam War. His association with the group was the focus of protests in France and Italy.\nIn 1984 Gell-Mann was one of several co-founders of the Santa Fe Institute\u2014a non-profit theoretical research institute in Santa Fe, New Mexico intended to study various aspects of a complex system and disseminate the notion of a separate interdisciplinary study of complexity theory.\nIn his 1994 popular book \"The Quark and the Jaguar: Adventures in the Simple and the Complex\", Gell-Mann acknowledged financial support from Jeffrey Epstein, who contributed via the Santa Fe Institute. In 2003, Gell-Mann also contributed a letter to \"The First Fifty Years\", a collection of birthday greetings for Epstein. Years later, in 2011, Gell-Mann reportedly attended the \"Mindshift Conference\" on Epstein\u2019s private island, Little Saint James. The gathering was organized by Epstein and science promoter Al Seckel. Gell-Mann\u2019s name also appeared in Epstein\u2019s so-called \"black book,\" a personal address book listing Epstein\u2019s close contacts.\nGeorge Johnson has written a biography of Gell-Mann, \"Strange Beauty: Murray Gell-Mann, and the Revolution in 20th-Century Physics\" (1999), Although Gell-Mann himself criticized \"Strange Beauty\" for some inaccuracies, with one interviewer reporting him wincing at the mention of it, the book was acclaimed by a number of his colleagues. A revised second edition was published in 2023 by the Santa Fe Institute Press with a foreword by Douglas Hofstadter. In 2012 Gell-Mann and his companion Mary McFadden published the book \"Mary McFadden: A Lifetime of Design, Collecting, and Adventure\".\nScientific contributions.\nIn 1958, Gell-Mann in collaboration with Richard Feynman, in parallel with the independent team of E. C. George Sudarshan and Robert Marshak, discovered the chiral structures of the weak interaction of physics and developed the V-A theory (vector minus axial vector theory). This work followed the experimental discovery of the violation of parity by Chien-Shiung Wu, as suggested theoretically by Chen-Ning Yang and Tsung-Dao Lee.\nGell-Mann's work in the 1950s involved recently discovered cosmic ray particles that came to be called kaons and hyperons. Classifying these particles led him to propose that a quantum number, called strangeness, would be conserved by the strong and the electromagnetic interactions, but not by the weak interaction. Another of Gell-Mann's ideas is the Gell-Mann\u2013Okubo formula, which was, initially, a formula based on empirical results, but was later explained by his quark model. Gell-Mann and Abraham Pais were involved in explaining this puzzling aspect of the neutral kaon mixing.\nMurray Gell-Mann's fortunate encounter with mathematician Richard Earl Block at Caltech, in the fall of 1960, \"enlightened\" him to introduce a novel classification scheme, in 1961, for hadrons. A similar scheme had been independently proposed by Yuval Ne'eman, and has come to be explained by the quark model. Gell-Mann referred to the scheme as the \"eightfold way\", because of the \"octets\" of particles in the classification (the term is a reference to the Eightfold Path of Buddhism).\nGell-Mann, along with Maurice L\u00e9vy, developed the sigma model of pions, which describes low-energy pion interactions.\nIn 1964, Gell-Mann and, independently, George Zweig went on to postulate the existence of quarks, particles which make up the hadrons of this scheme. The name \"quark\" was coined by Gell-Mann, and is a reference to the novel \"Finnegans Wake\", by James Joyce (\"Three quarks for Muster Mark!\" book 2, episode 4). Zweig had referred to the particles as \"aces\", but Gell-Mann's name caught on. Quarks, antiquarks, and gluons were soon established as the underlying elementary objects in the study of the structure of hadrons. He was awarded a Nobel Prize in Physics in 1969 for his contributions and discoveries concerning the classification of elementary particles and their interactions.\nIn the 1960s, he introduced current algebra as a method of systematically exploiting symmetries to extract predictions from quark models, in the absence of reliable dynamical theory. This method led to model-independent sum rules confirmed by experiment, and provided starting points underpinning the development of the Standard Model (SM), the widely accepted theory of elementary particles.\nIn 1972 Gell-Mann, together with Harald Fritzsch, Heinrich Leutwyler and William A. Bardeen, considered a Yang-Mills theory of \"quark color,\" and coined the term quantum chromodynamics (QCD) as the gauge theory of the strong interaction. The quark model is a part of QCD, and it has been robust enough to accommodate in a natural fashion the discovery of new \"flavors\" of quarks, which has superseded the eightfold way scheme.\nGell-Mann was responsible, with Pierre Ramond and Richard Slansky, and independently of Peter Minkowski, Rabindra Mohapatra, Goran Senjanovi\u0107, Sheldon Glashow, and Tsutomu Yanagida, for proposing the seesaw theory of neutrino masses. This produces masses at the large scale in any theory with a right-handed neutrino. He is also known to have played a role in keeping string theory alive through the 1970s and early 1980s, supporting that line of research at a time when it was a topic of niche interest.\nGell-Mann was a proponent of the consistent histories approach to understanding quantum mechanics, which he advocated in papers with James Hartle. \nGell-Mann's extensive interests outside of physics included archaeology, numismatics, birdwatching and linguistics. Along with S.\u00a0A. Starostin, he established the Evolution of Human Languages project at the Santa Fe Institute. As a humanist and an agnostic, Gell-Mann was a Humanist Laureate in the International Academy of Humanism. Novelist Cormac McCarthy saw Gell-Mann as a polymath who \"knew more things about more things than anyone I've ever met...losing Murray is like losing the \"Encyclop\u00e6dia Britannica\".\"\nAwards and honors.\nGell-Mann won numerous awards and honours including the following:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nUniversities that gave Gell-Mann honorary doctorates include Cambridge, Columbia, the University of Chicago, Oxford and Yale.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20478", "revid": "28481209", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20478", "title": "Magnetopause", "text": "Abrupt boundary between a magnetosphere and the surrounding plasma\nThe magnetopause is the abrupt boundary between a magnetosphere and the surrounding plasma. For planetary science, the magnetopause is the boundary between the planet's magnetic field and the solar wind. The location of the magnetopause is determined by the balance between the pressure of the dynamic planetary magnetic field and the dynamic pressure of the solar wind. As the solar wind pressure increases and decreases, the magnetopause moves inward and outward in response. Waves (ripples and flapping motion) along the magnetopause move in the direction of the solar wind flow in response to small-scale variations in the solar wind pressure and to Kelvin\u2013Helmholtz instabilities.\nThe solar wind is supersonic and passes through a bow shock where the direction of flow is changed so that most of the solar wind plasma is deflected to either side of the magnetopause, much like water is deflected before the bow of a ship. The zone of shocked solar wind plasma is the magnetosheath. At Earth and all the other planets with intrinsic magnetic fields, some solar wind plasma succeeds in entering and becoming trapped within the magnetosphere. At Earth, the solar wind plasma which enters the magnetosphere forms the plasma sheet. The amount of solar wind plasma and energy that enters the magnetosphere is regulated by the orientation of the interplanetary magnetic field, which is embedded in the solar wind.\nThe Sun and other stars with magnetic fields and stellar winds have a solar magnetopause or heliopause where the stellar environment is bounded by the interstellar environment.\nCharacteristics.\nPrior to the age of space exploration, interplanetary space was considered to be a vacuum. The coincidence of the first observation of a solar flare and the geomagnetic storm of 1859 was evidence that plasma was ejected from the Sun during the flare event. Chapman and Ferraro proposed that a plasma was emitted by the Sun in a burst as part of a flare event which disturbed the planet's magnetic field in a manner known as a geomagnetic storm. The collision frequency of particles in the plasma in the interplanetary medium is very low and the electrical conductivity is so high that it could be approximated to an infinite conductor. \nA magnetic field in a vacuum cannot penetrate a volume with infinite conductivity. Chapman and Bartels (1940) illustrated this concept by postulating a plate with infinite conductivity placed on the dayside of a planet's dipole as shown in the schematic. The field lines on the dayside are bent. At low latitudes, the magnetic field lines are pushed inward. At high latitudes, the magnetic field lines are pushed backwards and over the polar regions. The boundary between the region dominated by the planet's magnetic field (i.e., the magnetosphere) and the plasma in the interplanetary medium is the magnetopause. The configuration equivalent to a flat, infinitely conductive plate is achieved by placing an image dipole (green arrow at left of schematic) at twice the distance from the planet's dipole to the magnetopause along the planet-Sun line. Since the solar wind is continuously flowing outward, the magnetopause above, below and to the sides of the planet are swept backward into the geomagnetic tail as shown in the artist's concept. The region (shown in pink in the schematic) which separates field lines from the planet which are pushed inward from those which are pushed backward over the poles is an area of weak magnetic field or day-side cusp. Solar wind particles can enter the planet's magnetosphere through the cusp region. Because the solar wind exists at all times and not just times of solar flares, the magnetopause is a permanent feature of the space near any planet with a magnetic field.\nThe magnetic field lines of the planet's magnetic field are not stationary. They are continuously joining or merging with magnetic field lines of the interplanetary magnetic field in a process called magnetic reconnection. The joined field lines are swept back over the poles into the planetary magnetic tail. In the tail, the field lines from the planet's magnetic field are re-joined and start moving toward night-side of the planet. The physics of this process was first explained by Dungey (1961). As such, the process is now referred to as the Dungey Cycle.\nIf one assumed that magnetopause was just a boundary between a magnetic field in a vacuum and a plasma with a weak magnetic field embedded in it, then the magnetopause would be defined by electrons and ions penetrating one gyroradius into the magnetic field domain. Since the gyro-motion of electrons and ions is in opposite directions, an electric current flows along the boundary. The actual magnetopause is much more complex.\nEstimating the standoff distance to the magnetopause.\nIf the pressure from particles within the magnetosphere is neglected, it is possible to estimate the distance to the part of the magnetosphere that faces the Sun. The condition governing this position is that the dynamic ram pressure from the solar wind is equal to the magnetic pressure from the Earth's magnetic field:\nformula_1\nwhere formula_2 and formula_3 are the density and velocity of the solar wind, and\n\"B\"(\"r\") is the magnetic field strength of the planet in SI units (\"B\" in T, \"\u03bc\"0 in H/m).\nSince the dipole magnetic field strength varies with distance as formula_4 the magnetic field strength can be written as formula_5, where formula_6 is the planet's magnetic moment, expressed in formula_7.\nformula_8\nSolving this equation for r leads to an estimate of the distance\nformula_9\nThe distance from Earth to the subsolar magnetopause varies over time due to solar activity, but typical distances range from 6\u201315 Rformula_10. Empirical models using real-time solar wind data can provide a real-time estimate of the magnetopause location. A bow shock stands upstream from the magnetopause. It serves to decelerate and deflect the solar wind flow before it reaches the magnetopause.\nSolar System magnetopauses.\nResearch on the magnetopause is often conducted using the LMN coordinate system (which is set of axes like XYZ). N points normal to the magnetopause outward to the magnetosheath, L lies along the projection of the dipole axis onto the magnetopause (positive northward), and M completes the triad by pointing dawnward.\nVenus and Mars do not have a planetary magnetic field and do not have a magnetopause. The solar wind interacts with the planet's atmosphere and a void is created behind the planet. In the case of the Earth's moon and other bodies without a magnetic field or atmosphere, the body's surface interacts with the solar wind and a void is created behind the body.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20479", "revid": "48643156", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20479", "title": "Magnetosphere", "text": "Region around an astronomical object\nIn astronomy and planetary science, a magnetosphere is a region of space surrounding an astronomical object, such as a planet or other object, in which charged particles are affected by that object's magnetic field. It is created by a celestial body with an active interior dynamo.\nIn the space environment close to a planetary body with a dipole magnetic field such as Earth, the field lines resemble a simple magnetic dipole. Farther out, field lines can be significantly distorted by the flow of electrically conducting plasma, as emitted from the Sun (i.e., the solar wind) or a nearby star. Planets having active magnetospheres, like the Earth, are capable of mitigating or blocking the effects of solar radiation or cosmic radiation. Interactions of particles and atmospheres with magnetospheres are studied under the specialized scientific subjects of plasma physics, space physics, and aeronomy.\nHistory.\nStudy of Earth's magnetosphere began in 1600, when William Gilbert discovered that the magnetic field on the surface of Earth resembled that of a terrella, a small, magnetized sphere. In the 1940s, Walter M. Elsasser proposed the model of dynamo theory, which attributes Earth's magnetic field to the motion of Earth's iron outer core. Through the use of magnetometers, scientists were able to study the variations in Earth's magnetic field as functions of both time and latitude and longitude.\nBeginning in the late 1940s, rockets were used to study cosmic rays. In 1958, Explorer 1, the first of the Explorer series of space missions, was launched to study the intensity of cosmic rays above the atmosphere and measure the fluctuations in this activity. This mission observed the existence of the Van Allen radiation belt (located in the inner region of Earth's magnetosphere), with the follow-up Explorer 3 later that year definitively proving its existence. Also during 1958, Eugene Parker proposed the idea of the solar wind, with the term 'magnetosphere' being proposed by Thomas Gold in 1959 to explain how the solar wind interacted with the Earth's magnetic field. The later mission of Explorer 12 in 1961 led by the Cahill and Amazeen observation in 1963 of a sudden decrease in magnetic field strength near the noon-time meridian, later was named the magnetopause. By 1983, the International Cometary Explorer observed the magnetotail, or the distant magnetic field.\nStructure and behavior.\nThe structure of magnetospheres are dependent on several factors: the type of astronomical object, the nature of sources of plasma and momentum, the period of the object's spin, the nature of the axis about which the object spins, the axis of the magnetic dipole, and the magnitude and direction of the flow of solar wind.\nThe planetary distance where the magnetosphere can withstand the solar wind pressure is called the Chapman\u2013Ferraro distance. This is usefully modeled by the formula wherein formula_1 represents the radius of the planet, formula_2 represents the magnetic field on the surface of the planet at the equator, formula_3 represents the velocity of the solar wind, formula_4 is the particle density of solar wind, and formula_5 is the vacuum permeability constant:\nformula_6\nA magnetosphere is classified as \"intrinsic\" when formula_7, or when the primary opposition to the flow of solar wind is the magnetic field of the object. Mercury, Earth, Jupiter, Ganymede, Saturn, Uranus, and Neptune, for example, exhibit intrinsic magnetospheres. A magnetosphere is classified as \"induced\" when formula_8, or when the solar wind is not opposed by the object's magnetic field. In this case, the solar wind interacts with the atmosphere or ionosphere of the planet (or surface of the planet, if the planet has no atmosphere). Venus has an induced magnetic field, which means that because Venus appears to have no internal dynamo effect, the only magnetic field present is that formed by the solar wind's wrapping around the physical obstacle of Venus (see also Venus' induced magnetosphere). When formula_9, the planet itself and its magnetic field both contribute. It is possible that Mars is of this type.\nDawn-dusk asymmetry.\nWhen viewed from the Sun, a celestial body's orbital motion can compress its otherwise symmetrical magnetosphere slightly, and stretch it out in the direction opposite its motion (in Earth's example, from west to east). This is known as \"dawn-dusk asymmetry\".\nStructure.\nBow shock.\nThe bow shock forms the outermost layer of the magnetosphere; the boundary between the magnetosphere and the surrounding medium. For stars, this is usually the boundary between the stellar wind and interstellar medium; for planets, the speed of the solar wind there decreases as it approaches the magnetopause. Due to interactions with the bow shock, the stellar wind plasma gains a substantial anisotropy, leading to various plasma instabilities upstream and downstream of the bow shock.\nMagnetosheath.\nThe magnetosheath is the region of the magnetosphere between the bow shock and the magnetopause. It is formed mainly from shocked solar wind, though it contains a small amount of plasma from the magnetosphere. It is an area exhibiting high particle energy flux, where the direction and magnitude of the magnetic field varies erratically. This is caused by the collection of solar wind gas that has effectively undergone thermalization. It acts as a cushion that transmits the pressure from the flow of the solar wind and the barrier of the magnetic field from the object.\nMagnetopause.\nThe magnetopause is the area of the magnetosphere wherein the pressure from the planetary magnetic field is balanced with the pressure from the solar wind. It is the convergence of the shocked solar wind from the magnetosheath with the magnetic field of the object and plasma from the magnetosphere. Because both sides of this convergence contain magnetized plasma, the interactions between them are complex. The structure of the magnetopause depends upon the Mach number and beta ratio of the plasma, as well as the magnetic field. The magnetopause changes size and shape as the pressure from the solar wind fluctuates.\nMagnetotail.\nOpposite the compressed magnetic field is the magnetotail, where the magnetosphere extends far beyond the astronomical object. It contains two lobes, referred to as the \"northern\" and \"southern\" tail lobes. Magnetic field lines in the northern tail lobe point towards the object while those in the southern tail lobe point away. The tail lobes are almost empty, with few charged particles opposing the flow of the solar wind. The two lobes are separated by a plasma sheet, an area where the magnetic field is weaker, and the density of charged particles is higher.\nEarth's magnetosphere.\nOver Earth's equator, the magnetic field lines become almost horizontal, then return to reconnect at high latitudes. However, at high altitudes, the magnetic field is significantly distorted by the solar wind and its solar magnetic field. On the dayside of Earth, the magnetic field is significantly compressed by the solar wind to a distance of approximately . Earth's bow shock is about thick and located about from Earth. The dayside magnetopause exists at a distance of about 30,000\u201360,000 kilometers above Earth's surface. Earth's magnetopause has been compared to a sieve because it allows solar wind particles to enter. Kelvin\u2013Helmholtz instabilities occur when large swirls of plasma travel along the edge of the magnetosphere at different velocities from the magnetosphere, causing the plasma to slip past. This results in magnetic reconnection, and as the magnetic field lines break and reconnect, solar wind particles are able to enter the magnetosphere. On Earth's nightside, the magnetic field extends in the magnetotail, which lengthwise exceeds . Earth's magnetotail is the primary source of the polar aurora. Also, NASA scientists have suggested that Earth's magnetotail might cause \"dust storms\" on the Moon by creating a potential difference between the day side and the night side. The center of the tail's plasma sheet, referred to as the neutral sheet, is the region in which the magnetic field lines from each lobe can meet. It is therefore an important site of reconnection in the tail. Far from quiescent, the plasma sheet is known to exhibit bulk motions that tilt the neutral sheet relative to the ecliptic plane, producing oscillations referred to as flapping motions. These motions consist of oscillations of the plasma sheet in the north-south direction. An analogy with windsocks may be helpful in visualising these movements of the plasma sheet.\nOther objects.\nMany astronomical objects generate and maintain magnetospheres. In the Solar System this includes the Sun, Mercury, Earth, Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, Neptune, and Ganymede. The magnetosphere of Jupiter is the largest planetary magnetosphere in the Solar System, extending up to on the dayside and almost to the orbit of Saturn on the nightside. Jupiter's magnetosphere is stronger than Earth's by an order of magnitude, and its magnetic moment is approximately 18,000 times larger. Venus, Mars, and Pluto, on the other hand, have no \"intrinsic\" magnetic field. This may have had significant effects on their geological history. It is hypothesized that Venus and Mars may have lost their primordial water to photodissociation and the solar wind. A strong magnetosphere, were it present, would greatly slow down this process.\nMagnetospheres generated by exoplanets are thought to be common, though the first discoveries did not come until the 2010s. In 2014, a magnetic field around HD 209458 b was inferred from the way hydrogen was evaporating from the planet. In 2019, the strength of the surface magnetic fields of 4 hot Jupiters were estimated and ranged between 20 and 120 gauss compared to Jupiter's surface magnetic field of 4.3 gauss. In 2020, a radio emission in the 14-30\u00a0MHz band was detected from the Tau Bo\u00f6tis system, likely associated with cyclotron radiation from the poles of Tau Bo\u00f6tis b which might be a signature of a planetary magnetic field. In 2021 a magnetic field generated by the hot Neptune HAT-P-11b became the first to be confirmed. The first unconfirmed detection of a magnetic field generated by a terrestrial exoplanet was found in 2023 on YZ Ceti b.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20481", "revid": "14370093", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20481", "title": "Manama", "text": "Capital and largest city of Bahrain\nManama ( \"\", ) is the capital and largest city of Bahrain, with an approximate population of 297,502 as of 2012. Long an important trading center in the Persian Gulf, Manama is home to a diverse population. After periods of Portuguese and Persian control and a short invasion from the ruling dynasty of Saudi Arabia, followed by a longer invasion by Oman, Bahrain established itself as an independent nation in 1971 following a period of British hegemony.\nManama has a history spanning several centuries. First mentioned in Islamic texts as early as the 14th century, Manama remained a small trading port until it came under Portuguese control in the early 1500s. In 1602, the Safavid Persians expelled the Portuguese, and Manama became a regional center for commerce and pearling. By the late 19th century, it had grown significantly due to trade and was declared the capital of Bahrain in 1971 when the country gained independence from British protection. Since then, Manama has evolved into a modern financial hub in the Persian Gulf region.\nManama is situated on the northeastern coast of Bahrain Island, along the Persian Gulf. The city lies on low-lying terrain, with reclaimed land extending its coastline in recent decades due to rapid urban and economic development. Manama's coastal location has historically made it a vital port and trading point in the Gulf. The city has a desert climate, characterized by extremely hot summers, mild winters, and very low annual rainfall. Urban development has spread along the coast, with modern infrastructure, financial districts, and residential areas expanding into the desert outskirts and offshore artificial islands.\nAlthough the current twin cities of Manama and Muharraq appear to have been founded simultaneously in the 1800s, Muharraq took prominence due to its defensive location and was thus the capital of Bahrain until 1923. Manama became the mercantile capital and was the gateway to the main Bahrain Island. In the 20th century, Bahrain's oil wealth helped spur fast growth and in the 1990s a concerted diversification effort led to expansion in other industries and helped transform Manama into an important financial hub in the Middle East. Manama was designated as the 2012 capital of Arab culture by the Arab League, and a beta global city by the Globalization and World Cities Research Network in 2018.\nEtymology.\nThe name \"Man\u0101mah\" (without the Al-) was first recorded around the year 730 AH (approximately 1330 AD) during the visit of Tur\u0101n Shah of Hurmuz to the island. At that time, it had already been annexed by his predecessor, Tahamtam II of Hurmuz.\nThe name is claimed by some to be derived from the Arabic word \u0627\u0644\u0652\u0645\u064e\u0646\u064e\u0627\u0645\u064e\u0629 (\"el-Men\u00e2me\") meaning \"the place of rest\" or \"the place of dreams\".\nOriginally it was called simply \"Manamah\" before being renamed to Al-Manamah. In Persian, \"man\" (\u0645\u0646) means \"me,\" and \"nameh\" () means \"letter,\" similar to the structure of words like \"Shah Nameh\" (Book of Kings).\nBahrain\u2019s historical connection with Persian culture, particularly through the Sassanian and Achaemenid Empires, has influenced many place names and cultural elements in the region, supporting the possibility of Persian linguistic roots. Additionally, cities like Shah Khorah (\u0634\u0627\u0647 \u062e\u0648\u0631\u0627) in Bahrain reflect this Persian influence.\nHistory.\nPre-modern history.\nThere is evidence of human settlement on the northern coastline of Bahrain dating back to the Bronze Age. The Dilmun civilisation inhabited the area in 3000\u00a0BC, serving as a key regional trading hub between Mesopotamia, Magan and the Indus Valley Civilisation. Approximately 100,000 Dilmun burial mounds were found across the north and central regions of the country, some originating 5,000 years ago. Despite the discovery of the mounds, there is no significant evidence to suggest heavy urbanisation took place during the Dilmun era. It is believed that the majority of the population lived in rural areas, numbering several thousand. Evidence of an ancient large rural population was confirmed by one of Alexander the Great's ship captains, during voyages in the Persian Gulf. A vast system of aqueducts in northern Bahrain helped facilitate ancient horticulture and agriculture. \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n &lt;poem&gt;\"The capital of Awal... is a town well populated whose environs are fertile and produce corn and dates in abundance.\"&lt;/poem&gt;\n\u00a0\u2014Al-Idrisi \nThe commercial network of Dilmun lasted for almost 2,000 years, after which the Assyrians took control of the island in 700\u00a0BC for more than a century. This was followed by Babylonian and Achaemenid rule, which later gave way to Greek influence during the time of Alexander the Great's conquests. In the first century AD, the Roman writer Pliny the Elder wrote of Tylos, the Hellenic name of Bahrain in the classical era, and its pearls and cotton fields. The island came under the control of the Parthian and Sassanid empires respectively, by which time Nestorian Christianity started to spread in Bahrain. By 410\u2013420\u00a0AD, a Nestorian bishopric and monastery was established in Al Dair, on the neighbouring island of Muharraq. Following the conversion of Bahrain to Islam in 628\u00a0AD, work on one of the earliest mosques in the region, the Khamis Mosque, began as early as the seventh century AD. During this time, Bahrain was engaged in long distance marine trading, evident from the discovery of Chinese coins dating between 600 and 1200\u00a0AD, in Manama.\nIn 1330, under the Jarwanid dynasty, the island became a tributary of the Kingdom of Hormuz. The town of Manama was mentioned by name for the first time in a manuscript dating to 1345\u00a0AD. Bahrain, particularly Manama and the nearby settlement of Bilad Al Qadeem, became a centre of Shia scholarship and training for the ulema, it would remain so for centuries. The ulema would help fund pearling expeditions and finance grain production in the rural areas surrounding the city. In 1521, Bahrain fell to the expanding Portuguese Empire in the Persian Gulf, having already defeated Hormuz. The Portuguese consolidated their hold on the island by constructing the Bahrain Fort, on the outskirts of Manama. After numerous revolts and an expanding Safavid empire in Persia, the Portuguese were expelled from Bahrain and the Safavids took control in 1602.\nEarly modern history.\nThe Safavids, sidelining Manama, designated the nearby town of Bilad Al Qadeem as the provincial capital. The town was also the seat of the Persian governor and the Shaikh al-Islam of the islands. The position of Shaikh al-Islam lay under the jurisdiction of the central Safavid government and as such, candidates were carefully vetted by the Isfahan courts. During the Safavid era, the islands continued to be a centre for Twelver Shi'ism scholarship, producing clerics for use in mainland Persia. Additionally, the rich agricultural northern region of Bahrain continued to flourish due to an abundance of date palm farms and orchards. The Portuguese traveler Pedro Teixeira commented on the extensive cultivation of crops like barley and wheat. The opening of Persian markets to Bahraini exports, especially pearls, boosted the islands' export economy. The yearly income of exported Bahraini pearls was 600,000 ducats, collected by around 2,000 pearling dhows. Another factor that contributed to Bahrain's agricultural wealth was the migration of Shia cultivators from Ottoman-occupied Qatif and al-Hasa, fearing religious persecution, in 1537. Sometime after 1736, Nader Shah constructed a fort on the southern outskirts of Manama (likely the Diwan Fort).\nPersian control over the Persian Gulf waned during the later half of the 18th century. At this time, Bahrain archipelago was a dependency of the emirate of Bushehr, itself a part of Persia. In 1783, the Bani Utbah tribal confederation invaded Bahrain and expelled the resident governor Nasr Al-Madhkur. As a result, the Al Khalifa family became the rulers of the country, and all political relations with Bushehr and Persia/Iran were terminated. Ahmed ibn Muhammad ibn Khalifa (later called Ahmed al-Fateh, lit. \"Ahmed the conqueror\") become the dynasty's first Hakim of Bahrain. Political instability in the 19th century had disastrous effects on Manama's economy; Invasions by the Omanis in 1800 and by the Wahhabis in 1810\u201311, in addition to a civil war in 1842 between Bahrain's co-rulers saw the town being a major battleground. The instability paralysed commercial trade in Manama; the town's port was closed, most merchants fled abroad to Kuwait and the Persian coast until hostilities ceased. The English scholar William Gifford Palgrave, on a visit to Manama in 1862, described the town as having a few ruined stone buildings, with a landscape dominated with the huts of poor fishermen and pearl-divers.\nThe Pax Britannica of the 19th century resulted in British consolidation of trade routes, particularly those close to the British Raj. In response to piracy in the Persian Gulf region, the British deployed warships and forced much of the Persian Gulf States at the time (including Bahrain) to sign the General Maritime Treaty of 1820, which prohibited piracy and slavery. In 1861, the Perpetual Truce of Peace and Friendship was signed between Britain and Bahrain, which placed the British in charge of defending Bahrain in exchange for British control over Bahraini foreign affairs. With the ascension of Isa ibn Ali Al Khalifa as the Hakim of Bahrain in 1869, Manama became the centre of British activity in the Persian Gulf, though its interests were initially strictly commercial. Trading recovered fully by 1873 and the country's earnings from pearl exports increased by sevenfold between 1873 and 1900. Representing the British were native agents, usually from minorities such as Persians or Huwala who regularly reported back to British India and the British political residency in Bushehr. The position of native agent was later replaced by a British political agent, following the construction of the British political residency (locally referred to in ) in 1900, which further solidified Britain's position in Manama.\nModern history.\nFollowing the outbreak of World War I in 1914, the British Raj used Manama as a military base of operations during the Mesopotamian campaign. Prompted by the presence of oil in the region, the British political agency in Bushire concluded an oil agreement with the Hakim to prohibit the exploration and exploitation of oil for a five-year period. In 1919, Bahrain was officially integrated into the British Empire as an overseas imperial territory following the Bahrain order-in-council decree, issued in 1913. The decree gave the resident political agent greater powers and placed Bahrain under the residency of Bushire and therefore under the governance of the British Raj. The British pressured a series of administrative reforms in Bahrain during the 1920s (a move met with opposition from tribal leaders), during which the aging Hakim Isa ibn Ali Al Khalifa was forced to abdicate in favour of his reform-minded son Hamad ibn Isa Al Khalifa. A municipal government was established in Manama in 1919, the Customs office was reorganised in 1923 and placed under the supervision of an English businessman, the pearling industry was later reformed in 1924. Earnings from the customs office would be kept in the newly created state treasury. Civil courts were established for the first time in 1923, followed by the establishment of the Department of Land Registration in 1924. Charles Belgrave, from the Colonial office, was appointed in 1926 by the British to carry on further reforms and manage administration as a financial advisor to the King. He later organised the State Police and was in charge of the Finance and Land departments of the government.\nIn 1927, the country's pearling economy collapsed due to the introduction of Japanese cultured pearls in the world market. It is estimated that between 1929 and 1931, pearling entrepreneurs lost more than two-thirds of their income. Further aggravated by the Great Depression, many leading Bahraini businessmen, shopkeepers, and pearl-divers fell into debt. With the discovery of oil in 1932 and the subsequent production of oil exports in 1934, the country gained a greater significance in geopolitics. The security of oil supplies in the Middle East was a priority of the British, especially in the run-up to the Second World War. The discovery of oil led to gradual employment of bankrupt divers from the pearling industry in the 1930s, eventually causing the pearling industry to disappear. During the war, the country served as a strategic airbase between Britain and India as well as hosting RAF Muharraq and a naval base in Juffair. Bahrain was bombed by the Italian Air Force in 1940. In 1947, following the end of the war and subsequent Indian independence, the British residency of the Persian Gulf moved to Manama from Bushire.\nFollowing the rise of Arab nationalism across the Middle East and sparked by the Suez Crisis in 1956, anti-British unrest broke out in Manama, organised by the National Union Committee. Though the NUC advocated peaceful demonstrations, buildings and enterprises belonging to Europeans (the British in particular) as well as the main Catholic church in the city and petrol stations, were targeted and set ablaze. Demonstrations held in front of the British political residency called for the dismissal of Charles Belgrave, who was later dismissed by the direct intervention of the Foreign Office the following year. A subsequent crackdown on the NUC led to the dissolution of the body. Another anti-British uprising erupted in March 1965, though predominately led by students aspiring for independence rather than by Arab nationalists. In 1968, the British announced their withdrawal from Bahrain by 1971. The newly independent State of Bahrain designated Manama as the capital city.\nPost-independence Manama was characterised by the rapid urbanisation of the city and the swallowing-up of neighboring villages and hamlets into a single urbanised area, incorporating new neighbourhoods such as Adliya and Salmaniya. The construction boom attracted large numbers of foreigners from the Indian subcontinent and by 1981, foreigners outnumbered Bahrainis two-to-one. The construction of the Diplomatic Area district in the city's northeast helped facilitate diversification of the country's economy from oil by exploiting the lucrative financial industry. Financial institutions in the district numbered 187 by 1986. The scarcity of land suitable for construction led to land reclamation. Religious activism migrated from Manama to the suburban districts of Bani Jamra, Diraz and Bilad Al Qadeem, hotspots of unrest in the 1990s uprising that called for the reinstatement of an elected parliament. In 2001, the National Action Charter, presented by King Hamad bin Isa al-Khalifa was approved by Bahrainis. The charter led to the first parliamentary and municipal elections in decades. Further elections in 2006 and 2010 led to the election of Islamist parties, Al Wefaq, Al Menbar, and Al Asalah, as well as independent candidates. In 2011, a month-long uprising led to the intervention of GCC forces and the proclamation of a three-month state of emergency. The Bahrain Independent Commission of Inquiry published a 500-page report on the events of 2011.\nGovernment.\nHistorically, Manama has been restricted to what is now known as the Manama Souq and the Manama Fort (now the Ministry of Interior) to its south. However the city has now grown to include a number of newer suburban developments as well as older neighboring villages that have been engulfed by the growth of the city. The districts that make up Manama today include:\nManama is part of the Capital Governorate, one of five Governorates of Bahrain. Until 2002 it was part of the municipality of Al-Manamah. Councils exist within the governorates; eight constituencies are voted upon within Capital Governorate in 2006.\nEconomy.\nManama is the focal point of the Bahraini economy. While petroleum has decreased in importance in recent years due to depleting reserves and growth in other industries, it is still the mainstay of the economy. Heavy industry (e.g. aluminium smelting, ship repair), banking and finance, and tourism are among the industries which have experienced recent growth. Several multinationals have facilities and offices in and around Manama. The primary industry in Manama itself is financial services, with over two hundred financial institutions and banks based in the CBD and the Diplomatic Area. Manama is a financial hub for the Persian Gulf region and a center of Islamic banking. There is also a large retail sector in the shopping malls around Seef, while the center of Manama is dominated by small workshops and traders.\nManama's economy in the early 20th century relied heavily on pearling; in 1907, the pearling industry was estimated to include 917 boats providing employment for up to 18,000 people. Shipbuilding also employed several hundred in both Manama and Muharraq. The estimated income earned from pearling in 1926 and subsequent years prior to the Great Depression was \u00a31.5\u00a0million annually. Custom duties and tariffs served as the prime source of revenue for the government. With the onset of the Great Depression, the collapse of the pearling industry and the discovery of oil in 1932, the country's economy began to shift towards oil.\nHistorically, the ports at Manama were of poor reputation. The British described the ports importing systems as being \"very bad \u2013 goods were exposed to the weather and there were long delays in delivery\", in 1911. Indians began maintaining the ports and new resources were built on site, improving the situation. As of 1920, Manama was one of the main exporters of Bahrain pearls, attracting steamships from India. During this time, they also imported goods from India and from other regional countries. They imported rice, textiles, ghee, coffee, dates, tea, tobacco, fuel, and livestock. They exported less of a variety, with a focus on pearls, oysters, and sailcloth. For the year of 1911\u201312, Manama was visited by 52 steamships, the majority being British and the rest Turkish-Arabian.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe role of Manama as a regional port city in the Persian Gulf made it a hub for migrant workers in search of a better living. As a result, Manama has often been described, both in the pre-oil and post-oil era, as a cosmopolitan city. In 1904, it was estimated that Manama's population numbered 25,000, out of which half were believed to have been foreigners from Basra, Najd, al-Hasa and Iran, as well as from India and Europe.\nReligion.\nThe two main branches of Islam, Shia Islam and Sunni Islam, coexisted in Manama for centuries and are represented by distinct ethnic groups. The Shia community is represented by the native Arab Baharna, the Hasawis and Qatifis of mainland Arabia and the Persian Ajam. The Sunni community is represented by Arab Bedouin tribes who migrated in the eighteenth century along with the Bani Utbah and the Huwala.\nTransport.\nRoad network.\nManama is the main hub of the country's road network. At the moment the city's road network is undergoing substantial development to ameliorate the situation of traffic in the city. Due to the fact that it is the capital and the main city in the country, where most of the government and the commercial offices and facilities are established, along with the entertainment centers, and the country's fast growth, vehicle population is increasing rapidly.\nThe widening of roads in the old districts of Manama and the development of a national network linking the capital to other settlements commenced as early as the arrival of the first car in 1914. The continuous increase in the number of cars from 395 in 1944, to 3,379 in 1954 and to 18,372 cars in 1970 caused urban development to primarily focus on expanding the road network, widening carriageways and the establishment of more parking spaces. Many tracks previously laid in the pre-oil era (prior to the 1930s) were resurfaced and widened, turning them into 'road arteries'. Initial widening of the roads started in the Manama Souq district, widening its main roads by demolishing encroaching houses.\nA series of ring roads were constructed (Isa al Kabeer avenue in the 1930s, Exhibition avenue in the 1960s and Al Fateh highway in the 1980s), to push back the coastline and extend the city area in belt-like forms. To the north, the foreshore used to be around \"Government Avenue\" in the 1920s but it shifted to a new road, \"King Faisal Road\", in the early 1930s which became the coastal road. To the east, a bridge connected Manama to Muharraq since 1929, a new causeway was built in 1941 which replaced the old wooden bridge. Transits between the two islands peaked after the construction of the Bahrain International Airport in 1932.\nTo the south of Manama, roads connected groves, lagoons and marshes of Hoora, Adliya, Gudaibiya and Juffair. Villages such as Mahooz, Ghuraifa, Seqaya served as the end of these roads. To the west, a major highway was built that linked Manama to the isolated village port of Budaiya, this highway crossed through the 'green belt' villages of Sanabis, Jidhafs and Duraz. To the south, a road was built that connected Manama to Riffa. The discovery of oil accelerated the growth of the city's road network.\nThe four main islands and all the towns and villages are linked by well-constructed roads. There were of roadways in 2002, of which were paved. A causeway stretching over , connect Manama with Muharraq Island, and another bridge joins Sitra to the main island. A four-lane highway atop a causeway, linking Bahrain with the Saudi Arabian mainland via the island of Umm an-Nasan was completed in December 1986, and financed by Saudi Arabia. In 2000, there were 172,684 passenger vehicles and 41,820 commercial vehicles.\nBahrain's port of Mina Salman can accommodate 16 oceangoing vessels drawing up to . In 2001, Bahrain had a merchant fleet of eight ships of 1,000 GT or over, totaling 270,784 GT. Private vehicles and taxis are the primary means of transportation in the city.\nBuses.\nManama has a bus service that launched on 1 April 2015, with a fleet of 141 MAN buses. Regulated by the Ministry of Transportation, bus routes extend across Bahrain and around Manama.\nAir transport.\nBahrain International Airport is located on the nearby Muharraq Island, approximately from the Central Business District (CBD). It is a premier hub airport in the Middle East. Strategically located in the Northern Persian Gulf between the major markets of Saudi Arabia and Iran, the airport has one of the widest range and highest frequency of regional services with connections to major international destinations in Europe, Asia, Africa, and North America.\nBahrain also has a military airbase, the Isa Air Base, located in the south at Sakhir. This is the base of the Bahrain Defence Force, or BDF.\nEducation.\nQuranic schools were the only source of education in Bahrain prior to the 20th century; such schools were primarily dedicated to the study of the Qur'an. The first modern school to open in the country was a missionary elementary school set up in 1892 (according to one account) in Manama by the Reformed Church in America, with the school's syllabus comprising English, Mathematics and the study of Christianity. Leading merchants in the country sent their children to the school until it was closed down in 1933 due to financial difficulties. The school reopened some years later under the name of Al Raja School where it operates till the present day. In addition to the American Mission School, another foreign private school was opened in 1910; Al-Ittihad school, funded by the Persian community of Bahrain.\nFollowing the end of the First World War, Western ideas became more widespread in the country, culminating in the opening of the first public school of Bahrain, Al-Hidaya Al-Khalifia Boys school, in the island of Muharraq in 1919. The school was founded by prominent citizens of Muharraq and was endorsed by the Bahraini royal family. The country's first Education Committee was established by several leading Bahraini merchants, headed by Shaikh Abdulla bin Isa Al-Khalifa, the son of the then-ruler of Bahrain Isa ibn Ali Al Khalifa, who acted as the de facto Minister of Education. The Education Committee was also responsible for managing the Al-Hidaya Boys school. The school was, in fact, the brainchild of Shaikh Abdulla, who suggested the idea after returning from post-World War I celebrations in England.\nIn 1926, a second public school for boys opened up in Manama called the Jafaria School. Two years later, in 1928, the first public school for girls was established. Due to financial constraints suffered by the Education Committee, the Bahraini government took control of the schools in 1930.\nPresently, Manama has a wide range of private and public universities and colleges such as Ahlia University, Applied Science University, Arab Open University, Arabian Gulf University, Bahrain Institute of Banking and Finance, and the College of Health and Sport Sciences. Other notable primary and secondary schools situated in the city include the Bahrain School, the Indian School, Al Raja School amongst others.\nGeography.\nThe city is located in the north-eastern corner of Bahrain on a small peninsula. As in the rest of Bahrain, the land is generally flat (or gently rolling) and arid.\nClimate.\nManama has an arid climate. In common with the rest of Bahrain, Manama experiences extreme climatic conditions, with summer temperatures up to , and winter as low as with even hail on rare occasions. Average temperatures of the summer and winter seasons are generally from about 17\u00a0\u00b0C (63\u00a0\u00b0F) to about 34\u00a0\u00b0C (93\u00a0\u00b0F). The most pleasant time in Bahrain is spring when sunshine is comparatively low, coupled with mild temperatures moderated by soft breezes.\nCulture.\nBahrain attracts a large number of foreigners and foreign influences, with about half of the population hailing from abroad. Alcohol is legal in the country, with bars and nightclubs operating in the city. Bahrain gave women the right to vote in elections for the first time in 2002. Football is the most popular sport in Manama (and the rest of the country), with three teams from Manama participating in the Bahraini Premier League.\nNotable cultural sites within Manama include the Bab Al Bahrain and the adjacent souq area. In the 2010s, the historic core of Manama underwent revitalisation efforts alongside the Manama souq, which were due to be completed in 2020. The central areas of Manama are also the main location for Muharram processions in the country, attracting hundreds of thousands of people annually from Bahrain and across the Gulf.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20484", "revid": "2278355", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20484", "title": "Mance Lipscomb", "text": "American blues singer and guitarist (1895\u20131976)\nBeau De Glen \"Mance\" Lipscomb (April 9, 1895 \u2013 January 30, 1976) was an American blues singer, guitarist and songster. \nBiography.\nLipscomb was born April 9, 1895, near Navasota, Texas. His father had been born into slavery in Alabama; his mother was half African American and half Native American. As a youth, Lipscomb took the name Mance (short for \"emancipation\") from a friend of his oldest brother, Charlie. \nDue to his father's early departure from home, he was compelled to end his schooling after the third grade and work in the fields with his mother.\nFor most of his life, Lipscomb supported himself as a tenant farmer in Texas. His mother bought him a guitar and he taught himself to play by watching and listening. He became an accomplished performer then and played regularly for years at local gatherings, mostly what he called \"Saturday night suppers\" hosted by someone in the area. He and his wife regularly hosted such gatherings for a while. Until around 1960, most of his musical activity took place within what he called his \"precinct\", the area around Navasota, Texas.\nHe was discovered and recorded by Mack McCormick and Chris Strachwitz in 1960, during a revival of interest in the country blues. He recorded many albums of blues, ragtime, Tin Pan Alley, and folk music (most of them released by Strachwitz's Arhoolie Records), singing and accompanying himself on acoustic guitar. Lipscomb had a \"dead-thumb\" finger-picking guitar technique and an expressive voice. He honed his skills by playing in nearby Brenham, Texas, with a blind musician, Sam Rogers.\nHis first release was the album \"Texas Sharecropper and Songster\" (1960). Lipscomb performed songs in a wide range of genres, from old songs such as \"Sugar Babe\" (the first he ever learned), to pop numbers like \"Shine On, Harvest Moon\" and \"It's a Long Way to Tipperary\".\nIn 1961 he recorded the album \"Trouble in Mind\", released by Reprise Records. In May 1963, he appeared at the first Monterey Folk Festival, (which later became the Monterey Pop Festival) alongside other folk artists such as Bob Dylan, and Peter, Paul and Mary in California.\nUnlike many of his contemporaries, Lipscomb had not recorded in the early blues era. Michael Birnbaum recorded interviews with Mance in 1966 at his home in Navasota about his life and music. These recordings are in the Ethnomusicology library at University of California, Los Angeles. His life is well documented in his autobiography, \"I Say Me for a Parable: The Oral Autobiography of Mance Lipscomb, Texas Bluesman\", narrated to Glen Alyn (published posthumously). He was the subject of a short 1971 documentary film by Les Blank, called \"A Well Spent Life\".\nFollowing his discovery by McCormick and Strachwitz, Lipscomb became an important figure in the American folk music revival of the 1960s. He was a regular performer at folk festivals and folk-blues clubs around the United States, notably the Ash Grove in Los Angeles, California. He was known not only for his singing and intricate guitar style, but also as a storyteller and country \"sage\".\nHe died in Navasota, Texas, in 1976, two years after suffering a stroke. He is buried in Oakland Cemetery, Navasota.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\nLipscomb, Mance. \"I Say for Me a Parable: The Oral Autobiography of Mance Lipscomb, Texas Songster\". New York: W.W. Norton &amp; Company, 1993. "}
{"id": "20485", "revid": "50958025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20485", "title": "Melbourne Cup", "text": "Annual Thoroughbred horse race in Melbourne, Australia\nThe Melbourne Cup is an annual Group 1 Thoroughbred horse race held in Melbourne, Australia, at the Flemington Racecourse. It is a 3200-metre race for three-year-olds and older, conducted by the Victoria Racing Club that forms part of the Melbourne Spring Racing Carnival. It is the richest two-mile handicap in the world and one of the richest turf races. The event starts at 3:00 pm on the first Tuesday of November and is known locally as \"the race that stops the nation\".\nThe Melbourne Cup has cemented itself as a part of Melbourne and Australian culture, having been run every year since 1861. The day of the race has been a public holiday for much of Victoria since 1876. It was originally run over but was shortened to in 1972 when Australia adopted the metric system. This reduced the distance by , and Rain Lover's 1968 race record of 3:19.1 was accordingly adjusted to 3:17.9. The present record holder is the 1990 winner Kingston Rule with a time of 3:16.3.\nQualifying and race conditions.\nThe race is a quality handicap for horses three years old and older, run over a distance of 3200 metres, on the first Tuesday in November at Flemington Racecourse. The minimum handicap weight is 50kg. There is no maximum weight, but the top allocated weight must not be less than 57kg. The weight allocated to each horse is declared by the VRC Handicapper in early September.\nThe Melbourne Cup race is a handicap contest in which the weight of the jockey and riding gear is adjusted with ballast to a nominated figure. Older horses carry more weight than younger ones and weights are adjusted further according to the horse's previous results. The field is selected based on a range of factors, including each horse's age, weight, and previous racing performance.\nWeights were theoretically calculated to give each horse an equal winning chance in the past, but in recent years the rules were adjusted to a \"quality handicap\" formula where superior horses are given less severe weight penalties than under pure handicap rules.\nWeight penalties.\nAfter the declaration of weights for the Melbourne Cup, the winner of any handicap flat race of the advertised value of A$55,000 or over to the winner, or an internationally recognised Listed, Group, or Graded handicap flat race, shall carry such additional weight (if any), for each win, as the VRC Handicapper shall determine.\nFees.\nEntries for the Melbourne Cup usually close during the first week of August. The initial entry fee is $600 per horse. Around 300 to 400 horses are nominated each year, but the final field is limited to 24 starters. Following the allocation of weights, the owner of each horse must on the four occasions before the race in November declare the horse as an acceptor and pay a fee. First acceptance is $960, second acceptance is $1,450 and third acceptance is $2,420. The final acceptance fee, on the Saturday prior to the race, is $45,375. Should a horse be balloted out of the final field, the final declaration fee is refunded.\nBalloting conditions.\nThe race directors may exclude any horse from the race or exempt any horse from the ballot on the race, but in order to reduce the field to the safety limit of 24, horses are balloted out based on a number of factors which include prize money earned in the previous two years, wins or placings in certain lead-up races and allocated handicap weight.\nThe winners of the following races are exempt from any ballot:\nThe limitation of 24 starters is stated explicitly to be for safety reasons. However, in the past far larger numbers were allowed \u2013 the largest field ever raced was 39 runners in 1890.\nQuarantine.\nInternational horses (except from New Zealand) entering Australia must undergo quarantine in an approved premises in their own country for a minimum period of 14 days before travelling to Australia. Premises must meet the Australian Government Standards. The Werribee International Horse Centre at Werribee Racecourse is the Victorian quarantine station for international horses competing in the Melbourne Spring Racing Carnival. The facility has stabling for up to 24 horses in five separate stable complexes and is located 32\u00a0km from the Melbourne CBD.\nPrize money and trophies.\nPrize money.\nThe total prize money for the 2023 race was A$8,410,000, plus an 18-carat solid gold trophy weighing 1.69kg and valued at $600,000 to the winner. The first 12 past the post receive prize money, with the winner being paid $4.4 million, second $1.1 million, third $550,000, fourth $350,000, fifth $230,000, with sixth through to twelfth place earning $160,000. Prize money is distributed to the connections of each horse in the ratio of 85 percent to the owner, 10 percent to the trainer and 5 percent to the jockey.\nThe 1985 Melbourne Cup, won by What a Nuisance, was the first race run in Australia with prize money of $1 million.\nTrophies.\nThe winner of the first Melbourne Cup in 1861 received a gold watch. The first Melbourne Cup trophy was awarded in 1865 and was an elaborate silver bowl on a stand that had been manufactured in England. This is currently owned by Australian wine personality Wolf Blass and is on display at the Wolf Blass Gallery &amp; Museum/Adelaide Hills Wine Bar in Hahndorf, South Australia. The first existing and un-altered Melbourne Cup is from 1866, presented to the owners of The Barb; as of 2013, it is in the National Museum of Australia. The silver trophy presented in 1867, now also in the National Museum of Australia, was also made in England, but jewellers in Victoria complained to the Victorian Racing Club that the trophy should have been made locally. They believed the work of a Melburnian, William Edwards, to be superior in both design and workmanship to the English-made trophy. No trophy was awarded to the Melbourne Cup winner for the next eight years.\nIn 1876, Edward Fischer, an immigrant from Austria, produced the first Australian-made trophy. It was an Etruscan shape with two handles. One side depicted a horse race with the grandstand and hill of Flemington in the background. The opposite side had the words \"Melbourne Cup, 1876\" and the name of the winning horse. A silver-plated base sporting three silver horses was added in 1888, but in 1891 the prize changed to being a , trophy showing a Victory figure offering an olive wreath to a jockey. From 1899, the trophy was in the form of silver galloping horse embossed on a plaque, although it was said to look like a greyhound by some people.\nThe last Melbourne Cup trophy manufactured in England was made for the 1914 event. It was a chalice centred on a long base which had a horse at each end. The trophy awarded in 1916, the first gold trophy, was a three-legged, three-armed rose bowl. The three-handled loving cup design was first awarded in 1919. In that year, the Victorian Racing Club had commissioned James Steeth to design a trophy that would be in keeping with the prestige of the race, little realising that it would become the iconic Melbourne Cup still presented today. In the Second World War years (1942, 1943 and 1944), the winning owner received war bonds valued at 200 pounds.\nA new trophy is struck each year and becomes the property of the winning owner. In the event of a dead heat, a second cup is on hand. The present trophy is hand spun from 1.65\u00a0kg of 18-carat gold. The winning trainer and jockey also receive a miniature replica of the cup (since 1973) and the strapper is awarded the Tommy Woodcock Trophy, named after the strapper of Phar Lap.\nMelbourne Cup Tour.\nIn 2003, an annual tour of the Melbourne Cup trophy was initiated to provide communities across Australia and New Zealand with an opportunity to view the Cup trophy and highlight the contribution the Melbourne Cup has made to Australia's social, sporting and racing culture. Each year, communities in Australia and New Zealand apply for the cup to tour their community and the tour also takes in cities around the world as part of the Victoria Racing Club's strategy to promote the Melbourne Cup and the Melbourne Cup Carnival internationally.\nThe Tour has visited schools and aged-care and hospital facilities, and participated in community events and celebrations including race days across Australia and New Zealand.\nHistory.\nEarly years.\nFrederick Standish, member of the Victorian Turf Club and steward on the day of the first Cup, was credited with forming the idea to hold a horse race and calling it the \"Melbourne Cup\".\nSeventeen horses contested the first Melbourne Cup on Thursday 7 November 1861, racing for the modest prize of 710 gold sovereigns (\u00a3710) cash and a hand-beaten gold watch, winner takes all. The prize was not, as some have suggested, the largest purse up to that time. A large crowd of 4,000 men and women watched the race, although it has been suggested this was less than expected because of news reaching Melbourne of the death of explorers Burke and Wills five days earlier on 2 November. Nevertheless, the attendance was the largest at Flemington on any day for the past two years, with the exception of the recently run Two Thousand Guinea Stakes.\nThe winner of this first Melbourne Cup race was a 16.3 hand bay stallion by the name of Archer in a time of 3.52.00, ridden by John Cutts, trained by Etienne de Mestre, and leased (and consequently raced in his own name) by de Mestre. As a lessee de Mestre owned and was fully responsible for Archer during the lease. Archer was leased from the \"Exeter Farm\" of Jembaicumbene near Braidwood, New South Wales. His owners were Thomas John \"Tom\" Roberts (a good school-friend of de Mestre's), Rowland H. Hassall (Roberts' brother-in-law), and Edmund Molyneux Royds and William Edward Royds (Roberts' nephews).\nThe inaugural Melbourne Cup of 1861 was an eventful affair when one horse bolted before the start, and three of the seventeen starters fell during the race, two of which died. Archer, a Sydney outsider who drew scant favour in the betting, spread-eagled the field and defeated the favourite, and Victorian champion, Mormon by six lengths. Dismissed by the bookies, Archer took a lot of money away from Melbourne, 'refuelling interstate rivalry' and adding to the excitement of the Cup. The next day, Archer was raced in and won another 2-mile long-distance race, the Melbourne Town Plate.\nIt has become legend that Archer walked over 800\u00a0km (over 500 miles) to Flemington from de Mestre's stable at \"Terara\" near Nowra, New South Wales. However, newspaper archives of the day reveal that he had travelled south from Sydney to Melbourne on the steamboat \"City of Melbourne\", together with de Mestre, and two of de Mestre's other horses Exeter and Inheritor. Before being winched aboard the steamboat for the trip to Melbourne, the horses had arrived in Sydney in September 1861.\nArcher travelled to Melbourne by steamboat again the following year (1862) to run in the second Melbourne Cup. This time he won 810 gold sovereigns (\u00a3810) cash and a gold watch before a crowd of 7,000, nearly twice the size of the previous years large crowd in a time of 3.47.00, taking to two the number of Melbourne Cup wins by this horse. Archer had already won the 1862 AJC Queen Elizabeth Stakes in Randwick, Sydney, and returned to win his second Melbourne Cup carrying 10 stone 2 pounds. He defeated a field of twenty starters by eight lengths, a record that has never been beaten, and that was not matched for over 100 years. Mormon again running second. Winning the Melbourne Cup twice was a feat not repeated until more than seventy years later when Peter Pan won the race in 1932 and 1934, and winning the Melbourne Cup two years in a row was a feat not repeated until more than 30 years later when Rain Lover won in 1968 and 1969.\nArcher travelled to Melbourne by steamboat yet again the next year (1863). Despite his weight of 11 stone 4 pounds, Archer would have contested the third cup in 1863, but due to a Victorian public holiday trainer Etienne de Mestre's telegraphed acceptance form arrived late, and Archer was scratched on a technicality. In protest of this decision and in a show of solidarity, many of de Mestre's owners boycotted the third race and scratched their horses in sympathy. As a result, the Melbourne Cup of that year ran with only 7 starters, the smallest number in the history of the Cup.\nIn 1865, Adam Lindsay Gordon wrote a verse in which the Melbourne Cup winner was called Tim Whiffler. Two years later in 1867 two horses with the name Tim Whiffler ran in the Melbourne Cup. (The year before in 1866 two horses with the same name, Falcon, also ran in the Melbourne Cup.) To distinguish between the two Tim Whifflers they were called \"Sydney\" Tim Whiffler and \"Melbourne\" Tim Whiffler. \"Sydney\" Tim Whiffler actually won the Cup. He was trained by Etienne de Mestre, and like Archer before him raced in de Mestre's name but was leased from the \"Exeter Farm\".\nAs early as 1865, Cup day was a half-holiday in Melbourne for public servants and bank officials. Various businesses also closed at lunchtime.\nIt took some years before the purpose of the declared holiday was acknowledged in the Victoria Government Gazette. The Gazette of 31 October 1873 announced that the following Thursday (Cup Day) be observed as a bank and civil (public) service holiday.\nThe Melbourne Cup was first run on a Tuesday in 1875, the first Tuesday in that month.\nOn 7 November 1876, the three-year-old filly, Briseis, owned and trained by James Wilson Snr., won in a time of 3.36.25. Briseis then went on to create a record that is never likely to be equalled, winning the VRC Derby, the Melbourne Cup and the VRC Oaks in the space of six days. She was ridden in the Melbourne Cup by the tiny featherweight figure of jockey Peter St Albans. In 1876 at the recorded age thirteen (he was actually twelve, being 8 days short of his thirteenth birthday), Peter St Albans is also the youngest person ever to win a Melbourne Cup. Before 75,000 at Flemington Briseis, with St Albans in the saddle, comfortably won by 1 length in the biggest field of all time. \"At 4 o'clock the starter released the 33 runners and they swept down the long Flemington straight in a thundering rush. Briseis, ridden by what one writer termed a mere child, (in the Cup) captured a rare double, the Victoria Race Club Derby and the Melbourne Cup. Shouts and hurrahs were heard, hats were thrown in the air and one excited individual fell on his back in the attempt to do a somersault. The boy who rode the winner was carried around the pack and is the hero of the day,\" reported the \"Australasian Sketcher\" in 1876. Both Peter St Albans and Briseis have now become racing legends, and Briseis is regarded as one of the greatest mares foaled in Australia.\nBriseis wasn't the only sensation surrounding the 1876 Melbourne Cup. Two months before the event, on Saturday 9 September, the \"City of Melbourne\" sailed for Melbourne from Sydney with a cargo including 13 racehorses, many of whom were considered serious contenders for the Melbourne Cup. The following day the ship ran into a savage storm and was hit by several rogue waves, with Nemesis (the winner of the 1876 AJC Metropolitan Handicap in Randwick, Sydney and favourite for the Cup, owned by John Moffat) and Robin Hood (another favourite, owned by Etienne de Mestre) being among the 11 horses that were killed. Betting on the big race was paralysed. To the dismay and anger of the public, bookmakers, showing no feeling, presented a purse (loaded with coins) to the captain as token of their appreciation for his part in saving them many thousands of pounds in bets already laid on the favourites who had perished. Perhaps they should have kept their money, however. The outsider Briseis comfortably won by 1 length in the biggest field of all time and in an extremely good time, so it is unlikely that the horses who perished could have beaten her.\n1877 is also the year that the trainer Etienne de Mestre won his fourth Melbourne Cup with Chester owned by Hon. James White. In 1878, as in previous years, De Mestre fielded more than one horse. He entered the favourite Firebell (owned by W. S. Cox) who finished last, Chester (owned by Hon. James White) the previous year's winner who fell, and Calamia (owned by de Mestre) who, though less fancied, won easily by two lengths. First prize was \u00a31,790, the crowd was 80,000 and there were 30 starters. De Mestre's 1878 win with Calamia brought to 5 the number of Melbourne Cups he had won. This record was not to be matched for nearly 100 years when the trainer Bart Cummings won his fifth Melbourne Cup in 1975. Bart Cummings, regarded as the best Australian horse trainer of all time, went on to win 12 Melbourne Cups to 2008.\nIn 1883, the hardy New Zealand bred, Martini-Henry won the VRC Derby, the Melbourne Cup and on the following Monday retained his undefeated record by winning Mares' Produce Stakes.\nPhar Lap, the most famous horse in the world of his day, won the 1930 Melbourne Cup at 11/8 odds on, the shortest-priced favourite in the history of the race. He had to be hidden away at Geelong before the race after an attempt was made to shoot him and only emerged an hour before the race time of the Cup. Phar Lap also competed in 1929 and 1931, but came 3rd and 8th respectively, despite heavy favouritism in both years.\nThere are a few legends of the first Aboriginal jockey to ride in a Melbourne Cup. It was believed to be John Cutts who won the first and second cups in 1861 and 1862 riding archer. He was reputedly an Aboriginal stockman born in the area where Archer was trained but was actually John 'Cutts' Dillon, the son of a Sydney clerk, a jockey who rode for many trainers in his long career, and who was one of the best known, best-liked and most respected jockeys in New South Wales. It is thought that Peter St Albans was the first Aboriginal jockey to win the cup, on Briseis in 1876. Because St Albans was not quite 13 years old, the jockey was too young to ride in the cup. Thus, to allow him to race Briseis in the Cup, it was argued his birthdate and parents were unknown, and from this, the legend of him being Aboriginal grew. Both these legends, however, can definitely be disproved, and history had to wait nearly another 100 years. The first jockey of Indigenous heritage to ride a Melbourne Cup winner was Frank Reys in 1973 on Gala Supreme, who had a Filipino father and a half-Aboriginal mother.\nRecent years.\nThe race has undergone several alterations in recent years, the most visible being the entry of many foreign-trained horses. Most have failed to cope with the conditions; the three successful \"foreign raids\" include two by Irish trainer Dermot K. Weld successful in 1993 and 2002, and one in 2006 by Katsumi Yoshida of Japan's renowned Yoshida racing and breeding family. The attraction for foreigners to compete was, primarily, the low-profile change to the new \"quality handicap\" weighting system. The 1910 Melbourne Cup was won by Comedy King, the first foreign bred horse to do so. Subsequent foreign-bred horses to win Cup were Backwood, 1924; Phar Lap, 1930; Wotan, 1936; Beldale Ball, 1980; At Talaq, 1986; Kingston Rule, 1990; Vintage Crop, 1993; Jeune, 1994; Media Puzzle, 2002; Makybe Diva, 2003, 2004, 2005; Americain, 2010; and Dunaden, 2011.\nThe 1938 Melbourne Cup was won by trainer Mrs. Allan McDonald, who conditioned Catalogue. Mrs McDonald was a successful trainer in New Zealand; however, at the time, women were not allowed to compete as trainers in Australia, so her husband's name was officially recorded as the winning trainer. The 2001 edition was won by New Zealand mare Ethereal, trained by Sheila Laxon, the first woman to formally train a Melbourne Cup winner. She also won the Caulfield Cup, a 2,400-metre race also held in Melbourne, and therefore has won the \"Cups Double\".\nMaree Lyndon became the first female to ride in the Melbourne Cup, when she partnered Argonaut Style in 1987, in which she ran second-last place in the 21-horse field.\nIn 2004, Makybe Diva became the first mare to win two cups, and also the first horse to win with different trainers, after David Hall moved to Hong Kong and transferred her to the Lee Freedman stables.\nThe 2005 Melbourne Cup was held before a crowd of 106,479. Makybe Diva made history by becoming the only horse to win the race three times. Trainer Lee Freedman said after the race, \"Go and find the youngest child on the course because that's the only person here who will have a chance of seeing this happen again in their lifetime.\"\nDue to the 2007 Australian equine influenza outbreak, believed to have been started by a horse brought into Australia from Japan, neither Delta Blues nor Pop Rock participated in the 2007 Melbourne Cup. Both horses had been stabled in Japan. Corowa, NSW-trained \"Leica Falcon\" also was not permitted to race in Victoria despite Corowa being close to the Victorian border. Leica Falcon was ordained as the new staying star of Australian racing in 2005 when he ran fourth in both the Caulfield Cup and in Makybe Diva's famous third Melbourne Cup victory. But serious leg injuries saw the horse not race for another 20 months. Efficient, the previous year's VRC Derby winner, won the race.\nIn 2013, Damien Oliver returned from an eight-month ban, after betting against his own mount at a previous race meet, to win his 3rd Melbourne cup.\nThe Cup.\nIn 2016, ABC Bullion, a Pallion company, was awarded the rights to make the Melbourne Cup. The winning trophy contains 1.65\u00a0kg of 18-carat gold estimated at over $200,000. The cup is produced by W. J. Sanders, a sister division within Pallion and takes over 250 hours to produce. W. J. Sanders has produced each Melbourne Cup from 2016 to present.\nAttendance.\nThe event is one of the most popular spectator events in Australia, with sometimes over 110,000 people in attendance, some dressed in traditional formal raceday wear and others in all manner of exotic and amusing costumes, attending the race. The record crowd was 122,736 in 2003. The 1926 running of the Cup was the first time the 100,000 mark had been passed. Today the record at Flemington is held by the 2006 Victoria Derby when almost 130,000 attended.\nIn 2007, a limit was placed on the Spring Carnival attendance at Flemington Racecourse, and race-goers are now required to pre-purchase tickets. Every year more and more people travel to Flemington Racecourse; in 2016, there was a 7.8 per cent increase in the number of out-of-state individuals (80,472) attending the Melbourne Cup Carnival.\nThe popularity of the Melbourne Cup has been declining in recent years; every Melbourne Cup after 2015 since has seen a decline in attendance, with the 2019 Melbourne Cup's crowd of 81,408 the race's smallest in decades.\nIn the post-COVID-19 era, attendances at the Melbourne Cup increased each year from 2022 to 2024, before declining in 2025.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nTelevision broadcast.\nSince the introduction of television broadcasts in Australia during the 1950s, the Melbourne Cup has been broadcast regularly since the centenary race in 1960. The 1960 Melbourne Cup was the first interstate broadcast of the race, with three stations in Sydney showing the race live. The video recording of the race was shown on news broadcasts later that evening in Melbourne and Brisbane, after the tapes were transported. Live international broadcasts of the race began in 1971 when it was televised in New Zealand.\nIt wasn't until the 1978 Melbourne Cup that the race was permitted by the VRC to be shown live in Victoria, with Network 10 granted exclusive rights via ATV-0. Network Ten would be the official broadcast partner of the Melbourne Cup carnival from 1978 through to 2001. The Seven Network won the rights to broadcast the race from 2002, with caller Wayne Wilson criticised for his call of the 2002 race. Seven would retain exclusive coverage of the Melbourne Cup carnival until 2018, when the rights returned to Network Ten in a A$100m deal over five years.\nAs of 2025, the race is broadcast in Australia on the Nine Network and internationally through a number of broadcast partners. Nine entered into a five year deal with the VRC in February 2024.\nControversies.\nAnimal welfare.\nThe Melbourne Cup has drawn increasing criticism regarding the welfare of participating horses. Since 2013, six horses have been confirmed to have died during the Cup, or on Cup Day, with many more permanently injured either in the race or en route. Nationally, the Coalition for the Protection of Racehorses reported at least 174 thoroughbreds died from racing or training injuries in Australia over a 12-month period, marking the highest number on record. In several instances, horses have fractured limbs while being pushed to finish the race, or collapsed in stalls after competing. Visible injuries also raise alarm. The 2025 winner was photographed with blood around the mouth post-race.\nDomestic violence rates.\nThe Melbourne Cup also plays a role in broader social issues. Research shows that domestic violence incidents spike on Cup Day in Victoria and around other large sporting events. An academic analysis found that not only alcohol but gambling losses, heightened emotions and cultural norms around masculinity contribute to the surges in family violence.\nGambling culture.\nThe Cup acts as a major driver of betting behaviour in Australia, normalising wagering among people who may not otherwise regularly gamble. Research by the Centre for Gambling Research at ANU indicates that although betting on racehorses has slightly declined overall, Cup Day remains a \"huge spike\" in wagering and is effectively used by bookmakers to convert new or casual bettors into repeat users. A poll of Australian adults found that while just 19% regularly bet on horse races, 38% said they would watch the Melbourne Cup and place a bet, highlighting how the event sends social cues that wagering is expected. One study noted annual betting of over A$105 million on the single race in earlier years.\nLittering and waste issues.\nLarge volumes of litter accumulate across the surrounding areas during Carnival week, leading to criticism of the single-use culture. Cleaning crews estimate that the post-event clean-up often exceeds 150 tonnes of rubbish just for the main Cup day at Flemington Racecourse. Additionally, protests have targeted the event's social licence: in one 2022 incident, activists dumped oily sludge on the track to highlight perceived cruelty and environmental impact. Much of the waste consists of single-use drink bottles, beer cans, glassware, food packaging, and other disposable items left by attendees. For example, one report highlighted the discovery of \"underwear, hats, false teeth\" among the litter.\nCultural significance and popular culture.\n\"The Race that Stops a Nation\".\nThe Melbourne Cup is commonly billed as \"The race that stops a nation.\" In the Melbourne metropolitan area, the race day has been a gazetted public holiday since 1877, but around both Australia and New Zealand a majority of people watch the race on television and gamble, either through direct betting or participating in workplace cup \"sweeps\". In 2000, a betting agency claimed that 80 percent of the adult Australian population placed a bet on the race that year. In 2010 it was predicted that $183 million would be spent by 83,000 tourists during the Spring Racing Carnival. In New Zealand, the Melbourne Cup is the country's single biggest betting event, with carnival race-days held at several of the country's top tracks showing the cup live on big screens.\nPublic holiday.\nMelbourne Cup day is a public holiday for all working within metropolitan Melbourne and some parts of regional Victoria, but not for some country Victorian cities and towns which hold their own spring carnivals. For federal public servants it is also observed as a holiday in the entire state of Victoria, and from 2007 to 2009 also in the Australian Capital Territory known as Family and Community Day replacing Picnic Day. \nAs early as 1865, Cup Day was a half-holiday in Melbourne for public servants and bank officials. Various businesses also closed at lunchtime.\nIt took some years before the purpose of the declared holiday was acknowledged in the Victoria Government Gazette. The Gazette of 31 October 1873 announced that the following Thursday (Cup Day) be observed as a bank and civil (public) service holiday.\nSpring \"Fashions on the Field\".\n'Fashions on the Field' is a major focus of the day, with substantial prizes awarded for the best-dressed man and woman. The requirement for elegant hats, and more recently the alternative of a fascinator, almost single-handedly keeps Melbourne's milliners in business. Raceday fashion has occasionally drawn almost as much attention as the race itself. The miniskirt received worldwide publicity when model Jean Shrimpton wore a white shift version of one on Derby Day during Melbourne Cup week in 1965.\nFlowers, especially roses, are an important component of the week's racing at Flemington. The racecourse has around 12,000 roses within its large expanse. Over 200 varieties of the fragrant flower are nurtured by a team of up to 12 gardeners. Each of the major racedays at Flemington has an official flower. Victoria Derby Day has the Corn Flower, Melbourne Cup Day is for the Yellow Rose, Oaks Day highlights the Pink Rose, and Stakes Day goes to the Red Rose.\nLiterature.\nA Melbourne Cup betting coup is featured in the 1882 novel \"Robbery Under Arms\" by Rolf Boldrewood.\nFilm.\nThe 1930 and 1931 Melbourne Cups are depicted in the movie \"Phar Lap\" (1983), and a fictitious Melbourne Cup with what appears to be real newsreel footage is featured in \"Charlie Chan at the Race Track\" (1936). \"The Cup\" is a 2011 feature film about the dramatic events surrounding the 2002 Melbourne Cup. \"Ride Like a Girl\" is a 2019 feature film about the life of Michelle Payne and her victorious ride in the 2015 Melbourne Cup.\n\"Nup to the Cup\".\nAs Australia's highest-profile horse race, the Melbourne Cup has become a focus of growing criticism since the 2000s, relating to the treatment of racehorses on and off the field as well as concerns about the public holiday's normalisation of gambling and excess alcohol consumption. Since 2008, the Coalition for the Protection of Racehorses has run alternative events under the slogan \"Nup to the Cup\" and conducted research and public awareness campaigns on racehorse injuries and deaths. In 2019, an Australian Broadcasting Corporation (ABC) investigation revealed that hundreds of racehorses a year were being sent to slaughterhouses where they were subjected to inhumane treatment before being killed, contradicting statistics published by Racing Australia. Changing attitudes towards horse racing have been observed in public opinion polls and lower attendance rates since the ABC's investigation. High-profile celebrities including Taylor Swift, and Megan Gale cancelled their attendance at the 2019 Cup following the ABC report, and entertainers and influencers continue to face pressure from some of their fans to boycott the Cup.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
