{"id": "24077", "revid": "8695917", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24077", "title": "PDF", "text": "Portable Document Format, a digital file format\nPortable Document Format (PDF), standardized as ISO 32000, is a file format developed by Adobe in 1992 to present documents, including text formatting and images, in a manner independent of application software, hardware, and operating systems. Based on the PostScript language, each PDF file encapsulates a complete description of a fixed-layout flat document, including the text, fonts, vector graphics, raster images and other information needed to display it. PDF has its roots in \"The Camelot Project\" initiated by Adobe co-founder John Warnock in 1991.\nPDF was standardized as ISO 32000 in 2008. It is maintained by ISO TC 171 SC 2 WG8, of which the PDF Association is the committee manager. The last edition as ISO 32000-2:2020 was published in December 2020.\nPDF files may contain a variety of content besides flat text and graphics including logical structuring elements, interactive elements such as annotations and form-fields, layers, rich media (including video content), three-dimensional objects using U3D or PRC, and various other data formats. The PDF specification also provides for encryption and digital signatures, file attachments, and metadata to enable workflows requiring these features.\nHistory.\nThe development of PDF began in 1991 when John Warnock wrote a paper for a project then code-named Camelot, in which he proposed the creation of a simplified version of PostScript called Interchange PostScript (IPS). Unlike traditional PostScript, which was tightly focused on rendering print jobs to output devices, IPS would be optimized for displaying pages to any screen and any platform.\nAdobe Systems made the PDF specification available free of charge in 1993. In the early years PDF was popular mainly in desktop publishing workflows, and competed with several other formats, including DjVu, Envoy, Common Ground Digital Paper, Farallon Replica and even Adobe's own PostScript format.\nPDF was a proprietary format controlled by Adobe until it was released as an open standard on July 1, 2008, and published by the International Organization for Standardization as ISO 32000-1:2008, at which time control of the specification passed to an ISO Committee of volunteer industry experts. In 2008, Adobe published a Public Patent License to ISO 32000-1 granting royalty-free rights for all patents owned by Adobe necessary to make, use, sell, and distribute PDF-compliant implementations.\nPDF 1.7, the sixth edition of the PDF specification that became ISO 32000-1, includes some proprietary technologies defined only by Adobe, such as Adobe XML Forms Architecture (XFA) and JavaScript extension for Acrobat, which are referenced by ISO 32000-1 as normative and indispensable for the full implementation of the ISO 32000-1 specification. These proprietary technologies are not standardized, and their specification is published only on Adobe's website. Many of them are not supported by popular third-party implementations of PDF.\nISO published version 2.0 of PDF, ISO 32000-2 in 2017, available for purchase, replacing the free specification provided by Adobe. In December 2020, the second edition of PDF 2.0, ISO 32000-2:2020, was published, with clarifications, corrections, and critical updates to normative references (ISO 32000-2 does not include any proprietary technologies as normative references).\nIn April 2023 the PDF Association made ISO 32000-2 available for download free of charge.\nTechnical details.\nA PDF file is often a combination of vector graphics, text, and bitmap graphics. The basic types of content in a PDF are:\nIn later PDF revisions, a PDF document can also support links (inside document or web page), forms, JavaScript (initially available as a plugin for Acrobat 3.0), or any other types of embedded contents that can be handled using plug-ins.\nPDF combines three technologies:\nPostScript language.\nPostScript is a page description language run in an interpreter to generate an image. It can handle graphics and has standard features of programming languages such as branching and looping. PDF is a subset of PostScript, simplified to remove such control flow features, while graphics commands remain.\nPostScript was originally designed for a drastically different use case: transmission of one-way linear print jobs in which the PostScript interpreter would collect a series of commands until it encountered the codice_1 command, then execute all the commands to render a page as a raster image to a printing device. PostScript was not intended for long-term storage and real-time interactive rendering of electronic documents to computer monitors, so there was no need to support anything other than consecutive rendering of pages. If there was an error in the final printed output, the user would correct it at the application level and send a new print job in the form of an entirely new PostScript file. Thus, any given page in a PostScript file could be accurately rendered only as the cumulative result of executing all preceding commands to draw all previous pages\u2014any of which could affect subsequent pages\u2014plus the commands to draw that particular page, and there was no easy way to bypass that process to skip around to different pages.\nTraditionally, to go from PostScript to PDF, a source PostScript file (that is, an executable program) is used as the basis for generating PostScript-like PDF code (see, e.g., Adobe Distiller). This is done by applying standard compiler techniques like loop unrolling, inlining and removing unused branches, resulting in code that is purely declarative and static. The result is then packaged into a container format, together with all necessary dependencies for correct rendering (external files, graphics, or fonts to which the document refers), and compressed. Modern applications write to printer drivers that directly generate PDF rather than going through PostScript first.\nAs a document format, PDF has several advantages over PostScript:\nIts disadvantages are:\nPDF since v1.6 supports embedding of interactive 3D documents: 3D drawings can be embedded using U3D or PRC and various other data formats.\nFile format.\nA PDF file is organized using ASCII characters, except for certain elements that may have binary content.\nThe file starts with a header containing a magic number (as a readable string) and the version of the format, for example codice_2. The format is a subset of a COS (\"Carousel\" Object Structure) format. A COS tree file consists primarily of \"objects\", of which there are nine types:\nComments using 8-bit characters prefixed with the percent sign (codice_10) may be inserted.\nObjects may be either \"direct\" (embedded in another object) or \"indirect\". Indirect objects are numbered with an \"object number\" and a \"generation number\" and defined between the codice_11 and codice_12 keywords if residing in the document root. Beginning with PDF version 1.5, indirect objects (except other streams) may also be located in special streams known as \"object streams\" (marked codice_13). This technique enables non-stream objects to have standard stream filters applied to them, reduces the size of files that have large numbers of small indirect objects and is especially useful for \"Tagged PDF\". Object streams do not support specifying an object's \"generation number\" (other than 0).\nAn index table, also called the cross-reference table, is located near the end of the file and gives the byte offset of each indirect object from the start of the file. This design allows for efficient random access to the objects in the file, and also allows for small changes to be made without rewriting the entire file (\"incremental update\"). Before PDF version 1.5, the table would always be in a special ASCII format, be marked with the codice_14 keyword, and follow the main body composed of indirect objects. Version 1.5 introduced optional \"cross-reference streams\", which have the form of a standard stream object, possibly with filters applied. Such a stream may be used instead of the ASCII cross-reference table and contains the offsets and other information in binary format. The format is flexible in that it allows for integer width specification (using the codice_15 array), so that for example, a document not exceeding 64\u00a0KiB in size may dedicate only 2 bytes for object offsets. To ensure backward compatibility, a hybrid-reference PDF file may include both traditional cross-reference tables and cross-reference streams, allowing older PDF processors to read the file while still taking advantage of the new features introduced in version 1.5.\nAt the end of a PDF file is a footer containing\nIf a cross-reference stream is not being used, the footer is preceded by the codice_19 keyword followed by a dictionary containing information that would otherwise be contained in the cross-reference stream object's dictionary:\nWithin each page, there are one or multiple content streams that describe the text, vector and images being drawn on the page. The content stream is stack-based, similar to PostScript.\nThere are two layouts to the PDF files: non-linearized (not \"optimized\") and linearized (\"optimized\"). Non-linearized PDF files can be smaller than their linear counterparts, though they are slower to access because portions of the data required to assemble pages of the document are scattered throughout the PDF file. Linearized PDF files (also called \"optimized\" or \"web optimized\" PDF files) are constructed in a manner that enables them to be read in a Web browser plugin without waiting for the entire file to download, since all objects required for the first page to display are optimally organized at the start of the file. PDF files may be optimized using Adobe Acrobat software or QPDF.\nPage dimensions are not limited by the format itself. However, Adobe Acrobat imposes a limit of 15 million by 15 million inches, or , an area slightly larger than Tajikistan.\nImaging model.\nThe basic design of how graphics are represented in PDF is very similar to that of PostScript, except for the use of transparency, which was added in PDF 1.4.\nPDF graphics use a device-independent Cartesian coordinate system to describe the surface of a page. A PDF page description can use a matrix to scale, rotate, or skew graphical elements. A key concept in PDF is that of the \"graphics state\", which is a collection of graphical parameters that may be changed, saved, and restored by a \"page description\". PDF has (as of version 2.0) 25 graphics state properties, of which some of the most important are:\nVector graphics.\nAs in PostScript, vector graphics in PDF are constructed with \"paths\". Paths are usually composed of lines and cubic B\u00e9zier curves, but can also be constructed from the outlines of text. Unlike PostScript, PDF does not allow a single path to mix text outlines with lines and curves. Paths can be stroked, filled, fill then stroked, or used for clipping. Strokes and fills can use any color set in the graphics state, including \"patterns\". PDF supports several types of patterns. The simplest is the \"tiling pattern\" in which a piece of artwork is specified to be drawn repeatedly. This may be a \"colored tiling pattern\", with the colors specified in the pattern object, or an \"uncolored tiling pattern\", which defers color specification to the time the pattern is drawn. Beginning with PDF 1.3 there is also a \"shading pattern\", which draws continuously varying colors. There are seven types of shading patterns of which the simplest are the \"axial shading\" (Type 2) and \"radial shading\" (Type 3). \nRaster images.\nRaster images in PDF (called \"Image XObjects\") are represented by dictionaries with an associated stream. The dictionary describes the properties of the image, and the stream contains the image data. (Less commonly, small raster images may be embedded directly in a page description as an \"inline image\".) Images are typically \"filtered\" for compression purposes. Image filters supported in PDF include the following general-purpose filters:\nNormally all image content in a PDF is embedded in the file. But PDF allows image data to be stored in external files by the use of \"external streams\" or \"Alternate Images\". Standardized subsets of PDF, including PDF/A and PDF/X, prohibit these features.\nText.\nText in PDF is represented by \"text elements\" in page content streams. A text element specifies that \"characters\" should be drawn at certain positions. The characters are specified using the \"encoding\" of a selected \"font resource\".\nA font object in PDF is a description of a digital typeface. It may either describe the characteristics of a typeface, or it may include an embedded \"font file\". The latter case is called an \"embedded font\" while the former is called an \"unembedded font\". The font files that may be embedded are based on widely used standard digital font formats: Type 1 (and its compressed variant CFF), TrueType, and (beginning with PDF 1.6) OpenType. Additionally PDF supports the Type 3 variant in which the components of the font are described by PDF graphic operators. \nFourteen typefaces, known as the \"standard 14 fonts\" or \"base fourteen fonts\", have a special significance in PDF documents:\nThese fonts, or suitable substitute fonts with the same metrics, should be available in most PDF readers, but they are not \"guaranteed\" to be available in the reader, and may only display correctly if the system has them installed. Fonts may be substituted if they are not embedded in a PDF.\nWithin text strings, characters are shown using \"character codes\" (integers) that map to glyphs in the current font using an \"encoding\". There are several predefined encodings, including \"WinAnsi\", \"MacRoman\", and many encodings for East Asian languages and a font can have its own built-in encoding. (Although the WinAnsi and MacRoman encodings are derived from the historical properties of the Windows and Macintosh operating systems, fonts using these encodings work equally well on any platform.) PDF can specify a predefined encoding to use, the font's built-in encoding or provide a lookup table of differences to a predefined or built-in encoding (not recommended with TrueType fonts). The encoding mechanisms in PDF were designed for Type 1 fonts, and the rules for applying them to TrueType fonts are complex.\nFor large fonts or fonts with non-standard glyphs, the special encodings \"Identity-H\" (for horizontal writing) and \"Identity-V\" (for vertical) are used. With such fonts, it is necessary to provide a \"ToUnicode\" table if semantic information about the characters is to be preserved.\nA text document which is scanned to PDF without the text being recognised by optical character recognition (OCR) is an image, with no fonts or text properties.\nTransparency.\nThe original imaging model of PDF was \"opaque,\" similar to PostScript, where each object drawn on the page completely replaced anything previously marked in the same location. In PDF 1.4 the imaging model was extended to allow transparency. When transparency is used, new objects interact with previously marked objects to produce blending effects. The addition of transparency to PDF was done by means of new extensions that were designed to be ignored in products written to PDF 1.3 and earlier specifications. As a result, files that use a small amount of transparency might be viewed acceptably by older viewers, but files making extensive use of transparency could be viewed incorrectly by an older viewer.\nThe transparency extensions are based on the key concepts of \"transparency groups\", \"blending modes\", \"shape\", and \"alpha\". The model is closely aligned with the features of Adobe Illustrator version 9. The blend modes were based on those used by Adobe Photoshop at the time. When the PDF 1.4 specification was published, the formulas for calculating blend modes were kept secret by Adobe. They have since been published.\nThe concept of a transparency group in PDF specification is independent of existing notions of \"group\" or \"layer\" in applications such as Adobe Illustrator. Those groupings reflect logical relationships among objects that are meaningful when editing those objects, but they are not part of the imaging model.\nAdditional features.\nLogical structure and accessibility.\nA tagged PDF (see clause 14.8 in ISO 32000) includes document structure and semantics information to enable reliable text extraction and accessibility. Technically speaking, tagged PDF is a stylized use of the format that builds on the logical structure framework introduced in PDF 1.3. Tagged PDF defines a set of standard structure types and attributes that allow page content (text, graphics, and images) to be extracted and reused for other purposes.\nTagged PDF is not required in situations where a PDF file is intended only for print. Since the feature is optional, and since the rules for tagged PDF were relatively vague in ISO 32000-1, support for tagged PDF among consuming devices, including assistive technology (AT), is uneven as of 2021. ISO 32000-2, however, includes an improved discussion of tagged PDF which is anticipated to facilitate further adoption.\nAn ISO-standardized subset of PDF specifically targeted at accessibility, PDF/UA, was first published in 2012.\nOptional Content Groups (layers).\nWith the introduction of PDF version 1.5 (2003) came the concept of Layers. Layers, more formally known as Optional Content Groups (OCGs), refer to sections of content in a PDF document that can be selectively viewed or hidden by document authors or viewers. This capability is useful in CAD drawings, layered artwork, maps, multi-language documents, etc.\nBasically, it consists of an Optional Content Properties Dictionary added to the document root. This dictionary contains an array of Optional Content Groups (OCGs), each describing a set of information and each of which may be individually displayed or suppressed, plus a set of Optional Content Configuration Dictionaries, which give the status (Displayed or Suppressed) of the given OCGs.\nEncryption and signatures.\nA PDF file may be encrypted, for security, in which case a password is needed to view or edit the contents. PDF 2.0 defines 256-bit AES encryption as the standard for PDF 2.0 files. The PDF Reference also defines ways that third parties can define their own encryption systems for PDF.\nPDF files may be digitally signed, to provide secure authentication; complete details on implementing digital signatures in PDF are provided in ISO 32000-2.\nPDF files may also contain embedded DRM restrictions that provide further controls that limit copying, editing, or printing. These restrictions depend on the reader software to obey them, so the security they provide is limited.\nThe standard security provided by PDF consists of two different methods and two different passwords: a \"user password\", which encrypts the file and prevents opening, and an \"owner password\", which specifies operations that should be restricted even when the document is decrypted, which can include modifying, printing, or copying text and graphics out of the document, or adding or modifying text notes and AcroForm fields. The user password encrypts the file, while the owner password does not, instead relying on client software to respect these restrictions. An owner password can easily be removed by software, including some free online services. Thus, the use restrictions that a document author places on a PDF document are not secure, and cannot be assured once the file is distributed; this warning is displayed when applying such restrictions using Adobe Acrobat software to create or edit PDF files.\nEven without removing the password, most freeware or open source PDF readers ignore the permission \"protections\" and allow the user to print or make copies of excerpts of the text as if the document were not limited by password protection.\nBeginning with PDF 1.5, Usage rights (UR) signatures are used to enable additional interactive features that are not available by default in a particular PDF viewer application. The signature is used to validate that the permissions have been granted by a bona fide granting authority. For example, it can be used to allow a user:\nFor example, Adobe Systems grants permissions to enable additional features in Adobe Reader, using public-key cryptography. Adobe Reader verifies that the signature uses a certificate from an Adobe-authorized certificate authority. Any PDF application can use this same mechanism for its own purposes.\nUnder specific circumstances including non-patched systems of the receiver, the information the receiver of a digital signed document sees can be manipulated by the sender after the document has been signed by the signer.\nPAdES (\"PDF Advanced Electronic Signatures\") is a set of restrictions and extensions to PDF and ISO 32000-1 making it suitable for advanced electronic signatures. This is published by ETSI as TS 102 778.\nFile attachments.\nPDF files can have file attachments which processors may access and open or save to a local filesystem.\nMetadata.\nPDF files can contain two types of metadata. The first is the Document Information Dictionary, a set of key/value fields such as author, title, subject, creation and update dates. This is optional and is referenced from an codice_22 key in the trailer of the file. A small set of fields is defined and can be extended with additional text values if required. This method is deprecated in PDF 2.0.\nIn PDF 1.4, support was added for Metadata Streams, using the Extensible Metadata Platform (XMP) to add XML standards-based extensible metadata as used in other file formats. PDF 2.0 allows metadata to be attached to any object in the document, such as information about embedded illustrations, fonts, and images, as well as the whole document (attaching to the document catalog), using an extensible schema.\nPDF documents can also contain display settings, including the page display layout and zoom level in a Viewer Preferences object. Adobe Reader uses these settings to override the user's default settings when opening the document. The free Adobe Reader cannot remove these settings.\nAccessibility.\nPDF files can be created specifically to be accessible to people with disabilities. PDF file formats in use as of 2014[ [update]] can include tags, text equivalents, captions, audio descriptions, and more. Some software can automatically produce tagged PDFs, but this feature is not always enabled by default. Leading screen readers, including JAWS, Window-Eyes, Hal, and Kurzweil 1000 and 3000 can read tagged PDFs. Moreover, tagged PDFs can be re-flowed and magnified for readers with visual impairments. Adding tags to older PDFs and those that are generated from scanned documents can present some challenges.\nOne of the significant challenges with PDF accessibility is that PDF documents have three distinct views, which, depending on the document's creation, can be inconsistent with each other. The three views are (i) the physical view, (ii) the tags view, and (iii) the content view. The physical view is displayed and printed (what most people consider a PDF document). The tags view is what screen readers and other assistive technologies use to deliver high-quality navigation and reading experience to users with disabilities. The content view is based on the physical order of objects within the PDF's content stream and may be displayed by software that does not fully support the tags' view, such as the Reflow feature in Adobe's Reader.\nPDF/UA, the International Standard for accessible PDF based on ISO 32000-1 was first published as ISO 14289\u20131 in 2012 and establishes normative language for accessible PDF technology. PDF/UA address the PDF format and it brings the ideas behind WCAG 2.0 to establish PDF-specific accessibility rules.\nMultimedia.\n\"Rich Media PDF\" is a PDF file including interactive content that can be embedded or linked within the file. It can contain images, audio, video content, or buttons. For example, if the interactive PDF is a digital catalog for an E-commerce business, products can be listed on the PDF pages and can be added with images and links to the website and buttons to order directly from the document.\nForms.\n\"Interactive Forms\" is a mechanism to add forms to the PDF file format. PDF currently supports two different methods for integrating data and PDF forms. Both formats today coexist in the PDF specification:\nAcroForms were introduced in the PDF 1.2 format. AcroForms permit the uses of objects (\"e.g.\" text boxes, Radio buttons, \"etc.\") and some code (\"e.g.\" JavaScript). Alongside the standard PDF action types, interactive forms (AcroForms) support submitting, resetting, and importing data. The \"submit\" action transmits the names and values of selected interactive form fields to a specified uniform resource locator (URL). Interactive form field names and values may be submitted in any of the following formats, (depending on the settings of the action's ExportFormat, SubmitPDF, and XFDF flags):\nThe entire document can be submitted rather than individual fields and values, as was defined in PDF 1.4.\nAcroForms can keep form field values in external stand-alone files containing key-value pairs. The external files may use Forms Data Format (FDF) and XML Forms Data Format (XFDF) files. The usage rights (UR) signatures define rights for import form data files in FDF, XFDF, and text (CSV/TSV) formats, and export form data files in FDF and XFDF formats.\nIn PDF 1.5, Adobe Systems introduced a proprietary format for forms; Adobe XML Forms Architecture (XFA). Adobe XFA Forms are not compatible with ISO 32000's AcroForms feature, and most PDF processors do not handle XFA content. The XFA specification is referenced from ISO 32000-1/PDF 1.7 as an external proprietary specification and was entirely deprecated from PDF with ISO 32000-2 (PDF 2.0).\nLicensing.\nAnyone may create applications that can read and write PDF files without having to pay royalties to Adobe Systems; Adobe holds patents to PDF, but licenses them for royalty-free use in developing software complying with its PDF specification.\nSecurity.\nChanges to content.\nIn November 2019, researchers from Ruhr University Bochum and Hackmanit GmbH published attacks on digitally signed PDFs. They showed how to change the visible content in a signed PDF without invalidating the signature in 21 of 22 desktop PDF viewers and 6 of 8 online validation services by abusing implementation flaws.\nAt the same conference, they additionally showed how to exfiltrate the plaintext of encrypted content in PDFs. In 2021, they showed new so-called \"shadow attacks\" on PDFs that abuse the flexibility of features provided in the specification. An overview of security issues in PDFs regarding denial of service, information disclosure, data manipulation, and arbitrary code execution attacks was presented by Jens M\u00fcller.\nMalware vulnerability.\nSome popular PDF readers have a history of security vulnerabilities that allows PDF files that have been infected with viruses, Trojans, and other malware to inflict damage. Such PDF files can have hidden JavaScript code that might exploit vulnerabilities in a PDF reader, hidden objects executed when the file that hides them is opened, and, less commonly, a malicious PDF can launch malware.\nPDF attachments carrying viruses were first discovered in 2001. The virus, named \"OUTLOOK.PDFWorm\" or \"Peachy\", uses Microsoft Outlook to send itself as an attached Adobe PDF file. It was activated with Adobe Acrobat, but not with Acrobat Reader.\nOver the years, several vulnerabilities have been discovered in various versions of Adobe Reader, which prompted the company to issue security fixes. Vulnerabilities have been discovered in other PDF readers as well. One aggravating factor is that a PDF reader can be configured to start automatically if a web page has an embedded PDF file, providing a vector for attack. If a malicious web page contains an infected PDF file that takes advantage of a vulnerability in the PDF reader, the system may be compromised even if the browser is secure. Some of these vulnerabilities are a result of badly written PDF readers mishandling JavaScript embedded in the PDF file. Disabling JavaScript execution in the PDF reader can help mitigate such future exploits, although it does not protect against exploits in other parts of the PDF viewing software. Some security experts say that JavaScript is not essential for a PDF reader and that the security benefit that comes from disabling JavaScript outweighs any compatibility issues caused. One way of avoiding PDF file exploits is to have a local or web service convert files to another format before viewing.\nOn March 30, 2010, security researcher Didier Stevens reported an Adobe Reader and Foxit Reader exploit that runs a malicious executable if the user allows it to launch when asked.\nZip bomb.\nPDF streams can have nested filters, which allows one to craft a 5 kilobyte file that unpacks to 1 petabyte in RAM. This can be used to cause a denial of service with implementations that don't guard against this like it was the case with https://'s CVE-2025-55197.\nSoftware.\nViewers and editors.\nMany PDF viewers are provided free of charge from a variety of sources. Programs to manipulate and edit PDF files are available, usually for purchase. Additionally, most modern web browsers, including Chrome, Firefox, and Safari, include PDF viewing capabilities, replacing browser plugins that were previously created for such purposes.\nThere are many software options for creating PDFs, including the PDF printing capabilities built into macOS, iOS, and most Linux distributions. Much document processing software including LibreOffice, Microsoft Office 2007 (if updated to SP2) and later, WordPerfect 9, and Scribus can export documents in PDF. There are many PDF print drivers for Microsoft Windows, the pdfTeX typesetting system, the DocBook PDF tools, applications developed around Ghostscript and Adobe Acrobat itself as well as Adobe InDesign, Adobe FrameMaker, Adobe Illustrator, Adobe Photoshop, that allow a \"PDF printer\" to be set up, which when selected sends output to a PDF file instead of a physical printer. Google's online office suite Google Docs allows uploading and saving to PDF. Some web apps offer free PDF editing and annotation tools.\nThe Free Software Foundation was \"developing a free, high-quality and fully functional set of libraries and programs that implement the PDF file format and associated technologies to the ISO 32000 standard\", as one of its high priority projects. In 2011, however, the GNU PDF project was removed from the list of \"high priority projects\" due to the maturation of the Poppler library, which has enjoyed wider use in applications such as Evince with the GNOME desktop environment. Poppler is based on Xpdf code base. There are also commercial development libraries available as listed in List of PDF software.\nThe Apache PDFBox project of the Apache Software Foundation is an open source Java library, licensed under the Apache License, for working with PDF documents.\nPrinting.\nRaster image processors (RIPs) are used to convert PDF files into a raster format suitable for imaging onto paper and other media in printers, digital production presses and prepress in a process known as rasterization. RIPs capable of processing PDF directly include the Adobe PDF Print Engine from Adobe Systems and Jaws and the Harlequin RIP from Global Graphics.\nIn 1993, the Jaws raster image processor from Global Graphics became the first shipping prepress RIP that interpreted PDF natively without conversion to another format. The company released an upgrade to its Harlequin RIP with the same capability in 1997.\nAgfa-Gevaert introduced and shipped Apogee, the first prepress workflow system based on PDF, in 1997.\nMany commercial offset printers have accepted the submission of press-ready PDF files as a print source, specifically the PDF/X-1a subset and variations of the same. The submission of press-ready PDF files is a replacement for the problematic need for receiving collected native working files.\nIn 2006, PDF was widely accepted as the standard print job format at the Open Source Development Labs Printing Summit. It is supported as a print job format by the Common Unix Printing System and desktop application projects such as GNOME, KDE, Firefox, Thunderbird, LibreOffice and OpenOffice have switched to emit print jobs in PDF.\nSome desktop printers also support direct PDF printing, which can interpret PDF data without external help.\nNative display model.\nPDF was selected as the \"native\" metafile format for macOS (originally called Mac OS X), replacing the PICT format of the earlier classic Mac OS. The imaging model of the Quartz graphics layer is based on the model common to Display PostScript and PDF, leading to the nickname \"Display PDF\". The Preview application can display PDF files, as can version 2.0 and later of the Safari web browser. System-level support for PDF allows macOS applications to create PDF documents automatically, provided they support the OS-standard printing architecture. The files are then exported in PDF 1.3 format according to the file header. When taking a screenshot under Mac OS X versions 10.0 through 10.3, the image was also captured as a PDF; later versions save screen captures as a PNG file, though this behavior can be set back to PDF if desired.\nAnnotation.\nAdobe Acrobat is one example of proprietary software that allows the user to annotate, highlight, and add notes to already created PDF files. One UNIX application available as free software (under the GNU General Public License) is PDFedit. The freeware Foxit Reader, available for Microsoft Windows, macOS and Linux, allows annotating documents. Tracker Software's PDF-XChange Viewer allows annotations and markups without restrictions in its freeware alternative. Apple's macOS's integrated PDF viewer, Preview, does also enable annotations as does the open-source software Skim, with the latter supporting interaction with LaTeX, SyncTeX, and PDFSync and integration with BibDesk reference management software. Freeware Qiqqa can create an annotation report that summarizes all the annotations and notes one has made across their library of PDFs. The Text Verification Tool exports differences in documents as annotations and markups.\nThere are also web annotation systems that support annotation in pdf and other document formats. In cases where PDFs are expected to have all of the functionality of paper documents, ink annotation is required.\nConversion and Information Extraction.\nPDF's emphasis on preserving the visual appearance of documents across different software and hardware platforms poses challenges to the conversion of PDF documents to other file formats and the targeted extraction of information, such as text, images, tables, bibliographic information, and document metadata. Numerous tools and source code libraries support these tasks. Several labeled datasets to test PDF conversion and information extraction tools exist and have been used for benchmark evaluations of the tool's performance.\nAlternatives.\nThe Open XML Paper Specification is a competing format used both as a page description language and as the native print spooler format for Microsoft Windows since Windows Vista.\nMixed Object: Document Content Architecture is a competing format. MO:DCA-P is a part of Advanced Function Presentation.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "24080", "revid": "91088", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24080", "title": "PostScript", "text": "File format and programming language\nPostScript (PS) is a page description language and dynamically typed, stack-based programming language. It is most commonly used in the electronic publishing and desktop publishing realm, but as a Turing complete programming language, it can be used for many other purposes as well. PostScript was created at Adobe Systems by John Warnock, Charles Geschke, Doug Brotz, Ed Taft and Bill Paxton from 1982 to 1984. The most recent version, PostScript\u00a03, was released in 1997.\nHistory.\nThe concepts of the PostScript language were seeded in 1976 by John Gaffney at Evans &amp; Sutherland, a computer graphics company. At that time, Gaffney and John Warnock were developing an interpreter for a large three-dimensional graphics database of New York Harbor.\nConcurrently, researchers at Xerox PARC had developed the first laser printer and had recognized the need for a standard means of defining page images. In 1975\u201376 Bob Sproull and William Newman developed the Press format, which was eventually used in the Xerox Star system to drive laser printers. But Press, a data format rather than a language, lacked flexibility, and PARC mounted the Interpress effort to create a successor.\nIn 1978, John Gaffney and Martin Newell then at Xerox PARC wrote J\u00a0&amp;\u00a0M or JaM (for \"John and Martin\") which was used for VLSI design and the investigation of type and graphics printing. This work later evolved and expanded into the Interpress language.\nWarnock left with Chuck Geschke and founded Adobe Systems in December 1982. They, together with Doug Brotz, Ed Taft and Bill Paxton created a simpler language, similar to Interpress, called PostScript, which went on the market in 1984.\nMeanwhile, in the spring of 1983, Steve Jobs came to visit Adobe and was dazzled by PostScript's potential, especially for the new Macintosh computer he was developing at Apple. To John Sculley's frustration, Jobs licensed the PostScript technology from Adobe by offering a $1.5 million advance against PostScript royalties, plus $2.5 million in exchange for 20 percent of Adobe shares. During a series of meetings in 1983, Jobs also repeatedly offered for Apple to buy Adobe outright, but the founders kept turning him down. In December 1983, the two companies finally signed off on the PostScript licensing deal, and Adobe had to shift focus immediately from high-end, high-resolution printing devices to the consumer-oriented Apple LaserWriter laser printer.\nAt that time, the 300-dpi Canon laser printing engine to be used in LaserWriters was seen as good enough only for proof printing (i.e., for crude rough drafts of material whose final drafts would be sent to professional high-resolution devices), but Jobs presented Adobe with the challenge of making PostScript render high-quality output to such a low-resolution device (which for most consumers would be their only printing device). In response, Warnock and Brotz solved the so-called \"appearance problem\" of making the stem width of letters scale properly so that they look good at all resolutions. Their breakthrough was so important that Adobe never patented the technology, in order to keep its details concealed as a trade secret. Many years later, Warnock revealed the trade secret in a 2010 lecture, and in 2022, Adobe publicly released an early version of PostScript's original source code from February 1984. Paxton worked on several other related improvements, such as font hinting. This work occurred after February 1984, meaning that Paxton's improvements were not included in the source code release and are still protected as trade secrets. Adobe was also responsible for porting PostScript to the Canon's Motorola 68000 chip.\nApple and Adobe announced the LaserWriter at Apple's annual stockholder meeting on January 23, 1985. It was the first printer to ship with PostScript, sparking the desktop publishing (DTP) revolution in the mid-1980s. The original PostScript royalty was five percent of the list price for each laser printer sold, which was $350 of the original LaserWriter list price of $6,995, and such royalties provided nearly all of Adobe's income during its early years. (Apple later renegotiated the contract to pay a licensing fee based on volume of printers shipped.) The combination of technical merits and widespread availability made PostScript the language of choice for graphical output for printing applications. An interpreter (sometimes referred to as a RIP for Raster Image Processor) for the PostScript language was a common component of laser printers during the 1980s and 1990s.\nHowever, the cost of implementation was high; computers output raw PS code that would be interpreted by the printer into a raster image at the printer's natural resolution. This required high-performance microprocessors and ample memory. The LaserWriter used a 12\u00a0MHz Motorola 68000, making it faster than any of the Macintosh computers to which it was attached. When the laser printer engines themselves cost over a thousand dollars, the added cost of PS was marginal. But, as printer mechanisms fell in price, the cost of implementing PS became too great a fraction of overall printer cost. In addition, with desktop computers becoming more powerful during the 1990s than their attached printers, it no longer made sense to offload the rasterization work onto the resource-constrained printer. By 2001, few low-end printer models came with onboard support for PostScript, largely due to growing competition from much cheaper non-PostScript inkjet printers, and new software-based methods to render PostScript images on computers, making them suitable for any printer. PDF, a descendant of PostScript, provides one such method, and has largely replaced PostScript as the \"de facto\" standard for electronic document distribution.\nOn high-end printers, PostScript processors remain common, and their use can dramatically reduce the CPU work involved in printing documents, transferring the work of rendering PostScript images from the computer to the printer.\nPostScript Level 1.\nThe first version of the PostScript language was released to the market in 1984. The qualifier \"Level 1\" was added when \"Level 2\" was introduced.\nPostScript Level 2.\nPostScript Level 2 was introduced in 1991, and included several improvements: improved speed and reliability, support for in-Raster Image Processing (RIP) separations, image decompression (for example, JPEG images could be rendered by a PostScript program), support for composite fonts, and the form mechanism for caching reusable content.\nPostScript 3.\nPostScript 3 (Adobe dropped the \"level\" terminology in favor of simple versioning) came at the end of 1997, and along with many new dictionary-based versions of older operators, introduced better color handling and new filters (which allow in-program compression/decompression, program chunking, and advanced error handling).\nPostScript 3 was significant in terms of replacing the existing proprietary color electronic prepress systems, then widely used for magazine production, through the introduction of smooth shading operations with up to 4096 shades of grey (rather than the 256 available in PostScript Level 2), as well as DeviceN, a color space that allowed the addition of additional ink colors (called spot colors) into composite color pages.\nUse in printing.\nBefore PostScript.\nPrior to the introduction of Interpress and PostScript, printers were designed to print character output given the text\u2014typically in ASCII\u2014as input. There were a number of technologies for this task, but most shared the property that the glyphs were physically difficult to change, as they were stamped onto typewriter keys, bands of metal, or optical plates.\nThis changed to some degree with the increasing popularity of dot matrix printers. The characters on these systems were drawn as a series of dots, as defined by a font table inside the printer. As they grew in sophistication, dot matrix printers started including several built-in fonts from which the user could select, and some models allowed users to upload their own custom glyphs into the printer.\nDot matrix printers also introduced the ability to print raster graphics. The graphics were interpreted by the computer and sent as a series of dots to the printer using a series of escape sequences. These printer control languages varied from printer to printer, requiring program authors to create numerous drivers.\nVector graphics printing was left to special-purpose devices, called plotters. Almost all plotters shared a common command language, HPGL, but were of limited use for anything other than printing graphics. In addition, they tended to be expensive and slow, and thus rare.\nPostScript printing.\nLaser printers combine the best features of both printers and plotters. Like plotters, laser printers offer high-quality line art, and like dot-matrix printers, they are able to generate pages of text and raster graphics. Unlike either printers or plotters, a laser printer makes it possible to position high-quality graphics and text on the same page. PostScript made it possible to fully exploit these characteristics by offering a single control language that could be used on any brand of printer.\nPostScript went beyond the typical printer control language and was a complete programming language of its own. Many applications can transform a document into a PostScript program, the execution of which results in the original document. This program can be sent to an interpreter in a printer, which results in a printed document, or to one inside another application, which will display the document on-screen. Since the document-program is the same regardless of its destination, it is called \"device-independent\".\nPostScript is noteworthy for implementing on-the-fly rasterization in which everything, even text, is specified in terms of straight lines and cubic B\u00e9zier curves (previously found only in CAD applications), which allows arbitrary scaling, rotating and other transformations. When the PostScript program is interpreted, the interpreter converts these instructions into the dots needed to form the output. For this reason, PostScript interpreters are occasionally called PostScript raster image processors, or RIPs.\nFont handling.\nAlmost as complex as PostScript itself is its handling of fonts. The font system uses the PS graphics primitives to draw glyphs as curves, which can then be rendered at any resolution. A number of typographic issues had to be considered with this approach.\nOne issue is that fonts do not scale linearly at small sizes and features of the glyphs will become proportionally too large or small and start to look displeasing. PostScript avoided this problem with the inclusion of font hinting, in which additional information is provided in horizontal or vertical bands to help identify the features in each letter that are important for the rasterizer to maintain. The result was significantly better-looking fonts even at low resolution. It had formerly been believed that hand-tuned bitmap fonts were required for this task.\nAt the time, the technology for including these hints in fonts was carefully guarded, and the hinted fonts were compressed and encrypted into what Adobe called a \"Type 1 Font\" (also known as \"PostScript Type 1 Font\", \"PS1\", \"T1\" or \"Adobe Type 1\"). Type 1 was effectively a simplification of the PS system to store outline information only, as opposed to being a complete language (PDF is similar in this regard). Adobe would then sell licenses to the Type 1 technology to those wanting to add hints to their own fonts. Those who did not license the technology were left with the \"Type 3 Font\" (also known as \"PostScript Type 3 Font\", \"PS3\" or \"T3\"). Type 3 fonts allowed for all the sophistication of the PostScript language, but without the standardized approach to hinting.\nThe Type 2 font format was designed to be used with Compact Font Format (CFF) charstrings, and was implemented to reduce the overall font file size. The CFF/Type2 format later became the basis for handling PostScript outlines in OpenType fonts.\nThe CID-keyed font format was also designed, to solve the problems in the OCF/Type 0 fonts, for addressing the complex Asian-language (CJK) encoding and very large character set issues. The CID-keyed font format can be used with the Type 1 font format for standard CID-keyed fonts, or Type 2 for CID-keyed OpenType fonts.\nTo compete with Adobe's system, Apple designed their own system, TrueType, around 1991. Immediately following the announcement of TrueType, Adobe published the specification for the Type 1 font format. Retail tools such as Altsys Fontographer (acquired by Macromedia in January 1995, owned by FontLab since May 2005) added the ability to create Type 1 fonts. Since then, many free Type 1 fonts have been released; for instance, the fonts used with the TeX typesetting system are available in this format.\nIn the early 1990s, there were several other systems for storing outline-based fonts, developed by Bitstream and Metafont for instance, but none included a general-purpose printing solution and they were therefore not widely used.\nIn the late 1990s, Adobe joined Microsoft in developing OpenType, essentially a functional superset of the Type 1 and TrueType formats. When printed to a PostScript output device, the unneeded parts of the OpenType font are omitted, and what is sent to the device by the driver is the same as it would be for a TrueType or Type 1 font, depending on which kind of outlines were present in the OpenType font.\nAdobe supported Type 1 fonts in its products until January 2023, when it fully removed support in favor of OpenType fonts.\nOther implementations.\nBoth computer printers and high-end typesetters such as Linotronic implemented PostScript. In the 1980s, Adobe drew most of its revenue from the licensing fees for implementations, known as a raster image processor or \"RIP\". As a number of new RISC-based platforms became available in the mid-1980s, some found Adobe's support of the new machines to be lacking.\nThis and issues of cost led to third-party implementations of PostScript becoming common, particularly in low-cost printers (where the licensing fee was the sticking point) or in high-end typesetting equipment (where the quest for speed demanded support for new platforms faster than Adobe could provide). At one point, Microsoft licensed to Apple a PostScript-compatible interpreter it had bought called TrueImage, and Apple licensed to Microsoft its new font format, TrueType. Apple ended up reaching an accord with Adobe and licensed genuine PostScript for its printers, but TrueType became the standard outline font technology for both Windows and the Macintosh.\nToday, third-party PostScript-compatible interpreters are widely used in printers and multifunction peripherals (MFPs). For example, CSR plc's IPS PS3 interpreter, formerly known as PhoenixPage, is standard in many printers and MFPs, including those developed by Hewlett-Packard and sold under the LaserJet and Color LaserJet lines. Other third-party PostScript solutions used by print and MFP manufacturers include Jaws and the Harlequin RIP, both by Global Graphics. A free software version, with several other applications, is Ghostscript. Several compatible interpreters are listed on the Undocumented Printing Wiki.\nSome basic, inexpensive laser printers do not support PostScript, instead coming with drivers that simply rasterize the platform's native graphics formats rather than converting them to PostScript first. When PostScript support is needed for such a printer, Ghostscript can be used. There are also a number of commercial PostScript interpreters, such as TeleType Co.'s \"T-Script\" or Brother's \"BR-Script3\".\nUse as a display system.\nPostScript became commercially successful due to the introduction of the graphical user interface (GUI), allowing designers to directly lay out pages for eventual output on laser printers. However, the GUIs' own graphics systems were generally much less sophisticated than PostScript; Apple's QuickDraw, for instance, supported only basic lines and arcs, not the complex B-splines and advanced region filling options of PostScript. In order to take full advantage of PostScript printing, applications on the computers had to re-implement those features using the host platform's own graphics system. This led to numerous issues where the on-screen layout would not exactly match the printed output, due to differences in the implementation of these features.\nAs computer power grew, it became possible to host the PS system in the computer rather than the printer. This led to the natural evolution of PS from a printing system to one that could also be used as the host's own graphics language. There were numerous advantages to this approach; not only did it help eliminate the possibility of different output on screen and printer, but it also provided a powerful graphics system for the computer, and allowed the printers to be \"dumb\" at a time when the cost of the laser engines was falling. In a production setting, using PostScript as a display system meant that the host computer could render low-resolution to the screen, higher resolution to the printer, or simply send the PS code to a smart printer for offboard printing.\nHowever, PostScript was written with printing in mind, and had numerous features that made it unsuitable for direct use in an interactive display system. In particular, PS was based on the idea of collecting up PS commands until the codice_1 command was seen, at which point all of the commands read up to that point were interpreted and output. In an interactive system, this was clearly not appropriate, nor did PS have any sort of interactivity built in; for example, supporting hit detection for mouse interactivity obviously did not apply when PS was being used on a printer.\nWhen Steve Jobs left Apple and started NeXT, he pitched Adobe on the idea of using PS as the display system for his new workstation computers. The result was Display PostScript, or DPS. DPS added basic functionality to improve performance by changing many string lookups into 32 bit integers, adding support for direct output with every command, and adding functions to allow the GUI to inspect the diagram. Additionally, a set of \"bindings\" was provided to allow PS code to be called directly from the C programming language. NeXT used these bindings in their NeXTStep system to provide an object oriented graphics system. Although DPS was written in conjunction with NeXT, Adobe sold it commercially and it was a common feature of most Unix workstations in the 1990s.\nSun Microsystems took another approach, creating NeWS. Instead of DPS's concept of allowing PS to interact with C programs, NeWS instead extended PS into a language suitable for running the entire GUI of a computer. Sun added a number of new commands for timers, mouse control, interrupts and other systems needed for interactivity, and added data structures and language elements to allow it to be completely object oriented internally. A complete GUI, three in fact, were written in NeWS and provided for a time on their workstations. However, the ongoing efforts to standardize the X11 system led to its introduction and widespread use on Sun systems, and NeWS never became widely used.\nPortable Document Format.\nPDF and PostScript share the same imaging model, and both documents are mutually convertible to each other. Both documents produce the same result when printed. The difference between PDF and PostScript is that PDF lacks the general-purpose programming language framework of the PostScript language. A PDF document is a static data structure made for efficient access and embeds navigational information suitable for interactive viewing.9\nThe language.\nPostScript is a Turing-complete programming language, belonging to the concatenative group of programming languages. It is an interpreted, stack-based language similar to Forth but with strong dynamic typing, data structures inspired by those found in Lisp, scoped memory and, since language level 2, garbage collection. The language syntax uses reverse Polish notation, which makes the order of operations unambiguous, but reading a program requires some practice, because one has to keep the layout of the stack in mind. Most \"operators\" (what other languages term \"functions\") take their arguments from the stack, and place their results onto the stack. \"Literals\" (for example, numbers) have the effect of placing a copy of themselves on the stack. Sophisticated data structures can be built on the \"array\" and \"dictionary\" types, but cannot be declared to the type system, which sees them all only as arrays and dictionaries, so any further typing discipline to be applied to such user-defined \"types\" is left to the code that implements them.\nThe character \"%\" is used to introduce comments in PostScript programs. As a convention, every PostScript program should start with the characters \"%!PS\" as an interpreter directive so that all devices will properly interpret it as PostScript.\nPostScript programs are typically divided into two parts, conventionally called the \"prolog\" and the \"script\". The prolog contains procedures and is written by a programmer. The script passes data to those procedures. The script is often generated automatically, using a programming language other than PostScript.\n\"Hello world\".\nA Hello World program, the customary way to show a small example of a complete program in a given language, might look like this in PostScript (level 2):\n %!PS\n /Courier % name the desired font\n 20 selectfont % choose the size in points and establish \n % the font as the current one\n 72 500 moveto % position the current point at \n % coordinates 72, 500 (the origin is at the \n % lower-left corner of the page)\n (Hello world!) show % paint the text in parentheses\n showpage % print all on the page\nor if the output device has a console\n %!PS\n (Hello world!) =\nUnits of length.\nPostScript uses the point as its unit of length. However, unlike some of the other versions of the point, PostScript uses exactly 72 points to the inch. Thus:\n 1 point = inch = mm = mm = 352.777\u2026 micrometers\nFor example, in order to draw a vertical line of 4\u00a0cm length, it is sufficient to type:\n0 0 moveto \n0 113.385827 rlineto stroke\nMore readably and idiomatically, one might use the following equivalent, which demonstrates a simple procedure definition and the use of the mathematical operators codice_2 and codice_3:\n/cm {72 mul 2.54 div} def % 1 inch = 2.54 cm exactly\n 0 0 moveto\n 0 4 cm rlineto stroke\nMost implementations of PostScript use single-precision realsappendix B (24-bit mantissa), so it is not meaningful to use more than 9 decimal digits to specify a real number, and performing calculations may produce unacceptable round-off errors.\nSoftware.\nSoftware which can be used to render PostScript documents:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "24081", "revid": "1416331", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24081", "title": "Polarisation", "text": ""}
{"id": "24082", "revid": "50281986", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24082", "title": "Pole vault", "text": "Track and field event\nPole vaulting, also known as pole jumping, is a track and field event in which an athlete uses a long and flexible pole, usually made from fiberglass or carbon fiber, as an aid to jump over a bar. Pole jumping was already practiced by the ancient Egyptians, ancient Greeks and the ancient Irish people, although modern pole vaulting, an athletic contest where height is measured, was first established by the German teacher Johann Christoph Friedrich GutsMuths in the 1790s. It has been a full medal event at the Olympic Games since 1896 for men and since 2000 for women.\nIt is typically classified as one of the four major jumping events in athletics, alongside the high jump, long jump and triple jump. It is unusual among track and field events in that it requires a significant amount of specialised equipment in order to participate, even at a basic level. A number of elite pole vaulters have had backgrounds in gymnastics, including world record breakers Yelena Isinbayeva and Brian Sternberg, reflecting the similar physical attributes required for the events. Physical attributes such as speed, agility and strength, along with technical skill, are essential to pole vaulting.\nHistory.\nPole jumping was already practiced by the ancient Egyptians, ancient Greeks and the ancient Irish people. As depicted on stone engravings and artifacts dating back to c. 2500 BC, the Egyptians used spears to mount enemy structures, and to pass over irrigation ditches. Vases and pots from Greece show that poles were used by the locals to jump onto or over objects. From c. 1800 BC to c. 550 BC, a sport akin to pole vaulting was probably included in the Irish Tailteann Games, although the pole might have been used for gaining distance rather than height, as ancient Irish farmers used poles to jump over canals and rivers. Modern pole vaulting, an athletic contest where height is measured, was first established by the German teacher Johann Christoph Friedrich GutsMuths in the 1790s. GutsMuths is also considered by many to be the father of modern pole vaulting, as he described jumping standards, the distance of the approach, recommendations on hand grip, and the principles of pole jumping. It was first practiced as a sport in Germany, later spreading to the United Kingdom and the United States. The earliest recorded pole vaulting competition in England where height was measured took place at the Ulverston Football and Cricket Club, Lancashire, north of the sands, in 1843. Pole vault was one of the athletics events of the inaugural Olympic Games in 1896.\nOriginally, poles were made of ash and from hickory wood. Bamboo poles were introduced in 1904, and both aluminum and steel poles appeared after 1945. Glass fiber vaulting poles were invented in 1967 by James Monroe Lindler of the Columbia Products Company, Columbia, South Carolina. An application filed on 10 March 1967 was granted patent status on 27 January 1970 for the manufacture of, \"a vaulting pole of hollow construction with an integral helical winding,\" and a method of manufacturing the same (see: https://). The process starts with a metal tube, referred to in the industry as a mandrel, around which is wound a tape made of glass fibers impregnated with a resin. This is baked in an oven and after cooling the mandrel is removed to leave a hollow glass fiber tube. This process was based on a similar method used for manufacturing glass fiber golf clubs patented by the Woolley Manufacturing Company of Escondido, California in 1954 (see: https://).\nIn September 2005, Jeffrey P. Watry, Ralph W. Paquin, and Kenneth A. Hursey of Gill Athletic, Champaign, Illinois, filed application to patent a new method of winding the glass fibers around the pole in layers, each wound in a different direction or orientation to provide specific properties to various parts of the pole. This was called Carbon Weave, and their patent was granted on 21 October 2008 (see: https://). David J. Dodge and William C. Doble of the Alliance Design and Development Group of New York City, New York, were granted a patent in 2006 for the manufacture of, \"sports equipment having a tubular structural member\" which led to the introduction of carbon fiber vaulting poles in 2007 (see: https://).\nIn 2000, IAAF rule 260.18a (formerly 260.6a) was amended, so that \"world records\" (as opposed to \"indoor world records\") can be set in a facility \"with or without roof\". This rule was not applied retroactively. With many indoor facilities not conforming to outdoor track specifications for size and flatness, the pole vault was the only world record set indoors until 2022.\nModern vaulting.\nToday, athletes compete in the pole vault as one of the four jumping events in track and field. Because the high jump and pole vault are both vertical jumps, the competitions are conducted similarly. Each athlete can choose at what height they would like to enter the competition. Once they enter, they have three attempts to clear the height. If a height is cleared, the vaulter advances to the next height, where they will have three more attempts. Once the vaulter has three consecutive misses, they are out of the competition and the highest height they cleared is their result. A \"no height\", often denoted \"NH\", refers to the failure of a vaulter to clear any bar during the competition.\nOnce the vaulter enters the competition, they can choose to pass heights. If a vaulter achieves a miss on their first attempt at a height, they can pass to the next height, but they will only have two attempts at that height, as they will be out once they achieve three consecutive misses. Similarly, after earning two misses at a height, they could pass to the next height, where they would have only one attempt.\nThe competitor who clears the highest height is the winner. If two or more vaulters have finished with the same height, the tie is broken by the number of misses at the final height. If the tied vaulters have the same number of misses at the last height cleared, the tie is broken by the total number of misses in the competition.\nIf there is still a tie for first place, a jump-off occurs to break the tie. Marks achieved in this type of jump-off are considered valid and count for any purpose that a mark achieved in a normal competition would.\nIf a tie in the other places still exists, a jump-off is not normally conducted, unless the competition is a qualifying meet, and the tie exists in the final qualifying spot. In this case, an administrative jump-off is conducted to break the tie, but the marks are not considered valid for any other purpose than breaking the tie.\nA jump-off is a sudden death competition in which the tied vaulters attempt the same height, starting with the last attempted height. If both vaulters miss, the bar goes down by a small increment, and if both clear, the bar goes up by a small increment. A jump-off ends when one vaulter clears and the other misses. Each vaulter gets one attempt at each height until one clears and one misses.\nThe equipment and rules for pole vaulting are similar to the high jump. Unlike high jump, however, the athlete in the vault has the ability to select the horizontal position of the bar, known as the standards, before each jump and can place it a distance beyond the back of the box, the metal pit that the pole is placed into immediately before takeoff. The range of distance the vaulter may place the standards varies depending on the level of competition.\nIf the pole used by the athlete dislodges the bar from the uprights, a foul attempt is ruled, even if the athlete has cleared the height. An athlete does not benefit from quickly leaving the landing pad before the bar has fallen. The exception to this rule is if the vaulter is vaulting outdoors and has made a clear effort to throw the pole back, but the wind has blown the pole into the bar; this counts as a clearance. This call is made at the discretion of the pole vault official. If the pole breaks during the execution of a vault, it is considered an equipment failure and is ruled a non-jump, neither a make nor a miss. Other types of equipment failure include the standards slipping down or the wind dislodging the bar when no contact was made by the vaulter.\nEach athlete has a set amount of time in which to make an attempt. The time starts when the official deems the standards to be set, ready for the athlete to attempt their jump. When every athlete is still in the competition, each vaulter has one minute to complete their jump. When 3 athletes are remaining the time moves to 2 minutes. 2 athletes remaining gets 3 minutes. After the final jumper remains, he or she gets 5 minutes on the runway. The amount of time varies by level of competition and the number of vaulters remaining. If the vaulter fails to begin an attempt within this time, the vaulter is charged with a time foul and the attempt is a miss.\nPoles are manufactured with ratings corresponding to the vaulter's maximum weight. As a safety precaution, some organizations forbid use of poles rated below the vaulter's weight. The recommended weight roughly corresponds to a flex rating that is determined by the manufacturer by applying a standardized amount of stress (most commonly 23 kgf (230 N or 50 lb)) on the pole and measuring how much the center of the pole is displaced. Therefore, two poles rated at the same weight are not necessarily the same stiffness.\nPole stiffness and length are important factors to a vaulter's performance. Therefore, it is not uncommon for an elite vaulter to carry as many as ten poles to a competition. The effective length of a pole can be changed by gripping the pole higher or lower in relation to the top of the pole. The left and right handgrips are typically a bit more than shoulder width apart. Poles are manufactured for people of all skill levels and body sizes, with lengths between and and a wide range of weight ratings. Each manufacturer determines the weight rating for the pole and the location of the maximum handhold band.\nTechnology.\nCompetitive pole vaulting began using solid ash poles. As the heights attained increased, bamboo poles gave way to tubular aluminum, which was tapered at each end. Today's pole vaulters benefit from poles produced by wrapping pre-cut sheets of fiberglass that contains resin around a metal pole mandrel, to produce a slightly curved pole that bends more easily under the compression caused by an athlete's take-off. The shape of the fiberglass sheets and the amount of fiberglass used is carefully planned to provide the desired length and stiffness of pole. Different fiber types, including carbon fiber, are used to give poles specific characteristics intended to promote higher jumps. In recent years, carbon fiber has been added to the commonly used E-glass (E for initial electrical use) and S-glass (S for solid) materials to create a lighter pole.\nAs in the high jump, the landing area was originally a heap of sawdust or sand where athletes landed on their feet. As technology enabled higher vaults, mats evolved into bags of large chunks of foam. Today's mats are foam usually thick. They are usually built up with two cross-laid square section logs with gaps between them, topped by a solid layer of foam of the same thickness. This lattice construction is wrapped in a close-fitting cover topped with nylon mesh, which allows some air to escape, thus combining both foam and a measure of air cushioning. The final layer is a large mat of mesh-covered foam which is clipped around the edges of the complete pit and prevents the athlete from falling between the individual bags. The size of mats used has been increasing in area to minimize the risk of injury. Proper landing technique is on the back or shoulders. Landing on the feet should be avoided, to eliminate the risk of injury to the lower extremities, particularly ankle sprains.\nRule changes over the years have resulted in larger landing areas and additional padding of all hard and unyielding surfaces.\nThe pole vault crossbar has evolved from a triangular aluminum bar to a round fiberglass bar with rubber ends. This is balanced on standards and can be knocked off when it is hit by a pole vaulter or the pole. Rule changes have led to shorter pegs and crossbar ends that are semi-circular.\nTechnique.\nAlthough many techniques are used by vaulters at various skill levels to clear the bar, the generally accepted technical model can be broken down into several phases.\nApproach.\nDuring the approach the pole vaulter sprints down the runway in such a way as to achieve maximum speed and correct position to initiate takeoff at the end of the approach. A tape measure is laid on the runway so vaulters know exactly where to start their run from. Each vaulter has a certain starting distance, dependent on how many steps away from the box they start. Top class vaulters use approaches with 18 to 22 strides, often referred to as a \"step\" in which every other foot is counted as one step. For example when a vaulter takes 18 strides, it would be referred to as a 9-step, as 22 strides would be an 11-step. The run-up to the vaulting pit begins forcefully with the vaulter running powerfully in a relaxed, upright position with knees lifted and torso leaning very slightly forward. Right handed vaulters will start with a step back with their right foot before starting the run, left handed vaulters with their left back to begin. The head, shoulders and hips are aligned, the vaulter increasing speed as the body becomes erect. The tip of the vaulting pole is angled higher than eye level until three paces from takeoff, when the pole tip descends efficiently, amplifying run speed as the pole is planted into the vault box. The faster the vaulter can run and the more efficient their take-off is, the greater the kinetic energy that can be achieved and used during the vault.\nPlant and take-off.\nThe plant and take-off is initiated typically three steps out from the final step. Vaulters will usually count their steps backwards from their starting point to the box only counting the steps taken on the left foot (vice versa for left-handers). For example, a vaulter on a \"ten count\" (referring to the number of counted steps from the starting point to the box) would count backwards from ten, only counting the steps taken with the left foot. These last three steps are normally quicker than the previous strides and are referred to as the \"turn-over\". The goal of this phase is to efficiently translate the kinetic energy accumulated from the approach into potential energy stored by the elasticity of the pole, and to gain as much initial vertical height as possible by jumping off the ground. The plant starts with the vaulter raising their arms up from around the hips or mid-torso until they are fully outstretched above the head, with the right arm extended directly above the head and the left arm extended perpendicular to the pole (vice versa for left-handed vaulters). At the same time, the vaulter is dropping the pole tip into the box. On the final step, the vaulter jumps off the trail leg which should always remain straight and then drives the front knee forward. As the pole slides into the back of the box the pole begins to bend and the vaulter continues up and forward, leaving the trail leg angled down and behind, the body in a backwards 'C' position.\nSwing up.\nThe swing and row simply consists of the vaulter swinging the trail leg forward and rowing the pole, bringing the top arm down to the hips, while trying to keep the trail leg straight to store more potential energy into the pole, the rowing motion also keeps the pole bent for a longer period of time for the vaulter to get into optimum position. When parallel to the pole the left arm hugs the pole tight to efficiently use the recoil within the pole. The goal is to carry out these motions as thoroughly and as quickly as possible; it is a race against the unbending of the pole. Effectively, this causes a double pendulum motion, with the top of the pole moving forward and pivoting from the box, while the vaulter acts as a second pendulum pivoting from the right hand. This action gives the vaulter the best position possible to be \"ejected\" off the pole. The swing continues until the hips are above the head and the arms are pulling the pole close to the chest; from there the vaulter shoots their legs up over the cross bar while keeping the pole close.\nExtension.\nThe extension refers to the extension of the hips upward with outstretched legs as the shoulders drive down, causing the vaulter to be positioned upside down. This position is often referred to as \"inversion\". While this phase is executed, the pole begins to recoil, propelling the vaulter quickly upward. The hands of the vaulter remain close to the body as they move from the shins back to the region around the hips and upper torso.\nTurn.\nThe turn is executed immediately during the end of the rockback. As the name implies, the vaulter turns 180\u00b0 toward the pole while extending the arms down past the head and shoulders. Typically the vaulter will begin to angle their body toward the bar as the turn is executed, although ideally the vaulter will remain as vertical as possible. The motion of the vaulter can be described as a spin around an imaginary axis from head to toe.\nFly-away.\nThis is often highly emphasized by spectators and novice vaulters, but it is the easiest phase of the vault and is a result of proper execution of previous phases. This phase mainly consists of the vaulter pushing off the pole and releasing it so the pole falls away from the crossbar and mats. As the torso goes over and around the crossbar, the vaulter is facing the crossbar. Rotation of the body over the bar occurs naturally, and the vaulter's main concern is making sure that his arms, face and any other appendages do not knock the bar off as they go over. Vaulters aim to whip their upper torso around the top of the cross bar to ensure their elbows and face do not knock it off. The elite vaulter's center of gravity passes underneath the crossbar when they have their hips in the highest position like the crotch of an upside-down 'V'. The vaulter should land near the middle of the foam landing mats, or pit, face up. Landing on the feet or stomach first may lead to injuries or other problems.\nSix metres club.\nThe \"six metres club\" consists of pole vaulters who have reached at least 6.00\u00a0m (). In 1985 Sergey Bubka became the first pole vaulter to clear six metres.\nFive metres club.\nFour women have cleared 5 metres. Yelena Isinbayeva was the first to clear 5.00\u00a0m () on 22 July 2005. On 2 March 2013, Jennifer Suhr cleared 5.02\u00a0m () indoors to become the second. Sandi Morris cleared 5.00\u00a0m () on 9 September 2016, to become the third. Anzhelika Sidorova cleared 5.01\u00a0m () at the Diamond League final in Z\u00fcrich on 9 September 2021.\nMilestones.\nThis is a list of the first time a milestone mark was cleared.\nThis is a list of the first-time milestones for women.\nSeason's bests.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes and references.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "24083", "revid": "51058155", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24083", "title": "Party of European Socialists", "text": "Centre-left European political party\nThe Party of European Socialists (PES) is a social democratic European political party.\nThe PES comprises national-level political parties from all the European economic area states (EEA) plus the United Kingdom. This includes major parties such as the Social Democratic Party of Germany, the French Socialist Party, the British Labour Party, the Italian Democratic Party, the Portuguese Socialist Party, the Romanian Social Democrat Party and the Spanish Socialist Workers' Party. Parties from a number of other European countries and from the Mediterranean region are also admitted to the PES as associate or observer parties. Most member, associate, and observer parties are members of the wider Progressive Alliance or Socialist International.\nThe PES is currently led by its president, Stefan L\u00f6fven, a former Prime Minister of Sweden. Its political group in the European Parliament is the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats (S&amp;D). The PES also operates in the European Committee of the Regions (in the PES Group in the Committee of the Regions) and the European Council.\nName.\nThe party's English name is \"Party of European Socialists\". In addition, the following names are used in other languages:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nIn March 2014 following the congress in Rome, the PES added the tagline \"Socialists and Democrats\" to its name following the admission of Italy's Democratic Party into the organisation.\nHistory.\n1960s.\nIn 1961, the Socialists in the European Parliament attempted to produce a common 'European Socialist Programme' but this was neglected due to the applications of Britain, Denmark, Ireland and Norway to join the European Community. The Socialists' 1962 congress pushed for greater democratisation and powers for Parliament, though it was only in 1969 that this possibility was examined by the member states.\n1970s.\nIn 1973, Denmark, Ireland and the United Kingdom joined the European Community, bringing in new parties from these countries. The enlarged Socialist Congress met in Bonn and inaugurated the \"Confederation of the Socialist Parties of the European Community\". The Congress also passed a resolution on social policy, including the right to decent work, social security, democracy and equality in the European economy. In 1978, the Confederation of Socialist Parties approved the first common European election Manifesto. It focused on several goals among which the most important were to ensure a right to decent work, fight pollution, end discrimination, protect the consumer and promote peace, human rights and civil liberties.\n1980s.\nAt its Luxembourg Congress in 1980, the Confederation of Socialist Parties approved its first Statute. The accession of Greece to the EU in 1981, followed by Spain and Portugal in 1986, brought in more parties.\nIn 1984, a common Socialist election manifesto proposed a socialist remedy for the economic crisis of the time by establishing a link between industrial production, protection of fundamental social benefits, and the fight for an improved quality of life.\n1990s.\nIn 1992, with the European Community becoming the European Union and with the Treaty of Maastricht establishing the framework for political parties at a European level, the Confederation of Socialist Parties voted to transform itself into the Party of European Socialists. The party's first programme concentrated on job creation, democracy, gender equality, environmental and consumer protection, peace and security, regulation of immigration, discouragement of racism and fighting organised crime.\nAlong with the Socialist Group in the European Parliament, the founding members of the PES were:\n2000s.\nIn 2004, Poul Nyrup Rasmussen defeated Giuliano Amato to be elected President of the PES, succeeding Robin Cook in the post. He was re-elected for a further 2.5 years at the PES Congress in Porto on 8 December 2006 and again at the Prague Congress in 2009.\n2010s.\nIn 2010, the Foundation for European Progressive Studies was founded as the European political foundation (think tank) of the PES.\nMr Rasmussen stood down at the PES Progressive Convention in Brussels on 24 November 2011. He was replaced as interim president by Sergey Stanishev, at the time chairman of the Bulgarian Socialist Party (BSP) and former prime minister of Bulgaria.\nOn 28\u201329 September 2012, the PES Congress in Brussels Congress elected interim president Sergey Stanishev as full President, as well as four deputies: Jean-Christophe Cambad\u00e9lis (1st Vice-President \u2013 PS), Elena Valenciano (PSOE), Jan Royall (Labour) and Katar\u00edna Neve\u010falov\u00e1 (Smer-SD). The same Congress elected Achim Post (SPD) as its new secretary general, and adopted a process which it described as \"democratic and transparent\" for electing its next candidate for Commission President in 2014.\nSergey Stanishev was re-elected PES President on 22\u201323 June 2015 in Budapest. The Congress also approved Achim Post (SPD) as the Secretary-General as well as the four Vice-Presidents: Jean-Christophe Cambad\u00e9lis (PS), Carin J\u00e4mtin (Swedish Social Democratic Party), Katar\u00edna Neve\u010falov\u00e1 (Smer-SD) and Jan Royall (Labour).\nOn 7\u20138 December 2018, the PES Congress gathered in Lisbon to elect its leadership. Sergey Stanishev was confirmed as party President and Achim Post (SPD) as secretary general. Iratxe Garc\u00eda (Spanish Socialist Workers' Party) was elected by the new presidency 1st Vice-President of the PES and Francisco Andr\u00e9 (Socialist Party (Portugal)), Katar\u00edna Neve\u010falov\u00e1 (Smer-SD) and Marita Ulvskog (Swedish Social Democratic Party) were elected PES Vice-Presidents. During the PES Presidency of October 2019, Hel\u00e9ne Fritzon (Swedish Social Democratic Party) became PES Vice-President, replacing Marita Ulvskog.\nOn 22\u201323 February 2019, the PES held its Election Congress in Madrid to endorse a Common Candidate and adopt its manifesto for the 2019 European Parliament election. The Election Congress acclaimed European Commission First Vice-President Frans Timmermans and adopted its manifesto: A New Social Contract for Europe.\n2020s.\nOn 16 December 2021, the PES held its Council in Brussels, adopting the resolution: Fairness, Sustainability, Respect: a progressive vision for the future of Europe.\nOn 14\u201315 October 2022, the PES Congress in Berlin elected Stefan L\u00f6fven (Swedish Social Democratic Party) as PES President and welcomed a new PES leadership team: Caroline Gennez (Vooruit (political party)) as Treasurer, Iratxe Garc\u00eda (Spanish Socialist Workers' Party) as First Vice President, Katarina Barley (SPD) and Francisco Andr\u00e9 (Socialist Party (Portugal)) as Executive Vice Presidents, Tanja Fajon (Social Democrats (Slovenia)), Victor Negrescu (Social Democratic Party (Romania)), Kati Piri (Labour Party (Netherlands)), Andrzej Szejna (New Left), and Radmila \u0160ekerinska (Social Democratic Union of Macedonia) as Vice Presidents. Achim Post (SPD) continued as Secretary General, Giacomo Filibeck (Democratic Party (Italy)) took up the position of Executive Secretary General, Yonnec Polet (Socialist Party (Belgium)) remained as Deputy Secretary General, and Saar van Bueren (Labour Party (Netherlands)) became Deputy Secretary General. The Congress adopted the resolution: With Courage For Europe: leading Europe through change.\nOn 29 June 2023, Georgian Dream was removed from the PES due to activities and positions far outside PES values.\nOn 12 October, after the 2023 Slovak parliamentary election, the PES suspended Smer-SD and Hlas-SD over their plans to enter into coalition with the ultranationalist Slovak National Party (SNS), which the PES views as a \"radical-right party.\"\nOn 2 March 2024, the PES held its Election Congress in Rome and acclaimed European Commissioner Nicolas Schmit as presidential candidate and adopted its election programme.\nMembership.\nThe PES has thirty-three full member parties from each of the twenty-seven EU member states, Norway and the UK. There are a further twelve associate and twelve observer parties from other European countries.\nIndividual members.\nThe PES also includes a number of individual members, although, as most other European parties, it has not sought to develop mass individual membership.\nBelow is the evolution of individual membership of the PES since 2019.\nOrganisation.\nConstituent organisations.\nThe youth organisation of the PES is the Young European Socialists. PES Women is the party's women's organisation, led by Zita Gurmai. The LGBTI campaign organisation is Rainbow Rose.\nInternational memberships.\nPES is an associated organisation of Socialist International and the Progressive Alliance.\nPresident and Presidency.\nThe President (currently former Prime Minister of Sweden Stefan L\u00f6fven) represents the party on a daily basis and chairs the Presidency, which also consists of the Secretary General, President of the S&amp;D group in Parliament and one representative per full/associate member party and organisation. They may also be joined by the President of the European Parliament (if a PES member), a PES European Commissioner and a representative from associate parties and organisations.\nAs of 19 November 2024 the Presidency of the PES is:\nThe list below shows PES presidents and the presidents of its predecessors.\nGovernance.\nThe parties meet at the party \"Congress\" twice every five years to decide on political orientation, such as adopting manifestos ahead of elections. Every year that the Congress does not meet, the Council (a smaller version of the Congress) shapes PES policy. The Congress also elects the party's President, Vice-Presidents and the \"Presidency\".\nThe \"Leader's Conference\" brings together Prime Ministers and Party Leaders from PES parties three to four times a year to agree strategies and resolutions.\nEuropean election primaries.\nIn December 2009, the PES decided to put forward a candidate for Commission President at all subsequent elections. On 1 March 2014, the PES organised for the first time a European election Congress where a Common Manifesto was adopted and the Common Candidate designate for the post of Commission President, Martin Schulz, was elected by over a thousand participants in Rome, Italy.\nIn 2019, progressives elected Frans Timmermans as PES Common Candidate to the European Elections, during the Election Congress in Madrid on 22\u201323 February 2019.\nFunding.\nAs a registered European political party, the PES is entitled to European public funding, which it has received continuously since 2004.\nBelow is the evolution of European public funding received by the PES.\nIn line with the Regulation on European political parties and European political foundations, the PES also raises private funds to co-finance its activities. As of 2025, European parties must raise at least 10% of their reimbursable expenditure from private sources, while the rest can be covered using European public funding.\nBelow is the evolution of contributions and donations received by the PES.\nPES in the European institutions.\nEuropean Commission.\nEuropean Commissioners are meant to remain independent, however there has been an increasing degree of politicisation within the Commission. In the current European Commission, five of the Commissioners belong to the PES family.\nEuropean Council.\nOf the 27 heads of state and government that are members of the European Council, three are from the PES, and therefore regularly attend PES summits to prepare for European Council meetings.\nIn third countries.\nThrough its associate and observer parties the PES has six heads of state or government in non-EU countries:\nEuropean Council and Council of Ministers.\nParty-alignment at the European Council is often loose, but has been the basis of some intergovernmental cooperation. At present five countries are led by a PES-affiliated leader, who represents that state at the European Council: Germany (Olaf Scholz), Spain (Pedro S\u00e1nchez), Malta (Robert Abela), and Denmark (Mette Frederiksen).\nThe makeup of national delegations to the Council of Ministers is at some times subject to coalitions: for the above governments led by a PES party, that party may not be present in all Council configurations; in other governments led by non-PES parties a PES minister may be its representative for certain portfolios. PES is in coalition in the following countries: Romania, Belgium, Slovenia and Estonia.\nCommittee of the Regions.\nPES has 122 members in the Committee of the Regions as of 2014.\nElection results.\nEuropean Parliament\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "24085", "revid": "381953", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24085", "title": "Phenol", "text": "Organic compound (C6H5OH)\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chembox/styles.css\"/&gt;\nChemical compound\nPhenol (also known as carbolic acid, phenolic acid, or benzenol) is an aromatic organic compound with the molecular formula . It is a white crystalline solid that is volatile and can catch fire. \nThe molecule consists of a phenyl group () bonded to a hydroxy group (). Mildly acidic, it requires careful handling because it can cause chemical burns. It is acutely toxic and is considered a health hazard.\nPhenol was first extracted from coal tar, but today is produced on a large scale (about 7 million tonnes a year) from petroleum-derived feedstocks. It is an important industrial commodity as a precursor to many materials and useful compounds, and is a liquid when manufactured. It is primarily used to synthesize plastics and related materials. Phenol and its chemical derivatives are essential for production of polycarbonates, epoxies, explosives such as picric acid, Bakelite, nylon, detergents, herbicides such as phenoxy herbicides, and numerous pharmaceutical drugs. \nProperties.\nPhenol is an organic compound appreciably soluble in water, with about 84.2\u00a0g dissolving in 1000\u00a0ml (0.895 M). Homogeneous mixtures of phenol and water at phenol to water mass ratios of ~2.6 and higher are possible. The sodium salt of phenol, sodium phenoxide, is far more water-soluble. Phenol is a combustible solid (NFPA rating = 2). When heated, phenol produces flammable vapors that are explosive at concentrations of 3 to 10% in air. Carbon dioxide or dry chemical extinguishers should be used to fight phenol fires.\nAcidity.\nPhenol is a weak acid, with a pH range of 5 to 6. In aqueous solution in the pH range ca. 8\u201312 it is in equilibrium with the phenolate anion (also called phenoxide or carbolate):\nPhenol is more acidic than aliphatic alcohols. Its enhanced acidity is attributed to resonance stabilization of phenolate anion. In this way, the negative charge on oxygen is delocalized on to the ortho and para carbon atoms through the pi system. An alternative explanation involves the sigma framework, postulating that the dominant effect is the induction from the more electronegative sp2 hybridised carbons; the comparatively more powerful inductive withdrawal of electron density that is provided by the sp2 system compared to an sp3 system allows for great stabilization of the oxyanion. In support of the second explanation, the p\"K\"a of the enol of acetone in water is 10.9, making it only slightly less acidic than phenol (p\"K\"a 10.0). Thus, the greater number of resonance structures available to phenoxide compared to acetone enolate seems to contribute little to its stabilization. However, the situation changes when solvation effects are excluded.\nHydrogen bonding.\nIn carbon tetrachloride and in alkane solvents, phenol hydrogen bonds with a wide range of Lewis bases such as pyridine, diethyl ether, and diethyl sulfide. The enthalpies of adduct formation and the IR frequency shifts accompanying adduct formation have been compiled. Phenol is classified as a hard acid.\nTautomerism.\nPhenol exhibits keto-enol tautomerism with its unstable keto tautomer cyclohexadienone, but the effect is nearly negligible. The equilibrium constant for enolisation is approximately 10\u221213, which means only one in every ten trillion molecules is in the keto form at any moment. The small amount of stabilisation gained by exchanging a C=C bond for a C=O bond is more than offset by the large destabilisation resulting from the loss of aromaticity. Phenol therefore exists essentially entirely in the enol form. 4,4' Substituted cyclohexadienone can undergo a dienone\u2013phenol rearrangement in acid conditions and form stable 3,4\u2010disubstituted phenol.\nFor substituted phenols, several factors can favor the keto tautomer: (a) additional hydroxy groups (see resorcinol) (b) annulation as in the formation of naphthols, and (c) deprotonation to give the phenolate.\nPhenoxides are enolates stabilised by aromaticity. Under normal circumstances, phenoxide is more reactive at the oxygen position, but the oxygen position is a \"hard\" nucleophile whereas the alpha-carbon positions tend to be \"soft\".\nReactions.\nPhenol is highly reactive toward electrophilic aromatic substitution. The enhanced nucleophilicity is attributed to donation pi electron density from O into the ring. Many groups can be attached to the ring, via halogenation, acylation, sulfonation, and related processes. \nPhenol is so strongly activated that bromination and chlorination lead readily to polysubstitution. The reaction affords 2- and 4-substituted derivatives. The regiochemistry of halogenation changes in strongly acidic solutions where predominates. Phenol reacts with dilute nitric acid at room temperature to give a mixture of 2-nitrophenol and 4-nitrophenol while with concentrated nitric acid, additional nitro groups are introduced, e.g. to give 2,4,6-trinitrophenol. Friedel Crafts alkylations of phenol and its derivatives often proceed without catalysts. Alkylating agents include alkyl halides, alkenes, and ketones. Thus, adamantyl-1-bromide, dicyclopentadiene), and cyclohexanones give respectively 4-adamantylphenol, a bis(2-hydroxyphenyl) derivative, and a 4-cyclohexylphenols. Alcohols and hydroperoxides alkylate phenols in the presence of solid acid catalysts (e.g. certain zeolite). Cresols and cumyl phenols can be produced in that way.\nAqueous solutions of phenol are weakly acidic and turn blue litmus slightly to red. Phenol is neutralized by sodium hydroxide forming sodium phenate or phenolate, but being weaker than carbonic acid, it cannot be neutralized by sodium bicarbonate or sodium carbonate to liberate carbon dioxide.\nWhen a mixture of phenol and benzoyl chloride are shaken in presence of dilute sodium hydroxide solution, phenyl benzoate is formed. This is an example of the Schotten\u2013Baumann reaction:\nPhenol is reduced to benzene when it is distilled with zinc dust or when its vapour is passed over granules of zinc at 400\u00a0\u00b0C:\nWhen phenol is treated with diazomethane in the presence of boron trifluoride (), anisole is obtained as the main product and nitrogen gas as a byproduct.\nPhenol and its derivatives react with iron(III) chloride to give intensely colored solutions containing phenoxide complexes.\nProduction.\nBecause of phenol's commercial importance, many methods have been developed for its production, but the cumene process is the dominant technology. \nCumene process.\nAccounting for 95% of production (2003) is the cumene process, also called \"Hock process\". It involves the partial oxidation of cumene (isopropylbenzene) via the Hock rearrangement: Compared to most other processes, the cumene process uses mild conditions and inexpensive raw materials. For the process to be economical, both phenol and the acetone by-product must be in demand. In 2010, worldwide demand for acetone was approximately 6.7 million tonnes, 83 percent of which was satisfied with acetone produced by the cumene process.\nA route analogous to the cumene process begins with cyclohexylbenzene. It is oxidized to a hydroperoxide, akin to the production of cumene hydroperoxide. Via the Hock rearrangement, cyclohexylbenzene hydroperoxide cleaves to give phenol and cyclohexanone. Cyclohexanone is an important precursor to some nylons.\nOxidation of benzene, toluene, cyclohexylbenzene.\nThe direct oxidation of benzene () to phenol is possible, but it has not been commercialized: \nNitrous oxide is a potentially \"green\" oxidant that is a more potent oxidant than O2. Routes for the generation of nitrous oxide however remain uncompetitive.\nAn electrosynthesis employing alternating current gives phenol from benzene.\nThe oxidation of toluene, as developed by Dow Chemical, involves copper-catalyzed reaction of molten sodium benzoate with air:\nThe reaction is proposed to proceed via formation of benzyoylsalicylate.\nAutoxidation of cyclohexylbenzene gives the hydroperoxide. Decomposition of this hydroperoxide affords cyclohexanone and phenol.\nOlder methods.\nEarly methods relied on extraction of phenol from coal derivatives or the hydrolysis of benzene derivatives.\nHydrolysis of benzenesulfonic acid.\nThe original commercial route was developed by Bayer and Monsanto in the early 1900s, based on discoveries by Wurtz and Kekul\u00e9. The method involves the reaction of a strong base with benzenesulfonic acid, proceeded by the reaction of hydroxide with sodium benzenesulfonate to give sodium phenoxide. Acidification of the latter gives phenol. The net conversion is:\nHydrolysis of chlorobenzene.\nChlorobenzene can be hydrolyzed to phenol using a base (Dow process) or steam (Raschig\u2013Hooker process):\n\nThese methods suffer from the cost of the chlorobenzene and the need to dispose of the chloride byproduct.\nCoal pyrolysis.\nPhenol is also a recoverable byproduct of coal pyrolysis. In the Lummus process, the oxidation of toluene to benzoic acid is conducted separately.\nMiscellaneous methods.\nPhenyldiazonium salts hydrolyze to phenol. The method is of no commercial interest since the precursor is expensive.\nSalicylic acid decarboxylates to phenol.\nShipping.\nPhenol, which is produced and hence transported in large volumes, is shipped in a molten state below . The melting point is lowered and corrosive nature enhanced in the presence of small amounts of water. Typically, stainless steel containers and nitrogen-blanketing are required to prevent discoloration.\nExposure and potential toxicity.\nExposure to phenol may occur in people living near landfills, hazardous waste sites or factories manufacturing it. Low levels of phenol exposure may occur in consumer products, such as toothpastes and throat lozenges, skin or pain treatments, cigarette smoke, and in some foods or water.\nExposure to phenol through any form of ingestion or contact can produce systemic poisoning, with possible symptoms including transient brain stimulation, followed by coma and seizures over minutes to hours following exposure. Other symptoms may include hemolytic anemia, profuse sweating, hypotension, arrhythmia, pulmonary edema, nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea. Chronic exposure to phenol or its vapor may cause kidney toxicity, skin lesions, or gastrointestinal disease. Phenol is metabolized in the liver, and excreted by the kidneys.\nIf inhaled, ingested or by skin contact, phenol can enter the blood, possibly causing breathing problems, headaches, or sore eyes. High amounts of phenol contacting the skin may cause liver disease, irregular heartbeat, seizures, coma, and, rarely, death. Repeated or prolonged skin contact with phenol may cause dermatitis, or even second and third-degree burns. Its corrosive effect on skin and mucous membranes is due to a protein-degenerating effect. Chemical burns from skin exposures can be decontaminated by washing with polyethylene glycol, isopropyl alcohol, or with copious amounts of water.\nSafety concerns have caused phenol to be banned from use in cosmetic products in the European Union and Canada.\nBesides its hydrophobic effects, another possible mechanism for the toxicity of phenol is the formation of phenoxyl radicals.\nUses.\nChemicals.\nThe major uses of phenol, consuming two thirds of its production, involve its conversion to precursors for plastics. Condensation with acetone gives bisphenol-A, a key precursor to polycarbonates and epoxide resins. Condensation of phenol, alkylphenols, or diphenols with formaldehyde gives phenolic resins, an example of which is Bakelite. Partial hydrogenation of phenol gives cyclohexanone, a precursor to nylon. Nonionic detergents are produced by alkylation of phenol to give the alkylphenols, e.g., nonylphenol, which are then subjected to ethoxylation.\nPhenol is also a versatile precursor to a large collection of drugs, most notably aspirin but also many herbicides and pharmaceutical drugs. Phenol is a component in liquid\u2013liquid phenol\u2013chloroform extraction technique used in molecular biology for obtaining nucleic acids from tissues or cell culture samples. Depending on the pH of the solution either DNA or RNA can be extracted.\nPhenol is so inexpensive that it also attracts many small-scale uses. It is a component of industrial paint strippers used in the aviation industry for the removal of epoxy, polyurethane and other chemically resistant coatings.\nTopical anesthetic.\nConcentrated liquid phenol can be used topically as a local anesthetic for otology procedures, such as myringotomy and tympanotomy tube placement, as an alternative to general anesthesia or other local anesthetics. Phenol spray, with phenol as the active ingredient, is used medically to treat sore throat. It is the active ingredient in some oral analgesics.\nConcentrated phenol liquids are used for permanent treatment of ingrown toe and finger nails, a procedure known as a chemical matrixectomy. The procedure was first described by Otto Boll in 1945.\nNerve block.\nPhenol is used as a chemical denervation agent in analgesia treatment, such as for spasticity, arthritis, or cancer pain. Its effect on the nerve is to denature protein, diminish nerve fat and myelin content, and interrupt sensory transmission to the brain. If successful, pain relief may last for weeks to two years. Complications may include pain on injection, bleeding, or infection.\nClinical studies from 2023-25 reported that local injection of phenol (1.5\u20133 ml of 6% phenol in sterile water) at three to five sensory knee nerves was effective as a neurolytic treatment to relieve pain associated with chronic osteoarthritis. The phenol method may be used for people who did not experience pain relief from radiofrequency ablation of knee nerves.\nHistory.\nPhenol was discovered in 1834 by Friedlieb Ferdinand Runge, who extracted it (in impure form) from coal tar. Runge called phenol \"Karbols\u00e4ure\" (coal-oil-acid, carbolic acid). Coal tar remained the primary source until the development of the petrochemical industry. French chemist Auguste Laurent extracted phenol in its pure form, as a derivative of benzene, in 1841. In 1836, Auguste Laurent coined the name \"ph\u00e8ne\" for benzene; this is the root of the word \"phenol\" and \"phenyl\". In 1843, French chemist Charles Gerhardt coined the name \"ph\u00e9nol\".\nThe antiseptic properties of phenol were used by Sir Joseph Lister in his pioneering technique of antiseptic surgery. Lister decided that the wounds had to be thoroughly cleaned. He then covered the wounds with a piece of rag or lint covered in phenol. The skin irritation caused by continual exposure to phenol eventually led to the introduction of aseptic (germ-free) techniques in surgery. Lister's work was inspired by the works and experiments of his contemporary Louis Pasteur in sterilizing various biological media. He theorized that if germs could be killed or prevented, no infection would occur. Lister reasoned that a chemical could be used to destroy the micro-organisms that cause infection.\nMeanwhile, in Carlisle, England, officials were experimenting with sewage treatment using carbolic acid to reduce the smell of sewage cesspools. Having heard of these developments, and having previously experimented with other chemicals for antiseptic purposes without much success, Lister decided to try carbolic acid as a wound antiseptic. He had his first chance on August 12, 1865, when he received a patient: an eleven-year-old boy with a tibia bone fracture which pierced the skin of his lower leg. Ordinarily, amputation would be the only solution. However, Lister decided to try carbolic acid. After setting the bone and supporting the leg with splints, he soaked clean cotton towels in undiluted carbolic acid and applied them to the wound, covered with a layer of tin foil, leaving them for four days. When he checked the wound, Lister was pleasantly surprised to find no signs of infection, just redness near the edges of the wound from mild burning by the carbolic acid. Reapplying fresh bandages with diluted carbolic acid, the boy was able to walk home after about six weeks of treatment.\nBy 16 March 1867, when the first results of Lister's work were published in the Lancet, he had treated a total of eleven patients using his new antiseptic method. Of those, only one had died, and that was through a complication that was nothing to do with Lister's wound-dressing technique. Now, for the first time, patients with compound fractures were likely to leave the hospital with all their limbs intact\n\u2014 Richard Hollingham, \"Blood and Guts: A History of Surgery\", p. 62\nBefore antiseptic operations were introduced at the hospital, there were sixteen deaths in thirty-five surgical cases. Almost one in every two patients died. After antiseptic surgery was introduced in the summer of 1865, there were only six deaths in forty cases. The mortality rate had dropped from almost 50 per cent to around 15 per cent. It was a remarkable achievement\n\u2014 Richard Hollingham, \"Blood and Guts: A History of Surgery\", p. 63\nPhenol was the main ingredient of the \"carbolic smoke ball,\" an ineffective device marketed in London in the 19th century as protection against influenza and other ailments, and the subject of the famous law case \"Carlill v Carbolic Smoke Ball Company\". In the tort law case of \"Roe v Minister of Health\", phenol was used to sterilize anaesthetic packed in ampoules, in which it contaminated the anaesthetic through invisible micro-cracks and caused paraplegia to the plaintiffs.\nSecond World War.\nThe toxic effect of phenol on the central nervous system causes sudden collapse and loss of consciousness in both humans and animals; a state of cramping precedes these symptoms because of the motor activity controlled by the central nervous system. Injections of phenol were used as a means of individual execution by Nazi Germany during the Second World War. It was originally used by the Nazis in 1939 as part of the mass-murder of disabled people under \"Aktion T4\". The Germans learned that extermination of smaller groups was more economical by injection of each victim with phenol. Phenol injections were given to thousands of people. Maximilian Kolbe was also murdered with a phenol injection after surviving two weeks of dehydration and starvation in Auschwitz when he volunteered to die in place of a stranger. Approximately one gram is sufficient to cause death.\nOccurrences.\nPhenol is a normal metabolic product, excreted in quantities up to 40\u00a0mg/L in human urine. The temporal gland secretion of male elephants showed the presence of phenol and 4-methylphenol during musth. It is also one of the chemical compounds found in castoreum. This compound is ingested from the plants the beaver eats.\nPhenol is a measurable component in the aroma and taste of the distinctive Islay scotch whisky, generally ~30\u00a0ppm, but it can be over 160\u00a0ppm in the malted barley used to produce whisky. This amount is different from and presumably higher than the amount in the distillate.\nBiodegradation.\n\"Cryptanaerobacter phenolicus\" is a bacterium species that produces benzoate from phenol via 4-hydroxybenzoate. \"Rhodococcus phenolicus\" is a bacterium species able to degrade phenol as sole carbon source.\nNaming.\nThe word \"phenol\" is also used to refer to any compound that contains a six-membered aromatic ring, bonded directly to a hydroxyl group (-OH). Thus, phenols are a class of organic compounds of which the phenol discussed in this article is the simplest member.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "24086", "revid": "42362362", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24086", "title": "Protagoras", "text": "Pre-Socratic Greek philosopher (c.490\u2013c.420 BC)\nProtagoras ( ; ; c.\u2009490 BC\u00a0\u2013 c.\u2009420 BC) was a pre-Socratic Greek philosopher and rhetorical theorist. He is numbered as one of the sophists by Plato. In his dialogue \"Protagoras\", Plato credits him with inventing the role of the professional sophist.\nProtagoras is also believed to have created a major controversy during ancient times through his statement that \"Of all things the measure is Man, of the things that are, that they are, and of the things that are not, that they are not\" which was usually rendered simply as \"Man is the measure of all things,\" interpreted (possibly wrongly, since he disagreed) by Plato to mean that there is no objective truth; Protagoras seems to have meant that each person's own personal history, experiences and expectations, developed over their lifetime, determine their judgments, opinions, and statements regarding \"truth\" (which is the title of the book in which Protagoras made this statement). When a person makes a judgment about a certain thing\u2014good or bad or beautiful or unjust\u2014that person will differ from other people's judgments because their experience has been different.\nThis concept of individual relativity was intended to be provocative; naturally, it was criticized by Plato and other philosophers, contrasting with both popular opinion and other philosophical doctrine that reality and its truth must have an objective grounding. However, it was part of Protagoras' point that the statement is somewhat counterintuitive. He argued that this concept\u2014believing that others' opinions about the world are valid and must be respected, even if our own experience of truth is different\u2014is necessary for a community to base itself and its decisions on open, democratic debate.\nBiography.\nProtagoras was born in Abdera, Thrace, opposite the island of Thasos, around 490 BC. According to Aulus Gellius, he originally made his living as a porter, but one day he was seen by the philosopher Democritus carrying a load of small pieces of wood he had tied with a short cord. Democritus realized that Protagoras had tied the load together with such perfect geometric accuracy that he must be a mathematical prodigy. Democritus promptly took him into his own household and taught him philosophy. Protagoras became well known in Athens and even became a friend of Pericles.\nThe dates of his life are not recorded but extrapolated from writings that have survived the ages. In \"Protagoras\" Plato wrote that, before a gathering of Socrates, Prodicus, and Hippias, Protagoras stated that he was old enough to be the father of any of them. This suggests a birth date of not later than 490 BC. In the \"Meno\" he is said to have died at approximately the age of 70, after 40 years as a practising Sophist. His death, then, may be presumed to have occurred circa 420 BC, but is not known for certain, since assumptions about it are based on an apparently fake story about his trial for asebeia (impiety) in Athens.\nPlutarch wrote that Pericles and Protagoras spent a whole day discussing an interesting point of legal responsibility, that probably involved a more philosophical question of causation: \"In an athletic contest, a man had been accidentally hit and killed with a javelin. Was his death to be attributed to the javelin, to the man who threw it, or to the authorities responsible for the conduct of the games?\"\nPhilosophy.\nEven though he was mentored by Democritus, Protagoras did not share his enthusiasm for the pursuit of mathematics. \"For perceptible lines are not the kind of things the geometer talks about, since no perceptible thing is straight or curved in that way, nor is a circle tangent to a ruler at a point, but the way Protagoras used to say in refuting the geometers\" (Aristotle, Metaphysics 997b34-998a4). Protagoras was skeptical about the application of theoretical mathematics to the natural world; he did not believe they were really worth studying at all. According to Philodemus, Protagoras said that \"The subject matter is unknowable and the terminology distasteful\". Nonetheless, mathematics was considered to be by some a very viable form of art, and Protagoras says on the arts, \"art (\"tekhn\u00ea\") without practice and practice without art are nothing\" (Stobaeus, \"Selections\" 3.29.80).\nProtagoras taught subjects related to virtue and political life. He especially was involved in the question of whether virtue could be taught, a commonplace issue of fifth century BC Greece, that has been related to modern readers through Plato's dialogue. Rather than educators who offered specific, practical training in rhetoric or public speaking, Protagoras attempted to formulate a reasoned understanding, on a very general level, of a wide range of human phenomena, including language and education. In Plato's \"Protagoras\", he claims to teach \"the proper management of one's own affairs, how best to run one's household, and the management of public affairs, how to make the most effective contribution to the affairs of the city by word and action\".\nHe also seems to have had an interest in \"orthoepeia\"\u2014the correct use of words\u2014although this topic is more strongly associated with his fellow sophist Prodicus. In his eponymous Platonic dialogue, Protagoras interprets a poem by Simonides, focusing on the use of words, their literal meaning, and the author's original intent. This type of education would have been useful for the interpretation of laws and other written documents in the Athenian courts. Diogenes La\u00ebrtius reports that Protagoras devised a taxonomy of speech acts, such as assertion, question, answer, command, etc. Aristotle also says that Protagoras worked on the classification and proper use of grammatical gender.\nThe titles of his books, such as \"Technique of Eristics\" (\"Techn\u0113 Eristik\u014dn\", literally \"Practice of Wranglings\"\u2014 wrestling used as a metaphor for intellectual debate), prove that Protagoras also was a teacher of rhetoric and argumentation. Diogenes La\u00ebrtius states that he was one of the first to take part in rhetorical contests in the Olympic games.\nEusebius quoting Aristocles of Messene says that Protagoras was a member of a line of philosophy that began with Xenophanes and culminated in Pyrrhonism.\nRelativism.\nProtagoras also said that on any matter, there are two arguments (\"logoi\") opposed to one another. Consequently, he may have been the author of \"Dissoi logoi\", an ancient Sophistic text on such opposing arguments. According to Aristotle, Protagoras was criticized for having claimed \"to make the weaker argument stronger\".\nProtagoras is credited with the philosophy of relativism, which he discussed in his lost work, \"Truth\" (also known as \"Refutations\"). Although knowledge of Protagoras' position is limited, his relativism is inferred from one of his most famous statements: \"Man is the measure of all things: of the things that are, that they are, of the things that are not, that they are not.\"\nProtagoras appears to have meant that each individual is the measure of how things are perceived by that individual. Therefore, things are, or are not, true according to how the individual perceives them. For example, Person X may believe that the weather is cold, whereas Person Y may believe that the weather is hot. According to the philosophy of Protagoras, there is no absolute evaluation of the nature of a temperature because the evaluation will be relative to who is perceiving it. Therefore, to Person X, the weather is cold, whereas to Person Y, the weather is hot. This philosophy implies that there are no absolute \"truths\". The truth, according to Protagoras, is relative, and differs according to each individual.\nPlato ascribes relativism to Protagoras and uses his character Socrates as a foil for his own commitment to objective and transcendent realities and values. Plato ascribes to Protagoras an early form of what John Wild categorized as phenomenalism. That being an assertion that something that is, or appears for a single individual, is true or real for that individual. However, as described in Plato's \"Theaetetus\", Protagoras's views allow that some views may result from an ill body or mind. He stressed that although all views may appear equally true, and perhaps, should be equally respected, they certainly are not of equal gravity. One view may be useful and advantageous to the person who has it, while the perception of another may prove harmful. Hence, Protagoras believed that the sophist was there to teach the student how to discriminate between them, i.e., to teach virtue.\nBoth Plato and Aristotle argue against some of Protagoras's claims regarding relativity; however, they argue that the concept provides Protagoras with too convenient an exemption from his own theory and that relativism is true for him yet false for those who do not believe it. They claim that by asserting that truth is relative, Protagoras then could say that whatever further theory he proposed \"must\" be true.\nAgnosticism.\nProtagoras was a proponent of either agnosticism or, as Tim Whitmarsh claims, atheism, on the grounds that since he held that if something is not able to be known it does not exist. Reportedly, in Protagoras's lost work, \"On the Gods\", he wrote: \"Concerning the gods, I have no means of knowing whether they exist or not, nor of what sort they may be, because of the obscurity of the subject, and the brevity of human life.\"\nAccording to Diogenes La\u00ebrtius, the outspoken, agnostic position taken by Protagoras aroused anger, causing the Athenians to expel him from the city, and all copies of his book were collected and burned in the marketplace. The deliberate destruction of his works is also mentioned by Cicero. The classicist John Burnet doubts this account, however, as both Diogenes La\u00ebrtius and Cicero wrote hundreds of years later and as no such persecution of Protagoras is mentioned by contemporaries who make extensive references to this philosopher. Burnet notes that even if some copies of the Protagoras books were burned, enough of them survived to be known and discussed in the following century.\nSpectrum of topics.\nNonetheless, very few fragments from Protagoras have survived, although he is known to have written several different works: \"Antilogiae\" and \"Truth\". The latter is cited by Plato, and was known alternatively as, \"The Throws\" (a wrestling term referring to the attempt to floor an opponent). It began with the \"Man is the measure\" (\u1f04\u03bd\u03b8\u03c1\u03c9\u03c0\u03bf\u03c2 \u03bc\u03ad\u03c4\u03c1\u03bf\u03bd) pronouncement. According to Diogenes La\u00ebrtius other books by Protagoras include: \"On the Gods\", \"Art of Eristics\", \"Imperative\", \"On Ambition\", \"On Incorrect Human Actions\", \"On Those in Hades\", \"On Sciences\", \"On Virtues\", \"On the Original State of Things\" and \"Trial over a Fee\".\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "24087", "revid": "27822", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24087", "title": "Presocriaic", "text": ""}
{"id": "24088", "revid": "41833184", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24088", "title": "Presocratics", "text": ""}
{"id": "24089", "revid": "12978", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24089", "title": "Presocratic", "text": ""}
{"id": "24091", "revid": "40781349", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24091", "title": "Puritans", "text": "Subclass of English Reformed Protestants\nThe Puritans were English Protestants in the 16th and 17th centuries who sought to rid the Church of England of what they considered to be Roman Catholic practices, maintaining that the Church of England had not been fully reformed and should become more Protestant. Puritanism played a significant role in English and early American history, especially in the Protectorate in Great Britain, and the earlier settlement of New England.\nPuritans were dissatisfied with the limited extent of the English Reformation and with the Church of England's toleration of certain practices associated with the Catholic Church. They formed and identified with various religious groups advocating greater purity of worship and doctrine, as well as personal and corporate piety. Puritans adopted a covenant theology, and in that sense they were Calvinists (as were many of their earlier opponents). In church polity, Puritans were divided between supporters of episcopal, presbyterian, and congregational types. Some believed a uniform reform of the established church was called for to create a godly nation, while others advocated separation from, or the end of, any established state church entirely in favour of autonomous gathered churches, called-out from the world. These Separatist and Independents became more prominent in the 1640s, when the supporters of a presbyterian polity in the Westminster Assembly were unable to forge a new English national church.\nBy the late 1630s, Puritans were in alliance with the growing commercial world, with the parliamentary opposition to the royal prerogative, and with the Scottish Presbyterians with whom they had much in common. Consequently, they became a major political force in England and came to power as a result of the First English Civil War (1642\u20131646). \nAlmost all Puritan clergy left the Church of England after the restoration of the monarchy in 1660 and the Act of Uniformity 1662. Many continued to practise their faith in nonconformist denominations, especially in Congregationalist and Presbyterian churches. The nature of the Puritan movement in England changed radically. In New England, it retained its character for a longer period.\nPuritanism was never a formally defined religious division within Protestantism, and the term \"Puritan\" itself was rarely used after the turn of the 18th century. Congregationalist Churches, widely considered to be a part of the Reformed tradition of Christianity, are descended from the Puritans. Moreover, Puritan beliefs are enshrined in the Savoy Declaration, the confession of faith held by the Congregationalist churches. Some Puritan ideals, including the formal rejection of Roman Catholicism, were incorporated into the doctrines of the Church of England, the mother church of the worldwide Anglican Communion.\nTerminology.\nIn the 17th century, the word \"Puritan\" was a term applied not to just one group but to many. Historians still debate a precise definition of Puritanism. Originally, \"Puritan\" was a pejorative term characterizing certain Protestant groups as extremist. Thomas Fuller, in his \"Church History\", dates the first use of the word to 1564. Archbishop Matthew Parker of that time used it and \"precisian\" with a sense similar to the modern \"stickler\". Puritans, then, were distinguished for being \"more intensely protestant than their protestant neighbors or even the Church of England\". As a term of abuse, \"Puritan\" was not used by Puritans themselves. Those referred to as \"Puritan\" called themselves terms such as \"the godly\", \"saints\", \"professors\", or \"God's children\"; they had a \"passion for their truth\" which was, according to Matthew Arnold, a \"sort of cast iron product, rigid, definite and complete\".\n\"Non-separating Puritans\" were dissatisfied with the Reformation of the Church of England but remained within it, advocating for further reform; they disagreed among themselves about how much further reformation was possible or even necessary. Others, who were later termed \"Nonconformists\", \"Separatists\", or \"separating Puritans\", thought the Church of England was so corrupt that true Christians should separate from it altogether. In its widest historical sense, the term \"Puritan\" includes both groups.\nPuritans should not be confused with other radical Protestant groups of the 16th and 17th centuries, such as Quakers, Seekers, and Familists, who believed that individuals could be directly guided by the Holy Spirit. The latter denominations give precedence to direct revelation over the Bible.\nIn current English, \"puritan\" often means \"against pleasure\". In such usage, \"hedonism\" and \"puritanism\" are antonyms. William Shakespeare described the vain, pompous killjoy Malvolio in \"Twelfth Night\" as \"a kind of Puritan\". H. L. Mencken archly defined Puritanism as \"the haunting fear that someone, somewhere, may be happy.\" Puritans embraced sexuality but placed it in the context of marriage. Peter Gay writes that the Puritans' standard reputation for \"dour prudery\" was a \"misreading that went unquestioned in the nineteenth century\". He said they were in favour of married sexuality, and opposed the Catholic veneration of virginity (associated with the Virgin Mary), citing Edward Taylor and John Cotton. One Puritan settlement in western Massachusetts banished a husband because he refused to fulfill his sexual duties to his wife.\nHistory.\nPuritanism had a historical importance over a period of a century, followed by fifty years of development in New England. It changed character and emphasis nearly decade by decade over that time.\nElizabethan Puritanism.\nThe Elizabethan Religious Settlement of 1559 established the Church of England as a Protestant church and brought the English Reformation to a close. During the reign of Elizabeth\u00a0I (r. 1558\u20131603), the Church of England was widely considered a Reformed church, and Calvinists held the best bishoprics and deaneries. Nevertheless, it preserved certain characteristics of medieval Catholicism, such as cathedrals, church choirs, a formal liturgy contained in the \"Book of Common Prayer\", traditional clerical vestments, and episcopal polity.\nMany English Protestants\u2014especially those former Marian exiles returning to England to work as clergy and bishops\u2014considered the settlement merely the first step in reforming England's church. The years of exile during the Marian Restoration had exposed them to the practices of the Continental Reformed churches. The most impatient clergy began introducing reforms within their local parishes. The initial conflict between Puritans and the authorities included instances of nonconformity, such as omitting parts of the liturgy to allow more time for the sermon and singing of metrical psalms. Some Puritans refused to bow on hearing the name of Jesus, or to make the sign of the cross in baptism, or to use wedding rings or the organ. \nYet, the main complaint Puritans had was the requirement that clergy wear the white surplice and clerical cap. Puritan clergymen preferred to wear black academic attire. During the vestments controversy, church authorities attempted and failed to enforce the use of clerical vestments. While never a mass movement, the Puritans had the support and protection of powerful patrons in the aristocracy.\nIn the 1570s, the primary dispute between Puritans and the authorities was over the appropriate form of church government. Many Puritans believed that the Church of England should follow the example of Reformed churches in other parts of Europe and adopt presbyterian polity, under which government by bishops would be replaced with government by elders. But all attempts to enact further reforms through Parliament were blocked by the Queen. Despite such setbacks, Puritan leaders such as John Field and Thomas Cartwright continued to promote presbyterianism through the formation of unofficial clerical conferences that allowed Puritan clergymen to organise and network. This covert Puritan network was discovered and dismantled during the Marprelate controversy of the 1580s. For the remainder of Elizabeth's reign, Puritans ceased to agitate for further reform.\nJacobean Puritanism.\nThe accession of James\u00a0I to the English throne brought the Millenary Petition, a Puritan manifesto of 1603 for reform of the English church, but James wanted a religious settlement along different lines. He called the Hampton Court Conference in 1604, and heard the teachings of four prominent Puritan leaders, including Laurence Chaderton, but largely sided with his bishops. He was well informed on theological matters by his education and Scottish upbringing, and he dealt shortly with the peevish legacy of Elizabethan Puritanism, pursuing an irenic religious policy, in which he was arbiter.\nMany of James's episcopal appointments were Calvinists, notably James Montague, who was an influential courtier. Puritans still opposed much of the Roman Catholic summation in the Church of England, notably the \"Book of Common Prayer\", but also the use of non-secular vestments (cap and gown) during services, the sign of the Cross in baptism, and kneeling to receive Holy Communion. Some of the bishops under both Elizabeth and James tried to suppress Puritanism, though other bishops were more tolerant. In many places, individual ministers were able to omit disliked portions of the revised \"Book of Common Prayer\".\nThe Puritan movement of Jacobean times became distinctive by adaptation and compromise, with the emergence of \"semi-separatism\", \"moderate puritanism\", the writings of William Bradshaw (who adopted the term \"Puritan\" for himself), and the beginnings of Congregationalism. Most Puritans of this period were non-separating and remained within the Church of England; Separatists who left the Church of England altogether were numerically much fewer.\nCaroline Puritanism.\nUnder Charles I, the Puritans became a political force as well as a religious tendency in the country. Opponents of the royal prerogative became allies of Puritan reformers, who saw the Church of England moving in a direction opposite to what they wanted, and objected to increased Catholic influence both at Court and (as they saw it) within the Church.\nAfter the First English Civil War political power was held by various factions of Puritans. The trials and executions of William Laud and then King Charles were decisive moves shaping British history. While in the short term Puritan power was consolidated by the Parliamentary armed forces and Oliver Cromwell, in the same years, the argument for theocracy failed to convince enough of the various groupings, and there was no Puritan religious settlement to match Cromwell's gradual assumption of dictatorial powers. The distinctive formulation of Reformed theology in the Westminster Assembly would prove to be its lasting legacy.\nIn New England, immigration of what were Puritan family groups and congregations was at its peak for the middle years of King Charles's reign.\nFragmentation and political failure.\nThe Puritan movement in England was riven over decades by emigration and inconsistent interpretations of Scripture, as well as some political differences that surfaced at that time. The Fifth Monarchy Men, a radical millenarian wing of Puritanism, aided by strident, popular clergy like Vavasor Powell, agitated from the right wing of the movement, even as sectarian groups like the Ranters, Levellers, and Quakers pulled from the left. The fragmentation created a collapse of the centre and, ultimately, sealed a political failure, while depositing an enduring spiritual legacy that would remain and grow in English-speaking Christianity.\nThe Westminster Assembly was called in 1643, assembling clergy of the Church of England. The Assembly was able to agree to the Westminster Confession of Faith doctrinally, a consistent Reformed theological position. The \"Directory of Public Worship\" was made official in 1645, and the larger framework (now called the Westminster Standards) was adopted by the Church of Scotland. In England, the Standards were contested by Independents up to 1660.\nThe Westminster Divines, on the other hand, were divided over questions of church polity and split into factions supporting a reformed episcopacy, presbyterianism, congregationalism, and Erastianism. The membership of the Assembly was strongly weighted towards the Presbyterians, but Oliver Cromwell was a Puritan and an independent Congregationalist Separatist who imposed his doctrines upon them. The Church of England of the Interregnum (1649\u201360) was run along Presbyterian lines but never became a national Presbyterian church, such as existed in Scotland. England was not the theocratic state which leading Puritans had called for as \"godly rule\".\nGreat Ejection and Dissenters.\nAt the time of the English Restoration in 1660, the Savoy Conference was called to determine a new religious settlement for England and Wales. Under the \"Act of Uniformity 1662\", the Church of England was restored to its pre-Civil War constitution with only minor changes, and the Puritans found themselves sidelined. A traditional estimate of historian Calamy is that around 2,400 Puritan clergy left the Church in the \"Great Ejection\" of 1662. At this point, the term \"Dissenter\" came to include \"Puritan\", but more accurately described those (clergy or lay) who \"dissented\" from the 1662 \"Book of Common Prayer\".\nThe Dissenters divided themselves from all other Christians in the Church of England and established their own Separatist congregations in the 1660s and 1670s. An estimated 1,800 of the ejected clergy continued in some fashion as ministers of religion, according to Richard Baxter. The government initially attempted to suppress these schismatic organisations by using the Clarendon Code. There followed a period in which schemes of \"comprehension\" were proposed, under which Presbyterians could be brought back into the Church of England, but nothing resulted from them. The Whigs opposed the court religious policies and argued that the Dissenters should be allowed to worship separately from the established Church. This position ultimately prevailed when the \"Toleration Act\" was passed in the wake of the Glorious Revolution in 1689. This permitted the licensing of Dissenting ministers and the building of chapels. The term \"Nonconformist\" generally replaced the term \"Dissenter\" from the middle of the 18th century.\nPuritans in North America.\nSome Puritans left for New England, particularly from 1629 to 1640 (Charles I's Personal Rule), supporting the founding of the Massachusetts Bay Colony and other settlements among the northern colonies. The large-scale Puritan migration to New England ceased by 1641, with around 21,000 persons having moved across the Atlantic. This English-speaking population in the United States was not descended from all of the original colonists, since many returned to England shortly after arriving on the continent, but it produced more than 16\u00a0million descendants. This so-called \"Great Migration\" is not so named because of sheer numbers, which were much less than the number of English citizens who immigrated to Virginia and the Caribbean during this time, many as indentured servants. The rapid growth of the New England colonies (around 700,000 by 1790) was almost entirely due to the high birth rate and lower death rate per year. They had formed families more rapidly than did the southern colonies.\nPuritan hegemony lasted for at least a century. That century can be broken down into three parts: the generation of John Cotton and Richard Mather, 1630\u20131662 from the founding to the Restoration, years of virtual independence and nearly autonomous development; the generation of Increase Mather, 1662\u20131689 from the Restoration and the Halfway Covenant to the Glorious Revolution, years of struggle with the British crown; and the generation of Cotton Mather, 1689\u20131728 from the overthrow of Edmund Andros (in which Cotton Mather played a part) and the new charter, mediated by Increase Mather, to the death of Cotton Mather. Puritan leaders were political thinkers and writers who considered the church government to be God's agency in social life.\nThe Puritans in the Colonies wanted their children to be able to read and interpret the Bible themselves, rather than have to rely on the clergy for interpretation. In 1635, they established the Boston Latin School to educate their sons, the first and oldest formal education institution in the English-speaking New World. They also set up what were called dame schools for their daughters, and in other cases taught their daughters at home how to read. As a result, Puritans were among the most literate societies in the world. \nBy the time of the American Revolution there were 40 newspapers in the United States (at a time when there were only two cities\u2014New York and Philadelphia\u2014with as many as 20,000 people in them). The Puritans also set up a college (now Harvard University) only six years after arriving in Boston.\nBeliefs.\nCalvinism.\n\"Puritanism\" broadly refers to a diverse religious reform movement in Britain that was committed to the Continental Reformed tradition. While Puritans did not agree upon all doctrinal points, most of them shared similar doctrines about the nature of God, human sinfulness, and the relationship between God and mankind. They believed that all of their beliefs should be based upon the Bible, which they considered to be divinely inspired.\nThe concept of covenant was extremely important to Puritans, and covenant theology was central to their beliefs. With roots in the writings of the Reformed theologians John Calvin and Heinrich Bullinger, covenant theology was further developed by the Puritan theologians Dudley Fenner, William Perkins, John Preston, Richard Sibbes, William Ames, and, most fully by Ames's Dutch student, Johannes Cocceius. Covenant theology asserts that when God created Adam and Eve, he promised them eternal life in return for perfect obedience, and this promise was termed \"the covenant of works\". After the fall of man, human nature was corrupted by original sin, and therefore unable to fulfill the covenant of works, since each person inevitably violated God's law as expressed in the Ten Commandments. As sinners, every person deserved damnation.\nPuritans shared with other Calvinists a belief in double predestination, that some people (the elect) were destined by God to receive grace and salvation while others were destined for Hell. No one, however, could merit salvation. According to covenant theology, Jesus's sacrifice on the cross made possible the covenant of grace, by which people who are selected by God could be saved. Puritans believed in unconditional election and irresistible grace, which means that God's grace was given freely without condition to the elect, and could not be refused.\nConversion.\nCovenant theology made individual salvation deeply personal. It held that God's predestination was not \"impersonal and mechanical\", but was a \"covenant of grace\" that one entered into by faith. Therefore, being a Christian could never be reduced to simple \"intellectual acknowledgment\" of the truth of Christianity. Puritans agreed that the effectual call of each elect saint of God would always come as an individuated personal encounter with God's promises.\nThe process by which the elect are brought from spiritual death to spiritual life (regeneration) was described as conversion. Early on, Puritans did not consider a specific conversion experience normative or necessary, but many gained assurance of salvation from such experiences. Over time, however, Puritan theologians developed a framework for authentic religious experience based upon their own experiences, as well as those of their parishioners. Eventually, Puritans came to regard a specific conversion experience as an essential mark of one's election.\nThe Puritan conversion experience was commonly described as occurring in discrete phases. It began with a preparatory phase that was designed to produce contrition for sin via introspection, Bible study, and listening to preaching. This was followed by humiliation, when the sinner realized that he or she was helpless to break free from sin, and that their good works could never earn forgiveness. It was after reaching this point (the realization that salvation was possible only because of divine mercy) that the person would experience justification, when the righteousness of Jesus is imputed to the elect, and their minds and hearts are regenerated. For some Puritans, this was a dramatic experience, and they referred to it as being \"born again\".\nConfirming that such a conversion had actually happened often required prolonged and continual introspection. The historian Perry Miller wrote that the Puritans \"liberated men from the treadmill of indulgences and penances, but cast them on the iron couch of introspection\". It was expected that conversion would be followed by sanctification, which is described as \"the progressive growth in the saint's ability to better perceive and seek God's will, and thus to lead a holy life\". Some Puritans attempted to find assurance of their faith via keeping detailed records of their behavior and looking for the evidence of salvation in their lives. Puritan clergy wrote many spiritual guides to help their parishioners pursue personal piety and sanctification. These included Arthur Dent's \"The Plain Man's Pathway to Heaven\" (1601), Richard Rogers's \"Seven Treatises\" (1603), Henry Scudder's \"Christian's Daily Walk\" (1627), and Richard Sibbes's \"The Bruised Reed and Smoking Flax\" (1630).\nToo much emphasis upon one's good works could be criticized for being too close to Arminianism, and too much emphasis upon subjective religious experience could be criticized as Antinomianism. Many Puritans relied upon both personal religious experience and self-examination to assess their spiritual condition.\nPuritanism's experiential piety would be inherited by the evangelical Protestants of the 1700s. While evangelical doctrines about conversion were heavily influenced by Puritan theology, the Puritans believed that assurance of one's salvation was rare, late in life, and \"the fruit of struggle in the experience of believers\", whereas evangelicals believed that assurance was normative for all people who were truly converted.\nWorship and sacraments.\nWhile most Puritans were members of the Church of England, they were critical of its worship practices. In the 17th century, Sunday worship in the established church took the form of the Morning Prayer service in the \"Book of Common Prayer\". This may include a sermon, but Holy Communion or the Lord's Supper was only occasionally observed. Officially, lay people were only required to receive communion three times a year, but most people only received communion once a year at Easter. Puritans were concerned about biblical errors and Catholic remnants within the prayer book. Puritans objected to bowing at the name of Jesus, the requirement that priests wear the surplice, and the use of written, set prayers in place of improvised prayers.\nThe sermon was central to Puritan piety. It was not only a means of religious education; Puritans believed it was the most common way that God prepared a sinner's heart for conversion. On Sundays, Puritan ministers often shortened the liturgy to allow more time for preaching. Puritan churchgoers attended two sermons on Sundays and as many weekday sermons and lectures they could find, often traveling for miles. Still, many villagers could access sermons with ease. Due to the social patterns of New England, Puritan households were largely middle class and close in distance, so there was not much of a distance between a church goers and their church. Puritans were distinct for their adherence to Sabbatarianism. \nPuritans taught that there were two sacraments: baptism and the Lord's Supper. Puritans agreed with the church's practice of infant baptism. However, the effect of baptism was disputed. Puritans objected to the prayer book's assertion of baptismal regeneration. In Puritan theology, infant baptism was understood in terms of covenant theology\u2014baptism replaced circumcision as a sign of the covenant and marked a child's admission into the visible church. It could not be assumed that baptism produces regeneration. The Westminster Confession states that the grace of baptism is only effective for those who are among the elect, and its effects lie dormant until one experiences conversion later in life. Puritans wanted to do away with godparents, who made baptismal vows on behalf of infants, and give that responsibility to the child's father. Puritans also objected to priests making the sign of the cross in baptism. Private baptisms were opposed because Puritans believed that preaching should always accompany sacraments. Some Puritan clergy even refused to baptise dying infants because that implied the sacrament contributed to salvation.\nPuritans rejected both Roman Catholic (transubstantiation) and Lutheran (sacramental union) teachings that Christ is physically present in the bread and wine of the Lord's Supper. Instead, Puritans embraced the Reformed doctrine of real spiritual presence, believing that in the Lord's Supper the faithful receive Christ spiritually. In agreement with Thomas Cranmer, the Puritans stressed \"that Christ comes down to us in the sacrament by His Word and Spirit, offering Himself as our spiritual food and drink\". They criticised the prayer book service for being too similar to the Catholic mass. For example, the requirement that people kneel to receive communion implied adoration of the Eucharist, a practice linked to transubstantiation. Puritans also criticised the Church of England for allowing unrepentant sinners to receive communion. Puritans wanted better spiritual preparation (such as clergy home visits and testing people on their knowledge of the catechism) for communion and better church discipline to ensure that the unworthy were kept from the sacrament.\nPuritans did not believe confirmation was necessary and thought candidates were poorly prepared since bishops did not have the time to examine them properly. The marriage service was criticised for using a wedding ring (which implied that marriage was a sacrament) and having the groom vow to his bride \"with my body I thee worship\", which Puritans considered blasphemous. In the funeral service, the priest committed the body to the ground \"in sure and certain hope of resurrection to eternal life, through our Lord Jesus Christ.\" Puritans objected to this phrase because they did not believe it was true for everyone. They suggested it be rewritten as \"we commit his body [etc.] believing a resurrection of the just and unjust, some to joy, and some to punishment.\"\nPuritans eliminated choral music and musical instruments in their religious services because these were associated with Roman Catholicism; however, singing the Psalms was considered appropriate (see Exclusive psalmody). Church organs were commonly damaged or destroyed in the Civil War period, such as when an axe was taken to the organ of Worcester Cathedral in 1642.\nEcclesiology.\nWhile the Puritans were united in their goal of furthering the English Reformation, they were always divided over issues of ecclesiology and church polity, specifically questions that relate to the manner of organizing congregations, how individual congregations should relate with one another, and whether established national churches were scriptural. On these questions, Puritans divided between supporters of episcopal polity, presbyterian polity, and congregational polity.\nThe episcopalians (known as the prelatical party) were conservatives, who supported retaining bishops if those leaders supported reform and agreed to share power with local churches. They also supported the idea of having a Book of Common Prayer, but they were against demanding strict conformity or having too much ceremony. In addition, these Puritans called for a renewal of preaching, pastoral care, and Christian discipline within the Church of England.\nLike the episcopalians, the presbyterians agreed that there should be a national church, but one that is structured upon the model of the Church of Scotland. They wanted to replace bishops with a system of elective and representative governing bodies of clergy and laity (local sessions, presbyteries, synods, and ultimately a national general assembly). During the Interregnum, the presbyterians had limited success at reorganizing the Church of England. The Westminster Assembly proposed the creation of a presbyterian system, but the Long Parliament left implementation to local authorities. As a result, the Church of England never developed a complete presbyterian hierarchy.\nCongregationalists or Independents believed in the autonomy of the local church, which ideally would be a congregation of \"visible saints\" (meaning those who had experienced conversion). Members would be required to abide by a church covenant, in which they \"pledged to join in the proper worship of God and to nourish each other in the search for further religious truth\". Such churches were regarded as complete within themselves, with full authority to determine their own membership, administer their own discipline, and ordain their own ministers. Furthermore, the sacraments would only be administered to those in the church covenant.\nMost congregational Puritans remained within the Church of England, hoping to reform it according to their own doctrines. The New England Congregationalists were also adamant that they were not separating from the Church of England. However, some Puritans equated the Church of England with the Roman Catholic Church, and therefore considered it to be no Christian church at all. These groups, such as the Brownists, would split from the established church, and become known as Separatists. Other Separatists embraced more radical positions, particularly on the subject of believer's baptism, and became early Baptists.\nChurch and State.\nCalvin taught that if worldly rulers rise up against God they should be put down which could be hard to reconcile with the claims of divine right monarchy. Puritan views on church and state were also affected by their views on church governance, with those who favoured more centralised models tending to favour a closer relationship between the church and state, as well as other foreign models and their changing relationship with the English state.\nThe initial Puritan vision on the proper relationship between church and state in England was of an established reformed national church on the model of Calvin's Geneva, who had been more careful than the previous reformers Luther and Zwingli to keep church structures and city authorities apart. Geneva hosted many of the Marian exiles of the 1550s who formed the core of the early early Puritans. Fellow exile John Knox had implemented a reformed national church in neighbouring Scotland in the early 1560s. Despite the Elizabethan Settlement of 1559 creating a Protestant Church of England with many Calvinist bishops, the vestments controversy of the 1570s did show the limits of Puritan influence on the church.\nMany Independents, did not support a compulsory national church but believed that civil government should enforce godly discipline by upholding the moral teachings of Scripture. This included the Puritan settlers in the New England Colonies between 1620 and 1640, who established colony-supported churches and governments that closely intertwined civil law with religious practice, and often the right to vote linked to church membership.\nHowever, a minority of Puritan Separatists known as Brownists from as early as the 1580s rejected the notion of a state church altogether and argued for congregations to remain independent from civil power, with another Separatist Roger Williams in 1636 setting up Providence Plantations with a formal separation of church and state. \nDuring the Interregnum, led by the Independent Oliver Cromwell, starting in 1649, the parish system was retained and ministers financed through tithes, but oversight was exercised by state-appointed commissions such as the Triers and Ejectors, allowing a range of Protestant congregations to receive support while excluding Catholics and radical sects.\nOn 27 September 1650, the Rump Parliament of the Commonwealth of England passed an Act repealing the \"Act of Supremacy\", \"Act of Uniformity\", and all laws making recusancy a crime. There was no longer a legal requirement to attend the parish church on Sundays (for both Protestants and Catholics). In 1653, responsibility for recording births, marriages, and deaths was transferred from the church to a civil registrar. The result was that church baptisms and marriages became private acts, not guarantees of legal rights, which provided greater equality to dissenters. \nThe 1653 \"Instrument of Government\" guaranteed that in matters of religion, \"none shall be compelled by penalties or otherwise, but endeavours be used to win them by sound Doctrine and the Example of a good conversation\". Religious freedom was given to \"all who profess Faith in God by Jesus Christ\". However, Catholics and some others were excluded. No one was executed for their religion during the Protectorate. In London, people who attended Catholic mass or Anglican holy communion were occasionally arrested, but released without charge. Many unofficial Protestant congregations, such as Baptist churches, were permitted to meet. Quakers were allowed to publish freely and to hold meetings. They were, however, arrested for disrupting parish church services and organising tithe-strikes against the state church.\nAfter the Great Ejection of 1662 expelled Puritans from the Church of England, most became nonconformists, worshipping outside the established church.\nFamily life.\nBased on Biblical portrayals of Adam and Eve, Puritans believed that marriage was rooted in procreation, love, and, most importantly, salvation. Husbands were the spiritual heads of the household, while women were to demonstrate religious piety and obedience under male authority. Furthermore, marriage represented not only the relationship between husband and wife, but also the relationship between spouses and God. Puritan husbands commanded authority through family direction and prayer. The female relationship to her husband and to God was marked by submissiveness and humility.\nThomas Gataker describes Puritan marriage as:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;... together for a time as copartners in grace here, [that] they may reigne together forever as coheires in glory hereafter.\nThe paradox created by female inferiority in the public sphere and the spiritual equality of men and women in marriage, then, gave way to the informal authority of women concerning matters of the home and childrearing. With the consent of their husbands, wives made important decisions concerning the labour of their children, property, and the management of inns and taverns owned by their husbands. Pious Puritan mothers laboured for their children's righteousness and salvation, connecting women directly to matters of religion and morality. In her poem titled \"In Reference to her Children\", poet Anne Bradstreet reflects on her role as a mother:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I had eight birds hatched in one nest; Four cocks there were, and hens the rest. I nursed them up with pain and care, Nor cost nor labour I did spare.\nBradstreet alludes to the temporality of motherhood by comparing her children to a flock of birds on the precipice of leaving home. While Puritans praised the obedience of young children, they also believed that, by separating children from their mothers at adolescence, children could better sustain a superior relationship with God. A child could only be redeemed through religious education and obedience. Girls carried the additional burden of Eve's corruption and were catechised separately from boys at adolescence. Boys' education prepared them for vocations and leadership roles, while girls were educated for domestic and religious purposes. The pinnacle of achievement for children in Puritan society, however, occurred with the conversion process.\nPuritans viewed the relationship between master and servant similarly to that of parent and child. Just as parents were expected to uphold Puritan religious values in the home, masters assumed the parental responsibility of housing and educating young servants. Older servants also dwelt with masters and were cared for in the event of illness or injury. African-American and Indian servants were likely excluded from such benefits.\nGender and punishment.\nMany Puritan communities operated under strict values that determined gender roles and generally \u201cpure\u201d behavior. Many of these values were shaped from their interpretation of the Bible. If anyone in the community was found to have disobeyed or strayed from these values, they would be reported and put through the censure process. This involved a public confession from the accused of their wrongdoings. People would be censured for things that ranged from immodesty and cursing to domestic abuse and fornication. Religious leaders would often make an example of the censured individual by turning their experience into a lesson for the congregation. In some cases, ministers or elders would meet with an individual to counsel them for a \u201cprivate sin,\u201d such as impiety or struggles with faith, before taking public action. In 1648, Puritan minister Thomas Hooker explained the necessity of church discipline: \u201c[God] hath appointed Church-censures as good Physick, to purge out what is evill, as well as Word and Sacraments, which, like good diet, are sufficient to nourish the soul to eternal life.\u201d They saw these practices as necessary for the community to keep each other in check and in line with their \u201cgodly paths.\u201d\nWhile Puritan doctrine viewed men and women spiritually equal, laymen reinterpreted spirituality to reflect their ideas of masculinity. Men displayed their spirituality through their public actions and behaviors, such as being a good neighbor to the community and father to their families. Women were expected to reflect their inner spirituality with their entire being. The human soul was often described using feminine language, but men were allowed to separate their mind and body from their souls in order to maintain an image of masculinity on the outside. The husband was the patriarch with ultimate authority, and the wife would be his assistant. If any of the other members of the family misbehaved, such as the children or even their mother, their actions reflected the capability of the father to be the head of the household. Thus, men were often called out for not fulfilling their role as a good father, husband, and/or neighbor.\nAs a result of this reinterpretation of the Puritan doctrine to reflect certain gendered beliefs, the things men and women were censured for differed. For example, women were often associated with \u201cEve,\u201d a temptress and sinful seductress. This led to women being censured for fornication far more often than men. Men, on the other hand, had more of a focus on civil duty, being censured for filing false lawsuits, arguing over property lines, charging inflated prices, tearing down a neighbor\u2019s mill, land fraud, or poor military conduct. In the economic sphere, women lacked formal power. Thus, men were censured more often for poor business practices.\nThe audience played a large role in censures, listening for certain words that demonstrated the accused was truly remorseful for their actions. Similar to the distinction between female and male spirituality, the language women and men used in their confessions differed. The feminized language expected from women included words such as \u201cshame,\u201d \u201cwounded,\u201d \u201cgreat sin,\u201d \u201cnature,\u201d \u201cpity,\u201d \u201cevil,\u201d \u201cpoor,\u201d and \u201cgrief.\u201d On the other hand, men used more objective phrases such as \u201crules,\u201d breach,\u201d offense,\u201d desire,\u201d forgiveness,\u201d actions,\u201d and \u201cbrethren.\u201d\nThe difference in treatment for men and women was reflected even in the specific sins they were accused of committing. As stated earlier, women were rarely censured for economic disputes as they lacked influence in that regard. Thus, if a commercial dispute involving a woman were to arise, the congregation treated her differently than a man. Such was the case for a woman named Chaplain: \u201cIn 1696, Dorchester\u2019s Sister Chaplain borrowed money from John Green to buy a shipment of wine. When Green died and his estate tried to collect the debt from Chaplain, she refused. The congregation did not cite her for breaking a contract, but censured her for lying.\u201d Women would also at times face harsher punishments than men for the same sin. \u201cBoston's Second Church censured John Farnum for making bad comments about another church and its pastor, and they noted he was \"breaking the rule of truth.\" However, that same congregation recorded much harsher words about Sarah Stevens, whom they admonished for \"many evill carriages and sundry filthy speeches, not fit to be named.\" And when they censured her, they said she \"grew more vile and hard hearted.\" The court also took up her case and sentenced her to jail and two whippings.\u201d\nDemonology and witch hunts.\nLike most Christians in the early modern period, Puritans believed in the active existence of the devil and demons as evil forces that could possess and cause harm to men and women. There was also widespread belief in witchcraft and witches\u2014persons in league with the devil. \"Unexplained phenomena such as the death of livestock, human disease, and hideous fits suffered by young and old\" may all be blamed on the agency of the devil or a witch.\nPuritan pastors undertook exorcisms for demonic possession in some high-profile cases. Exorcist John Darrell was supported by Arthur Hildersham in the case of Thomas Darling. Samuel Harsnett, a sceptic on witchcraft and possession, attacked Darrell. However, Harsnett was in the minority, and many clergy, not only Puritans, believed in witchcraft and possession.\nIn the 16th and 17th centuries, thousands of people throughout Europe were accused of being witches and executed. In England and Colonial America, Puritans engaged in witch hunts as well. In the 1640s, Matthew Hopkins, the self-proclaimed \"Witchfinder General\", whose career flourished during Puritan rule, was responsible for accusing over two hundred people of witchcraft, mainly in East Anglia. Between 1644 and 1647, Hopkins and his colleague John Stearne sent more accused people to the gallows than all the other witch-hunters in England of the previous 160 years. In New England, few people were accused and convicted of witchcraft before 1692; there were at most sixteen convictions.\nThe Salem witch trials of 1692 had a lasting impact on the historical reputation of New England Puritans. Though this witch hunt occurred after Puritans lost political control of the Massachusetts colony, Puritans instigated the judicial proceedings against the accused and comprised the members of the court that convicted and sentenced the accused. By the time Governor William Phips ended the trials, fourteen women and five men had been hanged as witches. The main accusation brought against witches was evidence of \"maleficium\", which referred to a witch's meddling of misfortune such as dead livestock or illness. At Salem, the concern was primarily about the spectral possession and torment, or bewitchment, of the young female victims, especially torment that occurred in the courtroom. Many clergymen refer to this bewitchment as having a direct relation to the Devil, more so than \"maleficium\".\nThough men and women were both tried for witchcraft, the accusations were skewed toward women. About 78 percent of accused witches in New England were women, and those women were often societal pariahs: poor, homeless, childless, or women with inherited property. Men accused of witchcraft tended to have familial or sexual relations with female witches. In the Salem witch trials, six male witches were accused, and four of them had wives who were also accused, and several has accusations of domestic violence or murder. There was a clear correlation between women and violence in New England witchcraft accusations.\nMillennialism.\nPuritan millennialism has been placed in the broader context of European Reformed beliefs about the millennium and interpretation of biblical prophecy, for which representative figures of the period were Johannes Piscator, Thomas Brightman, Joseph Mede, Johannes Heinrich Alsted, and John Amos Comenius. Like most English Protestants of the time, Puritans based their eschatological beliefs upon a historicist interpretation of the Book of Revelation and the Book of Daniel. Protestant theologians identified the sequential phases that the world must pass through before the Last Judgment could occur, and tended to place their own time period near the end. It was expected that tribulation and persecution would increase, but eventually the church's enemies, namely the Antichrist (identified with the Roman Catholic Church) and the Ottoman Empire, would be defeated. Based upon Revelation 20, it was believed that a thousand-year period (the millennium) would occur, during which the saints would rule with Jesus on Earth.\nIn contrast to other Protestants who tended to view eschatology as an explanation for \"God's remote plans for the world and man\", Puritans understood it to describe \"the cosmic environment in which the regenerate soldier of Christ was now to do battle against the power of sin\". On a personal level, eschatology was related to sanctification, assurance of salvation, and the conversion experience. On a larger level, eschatology was the lens through which events such as the English Civil War and the Thirty Years' War were interpreted. There was also an optimistic aspect to Puritan millennianism: Puritans anticipated a future worldwide religious revival before the Second Coming of Jesus. Another departure from other Protestants was the widespread belief among Puritans that the conversion of the Jews to Christianity was an important sign of the apocalypse.\nCultural consequences.\nSome strong religious beliefs common to Puritans had direct impacts on culture. Puritans believed it was the government's responsibility to enforce moral standards and ensure true religious worship was established and maintained. Education was essential to every person, male and female, so that they could read the Bible for themselves. However, the Puritans' emphasis on individual spiritual independence was not always compatible with the community cohesion that was also a strong ideal. Anne Hutchinson (1591\u20131643), the well educated daughter of a teacher, argued with the established theological orthodoxy, and was forced to leave colonial New England with her followers.\nEducation.\nAt a time when the literacy rate in England was less than 30 per cent, the Puritan leaders of colonial New England believed that children should be educated for both religious and civil reasons, and they worked to achieve universal literacy. In 1642, Massachusetts required heads of households to teach their wives, children, and servants basic reading and writing, so that they could read the Bible and understand colonial laws. In 1647, the government required all towns with 50 or more households to hire a teacher, and required towns of 100 or more households to hire a grammar school instructor, to prepare promising boys for college. Philemon Pormort's Boston Latin School was the only one in Boston, the first school of public instruction in Massachusetts\". Boys who were interested in the ministry were often sent to colleges such as Harvard (founded in 1636) or Yale (founded in 1707). Aspiring lawyers or doctors apprenticed to a local practitioner, or in rare cases, were sent to England or Scotland.\nPuritan scientists.\nThe Merton Thesis is an argument about the nature of early experimental science proposed by Robert K. Merton. Similarly to Max Weber's famous claim on the link between the Protestant work ethic and the capitalist economy, Merton argued for a similar positive correlation between the rise of English Puritanism, as well as German Pietism, and early experimental science. As an example, seven of 10 nucleus members of the Royal Society were Puritans. In the year 1663, 62 per cent of the members of the Royal Society were similarly identified. The Merton Thesis has resulted in continuous debates.\nBehavioral regulations.\nPuritans in both England and New England believed that the state should protect and promote true religion and that religion should influence politics and social life. Certain holidays were outlawed when Puritans came to power. In 1647, Parliament outlawed the celebration of Christmas, Easter and Whitsuntide. Puritans strongly condemned the celebration of Christmas, considering it a Catholic invention and the \"trappings of popery\" or the \"rags of the Beast\". They also objected to Christmas because the festivities surrounding the holiday were seen as impious (English jails were usually filled with drunken revelers and brawlers). During the years that the Puritan ban on Christmas was in place in England, protests occurred over the repressiveness of the Puritan regime. Pro-Christmas rioting broke out across England, semi-clandestine religious services marking Christ's birth continued to be held, and people sang carols in secret. Following the restoration in 1660, when Puritan legislation was declared null and void, Christmas was again freely celebrated in England. Christmas was outlawed in Boston from 1659. The ban was revoked in 1681 by the English-appointed governor Edmund Andros, who also revoked a Puritan ban on festivities on Saturday nights. Nevertheless, it was not until the mid-19th century that celebrating Christmas became fashionable in the Boston region.\nAttempting to force religious and intellectual homogeneity on the whole community, civil and religious restrictions were most strictly applied by the Puritans of Massachusetts which saw various banishments applied to enforce conformity, including the branding iron, the whipping post, the bilboes and the hangman's noose. Swearing and blasphemy were illegal. In 1636, Massachusetts made blasphemy\u2014defined as \"a cursing of God by atheism, or the like\"\u2014punishable by death.\nPuritans were opposed to Sunday sport or recreation because these distracted from religious observance of the Sabbath. In an attempt to offset the strictness of the Puritans, James I's \"Book of Sports\" (1618) permitted Christians to play football every Sunday afternoon after worship. When the Puritans established themselves in power, football was among the sports that were banned: boys caught playing on Sunday could be prosecuted. Football was also used as a rebellious force: when Puritans outlawed Christmas in England in December 1647 the crowd brought out footballs as a symbol of festive misrule. Other forms of leisure and entertainment were completely forbidden on moral grounds. For example, Puritans were universally opposed to blood sports such as bearbaiting and cockfighting because they involved unnecessary injury to God's creatures. For similar reasons, they also opposed boxing. These sports were illegal in England during Puritan rule.\nWhile card playing by itself was generally considered acceptable, card playing and gambling were banned in England and the colonies, as was mixed dancing involving men and women\u2014which Mather condemned as \"promiscuous dancing\"\u2014because it was thought to lead to fornication. Folk dance that did not involve close contact between men and women was considered appropriate. The branle dance, which involved couples intertwining arms or holding hands, returned to popularity in England after the restoration when the bans imposed by the Puritans were lifted. In New England, the first dancing school did not open until the end of the 17th century.\nPuritans condemned the sexualization of the theatre and its associations with depravity and prostitution\u2014London's theatres were located on the south side of the Thames, which was a center of prostitution. A major Puritan attack on the theatre was William Prynne's book \"Histriomastix\" which marshals a multitude of ancient and medieval authorities against the \"sin\" of dramatic performance. Puritan authorities shut down English theatres in the 1640s and 1650s\u2014Shakespeare's Globe Theatre was demolished\u2014and none were allowed to open in Puritan-controlled colonies. In January 1643, actors in London protested against the ban with a pamphlet titled \"The Actors remonstrance or complaint for the silencing of their profession, and banishment from their severall play-houses\". With the end of Puritan rule and the restoration of Charles II, theatre among other arts exploded, and London's oldest operating theatre, Drury Lane in the West End, opened in 1663. The puppet show Punch and Judy, dominated by the anarchic Mr Punch, made its first recorded appearance in England in May 1662, with show historian Glyn Edwards stating the character of Punch \"went down particularly well with Restoration British audiences, fun-starved after years of Puritanism ... he became, really, a spirit of Britain \u2013 a subversive maverick who defies authority\".\nPuritans were not opposed to drinking alcohol in moderation. However, alehouses were closely regulated by Puritan-controlled governments in both England and Colonial America. Laws in Massachusetts in 1634 banned the \"abominable\" practice of individuals toasting each other's health. William Prynne, the most rabid of the Puritan anti-toasters, wrote a book on the subject, \"Health's Sicknesse\" (1628), that \"this drinking and quaffing of healthes had it origin and birth from Pagans, heathens, and infidels, yea, from the very Deuill himself.\"\nIn 1649, English colonist William Pynchon, the founder of Springfield, Massachusetts, wrote a critique of Puritanical Calvinism, entitled \"The Meritorious Price of Our Redemption\". Published in London in 1650, when the book reached Boston it was immediately burned on Boston Common and the colony pressed Pynchon to return to England which he did. The censorious nature of the Puritans and the region they inhabited would lead to the phrase \"banned in Boston\" being coined in the late 19th century, a phrase which was applied to Boston up to the mid-20th century.\nBounds were not set on enjoying sexuality within the bounds of marriage, as a gift from God. Spouses were disciplined if they did not perform their sexual marital duties, in accordance with and other biblical passages. Women and men were equally expected to fulfill marital responsibilities. Women and men could file for divorce based on this issue alone. In Massachusetts colony, which had some of the most liberal colonial divorce laws, one out of every six divorce petitions was filed on the basis of male impotence. Puritans publicly punished drunkenness and sexual relations outside marriage. Couples who had sex during their engagement were fined and publicly humiliated. Men, and a handful of women, who engaged in homosexual behavior, were seen as especially sinful, with some executed. While the practice of execution was also infrequently used for rape and adultery, homosexuality was actually seen as a worse sin. Passages from the Old Testament, including Lev 20:13., were thought to support the disgust for homosexuality and efforts to purge society of it. New Haven code stated \"If any man lyeth with mankinde, as a man lyeth with a woman, both of them have committed abomination, they shall surely be put to death\" and in 1636 the Plymouth Colony adopted a set of laws that included a sentence of death for sodomy and buggery. Prominent authors such as Thomas Cobbert, Samual Danforth and Cotton Mather wrote pieces condemning homosexuality. Mather argued that the passage \"Overcome the Devil when he tempts you to the youthful sin of Uncleanness\" was referring \"probably to the young men of Sodom\".\nPolitical Radicalism.\nPuritan political thought continued to shape political culture on both sides of the Atlantic, influencing both the ideology of the American Revolution the development of British liberal tradition.\nPuritanism contributed to the American Revolution partly through a sense that America was part of God's plan but mainly through the genesis of the eighteenth-century British Radical Whigs. The revolution's ideological basis was largely provided by the Radical Whigs, specifically the Commonwealthmen, who had been inspired by earlier Puritan writers such as Algernon Sidney, John Milton, James Harrington and Henry Neville. Robert Middlekauff argues that the comparatively secularized Radical Whig analysis fell on fertile American ground due to the Puritanism of the previous century that bequeathed a suspicion of executive authority although there are scholars such as Zera Fink who argued that Puritan political radicalism also owed a debt to Classical republicanism ultimately from Ancient Greece.\nIn England, the historic alliance between Nonconformists and Whiggery - and later the Liberal Party - was a strong one. Rooted in shared support for civil and religious liberty, this connection culminated by the turn of the twentieth century in what became known as the Nonconformist conscience, a moral and political movement that sought to apply evangelical principles to public life.\nNon Conformism.\nPuritanism played a central role in the development of English Nonconformism, as many Puritans rejected the Church of England\u2019s hierarchical structure, ceremonial practices and other perceived remnants of Catholicism. Their emphasis on individual conscience, the authority of Scripture, and congregational autonomy led to the formation of independent religious groups outside the established church. Following the Restoration in 1660 and the Act of Uniformity 1662, many Puritan ministers refused to conform to the prescribed rites of the Church of England and were consequently expelled from their livings in what was known as the Great Ejection. These Dissenters or Nonconformists formed the basis of later British Congregationalist, Baptist, and Presbyterian traditions.\nReligious toleration in New England.\nIn New England, where Congregationalism was the official religion, the Puritans exhibited intolerance of other religious beliefs, including Quaker, Anglican, and Baptist theologies. The Puritans of the Massachusetts Bay Colony were the most active of the New England persecutors of Quakers, and the persecuting spirit was shared by the Plymouth Colony and the colonies along the Connecticut river.\nFour Quakers, known as the Boston martyrs, were executed. The first two of the four Boston martyrs were executed by the Puritans on 27 October 1659, and in memory of this, 27 October is now International Religious Freedom Day, to recognise the importance of freedom of religion. In 1660, one of the most notable victims of the religious intolerance was the English Quaker Mary Dyer, who was hanged in Boston for repeatedly defying a Puritan law which banned Quakers from the colony. The hanging of Dyer on Boston Common marked the beginning of the end of the Puritan theocracy. In 1661, King Charles II explicitly forbade Massachusetts from executing anyone for professing Quakerism. In 1684, England revoked the Massachusetts charter, and in 1686, they sent over a royal governor to enforce English laws, and in 1689, they passed a broad \"Toleration Act\".\nAnti-Catholic sentiment appeared in New England with the first Pilgrim and Puritan settlers. In 1647, Massachusetts passed a law which prohibited any Jesuit Roman Catholic priests from entering territory that was under Puritan jurisdiction. Any suspected Catholic who could not clear himself was to be banished from the colony; a second offense carried a death penalty. A plaque in Southwick Hall at the University of Massachusetts Lowell commemorates \"Royal Southwick, Lowell's anti-slavery Quaker senator and manufacturer and a descendant of Lawrence and Cassandra Southwick who were despoiled, imprisoned, starved, whipped, banished from Massachusetts Colony and persecuted to death in the year 1660 for being Quakers\".\nHistoriography.\nPuritanism has attracted much scholarly attention, and as a result, the secondary literature on the subject is vast. Puritanism is considered crucial to understanding the religious, political, and cultural issues of early modern England. In addition, historians such as Perry Miller have regarded Puritan New England as fundamental to understanding American culture and identity. Puritanism has also been credited with the creation of modernity itself, from England's Scientific Revolution to the rise of democracy. In the early 20th century, Max Weber argued in \"The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism\" that Calvinist self-denial resulted in a Protestant work ethic that nurtured the development of capitalism in Europe and North America. Puritan authors such as John Milton, John Bunyan, Anne Bradstreet, and Edward Taylor continue to be read and studied as important figures within English and American literature.\nA debate continues on the definition of \"Puritanism\". The English historian Patrick Collinson argues that \"There is little point in constructing elaborate statements defining what, in ontological terms, puritanism was and what it was not, when it was not a thing definable in itself but only one half of a stressful relationship.\" Puritanism \"was only the mirror image of anti-puritanism and to a considerable extent its invention: a stigma, with great power to distract and distort historical memory.\" The historian John Spurr writes that Puritans were defined by their relationships with their surroundings, especially with the Church of England. Whenever the Church of England changed, Spurr argues, the definition of a Puritan also changed.\nThe analysis of \"mainstream Puritanism\", in terms of the evolution from it of Separatist and antinomian groups that did not flourish, and others that continue to this day, such as Baptists and Quakers, can suffer in this way. The national context (England and Wales, as well as the kingdoms of Scotland and Ireland) frames the definition of Puritans, but was not a self-identification for those Protestants who saw the progress of the Thirty Years' War from 1620 as directly bearing on their denomination, and as a continuation of the religious wars of the previous century, carried on by the English Civil Wars. The English historian Christopher Hill writes of the 1630s, old church lands, and the accusations that William Laud was a crypto-Catholic:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;To the heightened Puritan imagination it seemed that, all over Europe, the lamps were going out: the Counter-Reformation was winning back property for the church as well as souls: and Charles I and his government, if not allied to the forces of the Counter-Reformation, at least appeared to have set themselves identical economic and political objectives.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "24092", "revid": "13286072", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24092", "title": "Paul", "text": "Paul may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nRomanian derivatives:\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "24093", "revid": "49394694", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24093", "title": "Palestinian Authority", "text": "Interim government in Western Asia\nThe Palestinian Authority (PA), officially known as the Palestinian National Authority (PNA), is the Fatah-controlled government body that exercises partial civil control over the Palestinian enclaves in the Israeli-occupied West Bank as a consequence of the 1993\u20131995 Oslo Accords. The Palestinian Authority controlled the Gaza Strip prior to the Palestinian elections of 2006 and the subsequent Gaza conflict between the Fatah and Hamas parties, when it lost control to Hamas; the PA continues to claim the Gaza Strip, although Hamas exercises \"de facto\" control. Since January 2013, following United Nations General Assembly resolution 67/19, the Palestinian Authority has used the name \"State of Palestine\" on official documents, without prejudice to the Palestinian Liberation Organization (PLO) role as \"representative of the Palestinian people\".\nThe Palestinian Authority was formed on 4 May 1994, pursuant to the Gaza\u2013Jericho Agreement between the PLO and the government of Israel, and was intended to be a five-year interim body. Further negotiations were then meant to take place between the two parties regarding its final status. According to the Oslo Accords, the Palestinian Authority was designated to have exclusive control over both security-related and civilian issues in Palestinian urban areas (referred to as \"Area A\") and only civilian control over Palestinian rural areas (\"Area B\"). The remainder of the territories, including Israeli settlements, the Jordan Valley region and bypass roads between Palestinian communities, were to remain under Israeli control (\"Area C\"). East Jerusalem was excluded from the Accords. Negotiations with several Israeli governments had resulted in the Authority gaining further control of some areas, but control was then lost in some areas when the Israel Defense Forces (IDF) retook several strategic positions during the Second (\"Al-Aqsa\") Intifada. In 2005, after the Second Intifada, Israel withdrew unilaterally from its settlements in the Gaza Strip, thereby expanding Palestinian Authority control to the entire strip while Israel continued to control the crossing points, airspace, and the waters of the Gaza Strip's coast.\nIn the Palestinian legislative elections on 25 January 2006, Hamas emerged victorious and nominated Ismail Haniyeh as the Authority's prime minister. However, the national unity Palestinian government effectively collapsed, when a violent conflict between Hamas and Fatah erupted, mainly in the Gaza Strip. After the Gaza Strip was taken over by Hamas on 14 June 2007, the Authority's chairman Mahmoud Abbas dismissed the Hamas-led unity government and appointed Salam Fayyad as prime minister, dismissing Haniyeh. The move wasn't recognized by Hamas, thus resulting in two separate administrations \u2013 the Fatah-led Palestinian Authority in the West Bank and a rival Hamas government in the Gaza Strip. The reconciliation process to unite the Palestinian governments achieved some progress over the years, but had failed to produce a re-unification.\nThe Palestinian Authority received financial assistance from the European Union and the United States (approximately US$1\u00a0billion combined in 2005). All direct aid was suspended on 7 April 2006, as a result of the Hamas victory in parliamentary elections. Shortly thereafter, aid payments resumed, but were channeled directly to the offices of Mahmoud Abbas in the West Bank. Since 9 January 2009, when Mahmoud Abbas' term as president was supposed to have ended and elections were to have been called, Hamas supporters and many in the Gaza Strip have withdrawn recognition for his presidency and instead consider Aziz Dweik, the speaker of the Palestinian Legislative Council, to be the acting president until new elections can be held.\nThe State of Palestine is recognized by 157 nations as of September\u00a02025[ [update]]. In November 2012, the United Nations voted to recognize the State of Palestine as a non-member UN observer state. Widely considered an authoritarian regime, the Palestinian Authority has not held elections in over 15 years. It has been criticized for human rights abuses, including cracking down on journalists, human rights activists, and dissent against its rule.\nHistory.\nEstablishment.\nThe Palestinian Authority was created by the Gaza\u2013Jericho Agreement, pursuant to the 1993 Oslo Accords. The Gaza\u2013Jericho Agreement was signed on 4 May 1994 and included Israeli withdrawal from the Jericho area and partially from the Gaza Strip, and detailed the creation of the Palestinian Authority and the Palestinian Civil Police Force.\nThe PA was envisioned as an interim organization to administer a limited form of Palestinian self-governance in the Palestinian enclaves in the West Bank and Gaza Strip for a period of five years, during which final-status negotiations would take place. The Palestinian Central Council, itself acting on behalf of the Palestine National Council of the PLO, implemented this agreement in a meeting convened in Tunis from 10 to 11 October 1993, making the Palestinian Authority accountable to the PLO Executive Committee.\nThe administrative responsibilities accorded to the PA were limited to civil matters and internal security and did not include external security or foreign affairs. Palestinians in the diaspora and inside Israel were not eligible to vote in elections for the offices of the Palestinian Authority. The PA was legally separate from the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO), which continues to enjoy international recognition as the sole legitimate representative of the Palestinian people, representing them at the United Nations under the name \"Palestine\".\nGeneral elections were held for its first legislative body, the Palestinian Legislative Council, on 20 January 1996. The expiration of the body's term was 4 May 1999, but elections were not held because of the \"prevailing coercive situation\".\nSecond Intifada.\nOn 7 July 2004, the Quartet of Middle East mediators informed Ahmed Qurei, Prime Minister of the PA from 2003 to 2006, that they were \"sick and tired\" of the Palestinians failure to carry out promised reforms: \"If security reforms are not done, there will be no (more) international support and no funding from the international community\"\nOn 18 July 2004, United States President George W. Bush stated that the establishment of a Palestinian state by the end of 2005 was unlikely due to instability and violence in the Palestinian Authority.\nFollowing Arafat's death on 11 November 2004, Rawhi Fattouh, leader of the Palestinian Legislative Council became acting president of the Palestinian Authority as provided for in Article 54(2) of the Authority's Basic Law and Palestinian Elections Law.\nOn 19 April 2005, President Vladimir Putin of Russia agreed to aid the Palestinian Authority stating, \"We support the efforts of President Abbas to reform the security services and fight against terrorism [...] If we are waiting for President Abbas to fight terrorism, he cannot do it with the resources he has now. [...] We will give the Palestinian Authority technical help by sending equipment, training people. We will give the Palestinian Authority helicopters and also communication equipment.\"\nThe Palestinian Authority became responsible for civil administration in some rural areas, as well as security in the major cities of the West Bank and the Gaza Strip. Although the five-year interim period expired in 1999, the final status agreement has yet to be concluded despite attempts such as the 2000 Camp David Summit, the Taba Summit, and the unofficial Geneva Accords.\nIn August 2005, Israeli Prime Minister Ariel Sharon began his disengagement from the Gaza Strip, ceding full effective internal control of the Strip to the Palestinian Authority but retained control of its borders including air and sea (except for the Egyptian border). This increased the percentage of land in the Gaza Strip nominally governed by the PA from 60 percent to 100 percent.\nHamas\u2013Fatah conflict.\nPalestinian legislative elections took place on 25 January 2006. Hamas was victorious and Ismail Haniyeh was nominated as prime minister on 16 February 2006 and sworn in on 29 March 2006. However, when a Hamas-led Palestinian government was formed, the Quartet (United States, Russia, United Nations, and European Union) conditioned future foreign assistance to the Palestinian Authority (PA) on the future government's commitment to non-violence, recognition of the State of Israel, and acceptance of previous agreements. Hamas rejected these demands, which resulted in the Quartet suspension of its foreign assistance program and Israel imposed economic sanctions.\nIn December 2006, Ismail Haniyeh, Prime Minister of the PA, declared that the PA will never recognize Israel: \"We will never recognize the usurper Zionist government and will continue our jihad-like movement until the liberation of Jerusalem.\"\nIn an attempt to resolve the financial and diplomatic impasse, the Hamas-led government together with Fatah Chairman (and PA President) Mahmoud Abbas agreed to form a unity government. As a result, Haniyeh resigned on 15 February 2007 as part of the agreement. The unity government was finally formed on 18 March 2007, again under Prime Minister Ismail Haniyeh, and consisted of members from Hamas, Fatah and other parties and independents. The situation in the Gaza strip however quickly deteriorated into an open feud between the Hamas and Fatah, which eventually resulted in the \"Brothers' War\".\nAfter the takeover in Gaza by Hamas on 14 June 2007, Palestinian Authority President Abbas dismissed the government and created a new one by decree (without the approval of the Palestinian legislature) on 15 June 2007, appointing Salam Fayyad as Prime Minister to form the new government. Though the new government's authority is claimed to extend to all Palestinian territories, in effect it became limited to the Palestinian Authority-controlled areas of the West Bank, as Hamas hasn't recognized the move. The Fayyad government has won widespread international support. Egypt, Jordan, and Saudi Arabia said in late June 2007 that the West Bank-based Cabinet formed by Fayyad was the sole legitimate Palestinian government, and Egypt moved its embassy from Gaza to the West Bank. Hamas, which government has an effective control of the Gaza Strip since 2007, faces international diplomatic and economic isolation.\nIn 2013, political analyst Hillel Frisch from Bar-Ilan University's BESA Center, noted that \"The PA is playing a double game...with regards to battling Hamas, there's coordination if not cooperation with Israel. But on the political front, the PA is trying to generate a popular intifada.\"\nTwo PNA administrations.\nSince the Hamas-Fatah split in 2007, the Fatah-dominated Palestinian Authority based in areas of the West Bank had stabilized, though no significant economic growth had been achieved. Until 2012, there had also been no progress in promotion of PNA status in the UN, as well in negotiations with Israel. Ramallah-based Palestinian Authority stayed out of the Gaza War in 2008\u20132009, which followed the six-month truce, between Hamas and Israel which ended on 19 December 2008. Hamas claimed that Israel broke the truce on 4 November 2008, though Israel blamed Hamas for an increasing rocket fire directed at southern Israeli towns and cities. The 2008\u20132009 Israel\u2013Gaza conflict began on 27 December 2008 (11:30 a.m. local time; 09:30\u00a0UTC). Though condemning Israel over attacks on Gaza, the Palestinian Authority erected no actions during the conflict of Israel with Hamas.\nThe reconciliation process between Fatah and Hamas reached intermediate results by the two governments, most notably the agreement in Cairo on 27 April 2011, but with no final solution. Though the two agreed to form a unity government, and to hold elections in both territories within 12 months of the establishment of such a government, it had not been implemented. The 2011 deal also promised the entry of Hamas into the Palestine Liberation Organization and holding of elections to its Palestine National Council decision-making body, which was not implemented as well. The deal was further ratified in the 2012 Hamas\u2013Fatah Doha agreement, which was made with the background of Hamas relocation from Damascus, due to the simmering Syrian civil war.\nSince late August 2012, Palestinian National Authority has been swept with social protests aiming against the cost of living. The protesters targeted the Palestinian prime minister Salam Fayyad, calling for his resignation. Some anti-government protests turned violent. On 11 September, Palestinian prime minister issued a decree on lowering the fuel prices and cutting salaries of top officials.\nIn July 2012, it was reported that the Hamas Government in Gaza was considering to declare the independence of the Gaza Strip with the help of Egypt.\nOn 23 April 2014 Ismail Haniyeh, the prime minister of Hamas, and a senior Palestine Liberation Organisation delegation dispatched by Palestinian president Mahmoud Abbas signed the Fatah\u2013Hamas Gaza Agreement at Gaza City in an attempt to create reconciliation in the Fatah\u2013Hamas conflict. It stated that a unity government should be formed within five weeks, ahead of a presidential and parliamentary election within six months. The Palestinian unity government of 2014 formed on 2 June 2014 as a national and political union under Palestinian president Mahmoud Abbas. The European Union, the United Nations, the United States, China, India, Russia and Turkey all agreed to work with it. The Israeli government condemned the unity government because it views Hamas as a terrorist organization. The Palestinian unity government first convened in Gaza on 9 October 2014 to discuss the reconstruction of the Gaza Strip following the 2014 Israel\u2013Gaza conflict. On 30 November 2014, Hamas declared that the unity government had ended with the expiration of the six-month term. But Fatah subsequently denied the claim, and said that the government is still in force.\nOn 7\u20138 February 2016, Fatah and Hamas held talks in Doha, Qatar in an attempt to implement the 2014 agreements. Hamas official told \"Al-Monitor\" on 8 March, that the talks did not succeed and that discussions continued between the two movements. He also said that the foreign pressures on the Palestinian Authority to not implement the reconciliation terms is the main obstacle in the talks. In a 25 Feb statement to local newspaper \"Felesteen\", Hamas foreign relations chief Osama Hamdan accused the United States and Israel of blocking Palestinian reconciliation. The United States is putting pressure on the PA to not reconcile with Hamas until the latter recognizes the Quartet on the Middle East's conditions, including the recognition of Israel, which Hamas rejects. After the 2014 agreement, US president Barack Obama said in April 2014 that President Mahmoud Abbas' decision to form a national unity government with Hamas was \"unhelpful\" and undermined the negotiations with Israel. Amin Maqboul, secretary-general of Fatah's Revolutionary Council, told \"Al-Monitor\", \"Hamas did not stick to the 2014 agreement, as it has yet to hand over the reins of power over Gaza to the national consensus government and continues to control the crossings. Should Hamas continue down this path, we have to go to the polls immediately and let the people choose who they want to rule\".\n2013 name change.\nThe UN has permitted the PLO to title its representative office to the UN as \"The Permanent Observer Mission of the State of Palestine to the United Nations\", and Palestine has started to re-title its name accordingly on postal stamps, official documents and passports, whilst it has instructed its diplomats to officially represent 'The State of Palestine', as opposed to the 'Palestine National Authority'. Additionally, on 17 December 2012, UN Chief of Protocol Yeocheol Yoon decided that \"the designation of 'State of Palestine' shall be used by the Secretariat in all official United Nations documents\". However, in a speech in 2016 president Abbas said that \"The Palestinian Authority exists and it is here,\" and \"The Palestinian Authority is one of our achievements and we won't give it up.\"\n2024 mass resignation.\nOn the morning of 26 February 2024, the Shtayyeh cabinet, led by Prime Minister Mohammad Shtayyeh, resigned from office amid popular opposition to the Palestinian Authority and pressure from the United States during the Gaza war. On 28 March, the new technocratic Mustafa cabinet was formed, and 3 days later was officially sworn in.\nGeography.\nThe Palestinian Territories refers to the Gaza Strip and the West Bank (including East Jerusalem). The Palestinian Authority currently administers some 39% of the West Bank. 61% of the West Bank remains under direct Israeli military and civilian control. East Jerusalem was unilaterally annexed by Israel in 1980, prior to the formation of the PA. Since 2007 Gaza has been governed by the Hamas Government in Gaza.\nGovernment and politics.\nThe politics of the Palestinian Authority take place within the framework of a semi-presidential multi-party republic, with the Palestinian Legislative Council (PLC), an executive president, and a prime minister leading a Cabinet. According to the Palestinian Basic Law which was signed by Arafat in 2002 after a long delay, the current structure of the PA is based on three separate branches of power: executive, legislative, and judiciary. The PA was created by, is ultimately accountable to, and has historically been associated with, the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO), with whom Israel negotiated the Oslo Accords.\nThe PLC is an elected body of 132 representatives, which must confirm the Prime Minister upon nomination by the President, and which must approve all government cabinet positions proposed by the Prime Minister. The Judicial Branch has yet to be formalized. The President of the PA is directly elected by the people, and the holder of this position is also considered to be the commander-in-chief of the armed forces. In an amendment to the Basic Law approved in 2003, the president appoints the Prime Minister who is also chief of the security services in the Palestinian territories. The Prime Minister chooses a cabinet of ministers and runs the government, reporting directly to the President.\nParliamentary elections were conducted in January 2006 after the passage of an overhauled election law that increased the number of seats from 88 to 132. The Chairman of the PLO, Yasser Arafat, was elected as President of PA in a landslide victory at the general election in 1996.\nArafat's administration was criticized for its lack of democracy, widespread corruption among officials, and the division of power among families and numerous governmental agencies with overlapping functions. Both Israel and the US declared they lost trust in Arafat as a partner and refused to negotiate with him, regarding him as linked to terrorism. Arafat denied this, and was visited by other leaders around the world up until his death. However, this began a push for change in the Palestinian leadership. In 2003, Mahmoud Abbas resigned because of lack of support from Israel, the US, and Arafat himself. He won the presidency on 9 January 2005 with 62% of the vote. Former prime minister Ahmed Qureia formed his government on 24 February 2005 to wide international praise because, for the first time, most ministries were headed by experts in their field as opposed to political appointees.\nThe presidential mandate of Mahmoud Abbas expired in 2009 and he is no longer recognised by Hamas, among others, as the legitimate Palestinian president. According to Palestinian documents leaked to Al Jazeera in 2011, the United States has threatened to cut off funding to the Palestinian Authority should there be a change in the Palestinian leadership in the West Bank.\nOn 27 April 2011, Fatah's Azzam al-Ahmad announced the party's signing of a memorandum of understanding with Hamas' leadership, a major step towards reconciliation effectively paving the way for a unity government. The deal was formally announced in Cairo, and was co-ordinated under the mediation of Egypt's new intelligence director Murad Muwafi. The deal came amidst an international campaign for statehood advanced by the Abbas administration, which is expected to culminate in a request for admission into the General Assembly as a member state in September. As part of the deal, the two factions agreed to hold elections in both territories within twelve months of the creation of a transitional government. In response to the announcement, Israeli prime minister Netanyahu warned that the Authority must choose whether it wants \"peace with Israel or peace with Hamas\".\nPolitical parties and elections.\nFrom the establishment of the Palestinian Authority in 1993 until the death of Yasser Arafat in late 2004, only one election had taken place. All other elections were deferred for various reasons.\nA single election for president and the legislature took place in 1996. The next presidential and legislative elections were scheduled for 2001 but were delayed following the outbreak of the Al-Aqsa Intifada. Following Arafat's death, elections for the President of the Authority were announced for 9 January 2005. The PLO leader Mahmoud Abbas won 62.3% of the vote, while Dr. Mustafa Barghouti, a physician and independent candidate, won 19.8%.\nOn 10 May 2004, the Palestinian Cabinet announced that municipal elections would take place for the first time. Elections were announced for August 2004 in Jericho, followed by certain municipalities in the Gaza Strip. In July 2004 these elections were postponed. Issues with voter registration are said to have contributed to the delay. Municipal elections finally took place for council officials in Jericho and 25 other towns and villages in the West Bank on 23 December 2004. On 27 January 2005, the first round of the municipal elections took place in the Gaza Strip for officials in 10 local councils. Further rounds in the West Bank took place in May 2005.\nElections for a new Palestinian Legislative Council (PLC) were scheduled for July 2005 by Acting Palestinian Authority President Rawhi Fattuh in January 2005. These elections were postponed by Mahmoud Abbas after major changes to the Election Law were enacted by the PLC which required more time for the Palestinian Central Elections Committee to process and prepare. Among these changes were the expansion of the number of parliament seats from 88 to 132, with half of the seats to be competed for in 16 localities, and the other half to be elected in proportion to party votes from a nationwide pool of candidates.\nThe following organizations, listed in alphabetic order, have taken part in recent popular elections inside the Palestinian Authority:\nOctober 2006 polls showed that Fatah and Hamas had equal strength.\nOn 14 June 2007, after the Battle of Gaza (2007), Palestine president Mahmoud Abbas dismissed the Hamas-led government, leaving the government under his control for 30 days, after which the temporary government had to be approved by the Palestinian Legislative Council.\nAdministrative divisions.\nThe governorates ( \"muhafazat\") of the Palestinian Authority were founded in 1995 to replace the 8 Israeli military districts of the Civil Administration: 11 governorates in the West Bank and 5 in the Gaza Strip. The governorates are not regulated in any official law of decree by the Palestinian Authority but they are regulated by Presidential decrees, mainly Presidential Decree No. 22 of 2003, regarding the powers of the governors.\nThe regional governors ( \"muhafiz\") are appointed by the President. They are in charge of the Palestinian police force in their jurisdiction as well as coordinating state services such as education, health and transportation. The governorates are under the direct supervision of the Interior Ministry.\nThe governorates in the West Bank are grouped into three areas per the Oslo II Accord. Area A forms 18% of the West Bank by area, and is administered by the Palestinian Authority. Area B forms 22% of the West Bank, and is under Palestinian civil control, and joint Israeli-Palestinian security control. Area C, except East Jerusalem, forms 60% of the West Bank, and is administered by the Israeli Civil Administration, except that the Palestinian Authority provides the education and medical services to the 150,000 Palestinians in the area. 70.3% of Area C (40.5% of the West Bank) is off limit to Palestinian construction and development. These areas include areas under jurisdiction of Israeli settlements, closed military zones, nature reserves and national parks and areas designated by Israel as \"state land\". There are about 330,000 Israelis living in settlements in Area C, in the Israeli-occupied West Bank. Although Area C is under martial law, Israelis living there are judged in Israeli civil courts.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Legend/styles.css\" /&gt;\u00a0\u00a0Cities in the West Bank\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Legend/styles.css\" /&gt;\u00a0\u00a0Cities in the Gaza Strip\na. Data from Jerusalem includes occupied East Jerusalem with its Israeli population\nEast Jerusalem is administered as part of the Jerusalem District of Israel, but is claimed by Palestine as part of the Jerusalem Governorate. It was annexed by Israel in 1980, but this annexation is not recognised by any other country. Of the 456,000 people in East Jerusalem, roughly 60% are Palestinians and 40% are Israelis.\nForeign relations.\nThe Palestinian National Authority (PNA) foreign relations are conducted by the minister of foreign affairs. The PNA is represented abroad by the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO), which maintains a network of missions and embassies. In states that recognise the State of Palestine it maintains embassies and in other states it maintains \"delegations\" or \"missions\".\nRepresentations of foreign states to the Palestinian Authority are performed by \"missions\" or \"offices\" in Ramallah and Gaza. States that recognise the State of Palestine also accredit to the PLO (as the government-in-exile of the State of Palestine) non-resident ambassadors residing in third countries.\nOn 5 January 2013, following the 2012 UNGA resolution, Palestinian president Abbas ordered all Palestinian embassies to change any official reference to the Palestinian Authority into State of Palestine.\nThe Palestinian Authority is included in the European Union's European Neighbourhood Policy (ENP), which aims at bringing the EU and its neighbours closer.\nPalestinian Authority passport.\nIn April 1995, the Palestinian Authority, pursuant to the Oslo Accords with the State of Israel, started to issue passports to Palestinian residents of the Gaza Strip and West Bank. The appearance of the passport and details about its issuance are described in Appendix C of Annex II (Protocol Concerning Civil Affairs) of the Gaza-Jericho Agreement signed by Israel and the PLO on 4 May 1994. The Palestinian Authority does not issue the passports on behalf of the proclaimed State of Palestine. The passports bear the inscription: \"This passport/travel document is issued pursuant to the Palestinian Self Government Agreement according to Oslo Agreement signed in Washington on 13/9/1993\". By September 1995, the passport had been recognised by 29 states, some of them (e.g. the United States) recognise it only as a travel document (see further details below): Algeria, Bahrain, Bulgaria, People's Republic of China, Cyprus, Egypt, France, Germany, Greece, India, Iran, Jordan, Malta, Morocco, the Netherlands, Pakistan, Qatar, Romania, Russia, Saudi Arabia, Sudan, South Africa, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Tunisia, Turkey, the United Arab Emirates, the United Kingdom, and the United States.\nWhile the U.S. Government recognises Palestinian Authority passports as travel documents, it does not view them as conferring citizenship, since they are not issued by a government that they recognise. Consular officials representing the Governments of Egypt, Jordan and the United Arab Emirates, when asked by the Resource Information Center of UNHCR in May 2002, would not comment on whether their governments viewed PA passports as conferring any proof of citizenship or residency, but did say that the passports, along with valid visas or other necessary papers, would allow their holders to travel to their countries.\nThe Palestinian Authority has said that anyone with a birth certificate showing they were born in Palestine can apply for a PA passport. Whether or not Palestinians born outside Palestine could apply was not clear to the PA Representative questioned by UNHCR representatives in May 2002. The PA representative also said even if those applying met the PA's eligibility criteria, the Israeli government placed additional restrictions on the actual issuance of passports.\nIn October 2007, a Japanese Justice Ministry official said, \"Given that the Palestinian Authority has improved itself to almost a full-fledged state and issues its own passports, we have decided to accept the Palestinian nationality.\" The decision followed a recommendation by a ruling party panel on nationality that Palestinians should no longer be treated as stateless.\nLegal action against the Palestinian Authority.\nIn February 2015 in a civil case considered by a US federal court the Palestinian Authority and Palestine Liberation Organization were found liable for the death and injuries of US citizens in a number of terrorist attacks in Israel from 2001 to 2004. However, on 31 August 2016, the Second US Circuit Court of Appeals in Manhattan dismissed the case on the grounds that US federal courts lacked overseas jurisdiction on civil cases. In June 2025, the Supreme Court of the United States unanimously overturned the ruling of the lower court, thus reviving the associated lawsuits. Chief Justice John Roberts, writing for the court, said that their decision comported with the Promoting Security and Justice for Victims of Terrorism Act passed by the United States Congress in 2019.\nIn 2024, the Jerusalem District Court ruled that the Palestinian Authority must pay NIS 46 million to heirs of the victims of the 2001 Sbarro restaurant suicide bombing for \"punitive damages, compensation, funeral costs, and legal expenses.\"\nLawyers representing family members of victims of the October 7 attacks, numbering 208 plaintiffs, filed suit in the Jerusalem District Court in July 2025 against the Palestinian Authority for more than NIS 1 billion in damages. The lawyers noted that the damages could be drawn from NIS 3 billion frozen by the Israeli government following the attacks.\nLaw.\nHuman rights.\nIn theory the Palestinian Authority has guaranteed freedom of assembly to the Palestinian citizens residing in its territory. Nevertheless, the right to demonstrate for opponents of the PA regime or of PA policy has become increasingly subject to police control and restriction and is a source of concern for human rights groups. In August 2019, the Palestinian Authority banned LGBTQ organizations from operating in the West Bank, targeting the group Al Qaws.\nThe Fatah\u2013Hamas conflict has further limited the freedom of the press in the PA territories and the distribution of opposing voices in Hamas-controlled Gaza and the West Bank where Fatah still has more influence. According to the Ramallah-based Palestinian Center for Development and Media Freedoms, in 2011, there were more assaults on Palestinian press freedom from the PA than from Israel. In July 2010, with the easing of the blockade of the Gaza Strip, Israel allowed the distribution of the pro-Fatah newspapers al-Quds, al-Ayyam and al-Hayat al-Jadida to Gaza, but Hamas prevented Gazan distributors from retrieving the shipment. The Palestinian Centre for Human Rights (PCHR) condemned the Hamas restrictions of distribution of the West Bank newspapers in Gaza, and also condemned the Fatah-led government in the West Bank for restricting publication and distribution of the Gazan newspapers al-Resala and Falastin.\nWomen have full suffrage in the PA. In the 2006 elections, women made up 47 percent of registered voters. Prior to the elections, the election law was amended to introduce a quota for women on the national party lists, resulting in 22 percent of candidates on the national lists being women. The quota's effectiveness was illustrated in comparison with the district elections, where there was no quota, and only 15 of the 414 candidates were women.\nSelling land or housing to Israeli Jews is punishable by death, and some high-profile cases have received high media coverage. Although president Mahmoud Abbas has never ratified a death sentence in such cases, as late as December 2018 a Ramallah court sentenced the Palestinian-American Isaam Akel, a resident of East Jerusalem, to life in prison with hard labor for having sold land in the Old City of Jerusalem to Israeli Jews. His family maintained his innocence. The Palestinian governor of East Jerusalem, Adnan Gheith, was arrested twice by Israeli authorities in connection with the case.\nHamas has begun enforcing some Islamic standards of dress for women in the PA; women must don headscarves in order to enter government ministry buildings. In July 2010, Hamas banned the smoking of hookah by women in public. They claimed that it was to reduce the increasing number of divorces.\nIn June 2011, the Independent Commission for Human Rights published a report whose findings included that the Palestinians in the West Bank and the Gaza Strip were subjected in 2010 to an \"almost systematic campaign\" of human rights abuses by the Palestinian Authority and Hamas, as well as by Israeli authorities, with the security forces belonging to the PA and Hamas being responsible for torture, arrests and arbitrary detentions.\nPolice forces.\nThe creation of a Palestinian police force was called for under the Oslo Accords. The first Palestinian police force of 9,000 was deployed in Jericho in 1994, and later in Gaza. These forces initially struggled to control security in the areas in which it had partial controlled and because of this Israel delayed expansion of the area to be administered by the PA. By 1996, the PA security forces were estimated to include anywhere from 40,000 to 80,000 recruits. PA security forces employ some armored cars, and a limited number carry automatic weapons. Some Palestinians opposed to or critical of the peace process perceive the Palestinian security forces to be little more than a proxy of the State of Israel.\nCrime and law enforcement.\nViolence against civilians.\nThe Palestinian Human Rights Monitoring Group reports that through \"\"everyday disagreements and clashes between the various political factions, families and cities that a complete picture of Palestinian society is painted. These divisions have during the course of the al Aqsa Intifada also led to an increasingly violent 'Intrafada'. In the 10-year period from 1993 to 2003, 16% of Palestinian civilian deaths were caused by Palestinian groups or individuals\".\"\nErika Waak reports in \"The Humanist\" \"\"Of the total number of Palestinian civilians killed during this period by both Israeli and Palestinian security forces, 16 percent were the victims of Palestinian security forces.\" Accusations of collaboration with Israel are used to target and kill individual Palestinians:\n\"Those who are convicted have either been caught helping Israelis, spoken out against Arafat, or are involved in rival criminal gangs, and these individuals are hanged after summary trials. Arafat creates an environment where the violence continues while silencing would-be critics, and although he could make the violence impossible, he doesn't stop it.\"\nFreedom House's annual survey of political rights and civil liberties, Freedom in the World 2001\u20132002, reports \"Civil liberties declined due to: shooting deaths of Palestinian civilians by Palestinian security personnel; the summary trial and executions of alleged collaborators by the Palestinian Authority (PA); extrajudicial killings of suspected collaborators by militias; and the apparent official encouragement of Palestinian youth to confront Israeli soldiers, thus placing them directly in harm's way.\"\"\nPalestinian security forces have, as of March 2005, not made any arrests for the October 2003 killing of three American members of a diplomatic convoy in the Gaza Strip. Moussa Arafat, head of the Palestinian Military Intelligence and a cousin of the former Palestinian Authority Chairman Yasser Arafat has stated that, regarding the United States pressure to arrest the killers; \"They know that we are in a very critical position and that clashing with any Palestinian party under the presence of the occupation is an issue that will present many problems for us\". Since the October 2003 attack, United States diplomats have been banned from entering the Gaza Strip.\nViolence against officials (2001\u20132004).\nOn 22 April 2001, Jaweed al-Ghussein, former chairman of the Palestine National Fund, was abducted from Abu Dhabi, UAE, flown to Arish, Egypt, and driven across the border to Gaza, where he was held hostage by the Palestinian Authority. The Minister of Justice, Freh Abu Mediane, protested and resigned over the illegality. Haider Abdel Shafi, Chief Delegate in the Madrid Peace Process and leading Palestinian, protested at his incarceration and demanded his immediate release. The PCCR (Palestinian Commission on Citizens Rights) took the case up. The Attorney General Sorani declared there was no legality. The Red Cross was denied access to him. Amnesty International asked for his release. The United Nations Working Group on Arbitrary Detention determined he was being held 'manifestly with no legal justification' and appointed a Special Rapporteur on torture.\nOn 15 October 2003, three members of a United States diplomatic convoy were killed and additional members of the convoy wounded three kilometers south of the Erez Crossing into the Gaza Strip by a terrorist bomb. The perpetrators remain at large.\nIn February 2004, Ghassan Shaqawa, the mayor of Nablus, filed his resignation from office in protest of the Palestinian Authority's lack of action against the armed militias rampaging the city and the multiple attempts by some Palestinians to assassinate him. Gaza's police Chief, General Saib al-Ajez would later say: 'This internal conflict between police and militants cannot happen. It is forbidden. We are a single nation and many people know each other and it is not easy to kill someone who is bearing a weapon to defend his nation.\"\nKaren Abu Zayd, deputy commissioner-general for the UN Relief and Works Agency in the Gaza Strip stated on 29 February 2004: \"What has begun to be more visible is the beginning of the breakdown of law and order, all the groups have their own militias, and they are very organized. It's factions trying to exercise their powers.\"\nGhazi al-Jabali, the Gaza Strip Chief of Police, since 1994 has been the target of repeated attacks by Palestinians. In March 2004, his offices were targeted by gunfire. In April 2004, a bomb was detonated destroying the front of his house. On 17 July 2004, he was kidnapped at gunpoint following an ambush of his convoy and wounding of two bodyguards. He was released several hours later. Less than six hours later, Colonel Khaled Abu Aloula, director of military coordination in the southern part of Gaza was abducted.\nOn the eve of 17 July, Fatah movement members kidnapped 5 French citizens (3 men and 2 women) and held them hostage in Red Crescent Society building in Khan Yunis:\nPalestinian security officials said that the kidnapping was carried out by the Abu al-Rish Brigades, accused of being linked to Palestinian Authority Chairman Yasser Arafat's Fatah faction.\nOn 18 July, Arafat replaced Ghazi al-Jabali, with his nephew Moussa Arafat, sparking violent riots in Rafah and Khan Yunis in which members of the al-Aqsa Martyrs' Brigades burned PA offices and opened fire on Palestinian policemen. During the riots, at least one Palestinian was killed and a dozen more seriously wounded.\nOn 20 July 2004 David Satterfield, the second-in-charge at the United States Department of State Near East desk stated in a hearing before the Senate that the Palestinian Authority had failed to arrest the Palestinian terrorists who had murdered three members of an American diplomatic convoy travelling in the Gaza Strip on 15 October 2003. Satterfield stated:\n\"There has been no satisfactory resolution of this case. We can only conclude that there has been a political decision taken by the chairman (Yasser Arafat) to block further progress in this investigation.\"\nOn 21 July, Nabil Amar, former Minister of Information and a cabinet member and a member of the Palestinian Legislative Council, was shot by masked gunmen, after an interview with a television channel in which he criticized Yasser Arafat and called for reforms in the PA.\nRegarding the descent into chaos Cabinet minister Qadura Fares stated on 21 July 2004:\n\"Every one of us is responsible. Arafat is the most responsible for the failure. President Arafat failed and the Palestinian government failed, the Palestinian political factions failed.\"\nOn 22 July 2004, The United Nations elevated its threat warning level for the Gaza Strip to \"Phase Four\" (one less than the maximum \"Phase Five\") and planned to evacuate non-essential foreign staff from the Gaza Strip.\nOn 23 July 2004, an Arab boy was shot and killed by Palestinian terrorists of the Al-Aqsa Martyrs' Brigades after he and his family physically opposed their attempt to set up a Qassam rocket launcher outside the family's house. Five other individuals were wounded in the incident.\nOn 31 July, Palestinian kidnappers in Nablus seized 3 foreign nationals, an American, British and Irish citizen. They were later released. Also, a PA security forces HQ building was burnt down in Jenin by the al Aqsa Martyrs' Brigades. A leader of Al Aqsa Martyrs Brigades said they torched the building because new mayor Qadorrah Moussa, appointed by Arafat, had refused to pay salaries to Al Aqsa members or to cooperate with the group.\nOn 8 August 2004 the Justice Minister Nahed Arreyes resigned stating that he has been stripped of much of his authority over the legal system. The year before, Yasser Arafat created a rival agency to the Justice Ministry and was accused of continuing to control the judiciary and in particular the state prosecutors.\nOn 10 August 2004, a report by an investigation committee Palestinian Legislative Council for the reasons for the anarchy and chaos in the PA was published by Haaretz daily newspaper. The report put the main blame on Yasser Arafat and the PA's security forces, which \"have failed to make a clear political decision to end it\".\nThe report states,\n \"The main reason for the failure of the Palestinian security forces and their lack of action in restoring law and order [...] is the total lack of a clear political decision and no definition of their roles, either for the long term or the short.\"\nThe report also calls to stop shooting Qassam rockets and mortar shells on Israeli settlements because it hurts \"Palestinian interests\".\nHakham Balawi said:\n\"...\u00a0It is prohibited to launch rockets and to fire weapons from houses, and that is a supreme Palestinian interest that should not be violated because the result is barbaric retaliation by the occupying army and the citizenry cannot accept such shooting. Those who do it are a certain group that does not represent the people and nation, doing it without thinking about the general interest and public opinion in the world and in Israel. There is no vision or purpose to the missiles; the Palestinian interest is more important\"\nDespite the criticism against Yasser Arafat, the troubles continued. On 24 August, the Lieutenant Commander of the Palestinian General Intelligence in the Gaza Strip, Tareq Abu-Rajab, was shot by group of armed men. He was seriously injured.\nOn 31 August, the Jenin Martyrs Brigades, the armed wing of the Popular Resistance Committees, threaten to kill Minister Nabil Shaath for participating in a conference in Italy attended by Israeli foreign minister Silvan Shalom, declaring \"He will be sentenced to death if he enters. The decision cannot be rescinded, we call upon his bodyguards to abandon his convoy in order to save their lives.\"\nOn 8 September, Prime Minister Ahmed Qurei, threatens to resign, again. Three weeks have elapsed since he retracted is resignation, originally tendered six weeks ago.\nOn 12 October, Moussa Arafat, cousin of Yasser Arafat and a top security official in the Gaza Strip, survived a car bomb assassination attempt. Recently the Popular Resistance Committees threatened Moussa Arafat with retaliation for an alleged attempt to assassinate its leader, Mohammed Nashabat.\nOn 14 October, Palestinian prime minister Ahmed Qurei stated that the Palestinian Authority is unable to stop the spreading anarchy. While routinely blaming Israel for the PA's problems, he pointed out that the many PA security forces are hobbled by corruption and factional feuding. Due to the lack of governmental reforms demanded by international peace mediators, Palestinian legislators demanded Qurei present a report on the matter by 20 October, at which point they will decide upon holding a no-confidence vote.\nOn 19 October, a group of Al-Aqsa Martyrs' Brigades members, led by Zakaria Zubeidi, seized buildings belonging to the Palestinian Finance ministry and Palestinian parliament in Jenin.\nAccording to Mosab Hassan Yousef, the CIA has provided sophisticated electronic eavesdropping equipment to the Palestinian Authority that has been used against suspected Palestinian militants. However, the equipment has also been used against Shin Bet informants.\nPalestinian measures to keep law and order.\nIn 2006, after the Hamas victory, the Palestinian interior minister formed an Executive Force for the police. However, the PA president objected and after clashes between Hamas and Fatah, redeployment of the force was made and efforts started in order to integrate it with the police force.\nIn 2011, Amira Hass reported that in sections of Area B of the West Bank, especially around the towns of Abu Dis and Sawahera, a security paradox was evolving: while the Oslo Accords stipulate that the Israeli Army have authority to police Area B, they weren't; and though the Palestinian security forces were prepared to deal with criminal activity in this area, they had to wait for Israeli permission to enter, and were thus ineffective. Hass also reported that as a result of this paradox, Abu Dis and surrounding areas were becoming a haven for weapons smugglers, drug dealers, and other criminals.\nAs of 2013, Palestinian security forces continue to coordinate with Israeli troops in tracking Islamic militants in the West Bank.\nAccording to Al-Jazeera, in 2024 the Palestinian Authority was attempting to assert its limited authority by cracking down on armed groups in the Jenin Refugee Camp, according to experts, in order to convince President-elect Donald Trump that it is a beneficial security partner.\nEconomy.\nThe Gaza International Airport was built by the PA in the city of Rafah, but operated for only a brief period before being destroyed by Israel following the outbreak of Al-Aqsa Intifada in 2000. A seaport was also being constructed in Gaza but was never completed.\nSome Palestinians are dependent on access to the Israeli job market. During the 1990s, some Israeli companies began to replace Palestinians with foreign workers. The process was found to be economical and also addressed security concerns. This hurt the Palestinian economy, in particular in the Gaza strip, where 45.7% of the population is under the poverty line according to the CIA World Factbook, but it also affected the West Bank.\nBudget.\nAccording to the World Bank, the budget deficit in PNA was about $800\u00a0million in 2005, with nearly half of it financed by donors. The World Bank stated, \"The PA's fiscal situation has become increasingly unsustainable mainly as a result of uncontrolled government consumption, in particular a rapidly increasing public sector wage bill, expanding social transfer schemes and rising net lending.\"\nIn June 2011, Prime Minister Salam Fayyad stated that the Palestinian Authority is facing a financial crisis because funds pledged by donor nations have not arrived on time. Fayyad said that \"In 2011, we have been receiving $52.5 million dollars a month from the Arab countries, which is much less than the amount they committed to deliver.\"\nIn June 2012, the Palestinian Authority was unable to pay its workers' salaries as a result of their financial issues, including a cutback in aid from foreign donors, and Arab countries not fulfilling their pledges to send money to the Palestinian Authority, in which the Palestinian Authority is heavily dependent. Finance Minister Nabil Kassis called the crisis \"the worst\" in three years. Adding to the complications are the fact that in the same month, the head of the Palestine Monetary Authority, Jihad Al-Wazir, stated that the Palestinian Authority reached the maximum limit of borrowing from Palestinian banks.\nIn July 2012, Prime Minister Salam Fayyad urged Arab countries to send the money they promised, which amounts to tens of millions of dollars, as they have not made good on their pledges, while Western donors have. The Palestinian labor minister Ahmed Majdalani also warned of the consequences of a shortfall in the delivery of aid from Arab donor nations.\nIn order to help the Palestinian Authority solve its crisis, Israel sought $1\u00a0billion in loans from the International Monetary Fund, intending to transfer this loan to the Palestinian Authority who would pay them back when possible. The IMF rejected the proposal because it feared setting a precedent of making IMF money available to non-state entities, like the Palestinian Authority, which as a non-state cannot directly request or receive IMF funding.\nIn mid-July 2012, it was announced that Saudi Arabia would imminently send $100\u00a0million to the Palestinian Authority to help relieve them of their financial crisis. Still, the Palestinian Authority is seeking the support of other countries to send more money to help fix a budget deficit that is approximately $1.5\u00a0billion for 2012, and it is estimated that they need approximately $500\u00a0million more. Ghassan Khatib, a Palestinian Authority spokesman, said, \"This $100 million is important and significant because it's coming from a leading Arab state, and this hopefully can be an example for other countries to follow... We will remain in need of external funding. Whenever it is affected, then we will be in crisis.\"\nBy 15 July 2012, Palestinian Authority workers received only 60% of their salaries for June, which caused discontent against the government.\nIn a \"goodwill gesture\" to the Palestinian Authority to renew dialogue with Israel, Israeli prime minister Benjamin Netanyahu and Finance Minister Yuval Steinitz decided to give Ramallah a NIS 180\u00a0million advance on tax money it transfers on a monthly basis. The Israeli government's economic cabinet also decided to increase the number of Palestinian construction workers allowed in Israel by approximately 5,000. One Israeli official said that the money helped the Palestinian Authority pay its salaries before Ramadan, and it was part of Israel's policy of helping to \"preserve the Palestinian economy.\"\nThe World Bank issued a report in July 2012 that the Palestinian economy cannot sustain statehood as long as it continues to heavily rely on foreign donations and the private sector fails to thrive. The report said that the Palestinian Authority is unlikely to reach fiscal sustainability until a peace deal is achieved that allows the private sector to experience rapid and sustained growth. The World Bank report also blamed the financial issues on the absence of a final status agreement that would allow for a two-state solution to the Israeli-Arab conflict.\nAs of May 2011, the Palestinian Authority spent $4.5\u00a0million per month paying Palestinian prisoners. The payments include monthly amounts such as NIS 12,000 ($3,000) to prisoners who have been imprisoned for over 30 years. The salaries, funded by the PA, are given to Fatah, Hamas, and Islamic Jihad prisoners, despite financial hardships by the Palestinian Authority. These payments make up 6% of the PA's budget.\nAs of January\u00a02015[ [update]], the PA has a debt of 1.8 bln NIS to the Israel Electric Corporation.\nIn 2017, the PA received $693\u00a0million from foreign donors, of which $345\u00a0million, was paid out through the Martyrs Fund in the form of stipends to convicted militants and their families.\nCorruption.\nA poll conducted by the Palestinian Center for Policy and Survey Research revealed that 71% of Palestinians believe there is corruption in the Palestinian Authority institutions in the West Bank, and 57% say there is corruption in the institutions of the dismissed Palestinian government in the Gaza Strip. 34% say that there is no freedom of the press in the West Bank, 21% say that there is press freedom in the West Bank, and 41% say there is to a certain extent. 29% of Palestinians say people in the West Bank can criticize the government in the West Bank without fear.\nAt a hearing of the House Committee on Foreign Affairs in the United States Congress on 10 July 2012, titled \"Chronic Kleptocracy: Corruption within the Palestinian Political Establishment,\" it was stated that there is serious corruption within the political establishment and in financial transactions. The experts, analysts, and specialists testified on corruption within financial transactions concerning Mahmoud Abbas, his sons Yasser and Tareq, and the Palestine Investment Fund, among others, as well as on the limiting of freedom of the press, crushing political opposition, and cracking down on protestors. According to Representative Steve Chabot, who testified at the hearing, \"Reports suggest that Palestinian President Mahmoud Abbas, like his predecessor Yassir Arafat, has used his position of power to line his own pockets as well as those of his cohort of cronies, including his sons, Yasser and Tareq. The Palestinian Investment Fund, for example, was intended to serve the interests of the Palestinian population and was supposed to be transparent, accountable, and independent of the Palestinian political leadership. Instead, it is surrounded by allegations of favoritism and fraud.\" Concerning Abbas' children, Chabot stated that \"Even more disturbingly, Yasser and Tareq Abbas\u2014who have amassed a great deal of wealth and economic power\u2014have enriched themselves with U.S. taxpayer money. They have allegedly received hundreds of thousands of dollars in USAID contracts.\"\nIn April 2013, the Palestinian organization Coalition for Transparency in Palestine said it was investigating 29 claims of stolen public funds. In addition, they said that the PA \"has problems with money laundering, nepotism and misusing official positions.\" Twelve earlier claims were investigated and sent to the courts for resolution. In response, Palestinian Authority Justice Minister Ali Muhanna said that they have \"made large strides in reducing corruption.\"\nInternational aid.\nThe majority of aid to the Palestinian Authority comes from the United States and European Union. According to figures released by the PA, only 22 percent of the $530,000,000 received since the beginning of 2010 came from Arab donors. The remaining came from Western donors and organizations. The total amount of foreign aid received directly by the PA was $1.4\u00a0billion in 2009 and $1.8\u00a0billion in 2008.\nPalestinian leaders stated the Arab world was \"continuing to ignore\" repeated requests for help.\nThe US and the EU responded to Hamas' political victory by stopping direct aid to the PA, while the US imposed a financial blockade on PA's banks, impeding some of the Arab League's funds (e.g. Saudi Arabia and Qatar) from being transferred to the PA. On 6 and 7 May 2006, hundreds of Palestinians demonstrated in Gaza and the West Bank demanding payment of their wages.\nIn 2013 there are 150,000 government employees. Income to run the government to serve about 4\u00a0million citizens, comes from donations from other countries.\nIn 2020, Swedish foreign aid minister Peter Eriksson (Green Party) announced a 1.5\u00a0billion SEK support package (about 150\u00a0million euro) to the Palestine Authority in 2020\u20132024. This announcement came after several other countries had reduced aid due to indicators of corruption and that funds go towards the salaries of militants.\nEconomic sanctions following January 2006 legislative elections.\nFollowing the January 2006 legislative elections, won by Hamas, the Quartet (the United States, Russia, the European Union, and the United Nations) threatened to cut funds to the Palestinian Authority. On 2 February 2006, according to the AFP, the PA accused Israel of \"practicing collective punishment after it snubbed the US calls to unblock funds owed to the Palestinians.\" Prime minister Ahmed Qorei \"said he was hopeful of finding alternative funding to meet the budget shortfall of around 50 million dollars, needed to pay the wages of public sector workers, and which should have been handed over by Israel on the first of the month.\" The US Department criticized Israel for refusing to quickly unblock the funds. The funds were later unblocked. However, \"The New York Times\" alleged on 14 February 2006 that a \"destabilization plan\" of the United States and Israel, aimed against Hamas, winner of the January 2006 legislative elections, centered \"largely on money\" and cutting all funds to the PA once Hamas takes power, in order to delegitimize it in the eyes of the Palestinians. According to the news article, \"The Palestinian Authority has a monthly cash deficit of some $60 million to $70 million after it receives between $50 million and $55 million a month from Israel in taxes and customs duties collected by Israeli officials at the borders but owed to the Palestinians.\" Beginning March 2006, \"the Palestinian Authority will face a cash deficit of at least $110 million a month, or more than $1 billion a year, which it needs to pay full salaries to its 140,000 employees, who are the breadwinners for at least one-third of the Palestinian population. The employment figure includes some 58,000 members of the security forces, most of which are affiliated with the defeated Fatah movement.\" Since 25 January elections, \"the Palestinian stock market has already fallen about 20 percent\", while the \"Authority has exhausted its borrowing capacity with local banks.\"\nUse of European Union assistance.\nIn February 2004, it was reported that the European Union (EU) anti-fraud office (OLAF) was studying documents suggesting that Yasser Arafat and the Palestinian Authority had diverted tens of millions of dollars in EU funds to organizations involved in terrorist attacks, such as the Al-Aqsa Martyrs Brigades. However, in August 2004, a provisional assessment stated that \"To date, there is no evidence that funds from the non-targeted EU Direct Budget Assistance to the Palestinian Authority have been used to finance illegal activities, including terrorism.\"\nUnited States foreign aid packages.\nThe US House Appropriations Subcommittee on State, Foreign Operations, and Related Programs announced a foreign assistance package to the Palestinian Authority that included provisions that would bar the government from receiving aid if it seeks statehood at the UN or includes Hamas in a unity government. The bill would provide $513\u00a0million for the Palestinian Authority.\nPayments to Palestinian prisoners in Israeli prisons.\nOn 22 July 2004, Salam Fayyad, PA Minister of Finance, in an article in the Palestinian weekly, \"The Jerusalem Times\", detailed the following payments to Palestinians imprisoned by the Israeli authorities:\nIn February 2011, The Jerusalem Post revealed that the PA was paying monthly salaries to members of Hamas who are in Israeli prisons.\nIn March 2009, an extra 800 shekels ($190) was added to the stipends given to Palestinians affiliated with PLO factions in Israeli prisons, as confirmed by the head of Palestinian Prisoner Society in Nablus Ra'ed Amer. Each PLO-affiliated prisoner receives 1,000 shekels ($238) per month, an extra 300 shekels ($71) if they are married, and an extra 50 shekels ($12) for each child.\nIn 2016 the United Kingdom had a domestic debate about how its aid to the PA ended up funding prisoners incarcerated in Israel. In October 2016 a sum of \u00a325\u00a0million, constituting a third of its aid payments, was withheld pending the results of an investigation.\n2007 James G. Lindsay report.\nJames G. Lindsay, a former UNRWA general-counsel and fellow researcher for The Washington Institute for Near East Policy, published a report regarding the use of international aid in the Palestinian Authority. Lindsay argued that internationally funded construction projects in the West Bank should try to minimize foreign labor and maximize the participation of Palestinian workers and management to ensure economic expansion through salaries, job training, and improved infrastructure. Lindsay stated that some financial control should stay in international hands to avoid \"nepotism or corruption\".\nLindsay has also argued that in any peace settlement acceptable to Israel \"there will be few, if any, Palestinian refugees returning to Israel proper\".\nLindsay suggested that internationally funded construction projects should try to benefit West Bank refugees who are willing to give up their longstanding demand for a \"right of return\". Lindsay also claimed that projects that will improve the living conditions of West Bank refugees could also be seen as part of the reparations or damages to be paid to refugees in any likely Israeli-Palestinian agreement. Lindsay criticized the Palestinian Authority treatment of these refugees:\nPA projects are not likely to address refugee needs, however, since the PA has traditionally deferred to the UN Relief and Works Agency (UNRWA) regarding infrastructure in refugee camps.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "24095", "revid": "1384218", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24095", "title": "Diana, Princess of Wales", "text": "Member of the British royal family (1961\u20131997)\nDiana, Princess of Wales (born Diana Frances Spencer; 1\u00a0July 1961\u00a0\u2013 31\u00a0August 1997), was a member of the British royal family. She was the first wife of Charles\u00a0III (then Prince of Wales) and mother of Princes William and Harry. Her activism and glamour made her an international icon and earned her enduring popularity.\nDiana was born into the British nobility and grew up close to the royal family, living at Park House on their Sandringham estate. In 1981, while working as a nursery teacher's assistant, she became engaged to Charles, the eldest son of Queen Elizabeth II. Their wedding took place at St\u00a0Paul's Cathedral in July 1981 and made her Princess of Wales, a role in which she was enthusiastically received by the public. The couple had two sons, William and Harry, who were then respectively second and third in the line of succession to the British throne. Diana's marriage to Charles suffered due to their incompatibility and extramarital affairs. They separated in 1992, soon after the breakdown of their relationship became public knowledge. Their marital difficulties were widely publicised, and the couple divorced in 1996.\nAs Princess of Wales, Diana undertook royal duties on behalf of the Queen and represented her at functions across the Commonwealth realms. She was celebrated in the media for her beauty, style, charm, and later, her unconventional approach to charity work. Her patronages were initially centred on children and the elderly, but she later became known for her involvement in two particular campaigns: one involved the social attitudes towards and the acceptance of AIDS patients, and the other for the removal of landmines, promoted through the International Red Cross. She also raised awareness and advocated for ways to help people affected by cancer and mental illness. Diana was initially noted for her shyness, but her charisma and friendliness endeared her to the public and helped her reputation survive the public collapse of her marriage. Considered photogenic, she was regarded as a fashion icon.\nIn August 1997, Diana died after a car crash in Paris; the incident led to extensive public mourning and global media attention. An inquest returned a verdict of unlawful killing due to gross negligence by a driver and the paparazzi pursuing her as found in Operation Paget, an investigation by the Metropolitan Police. Her legacy has had a significant effect on the royal family and British society.\nEarly life.\nDiana Frances Spencer was born on 1 July 1961, the fourth of five children of John Spencer, Viscount Althorp (1924\u20131992), and Frances Spencer, Viscountess Althorp (n\u00e9e Roche; 1936\u20132004). She was delivered at Park House, Sandringham, Norfolk. The Spencer family had been closely allied with the British royal family for several generations; her grandmothers, Cynthia Spencer, Countess Spencer, and Ruth Roche, Baroness Fermoy, had served as ladies-in-waiting to Queen Elizabeth The Queen Mother. Her parents were hoping for a boy to carry on the family line, and no name was chosen for a week until they settled on Diana Frances after her mother and Lady Diana Spencer, a many-times-great-aunt who was also a prospective Princess of Wales as a potential bride for Frederick, Prince of Wales. Within the family, she was also known informally as \"Duch\", a reference to her duchess-like attitude in childhood.\nOn 30 August 1961, Diana was baptised at St. Mary Magdalene Church, Sandringham. She grew up with three siblings: Sarah, Jane, and Charles. Her infant brother, John, died shortly after his birth one year before Diana was born. The desire for an heir added strain to her parents' marriage, and Lady Althorp was sent to Harley Street clinics in London to determine the cause of the \"problem\". The experience was described as \"humiliating\" by Diana's younger brother, Charles: \"It was a dreadful time for my parents and probably the root of their divorce because I don't think they ever got over it\". Diana grew up in Park House, situated on the Sandringham estate. The family leased the house from its owner, Queen Elizabeth II, whom Diana called \"Aunt Lilibet\" since childhood. The royal family frequently holidayed at the neighbouring Sandringham House, and Diana played with Princes Andrew and Edward.\nDiana was seven years old when her parents divorced. Her mother later began a relationship with Peter Shand Kydd and married him in 1969. Diana lived with her mother in London during her parents' separation in 1967, but during that year's Christmas holidays, Lord Althorp refused to let his daughter return to London with Lady Althorp. Shortly afterwards, he won custody of Diana with support from his former mother-in-law, Lady Fermoy. In 1976, Lord Althorp married Raine, Countess of Dartmouth. Diana's relationship with her stepmother was particularly bad. She resented Raine, whom she called a \"bully\". On one occasion Diana pushed her down the stairs. She later described her childhood as \"very unhappy\" and \"very unstable, the whole thing\". She became known as Lady Diana after her father later inherited the title of Earl Spencer in 1975, at which point her father moved the entire family from Park House to Althorp, the Spencer seat in Northamptonshire.\nEducation and career.\nDiana was initially home-schooled under the supervision of her governess, Gertrude Allen. She began her formal education at Silfield Private School in King's Lynn, Norfolk, and moved to Riddlesworth Hall School, an all-girls boarding school near Thetford, when she was nine. She joined her sisters at West Heath Girls' School in Sevenoaks, Kent, in 1973. She did not perform well academically, failing her O-levels twice. Her outstanding community spirit was recognised with an award from West Heath. She left West Heath when she was sixteen. Her brother Charles recalls her as being quite shy up until that time. She demonstrated musical ability as a skilled pianist. She also excelled in swimming and diving, and studied ballet and tap dance.\nIn the mid-1970s, Diana did voluntary work at the psychiatric Darenth Park Hospital near Dartford, Kent.\nIn 1978 Diana worked for three months as a nanny for Philippa and Jeremy Whitaker in Hampshire. After attending Institut Alpin Videmanette (a finishing school in Rougemont, Switzerland) for one term, and leaving after the Easter term of 1978, Diana returned to London, where she shared her mother's flat with two school friends. In London, she took an advanced cooking course and worked at a series of low-paying jobs; she worked as a dance instructor for youth until a skiing accident caused her to miss three months of work. She then found employment as a playgroup pre-school assistant, did some cleaning work for her sister Sarah and several of her friends, and acted as a hostess at parties. She spent time working as a nanny for the Robertsons, an American family living in London, and worked as a nursery teacher's assistant at the Young England School in Pimlico. In July 1979, her mother bought her a flat at Coleherne Court in Earl's Court as an 18th birthday present. She lived there with three flatmates until 25 February 1981.\nPersonal life.\nDiana first met Charles, Prince of Wales, the Queen's eldest son and heir apparent, when she was 16 in November 1977. He was then 29 and dating her older sister, Sarah. Charles and Diana were guests at a country weekend during the summer of 1980 and he took a serious interest in her as a potential bride. The relationship progressed when he invited her aboard the royal yacht \"Britannia\" for a sailing weekend to Cowes. This was followed by an invitation to Balmoral Castle (the royal family's Scottish residence) to meet his family. She was well received by the Queen, the Queen Mother and the Duke of Edinburgh. Charles subsequently courted Diana in London. He proposed on 6 February 1981 at Windsor Castle, and she accepted, but their engagement was kept secret for two and a half weeks.\nEngagement and wedding.\nTheir engagement became official on 24 February 1981. Diana selected her own engagement ring. Following the engagement, she left her occupation as a nursery teacher's assistant and temporarily lived at the Queen Mother's residence, Clarence House. She subsequently resided at Buckingham Palace until the wedding, where, according to the biographer Ingrid Seward, her life was \"incredibly lonely\". Diana was the first Englishwoman to marry the first in line to the throne since Anne Hyde married James, Duke of York and Albany (later James VII and II), over 300 years earlier, and she was also the first royal bride to have a paying job before her engagement. Diana's first public appearance with Charles was at a charity ball held at Goldsmiths' Hall in March 1981, where she was introduced to Princess Grace of Monaco.\nDiana became Princess of Wales at age 20 when she married Charles, then 32, on 29 July 1981. The wedding was held at St Paul's Cathedral, which offered more seating than Westminster Abbey, a church that was generally used for royal weddings. The service was widely described as a \"fairytale wedding\" and was watched by a global television audience of 750million people while 600,000 spectators lined the streets to catch a glimpse of the couple en route to the ceremony. At the altar, Diana inadvertently reversed the order of his first two names, saying \"Philip Charles\" Arthur George instead. She did not say she would \"obey\" him; that traditional vow was left out at the couple's request, which caused some comment at the time. Diana wore a dress valued at \u00a39,000 () with a 25-foot (7.62-metre) train. Within a few years of the wedding, the Queen extended Diana visible tokens of membership in the royal family, lending her the Queen Mary's Lover's Knot Tiara and granting her the badge of the Royal Family Order of Elizabeth II.\nChildren.\nThe couple had residences at Kensington Palace and Highgrove House, near Tetbury. On 5 November 1981, Diana's pregnancy was announced. In January 1982\u201412 weeks into the pregnancy\u2014Diana fell down a staircase at Sandringham, suffering some bruising, and the royal gynaecologist George Pinker was summoned from London; the foetus was uninjured. Diana later confessed that she had intentionally thrown herself down the stairs because she was feeling \"so inadequate\". On 21 June 1982, she gave birth to the couple's first son, Prince William. She subsequently suffered from postpartum depression after her first pregnancy. Amidst some media criticism, she decided to take William\u2014who was still a baby\u2014on her first major tours of Australia and New Zealand, and the decision was popularly applauded. By her own admission, Diana had not initially intended to take William until Australian prime minister Malcolm Fraser made the suggestion.\nA second son, Harry, was born on 15 September 1984. Diana said she and Charles were closest during her pregnancy with Harry. She was aware their second child was a boy, but did not share the knowledge with anyone else, including Charles, who hoped for a girl.\nDiana gave her sons wider experiences than was usual for royal children. She rarely deferred to Charles or to the royal family, and was often intransigent when it came to the children. She chose their first given names, dismissed a royal family nanny and engaged one of her own choosing, selected their schools and clothing, planned their outings, and took them to school herself as often as her schedule permitted. She also organised her public duties around their timetables. Diana was reported to have described Harry as \"naughty, just like me\", and William as \"my little wise old man\" whom she started to rely on as her confidant by his early teens.\nProblems and separation.\nFive years into the marriage, the couple's incompatibility and age difference became visible and damaging. In 1986, Diana began a relationship with James Hewitt, the family's former riding instructor and in the same year, Charles resumed his relationship with his former girlfriend Camilla Parker Bowles. The media speculated that Hewitt, not Charles, was Harry's father based on the alleged physical similarity between Hewitt and Harry, but Hewitt and others have denied this. Harry was born two years before Diana and Hewitt met and began their affair.\nBy 1987, cracks in the marriage had become visible and the couple's unhappiness and cold attitude towards one another were being reported by the press, who dubbed them \"the Glums\" because of their evident discomfort in each other's company. In 1989, Diana was at a birthday party for Parker Bowles's sister, Annabel Elliot, when she confronted Parker Bowles about her and Charles's extramarital affair. These affairs were later exposed in 1992 with the publication of Andrew Morton's book, \"\". The book, which also revealed Diana's allegedly suicidal unhappiness, caused a media storm. In 1991, James Colthurst conducted secret interviews with Diana in which she had talked about her marital issues and difficulties. These recordings were later used as a source for Morton's book. During her lifetime, both Diana and Morton denied her direct involvement in the writing process and maintained that family and friends were the book's main source; however, after her death Morton acknowledged Diana's role in writing the tell-all in the book's updated edition, \"Diana: Her True Story in Her Own Words\".\nThe Queen and Prince Philip hosted a meeting between Charles and Diana and unsuccessfully tried to effect a reconciliation. Philip wrote to Diana and expressed his disappointment at the extramarital affairs of both her and Charles; he asked her to examine their behaviour from the other's point of view. Diana reportedly found the letters difficult, but nevertheless appreciated that he was acting with good intent. It was alleged by some people, including Diana's close friend Simone Simmons, that Diana and Philip had a tense relationship; however, other observers said their letters provided no sign of friction between them. Philip later issued a statement, publicly denying allegations of his insulting Diana.\nDuring 1992 and 1993, leaked tapes of telephone conversations reflected negatively on both Charles and Diana. Tape recordings of Diana and James Gilbey were made public in August 1992, and transcripts were published the same month in what became known as Squidgygate. In December 1992, Prime Minister John Major announced the couple's \"amicable separation\" to the House of Commons. Early the following year, the leaked Tampongate tapes, which included intimate exchanges between Charles and Parker Bowles, were published in the tabloids.\nBetween 1992 and 1993, Diana hired a voice coach, Peter Settelen, to help her develop her public speaking voice. In a videotape recorded by Settelen in 1992, Diana said that in 1984 through to 1986, she had been \"deeply in love with someone who worked in this environment\". It is thought she was referring to Barry Mannakee, who was transferred to the Diplomatic Protection Squad in 1986 after his managers had determined that his relationship with Diana had been inappropriate. Diana said in the tape that Mannakee had been \"chucked out\" from his role as her bodyguard following suspicion that the two were having an affair. Penny Junor suggested in her 1998 book that Diana was in a romantic relationship with Mannakee. Diana's friends dismissed the claim as absurd. In the subsequently released tapes, Diana said she had feelings for that \"someone\", saying \"I was quite happy to give all this up [and] just to go off and live with him\". She described him as \"the greatest friend [she's] ever had\", though she denied any sexual relationship with him. She also spoke bitterly of her husband saying that \"[He] made me feel so inadequate in every possible way, that each time I came up for air he pushed me down again.\"\nAlthough she blamed Parker Bowles for her marital troubles, Diana began to believe her husband had been involved in other affairs. In October 1993 Diana wrote to her butler Paul Burrell, telling him that she believed her husband was now in love with his personal assistant Tiggy Legge-Bourke\u2014who was also his sons' former nanny\u2014and was planning to have her killed \"to make the path clear for him to marry Tiggy\". Legge-Bourke had been hired by Charles as a young companion for his sons while they were in his care, and Diana was resentful of Legge-Bourke and her relationship with the young princes. Charles sought public understanding via with Jonathan Dimbleby on 29 June 1994. In the interview, he said he had rekindled his relationship with Parker Bowles in 1986 only after his marriage to Diana had \"irretrievably broken down\". In the same year, Diana's affair with Hewitt was exposed in detail in the book \"Princess in Love\" by Anna Pasternak, with Hewitt acting as the main source. Diana was evidently disturbed and outraged when the book was released, although Pasternak claimed Hewitt had acted with Diana's support to avoid having the affair covered in Andrew Morton's second book. In the same year, the \"News of the World\" claimed that Diana had had an affair with the married art dealer Oliver Hoare. According to Hoare's obituary, there was little doubt she had been in a relationship with him. However, Diana denied any romantic relationship with Hoare, whom she described as a friend. She was also linked by the press to the rugby union player Will Carling and private equity investor Theodore J. Forstmann, yet these claims were neither confirmed nor proven.\nDivorce.\nThe journalist Martin Bashir interviewed Diana for the BBC current affairs show \"Panorama\". The interview was broadcast on 20 November 1995. Diana discussed her own and her husband's extramarital affairs. Referring to Charles's relationship with Parker Bowles, she said: \"Well, there were three of us in this marriage, so it was a bit crowded.\" She also expressed doubt about her husband's suitability for kingship. The authors Tina Brown, Sally Bedell Smith, and Sarah Bradford support Diana's admission in the interview that she had suffered from depression, bulimia and had engaged numerous times in the act of self-harm; the show's transcript records Diana confirming many of her mental health problems. The combination of illnesses from which Diana herself said she suffered resulted in some of her biographers opining that she had borderline personality disorder. It was later revealed that Bashir had used forged bank statements to win Diana and her brother's trust to secure the interview, falsely indicating people close to her had been paid for spying. Lord Dyson conducted an independent inquiry into the issue and concluded that Bashir had \"little difficulty in playing on [Diana's] fears and paranoia\", a sentiment that was shared by Diana's son William.\nThe interview proved to be the tipping point. On 20 December, Buckingham Palace announced that the Queen had sent letters to Charles and Diana, advising them to divorce. The Queen's move was backed by Prime Minister John Major and by senior privy counsellors, and, according to the BBC, was decided after two weeks of talks. Charles formally agreed to the divorce in a written statement soon after. In February 1996, Diana announced her agreement after negotiations with Charles and representatives of the Queen, irritating Buckingham Palace by issuing her own announcement of the divorce agreement and its terms. In July 1996, the couple agreed on the terms of their divorce. This followed shortly after Diana's accusation that Charles's personal assistant Tiggy Legge-Bourke had aborted his child, after which Legge-Bourke instructed her solicitor Peter Carter-Ruck to demand an apology. Diana's private secretary Patrick Jephson resigned shortly before the story broke, later writing that Diana had \"exulted in accusing Legge-Bourke of having had an abortion\". The rumours of Legge-Bourke's alleged abortion were apparently spread by Martin Bashir as a means to gain his \"Panorama\" interview with Diana.\nThe decree nisi was granted on 15 July 1996 and the divorce was finalised on 28 August 1996. Diana was represented by Anthony Julius in the case. The couple shared custody of their children. She received a lump sum settlement of \u00a317million (equivalent to \u00a3million in 2023) as well as \u00a3400,000 per year. The couple signed a confidentiality agreement that prohibited them from discussing the details of the divorce or of their married life. Days before, letters patent were issued with general rules to regulate royal titles after divorce. Diana lost the style \"Her Royal Highness\" and instead was styled \"Diana, Princess of Wales\". As the mother of the prince expected to one day ascend to the throne, she was still considered to be a member of the royal family and was accorded the same precedence she enjoyed during her marriage. The Queen reportedly wanted to let Diana continue to use the style of Royal Highness after her divorce, but Charles had insisted on removing it. Prince William was reported to have reassured his mother: \"Don't worry, Mummy, I will give it back to you one day when I am king\". Almost a year before, according to Tina Brown, Philip had warned Diana: \"If you don't behave, my girl, we'll take your title away.\" She is said to have replied: \"My title is a lot older than yours, Philip.\"\nPost-divorce.\nAfter her divorce, Diana retained the double apartment on the north side of Kensington Palace that she had shared with Charles since the first year of their marriage; the apartment remained her home until her death the following year. She also moved her offices to Kensington Palace but was permitted \"to use the state apartments at St James's Palace\". In a book published in 2003, Paul Burrell claimed Diana's private letters had revealed that her brother, Lord Spencer, had refused to allow her to live at Althorp, despite her request. The allegations were proven to be untrue as Spencer received legal apologies from different newspapers, including \"The Times\" in 2021, which admitted that \"having considered his sister's safety, and in line with police advice, the Earl offered the Princess of Wales a number of properties including Wormleighton Manor, the Spencer family's original ancestral home\". However, he could not offer Garden House cottage on the Althorp estate to Diana as the home was intended for a member of staff.\nDiana was also given an allowance to run her private office, which was responsible for her charity work and royal duties, but from September 1996 onwards she was required to pay her bills and \"any expenditure\" incurred by her or on her behalf. Furthermore, she continued to have access to the jewellery that she had received during her marriage, and was allowed to use the air transport of the British royal family and government. Diana was also offered security by Metropolitan Police's Royalty Protection Group, which she benefitted from while travelling with her sons, but had refused it in the final years of her life, in an attempt to distance herself from the royal family. After her death, it was revealed that Diana had been in discussion with Major's successor, Tony Blair, about a special role that would provide a government platform for her campaigns and charities to make her capable of endorsing Britain's interests overseas.\nDiana retained close friendships with several celebrities, including Elton John, Liza Minnelli, George Michael, Michael Jackson, and Gianni Versace, whose funeral she attended in 1997. She dated the British-Pakistani heart surgeon Hasnat Khan, who was called \"the love of her life\" by many of her closest friends after her death, and she is said to have described him as \"Mr. Wonderful\". In May 1996, Diana visited Lahore upon invitation of Imran Khan, a relative of Hasnat Khan, and visited the latter's family in secret. Khan was intensely private and the relationship was conducted in secrecy, with Diana lying to members of the press who questioned her about it. Their relationship lasted almost two years with differing accounts of who ended it. She is said to have spoken of her distress when he ended their relationship. However, according to Khan's testimony at the inquest into her death, it was Diana who ended their relationship in the summer of 1997. Burrell also said the relationship was ended by Diana in July 1997. Burrell also claimed that Diana's mother, Frances Shand Kydd, disapproved of her daughter's relationship with a Muslim man. By the time of Diana's death in 1997, she had not spoken to her mother in four months. By contrast, her relationship with her estranged stepmother had reportedly improved.\nWithin a month, Diana began a relationship with Dodi Fayed, the son of her summer host, Mohamed Al-Fayed. That summer, Diana had considered taking her sons on a holiday to the Hamptons on Long Island, New York, but security officials had prevented it. After deciding against a trip to Thailand, she accepted Fayed's invitation to join his family in the south of France, where his compound and large security detail would not cause concern to the Royal Protection squad. Mohamed Al-Fayed bought the \"Jonikal\", a 60-metre multimillion-pound yacht on which to entertain Diana and her sons. Tina Brown later claimed that Diana's romance with Fayed and her four-month relationship with Gulu Lalvani were a ploy \"to inflame the true object of her affections, Hasnat Khan\". In the years after her death, Burrell, journalist Richard Kay, and voice coach Stewart Pearce have claimed that Diana was also thinking about buying a property in the United States.\nPrincess of Wales.\nFollowing her engagement to Charles, Diana made her first official public appearance in March 1981 in a charity event at Goldsmiths' Hall. She attended the Trooping the Colour for the first time in June 1981, making her appearance on the balcony of Buckingham Palace afterwards. In October 1981, Charles and Diana visited Wales. She attended the State Opening of Parliament for the first time on 4 November 1981. Her first solo engagement was a visit to Regent Street on 18 November 1981 to switch on the Christmas lights. Diana made her inaugural overseas tour in September 1982, to attend the funeral of Princess Grace of Monaco. Also in 1982, Queen Beatrix of the Netherlands created Diana a Grand Cross of the Order of the Crown. In 1983, Diana accompanied Charles and William on a tour of Australia and New Zealand. The tour was a success and the couple drew immense crowds, though the press focused more on Diana rather than Charles, coining the term 'Dianamania' as a reference to people's obsession with her. While sitting in a car with Charles near the Sydney Opera House, Diana burst into tears for a few minutes, which their office stated was due to jet lag and the heat. In New Zealand, the couple met with representatives of the M\u0101ori people. Their visit to Canada in June and July 1983 included a trip to Edmonton to open the 1983 Summer Universiade and a stop in Newfoundland to commemorate the 400th anniversary of that island's acquisition by the Crown. In 1983, she was targeted by the Scottish National Liberation Army who tried to deliver a letter bomb to her.\nIn February 1984, Diana was the patron of London City Ballet when she travelled to Norway on her own to attend a performance organised by the company. In April 1985, Charles and Diana visited Italy, and were later joined by their sons. They met with President Alessandro Pertini. Their visit to the Holy See included a private audience with Pope John Paul II. In autumn 1985, they returned to Australia, and their tour was well received by the public and the media, who referred to Diana as \"Di-amond Princess\" and the \"Jewel in the Crown\". In November 1985, the couple visited the United States, meeting President Ronald Reagan and First Lady Nancy Reagan at the White House. Diana had a busy year in 1986 as she and Charles toured Japan, Spain, and Canada. In Canada, they visited Expo 86, where Diana fainted in the California Pavilion. In November 1986, she went on a six-day tour to Oman, Qatar, Bahrain and Saudi Arabia, where she met King Fahd of Saudi Arabia and Sultan Qaboos of Oman.\nIn 1988, Charles and Diana visited Thailand and toured Australia for the bicentenary celebrations. In February 1989, she spent a few days in New York as a solo visit, mainly to promote the works of the Welsh National Opera, of which she was a patron. During a tour of Harlem Hospital Center, she spontaneously hugged a seven-year-old child with AIDS. In March 1989, she had her second trip to the Arab states of the Persian Gulf, in which she visited Kuwait and the UAE.\nIn March 1990, Diana and Charles toured Nigeria and Cameroon. Cameroonian president Paul Biya hosted an official dinner to welcome them in Yaound\u00e9. Highlights of the tour included visits by Diana to hospitals and projects focusing on women's development. In May 1990, they visited Hungary for four days. It was the first visit by members of the royal family to \"a former Warsaw Pact country\". They attended a dinner hosted by President \u00c1rp\u00e1d G\u00f6ncz and viewed a fashion display at the Museum of Applied Arts in Budapest. Pet\u0151 Institute was among the places visited by Diana, and she presented its director with an honorary OBE. In November 1990, she and Charles went to Japan to attend the enthronement of Emperor Akihito.\nIn her desire to play an encouraging role during the Gulf War, Diana visited Germany in December 1990 to meet with the families of soldiers. She subsequently travelled to Germany in January 1991 to visit RAF Bruggen, and later wrote an encouraging letter that was published in \"Soldier\", \"Navy News\" and \"RAF News\". In 1991, Charles and Diana visited Queen's University at Kingston, Ontario, where they presented the university with a replica of their royal charter. In September 1991, Diana visited Pakistan on a solo trip, and went to Brazil with Charles. During the Brazilian tour, Diana paid visits to organisations that battled homelessness among street children. Her final trips with Charles were to India and South Korea in 1992. She visited Mother Teresa's hospice in Kolkata, India. The two women met later in the same month in Rome and developed a personal relationship. It was also during the Indian tour that pictures of Diana alone in front of the Taj Mahal made headlines. In May 1992, she went on a solo tour of Egypt, visiting the Giza pyramid complex and attending a meeting with Egyptian president Hosni Mubarak. In November 1992, she went on an official solo trip to France and had an audience with President Fran\u00e7ois Mitterrand. In March 1993, she went on her first solo trip after her separation from Charles, visiting a leprosy hospital in Nepal where she met and came into contact with some patients, marking the first time they had ever been touched by a dignitary who had come to visit. In December 1993, she announced that she would withdraw from public life, but in November 1994 she said she wished to \"make a partial return\". In her capacity as the vice-president of British Red Cross, she was interested in playing an important role for its 125th anniversary celebrations. Later, Queen Elizabeth II formally invited her to attend the anniversary celebrations of D-Day. In February 1995, Diana visited Japan. She paid a formal visit to Emperor Akihito and Empress Michiko, and visited the National Children's Hospital in Tokyo. In June 1995, Diana went to the Venice Biennale art festival, and also visited Moscow where she received the International Leonardo Prize. In November 1995, Diana undertook a four-day trip to Argentina to attend a charity event. She visited many other countries, including Belgium, Switzerland, and Zimbabwe, alongside numerous others. During her separation from Charles, which lasted for almost four years, Diana participated in major national occasions as a senior member of the royal family, notably including \"the commemorations of the 50th anniversaries of Victory in Europe Day and Victory over Japan Day\" in 1995.\nCharity work and patronages.\nIn 1983 Diana confided to the premier of Newfoundland, Brian Peckford, \"I am finding it very difficult to cope with the pressures of being Princess of Wales, but I am learning to cope with it\". She was expected to make regular public appearances at hospitals, schools, and other facilities, in the 20th-century model of royal patronage. From the mid-1980s, she became increasingly associated with numerous charities. She carried out 191 official engagements in 1988 and 397 in 1991. Diana developed an intense interest in serious illnesses and health-related matters outside the purview of traditional royal involvement, including AIDS and leprosy. In recognition of her effect as a philanthropist, Stephen Lee, director of the UK Institute of Charity Fundraising Managers, said \"Her overall effect on charity is probably more significant than any other person's in the 20th century.\"\nDiana was the patroness of charities and organisations who worked with the homeless, youth, drug addicts, and the elderly. From 1989, she was president of Great Ormond Street Hospital for Children. She was patron of the Natural History Museum and president of the Royal Academy of Music and the Royal Academy of Dramatic Art. From 1984 to 1996, she was president of Barnardo's, a charity founded by Dr. Thomas John Barnardo in 1866 to care for vulnerable children and young people. In 1988, she became patron of the British Red Cross and supported its organisations in other countries such as Australia and Canada. She made several lengthy visits each week to Royal Brompton Hospital, where she worked to comfort seriously ill or dying patients. From 1991 to 1996, she was a patron of Headway, a brain injury association. In 1992, she became the first patron of Chester Childbirth Appeal, a charity she had supported since 1984. The charity, which is named after one of Diana's royal titles, could raise over \u00a31\u00a0million with her help. In 1994, she helped her friend Julia Samuel launch the charity Child Bereavement UK, which supports children \"of military families, those of suicide victims, [and] terminally-ill parents\", and became its patron. Her son William later became the charity's royal patron.\nIn 1987 Diana was awarded the Honorary Freedom of the City of London, the highest honour in the power of the City of London to bestow on someone. In June 1995, she travelled to Moscow. She paid a visit to a children's hospital she had previously supported when she provided them with medical equipment. In December 1995, Diana received the United Cerebral Palsy Humanitarian of the Year Award in New York City for her philanthropic efforts. In October 1996, for her works on the elderly, she was awarded a gold medal at a health care conference organised by the Pio Manz\u00f9 Centre in Rimini, Italy.\nThe day after her divorce, she announced her resignation from over 100 charities and retained patronages of only six: Centrepoint, English National Ballet, Great Ormond Street Hospital, The Leprosy Mission, National AIDS Trust, and the Royal Marsden Hospital. She continued her work with the British Red Cross Anti-Personnel Land Mines Campaign, but was no longer listed as patron.\nIn May 1997, Diana opened the Richard Attenborough Centre for Disability and the Arts in Leicester, after being asked by her friend Richard Attenborough. In June 1997 and at the suggestion of her son William, some of her dresses and suits were sold at Christie's auction houses in London and New York, and the proceeds that were earned from these events were donated to charities. Her final official engagement was a visit to Northwick Park Hospital, London, on 21 July 1997. Her 36th and final birthday celebration was held at Tate Gallery, which was also a commemorative event for the gallery's 100th anniversary. She was scheduled to attend a fundraiser at the Osteopathic Centre for Children on 4 September 1997, upon her return from Paris.\nHIV/AIDS.\nDiana began her work with AIDS patients in the 1980s. Contrary to the prevailing stigmatization of AIDS patients, she was not averse to making physical contact with patients, and was the first British royal to do so. In 1987, she held hands with an AIDS patient in one of her early efforts to destigmatise the condition. Diana noted: \"HIV does not make people dangerous to know. You can shake their hands and give them a hug. Heaven knows they need it. What's more, you can share their homes, their workplaces, and their playgrounds and toys\". To Diana's disappointment, the Queen did not support this type of charity work, suggesting she get involved in \"something more pleasant\". In July 1989, she opened Landmark Aids Centre in South London. In October 1990, Diana opened Grandma's House, a home for young AIDS patients in Washington, DC. She was also a patron of the National AIDS Trust and regularly visited London Lighthouse, which provided residential care for HIV patients (it has since merged with the Terrence Higgins Trust). In 1991, she hugged one patient during a visit to the AIDS ward of the Middlesex Hospital, which she had opened in 1987 as the first hospital unit dedicated to this cause in the UK. As the patron of Turning Point, a health and social care organisation, Diana visited its project in London for people with HIV/AIDS in 1992. She later established and led fundraising campaigns for AIDS research.\nIn March 1997, Diana visited South Africa, where she met with Nelson Mandela. On 2 November 2002, Mandela announced that the Nelson Mandela Children's Fund would be teaming up with the Diana, Princess of Wales Memorial Fund to help people with AIDS. They had planned the combination of the two charities a few months before her death. Mandela later praised Diana for her efforts surrounding the issue of HIV/AIDS: \"When she stroked the limbs of someone with leprosy or sat on the bed of a man with HIV/AIDS and held his hand, she transformed public attitudes and improved the life chances of such people\". Diana had used her celebrity status to \"fight stigma attached to people living with HIV/AIDS\", Mandela said.\nLandmines.\nDiana was patron of the HALO Trust, an organisation that removes debris\u2014particularly landmines\u2014left behind by war. In January 1997, pictures of Diana touring an Angolan minefield in a ballistic helmet and flak jacket were seen worldwide. During her campaign, she was accused of meddling in politics and called a \"loose cannon\" by Lord Howe, an official in the British Ministry of Defence. Despite the criticism, HALO states that Diana's efforts resulted in raising international awareness about landmines and the subsequent sufferings caused by them. In June 1997, she gave a speech at a landmines conference held at the Royal Geographical Society, and went to Washington, DC to support the American Red Cross's anti-landmine initiative. From 7 to 10 August 1997, just days before her death, she visited Bosnia and Herzegovina with Jerry White and Ken Rutherford of the Landmine Survivors Network.\nDiana's work on the landmines issue has been described as influential in the signing of the Ottawa Treaty, which created an international ban on the use of anti-personnel landmines. Introducing the Second Reading of the Landmines Bill 1998 to the British House of Commons, the Foreign Secretary, Robin Cook, paid tribute to Diana's work on landmines:All Honourable Members will be aware from their postbags of the immense contribution made by Diana, Princess of Wales to bringing home to many of our constituents the human costs of landmines. The best way in which to record our appreciation of her work, and the work of NGOs that have campaigned against landmines, is to pass the Bill, and to pave the way towards a global ban on landmines.\nA few months after Diana's death in 1997, the International Campaign to Ban Landmines won the Nobel Peace Prize.\nCancer.\nFor her first solo official trip, Diana visited The Royal Marsden NHS Foundation Trust, a cancer treatment hospital in London. She later chose this charity to be among the organisations that benefited from the auction of her clothes in New York. The trust's communications manager said she did \"much to remove the stigma and taboo associated with diseases such as cancer, AIDS, HIV and leprosy\". Diana became president of the hospital on 27 June 1989. The Wolfson Children's Cancer Unit was opened by Diana on 25 February 1993. In February 1996, Diana, who had been informed about a newly opened cancer hospital built by Imran Khan, travelled to Pakistan to visit its children's cancer wards and attend a fundraising dinner in aid of the charity in Lahore. She later visited the hospital again in May 1997. In June 1996, she travelled to Chicago in her capacity as president of the Royal Marsden Hospital in order to attend a fundraising event at the Field Museum of Natural History and raised more than \u00a31\u00a0million for cancer research. She additionally visited patients at the Cook County Hospital and delivered remarks at a conference on breast cancer at the Northwestern University Chicago campus after meeting a group of breast cancer researchers. In September 1996, after being asked by Katharine Graham, Diana went to Washington and appeared at a White House breakfast in respect of the Nina Hyde Center for Breast Cancer Research. She also attended an annual fund-raiser for breast cancer research organised by \"The Washington Post\" at the same centre.\nIn 1988, Diana opened Children with Leukaemia (later renamed Children with Cancer UK) in memory of two young cancer victims. In November 1987, a few days after the death of Jean O'Gorman from cancer, Diana met her family. The deaths of Jean and her brother affected her and she assisted their family to establish the charity. It was opened by her on 12 January 1988 at Mill Hill Secondary School, and she supported it until her death in 1997.\nOther areas.\nIn November 1989, Diana visited a leprosy hospital in Indonesia. Following her visit, she became patron of the Leprosy Mission, an organisation dedicated to providing medicine, treatment, and other support services to those who are afflicted with the disease. She remained the patron of this charity and visited several of its hospitals around the world, especially in India, Nepal, Zimbabwe and Nigeria until her death in 1997. She touched those affected by the disease when many people believed it could be contracted through casual contact. \"It has always been my concern to touch people with leprosy, trying to show in a simple action that they are not reviled, nor are we repulsed\", she commented. The Diana Princess of Wales Health Education and Media Centre in Noida, India, was opened in her honour in November 1999, funded by the Diana Princess of Wales Memorial Fund to give social support to the people affected by leprosy and disability.\nDiana was a long-standing and active supporter of Centrepoint, a charity that provides accommodation and support to homeless people, and became patron in 1992. She supported organisations that battle poverty and homelessness, including the Passage. Diana was a supporter of young homeless people and spoke out on behalf of them by saying that \"they deserve a decent start in life\". \"We, as a part of society, must ensure that young people\u2014who are our future\u2014are given the chance they deserve\", she said. Diana used to take young William and Harry for private visits to Centrepoint services and homeless shelters. \"The young people at Centrepoint were always really touched by her visits and by her genuine feelings for them\", said one of the charity's staff members. William later became the patron of Centrepoint.\nDiana was a staunch and longtime supporter of charities and organisations that focused on social and mental issues, including Relate and Turning Point. Relate was relaunched in 1987 as a renewed version to its predecessor, the National Marriage Guidance Council. Diana became its patron in 1989. Turning Point, a health and social care organisation, was founded in 1964 to help and support those affected by drug and alcohol misuse and mental health problems. She became the charity's patron in 1987 and visited the charity on a regular basis, meeting the sufferers at its centres or institutions including Rampton and Broadmoor. In 1990 during a speech for Turning Point she said, \"It takes professionalism to convince a doubting public that it should accept back into its midst many of those diagnosed as psychotics, neurotics and other sufferers who Victorian communities decided should be kept out of sight in the safety of mental institutions\". Despite the protocol problems of travelling to a Muslim country, she made a trip to Pakistan in 1991 in order to visit a rehabilitation centre in Lahore as a sign of \"her commitment to working against drug abuse\".\nPrivacy and legal issues.\nIn November 1980, the \"Sunday Mirror\" ran a story claiming that Charles had used the Royal Train twice for secret love rendezvous with Diana, prompting the palace to issue a statement, calling the story \"a total fabrication\" and demanding an apology. The newspaper editors, however, insisted that the woman boarding the train was Diana and declined to apologise. In February 1982, pictures of a pregnant Diana in bikini while holidaying were published in the media. The Queen subsequently released a statement and called it \"the blackest day in the history of British journalism\".\nIn 1993 Mirror Group Newspapers (MGN) published photographs of Diana that were taken by gym owner Bryce Taylor. The photos showed her exercising in the gym LA Fitness wearing \"a leotard and cycling shorts\". Diana's lawyers immediately filed a criminal complaint that sought \"a permanent ban on the sale and publication of the photographs\" around the world. However, some newspapers outside the UK published the pictures. The courts granted an injunction against Taylor and MGN that prohibited \"further publication of the pictures\". MGN later issued an apology after facing much criticism from the public and gave Diana \u00a31\u00a0million as a payment for her legal costs, while donating \u00a3200,000 to her charities. LA Fitness issued its own apology in June 1994, which was followed by Taylor apologising in February 1995 and giving up the \u00a3300,000 he had made from the sale of pictures in an out-of-court settlement about a week before the case was set to start. It was alleged that a member of the royal family had helped him financially to settle out of court.\nIn 1994 pictures of Diana sunbathing topless at a Costa del Sol hotel were put up for sale by a Spanish photography agency for a price of \u00a31 million. In 1996, a set of pictures of a topless Diana while sunbathing appeared in the \"Mirror\", which resulted in \"a furor about invasion of privacy\". In the same year, she was the subject of a hoax call by Victor Lewis-Smith, who pretended to be Stephen Hawking, though the full recorded conversation was never released. Also in 1996, Stuart Higgins of \"The Sun\" wrote a front-page story about an intimate video purporting to feature Diana with James Hewitt. The video turned out to be a hoax, forcing Higgins to issue an apology.\nDeath.\nDiana died on 31 August 1997 due to injuries resulting from a car crash in the Pont de l'Alma tunnel in Paris while her driver was fleeing the paparazzi. Diana was taken to Piti\u00e9-Salp\u00eatri\u00e8re Hospital around 2:00\u00a0am and was pronounced dead around 4:00\u00a0am. The crash also resulted in the deaths of her companion Dodi Fayed and their driver, Henri Paul, who was also the acting security manager of H\u00f4tel Ritz Paris. Trevor Rees-Jones, who was employed as a bodyguard by Dodi's father, survived the crash, suffering a serious head injury. The televised funeral, on 6 September, was watched by a British television audience that peaked at 32.1million, which was one of the United Kingdom's highest viewing figures ever and a United States television audience that peaked at 50 million. The event was broadcast to over 200 countries and was seen by an estimated 2.5 billion people.\nTribute, funeral, and burial.\nThe sudden and unexpected death of an extraordinarily popular royal figure brought statements from senior figures worldwide and many tributes by members of the public. People left flowers, candles, cards, and personal messages outside Kensington Palace for many months. Diana's coffin, draped with the royal flag, was brought to London from Paris by Charles and her two sisters on 31 August 1997. The coffin was taken to a private mortuary and then placed in the Chapel Royal, St James's Palace.\nOn 5 September, Queen Elizabeth II paid tribute to Diana in a live television broadcast. The funeral took place in Westminster Abbey on 6 September. Her sons walked in the funeral procession behind her coffin, along with the Prince of Wales, the Duke of Edinburgh, Diana's brother Lord Spencer, and representatives of some of her charities. Lord Spencer said of his sister, \"She proved in the last year that she needed no royal title to continue to generate her particular brand of magic.\" Re-written in tribute to Diana, \"Candle in the Wind 1997\" was performed by Elton John at the funeral service (the only occasion the song has been performed live). Released as a single in 1997, the global proceeds from the song have gone to Diana's charities.\nThe burial took place privately later the same day. Diana's former husband, sons, mother, siblings, a close friend, and a clergyman were present. Diana's body was clothed in a black long-sleeved dress designed by Catherine Walker, which she had chosen some weeks before. A set of rosary beads that she had received from Mother Teresa was placed in her hands. Diana's grave is on an island within the grounds of Althorp Park, the Spencer family home for centuries.\nThe burial party was provided by the 2nd Battalion the Princess of Wales's Royal Regiment, who carried Diana's coffin across to the island and laid her to rest. Diana was the Regiment's Colonel-in-Chief from 1992 to 1996. The original plan was for Diana to be buried in the Spencer family vault at the local church in nearby Great Brington, but Lord Spencer said he was concerned about public safety and security and the onslaught of visitors that might overwhelm Great Brington. He decided Diana would be buried where her grave could be easily cared for and visited in privacy by William, Harry, and other relatives.\nConspiracy theories, inquest and verdict.\nThe initial French judicial investigation concluded that the crash was caused by Paul's intoxication, reckless driving, speeding, and effects of prescription drugs. In February 1998, Mohamed Al-Fayed, father of Dodi Fayed, publicly said the crash, which killed his son, had been planned, and accused MI6 and the Duke of Edinburgh. An inquest, which started in London in 2004 and continued in 2007 and 2008, attributed the crash to grossly negligent driving by Paul and to the pursuing paparazzi, who forced Paul to speed into the tunnel. In 2003 Diana's butler Paul Burrell published a note that he claimed had been written by Diana in 1995, in which there were allegations that Charles was \"planning 'an accident' in [Diana's] car, brake failure and serious head injury\", so that he could remarry. She had allegedly expressed similar concerns in October 1995 to Lord Mishcon, her solicitor, that \"reliable sources\" had told her \"that she and Camilla would be put aside\" for Charles to marry Tiggy Legge-Bourke. When questioned by the Metropolitan Police inquiry team as a part of Operation Paget, Charles told the authorities that he did not know about his former wife's note from 1995 and could not understand why she had those feelings. On 7 April 2008, the jury returned a verdict of \"unlawful killing\". On the day after the final verdict of the inquest, Al-Fayed announced that he would end his 10-year campaign to establish that the tragedy was murder; he said he did so for the sake of Diana's children.\nLater events.\nFinances.\nFollowing her death, Diana left a \u00a321\u00a0million estate, \"netting \u00a317 million after estate taxes\", which were left in the hands of trustees, her mother, and her sister Sarah. The will was signed in June 1993, but Diana had it modified in February 1996 to remove the name of her personal secretary from the list of trustees and have Sarah replace him. After applying personal and inheritance taxes, a net estate of \u00a312.9\u00a0million was left to be distributed among the beneficiaries. Her two sons subsequently inherited the majority of her estate. Each of them was left with \u00a36.5 million, which was invested and gathered substantial interest, and an estimated \u00a310 million was given to each son upon turning 30 years old in 2012 and 2014 respectively. Many of Diana's possessions were initially left in the care of her brother, who put them on show in Althorp twice a year until they were returned to Diana's sons. They were also put on display in American museums and as of 2011[ [update]] raised two million dollars for charities. Among the objects were her dresses and suits along with numerous family paintings and jewels. Diana's engagement ring and her yellow gold watch were given to William and Harry, respectively. William later passed the ring to his wife, Catherine Middleton. Her wedding dress was also given to her sons.\nIn addition to her will, Diana had written a letter of wishes in which she had asked for three-quarters of her personal property to be given to her sons, and dividing the remaining quarter (aside from the jewellery) among her 17 godchildren. Despite Diana's wishes, the executors (her mother and sister) \"petitioned the probate court for a 'variance' of the will\", and the letter of wishes was ignored \"because it did not contain certain language required by British law\". Eventually, one item from Diana's estate was given to each of her godchildren, while they would have received \u00a3100,000 each if a quarter of her estate had been divided between them. The variance also delayed the distribution of her estate to her sons until they reached age 30. (It had originally been set at age 25.) Diana also left her butler Paul Burrell around \u00a350,000 in cash.\nSubject of US government surveillance.\nIn 1999, after the submission of a Freedom of Information request by the Internet news service \"apbonline.com\", it was revealed that Diana had been placed under surveillance by the National Security Agency until her death, and the organisation kept a top secret file on her containing more than 1,000 pages. The contents of Diana's NSA file cannot be disclosed because of national security concerns. The NSA officials insisted Diana was not a \"target of [their] massive, worldwide electronic eavesdropping infrastructure\". Despite multiple inquiries for the files to be declassified\u2014with one of the notable ones being filed by Mohamed Al-Fayed\u2014the NSA has refused to release the documents.\nIn 2008, Ken Wharfe, a former bodyguard of Diana, claimed that her scandalous conversations with James Gilbey (commonly referred to as Squidgygate) were in fact recorded by the GCHQ, which intentionally released them on a \"loop\". People close to Diana believed the action was intended to defame her. Wharfe said Diana herself believed that members of the royal family were all being monitored, though he also stated that the main reason for it could be the potential threats of the IRA.\nAnniversaries, commemorations, and auctions.\nOn the first anniversary of Diana's death, people left flowers and bouquets outside the gates of Kensington Palace and a memorial service was held at Westminster Abbey. The royal family and Tony Blair and his family went to Crathie Kirk for private prayers, while Diana's family held a private memorial service at Althorp. All flags at Buckingham Palace and other royal residences were flown at half-mast on the Queen's orders. The Union Jack was first lowered to half-mast on the day of Diana's funeral and has set a precedent, as based on the previous protocol no flag could ever fly at half-mast over the palace \"even on the death of a monarch\". Since 1997, however, the Union Flag (but not the Royal Standard) has flown at half-mast upon the deaths of members of the royal family, and other times of national mourning.\nThe Concert for Diana at Wembley Stadium was held on 1 July 2007. The event, organised by Princes William and Harry, celebrated the 46th anniversary of their mother's birth and occurred a few weeks before the 10th anniversary of her death on 31 August. The proceeds from this event were donated to Diana's charities. On 31 August 2007, a service of thanksgiving for Diana took place in the Guards' Chapel. Among the 500 guests were members of the royal family and their relatives, members of the Spencer family, her godparents and godchildren, members of her wedding party, her close friends and aides, representatives from many of her charities, Gordon Brown, Tony Blair and John Major, and friends from the entertainment world such as David Frost, Elton John, and Cliff Richard.\nIn January 2017, a series of letters that Diana and other members of the royal family had written to a Buckingham Palace steward were sold as a part of a collection. The six letters written by Diana raised \u00a315,100. Another collection of 40 letters written by Diana between 1990 and 1997 were sold for \u00a367,900 at an auction in 2021. In 2023, two of Diana's friends put 32 highly personal letters and cards written by her while she was going through her divorce up for auction, announcing that proceeds of the sale would be donated to charities associated with them or Diana.\n\"Diana: Her Fashion Story\", an exhibition of gowns and suits worn by Diana, was announced to be opened at Kensington Palace in February 2017 as a tribute to mark her 20th death anniversary, with her favourite dresses created by numerous fashion designers being displayed until the next year. Other tributes planned for the anniversary included exhibitions at Althorp hosted by Diana's brother, Earl Spencer, a series of commemorating events organised by the Diana Award, as well as restyling Kensington Gardens and creating a new section called \"The White Garden\".\nLegacy.\nPublic image.\nDiana remains one of the most popular members of the royal family throughout history, and she continues to influence the younger generations of royals. She was a major presence on the world stage from her engagement to Charles until her death, and was often described as the \"world's most photographed woman\". She was noted for her compassion, style, charisma, and high-profile charity work, as well as her ill-fated marriage. Biographer Sarah Bradford commented, \"The only cure for her suffering would have been the love of the Prince of Wales ... the way in which he consistently denigrated her reduced her to despair.\" Despite all the marital issues and scandals, Diana continued to enjoy a high level of popularity in the polls while her husband was suffering from low levels of public approval. Diana's former private secretary Patrick Jephson described her as an organised and hardworking person, and pointed out Charles was not able to \"reconcile with his wife's extraordinary popularity\", a viewpoint supported by the biographer Tina Brown. He also said she was a tough boss who was \"equally quick to appreciate hard work\" but could also be defiant \"if she felt she had been the victim of injustice\". Diana's mother also defined her as a \"loving\" figure who could occasionally be \"tempestuous\". She was often described as a devoted mother to her children, who are believed to be influenced by her personality and way of life.\nIn the early years, Diana was often noted for her shy nature. Journalist Michael White perceived her as being \"smart\", \"shrewd and funny\". Those who communicated with her closely described her as a person who was led by \"her heart\". In an article for \"The Guardian\", Monica Ali believed that, despite being inexperienced and uneducated, Diana could handle the expectations of the royal family and overcome the difficulties and sufferings of her marital life. Ali also believed that she \"had a lasting influence on the public discourse, particularly in matters of mental health\" by discussing her eating disorder publicly. According to Tina Brown, in her early years Diana possessed a \"passive power\", a quality that in her opinion she shared with the Queen Mother and a trait that would enable her to instinctively use her appeal to achieve her goals.\nDiana was known for her encounters with sick and dying patients, and the poor and unwanted whom she used to comfort, an action that earned her more popularity. Known for her easygoing attitude, she reportedly hated formality in her inner circle, asking \"people not to jump up every time she enters the room\". Diana is often credited with widening the range of charity works carried out by the royal family in a more modern style. Eugene Robinson of \"The Washington Post\" wrote in an article that \"Diana imbued her role as royal princess with vitality, activism and, above all, glamour.\" Alicia Carroll of \"The New York Times\" described Diana as \"a breath of fresh air\" who was the main reason the royal family was known in the United States. In Anthony Holden's opinion, Diana was \"visibly reborn\" after her separation from Charles, a point in her life that was described by Holden as her \"moment of triumph\", which put her on an independent path to success.\nDiana's sudden death brought an unprecedented spasm of grief and mourning, and subsequently a crisis arose in the Royal Household. Andrew Marr said that by her death she \"revived the culture of public sentiment\". Her son William has stated that the outpouring of public grief after her death \"changed the British psyche, for the better\", while Alastair Campbell noted that it assisted in diminishing \"the stiff upper lip approach\". In 1981 and 1997 Diana was one of the runners-up for \"Time\" magazine's Person of the Year, and in 2020 the magazine included Diana's name on its list of 100 Women of the Year. She was chosen as the Woman of the Year 1987 for her efforts in destigmatising the conditions surrounding HIV/AIDS patients. In 2002 Diana ranked third on the BBC's poll of the \"100 Greatest Britons\", above the Queen and other British monarchs.\nDespite being regarded as an iconic figure and a popular member of the royal family, Diana was subject to criticism during her life. She was criticised by philosophy professor Anthony O'Hear who in his notes argued that she was unable to fulfill her duties, her reckless behaviour was damaging the monarchy, and she was \"self-indulgent\" in her philanthropic efforts. Following his remarks, charity organisations that were supported by Diana defended her, and Peter Luff called O'Hear's comments \"distasteful and inappropriate\". Further criticism surfaced as she was accused of using her public profile to benefit herself, which in return \"demeaned her royal office\". Diana's unique type of charity work, which sometimes included physical contact with people affected by serious diseases, occasionally had a negative reaction in the media.\nDiana's relationship with the press and the paparazzi has been described as \"ambivalent\". On different occasions she would complain about the way she was being treated by the media, mentioning that their constant presence in her proximity had made life impossible for her, whereas at other times she would seek their attention and hand information to reporters herself. Writing for \"The Guardian\", Peter Conrad suggested that it was Diana who let the journalists and paparazzi into her life as she knew they were the source of her power. This view was supported by Christopher Hitchens, who believed that \"in pursuit of a personal solution to an unhappy private life, she became an assiduous leaker to the press\". Tina Brown argued that Diana was in no way \"a vulnerable victim of media manipulation\", and she found it \"offensive to present the canny, resourceful Diana as a woman of no agency\". Former \"News of the World\" royal editor Clive Goodman, who later hacked the phones of Diana's sons on several occasions, stated in a court in 2014 that, in 1992, Diana sent a confidential directory containing numbers of senior members of the royal household to their office to get back at Prince Charles. Nevertheless, Diana also used the media's interest in her to shine light on her charitable efforts and patronages.\nSally Bedell Smith characterised Diana as unpredictable, egocentric, and possessive. Smith also argued that in her desire to do charity works, Diana was \"motivated by personal considerations, rather than by an ambitious urge to take on a societal problem\". Eugene Robinson, however, said that \"[Diana] was serious about the causes she espoused\". According to Sarah Bradford, Diana looked down on the House of Windsor, whom she reportedly viewed \"as jumped-up foreign princelings\" and called them \"the Germans\". Tony Blair characterised Diana as a manipulative person and \"extraordinarily captivating\".\nIn an article written for \"The Independent\" in 1998, journalist Yvonne Roberts observed the sudden change in people's opinion of Diana after her death from critical to complimentary, a viewpoint supported by Theodore Dalrymple, who also noticed the \"sudden shift\". Roberts also added that Diana was neither \"a saint\" nor \"a revolutionary\" figure, but \"may have encouraged some people\" to tackle issues such as landmines, AIDS and leprosy. While analysing the impact of Diana's death and her popularity from a gendered point of view, the British historian Ludmilla Jordanova said \"no human being can survive the complex forces that impact upon charismatic women.\" Jordanova also observed that it is \"Better to remember her by trying to decipher how emotions overshadow analysis and why women are the safeguards of humanitarian feelings.\" The author Anne Applebaum believed that Diana had not had any impact on public opinions posthumously; an idea supported by Jonathan Freedland of \"The Guardian\" who believed that Diana's memory and influence started to fade away in the years after her death, while Peter Conrad, another \"Guardian\" contributor, argued that even in \"a decade after her death, she is still not silent\", and Allan Massie of \"The Telegraph\" believed that Diana's sentiments \"continue to shape our society\". Writing for \"The Guardian\", Monica Ali described Diana as \"fascinating and flawed. Her legacy might be mixed, but it's not insubstantial. Her life was brief, but she left her mark\".\nFashion and style.\nDiana was a fashion icon whose style was emulated by women around the world. In 2012, \"Time\" included Diana on its All-Time 100 Fashion Icons list. Iain Hollingshead of \"The Telegraph\" wrote: \"[Diana] had an ability to sell clothes just by looking at them.\" An early example of the effect occurred during her courtship with Charles in 1980 when sales of Hunter Wellington boots skyrocketed after she was pictured wearing a pair on the Balmoral estate. According to designers and people who worked with Diana, she used fashion and style to endorse her charitable causes, express herself and communicate. Diana remains a prominent figure for her fashion style, impacting recent cultural and style trends.\nDiana's fashion combined classically royal expectations with contemporary fashion trends in Britain. While on diplomatic trips, her clothes and attire were chosen to match the destination countries' costumes, and while off-duty she used to wear loose jackets and jumpers. \"She was always very thoughtful about how her clothes would be interpreted, it was something that really mattered to her\", according to Anna Harvey, a former British \"Vogue\" editor and Diana's fashion mentor. Her fashion sense originally incorporated decorous and romantic elements, with pastel shades and lush gowns. Elements of her fashion rapidly became trends. She forwent certain traditions, such as wearing gloves during engagements, and sought to create a wardrobe that helped her to connect with the public. According to Donatella Versace who worked closely with Diana alongside her brother, Diana's interest and sense of curiosity about fashion grew significantly after her marital separation. Her style subsequently grew bolder and more businesslike, featuring structured skirt suits, sculptural gowns, and neutral tones designed to reflect attention toward her charity work.\nCatherine Walker was among Diana's favourite designers with whom she worked to create her \"royal uniform\". David Sassoon designed about 70 outfits for her from 1981 until 1997, many of which were influenced by his Jewish heritage. Among her favoured designers were Versace, Armani, Chanel, Dior, Gucci and Clarks. Her famous outfits include the \"Black Sheep Sweater\", the \"Revenge dress\", which she wore after Charles's admission of adultery, and the \"Travolta dress\". Copies of Diana's British \"Vogue\"-featured pink chiffon blouse by David and Elizabeth Emanuel, which appeared in the magazine on her engagement announcement day, sold in the millions. She appeared on three British \"Vogue\" covers during her lifetime and was featured on its October 1997 issue posthumously. Diana did her own makeup for events, and was accompanied by a hairstylist for public appearances. In the 1990s, she was frequently photographed clutching distinctive handbags manufactured by Gucci and Dior, which became known as the Gucci Diana and Lady Dior.\nFollowing the opening of an exhibition of Diana's clothes and dresses at Kensington Palace in 2017, Catherine Bennett of \"The Guardian\" said such exhibitions are among the suitable ways to commemorate public figures whose fashion styles were noted due to their achievements. The exhibition suggests to detractors who, like many other princesses, \"looking lovely in different clothes was pretty much her life's work\" which also brings interest in her clothing. Versace also pointed out that \"[she doesn't] think that anyone, before or after her, has done for fashion what Diana did\". One of Diana's favourite milliners, John Boyd, said \"Diana was our best ambassador for hats, and the entire millinery industry owes her a debt.\" Boyd's pink tricorn hat Diana wore for her honeymoon was later copied by milliners across the world and credited with rebooting an industry in decline for decades.\nMemorials.\nPermanent memorials to Diana include the Diana, Princess of Wales Memorial Fountain in Hyde Park, London; the Diana, Princess of Wales Memorial Playground in Kensington Gardens; the Diana, Princess of Wales Memorial Walk, a circular path between Kensington Gardens, Green Park, Hyde Park, and St. James's Park; the Diana Memorial Award, established in 1999 and later relaunched in 2007 by Gordon Brown; the Statue of Diana, Princess of Wales, in the Sunken Garden of Kensington Palace; and the Princess Diana Memorial in the garden of Schloss Cobenzl in Vienna, making it the first memorial dedicated to Diana in a German-speaking country. The \"Flame of Liberty\" was erected in 1989 on the Place de l'Alma in Paris above the entrance to the tunnel in which the fatal crash later occurred. It became an unofficial memorial to Diana. The Place de l'Alma was renamed Place Diana princesse de Galles in 2019. Following her death, several countries issued postage stamps commemorating Diana, including Armenia, Azerbaijan, Somalia, and Congo. A bronze plaque was unveiled by Earl Spencer at Northampton Guildhall in 2002 as a memorial to his sister.\nThere were two memorials inside Harrods department store, commissioned by Dodi Fayed's father, who owned the store from 1985 to 2010. The first memorial was a pyramid-shaped display containing photos of Diana and al-Fayed's son, a wine glass said to be from their last dinner, and a ring purchased by Dodi the day prior to the crash. The second, \"Innocent Victims\", unveiled in 2005, was a bronze statue of Fayed dancing with Diana on a beach beneath the wings of an albatross. In January 2018, it was announced that the statue would be returned to the al-Fayed family. Diana's granddaughters, Charlotte Elizabeth Diana (born 2015) and Lilibet Diana (born 2021), as well as her niece, Charlotte Diana Spencer (born 2012), are named after her.\nIn popular culture and art.\nBefore and after her death, Diana has been the subject of films and television series and depicted in contemporary art. The first biopics about Diana and Charles were ' and \"The Royal Romance of Charles and Diana\" that were broadcast on American TV channels on 17 and 20 September 1981, respectively. In December 1992, ABC aired ', a TV movie about marital discord between Diana and Charles. Actresses who have portrayed Diana include Serena Scott Thomas (in ', 1993), Julie Cox (in \"Princess in Love\", 1996), Amy Seccombe (in ', 1998), Michelle Duncan (in \"Whatever Love Means\", 2005), Genevieve O'Reilly (in ', 2007), Nathalie Brocker (in \"The Murder of Princess Diana\", 2007), Naomi Watts (in \"Diana\", 2013), Jeanna de Waal (in ', 2019\u20132021), Emma Corrin (2020) and Elizabeth Debicki (in \"The Crown\", 2022\u20132023), and Kristen Stewart (in \"Spencer\", 2021).\nIn 2017, William and Harry commissioned two documentaries to mark the 20th anniversary of her death. The first of the two, \"\", was broadcast on ITV and HBO on 24 July 2017. This film focuses on Diana's legacy and humanitarian efforts for causes such as AIDS, landmines, homelessness and cancer. The second documentary, \"Diana, 7 Days\", aired on 27 August on BBC and focused on Diana's death and the subsequent outpouring of grief.\nIn January 2023, rapper Ice Spice, whose looks were noted by the media to be reminiscent of Diana's, released a song named after Diana on her debut EP titled \"Like..?\". The song was later accompanied by a remix with rapper Nicki Minaj, which charted at #4 on the Billboard Hot 100.\nMadame Tussauds in London once had a wax statue of Diana. In 2025 a wax statue of Diana wearing a replica of her \u201crevenge dress\u201d was placed in Mus\u00e9e Gr\u00e9vin.\nTitles, styles, honours and arms.\nTitles and styles.\nDiana was born with the style of \"The Honourable Diana Frances Spencer\". When her father inherited the Earldom of Spencer in 1975, she became entitled to the style of \"Lady Diana Spencer\". During her marriage, Diana was styled as \"Her Royal Highness the Princess of Wales\". She additionally bore the titles Duchess of Rothesay, Duchess of Cornwall, Countess of Chester, and Baroness of Renfrew. After her divorce in 1996 and until her death, she was known as \"Diana, Princess of Wales\", without the style of \"Her Royal Highness\". Though popularly referred to as \"Princess Diana\", that style is incorrect and one she never held officially. She is still sometimes referred to in the media as \"Lady Diana Spencer\" or colloquially as \"Lady Di\". In a speech after her death, Tony Blair referred to Diana as \"the people's princess\". Discussions were also held with the Spencer family and the British royal family as to whether Diana's HRH style needed to be restored posthumously, but Diana's family decided that it would be against her wishes and, thus, no formal offer was made.\nHonours.\nHonorary military appointments.\nAs Princess of Wales, Diana held the following military appointments:\nShe relinquished these appointments following her divorce.\nAncestry.\nDiana was born into the British Spencer family, different branches of which hold the titles of Duke of Marlborough, Earl Spencer, Earl of Sunderland, and Baron Churchill. The Spencers claimed descent from a cadet branch of the powerful medieval Despenser family, but its validity is questioned. Her great-grandmother was Margaret Baring, a member of the German-British Baring family of bankers and the daughter of Edward Baring, 1st Baron Revelstoke. Diana's distant noble ancestors included the first Duke and Duchess of Marlborough. Diana and Charles were distantly related, as they were both descended from the House of Tudor through Henry VII of England. She was also descended from the House of Stuart through Charles II of England by Charles Lennox, 1st Duke of Richmond, and Henry FitzRoy, 1st Duke of Grafton, and his brother James II of England by Henrietta FitzJames. Other noble ancestors include Margaret Kerdeston, granddaughter of Michael de la Pole, 2nd Earl of Suffolk; Robert Devereux, 2nd Earl of Essex, an English nobleman and a favourite of Elizabeth I of England; and Edward Seymour, 1st Duke of Somerset, a descendant of Edward III of England through his son Lionel of Antwerp, 1st Duke of Clarence. Diana's Scottish roots came from her maternal grandmother, Lady Fermoy. Her Scottish ancestors included Alexander Gordon, 4th Duke of Gordon, and his wife Jane, and Archibald Campbell, 9th Earl of Argyll.\nDiana's American lineage came from her great-grandmother Frances Ellen Work, daughter of wealthy American stockbroker Franklin H. Work from Ohio, who was married to her great-grandfather James Roche, 3rd Baron Fermoy, an Irish peer. Diana's fourth great-grandmother in her direct maternal line, Eliza Kewark, was matrilineally of Indian descent. She is variously described in contemporary documents as \"a dark-skinned native woman\" and \"an Armenian woman from Bombay\".\nNotes, references and sources.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "24096", "revid": "43602564", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24096", "title": "Plough", "text": "Tool or farm implement\nA plough or (in the United States) plow (both pronounced ) is a farm tool for loosening or turning soil before sowing seed or planting. Ploughs were traditionally drawn by oxen and horses but modern ploughs are drawn by tractors. A plough may have a wooden, iron or steel frame with a blade attached to cut and loosen the soil. It has been fundamental to farming for most of history. The earliest ploughs had no wheels; such a plough was known to the Romans as an \"aratrum\". Celtic peoples first came to use wheeled ploughs in the Roman era.\nThe prime purpose of ploughing is to turn over the uppermost soil, bringing fresh nutrients to the surface while burying weeds and crop remains to decay. Trenches cut by the plough are called furrows. In modern use, a ploughed field is normally left to dry and then harrowed before planting. Ploughing and cultivating soil evens the content of the upper layer of soil, where most plant feeder roots grow.\nPloughs were initially powered by humans, but the use of farm animals is considerably more efficient. The earliest animals worked were oxen. Later, horses and mules were used in many areas. With the Industrial Revolution came the possibility of steam engines to pull ploughs. These in turn were superseded by internal-combustion-powered tractors in the early 20th century. The Petty Plough was a notable invention for ploughing out orchard strips in Australia in the 1930s.\nUse of the traditional plough has decreased in some areas threatened by soil damage and erosion. Used instead is shallower ploughing or other less-invasive conservation tillage.\nThe plough appears in one of the oldest surviving pieces of written literature, from the 3rd millennium BC, where it is personified and debating with another tool, the hoe, over which is better: a Sumerian disputation poem known as the Debate between the hoe and the plough.\nEtymology.\nIn older English, as in other Germanic languages, the plough was traditionally known by other names, e.g. Old English (modern dialectal \"\"), Old High German , , , Old Norse (Swedish ), and Gothic , all presumably referring to the ard (scratch plough).\nThe modern word comes from the Old Norse , and is therefore Germanic, but it appears relatively late (it is not attested in Gothic) and is thought to be a loan from one of the north Italic languages. The German cognate is \"pflug\", the Dutch \"ploeg\" and the Swedish \"plog\". In many Slavic languages and in Romanian the word is \"plug\". Words with the same root appeared with related meanings: in Raetic \"wheeled heavy plough\" (Pliny, \"Nat. Hist.\" 18, 172), and in Latin \"farm cart\", \"cart\", and \"cart box\". The word must have originally referred to the wheeled heavy plough, common in Roman north-western Europe by the 5th century AD.\nMany view \"plough\" as a derivative of the verb *\"plehan\" ~ *\"plegan\" 'to take responsibility' (cf. German \"pflegen\" 'to look after, nurse'), which would explain, for example, Old High German \"pfluog\" with its double meaning of 'plough' and 'livelihood'. Guus Kroonen (2013) proposes a \"v\u1e5bddhi\"-derivative of *\"plag/kk\u014dn\" 'sod' (cf. Dutch \"plag\" 'sod', Old Norse \"plagg\" 'cloth', Middle High German 'rag, patch, stain'). Finally, Vladimir Orel (2003) tentatively attaches \"plough\" to a PIE stem , which supposedly gave Old Armenian \"to dig\" and Welsh \"crack\", though the word may not be of Indo-European origin.\nParts.\nThe basic parts of the modern plough are:\nOther parts include the frog (or frame), runner, landside, shin, trashboard, and stilts (handles).\nOn modern ploughs and some older ploughs, the mould board is separate from the share and runner, so these parts can be replaced without replacing the mould board. Abrasion eventually wears out all parts of a plough that come into contact with the soil.\nHistory.\nHoeing.\nWhen agriculture was first developed, soil was turned using simple hand-held digging sticks and hoes. These were used in highly fertile areas, such as the banks of the Nile, where the annual flood rejuvenates the soil, to create drills (furrows) in which to plant seeds. Digging sticks, hoes and mattocks were not invented in any one place, and hoe cultivation must have been common everywhere agriculture was practised. Hoe-farming is the traditional tillage method in tropical or sub-tropical regions, which are marked by stony soils, steep slope gradients, predominant root crops, and coarse grains grown at wide intervals. While hoe-agriculture is best suited to these regions, it is used in some fashion everywhere.\nArd.\nSome ancient hoes, like the Egyptian \"mr\", were pointed and strong enough to clear rocky soil and make seed drills, which is why they are called \"hand-ards\". However, domestication of oxen in Mesopotamia and the Indus Valley Civilisation, perhaps as early as the 6th millennium BC, provided mankind with the draft power needed to develop the larger, animal-drawn true \"ard\" (or scratch plough). A ploughed field, from c.\u20092800 BCE, was also discovered at Kalibangan, India. A terracotta model of the early ards was found at Banawali, India, giving insight into the form of the tool used. The ard remained easy to replace if it became damaged and easy to replicate.\nThe earliest was the bow ard, which consists of a draft-pole (or beam) pierced by a thinner vertical pointed stick called the head (or body), with one end being the stilt (handle) and the other a share (cutting blade) dragged through the topsoil to cut a shallow furrow suitable for most cereal crops. The ard does not clear new land well, so hoes or mattocks had to be used to pull up grass and undergrowth, and a hand-held, coulter-like ristle could be made to cut deeper furrows ahead of the share. Because the ard left a strip of undisturbed earth between furrows, the fields were often cross-ploughed lengthwise and breadth-wise, which tended to form squarish Celtic fields. The heavy soils of Northern Europe were difficult to work with a scratch plough.:43 In fact, the ard is best suited to loamy or sandy soils that are naturally fertilised by annual flooding, as in the Nile Delta and Fertile Crescent, and to a lesser extent any other cereal-growing region with light or thin soil.\nMould-board ploughing.\nTo grow crops regularly in less-fertile areas, it was once believed that the soil must be turned to bring nutrients to the surface. A major advance for this type of farming was the turn plough, also known as the mould-board plough (UK), moldboard plow (U.S.), or frame-plough. A coulter (or skeith) could be added to cut vertically into the ground just ahead of the share (in front of the frog), a wedge-shaped cutting edge at the bottom front of the mould board with the landside of the frame supporting the under-share (below-ground component). The heavy iron moldboard plow was invented in China's Han Empire in the 1st and 2nd century, and from there it spread to the Netherlands, which led the Agricultural Revolution.20 The mould-board plough introduced in the 18th century was a major advance in technology. \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Chinese ploughs from Han times on fulfill all these conditions of efficiency nicely, which is presumably why the standard Han plough team consisted of two animals only, and later teams usually of a single animal, rather than the four, six or eight draught animals common in Europe before the introduction of the curved mould-board and other new principles of design in the 18th century. Though the mould-board plough first appeared in Europe in early medieval, if not in late Roman, times, pre-eighteenth century mould-boards were usually wooden and straight (Fig. 59). The enormous labour involved in pulling such a clumsy construction necessitated large plough-teams, and this meant that large areas of land had to be reserved as pasture. In China, where much less animal power was required, it was not necessary to maintain the mixed arable-pasture economy typical of Europe: fallows could be reduced and the arable area expanded, and a considerably larger population could be supported than on the same amount of land in Europe.\u2014\u200a\nThe upper parts of the frame carry (from the front) the coupling for the motive power (horses), the coulter, and the landside frame. Depending on the size of the implement, and the number of furrows it is designed to plough at one time, a fore-carriage with a wheel or wheels (known as a furrow wheel and support wheel) may be added to support the frame (wheeled plough). In the case of a single-furrow plough there is one wheel at the front and handles at the rear for the ploughman to maneuver it.\nWhen dragged through a field, the coulter cuts down into the soil and the share cuts horizontally from the previous furrow to the vertical cut. This releases a rectangular strip of sod to be lifted by the share and carried by the mould board up and over, so that the strip of sod (slice of the topsoil) that is being cut lifts and rolls over as the plough moves forward, dropping back upside down into the furrow and onto the turned soil from the previous run down the field. Each gap in the ground where the soil has been lifted and moved across (usually to the right) is called a furrow. The sod lifted from it rests at an angle of about 45 degrees in the adjacent furrow, up the back of the sod from the previous run.\nA series of ploughings run down a field leaves a row of sods partly in the furrows and partly on the ground lifted earlier. Visually, across the rows, there is the land on the left, a furrow (half the width of the removed strip of soil) and the removed strip almost upside-down lying on about half of the previous strip of inverted soil, and so on across the field. Each layer of soil and the gutter it came from forms a classic furrow. The mould-board plough greatly reduced the time needed to prepare a field and so allowed a farmer to work a larger area of land. In addition, the resulting pattern of low (under the mould board) and high (beside it) ridges in the soil forms water channels, allowing the soil to drain. In areas where snow build-up causes difficulties, this lets farmers plant the soil earlier, as the meltwater run-off drains away more quickly.\nParts.\nThere are five major parts of a mouldboard plough:\nThe share, landside and mould board are bolted to the frog, which is an irregular piece of cast iron at the base of the plough body, to which the soil-wearing parts are bolted.\nThe share is the edge that makes the horizontal cut to separate the furrow slice from the soil below. Conventional shares are shaped to penetrate soil efficiently: the tip is pointed downward to pull the share into the ground to a regular depth. The clearance, usually referred to as suction or down suction, varies with different makes and types of plough. Share configuration is related to soil type, particularly in the down suction or concavity of its lower surface. Generally three degrees of clearance or down suction are recognised: regular for light soil, deep for ordinary dry soil, and double-deep for clay and gravelly soils.\nAs the share wears away, it becomes blunt and the plough will require more power to pull it through the soil. A plough body with a worn share will not have enough \"suck\" to ensure it delves the ground to its full working depth.\nIn addition, the share has horizontal suction related to the amount its point is bent out of line with the land side. Down suction causes the plough to penetrate to proper depth when pulled forward, while horizontal suction causes the plough to create the desired width of furrow. The share is a plane part with a trapezoidal shape. It cuts the soil horizontally and lifts it. Common types are regular, winged-plane, bar-point, and share with mounted or welded point. The regular share conserves a good cut but is recommended on stone-free soils. The winged-plane share is used on heavy soil with a moderate amount of stones. The bar-point share can be used in extreme conditions (hard and stony soils). The share with a mounted point is somewhere between the last two types. Makers have designed shares of various shapes (trapesium, diamond, etc.) with bolted point and wings, often separately renewable. Sometimes the share-cutting edge is placed well in advance of the mould board to reduce the pulverizing action of the soil.\nThe mould board is the part of the plough that receives the furrow slice from the share. It is responsible for lifting and turning the furrow slice and sometimes for shattering it, depending on the type of mould board, ploughing depth and soil conditions. The intensity of this depends on the type of mould board. To suit different soil conditions and crop requirements, mould boards have been designed in different shapes, each producing its own furrow profile and surface finish, but essentially they still conform to the original plough body classification. The various types have been traditionally classified as general purpose, digger, and semi-digger, as described below.\nThe land side is the flat plate which presses against and transmits the lateral thrust of the plough bottom to the furrow wall. It helps to resist the side pressure exerted by the furrow slice on the mould board. It also helps to stabilise the plough while in operation. The rear bottom end of the landslide, which rubs against the furrow sole, is known as the heel. A heel iron is bolted to the end of the rear of the land side and helps to support the back of the plough. The land side and share are arranged to give a \"lead\" towards the unploughed land, so helping to sustain the correct furrow width. The land side is usually made of solid medium-carbon steel and is very short, except at the rear bottom of the plough. The heel or rear end of the rear land side may be subject to excessive wear if the rear wheel is out of adjustment, and so a chilled iron heel piece is frequently used. This is inexpensive and can be easily replaced. The land side is fastened to the frog by plough bolts.\nThe frog (standard) is the central part of the plough bottom to which the other components of the bottom are attached. It is an irregular piece of metal, which may be made of cast iron for cast iron ploughs or welded steel for steel ploughs. The frog is the foundation of the plough bottom. It takes the shock resulting from hitting rocks, and therefore should be tough and strong. The frog is in turn fastened to the plough frame.\nA runner extending from behind the share to the rear of the plough controls the direction of the plough, because it is held against the bottom land-side corner of the new furrow being formed. The holding force is the weight of the sod, as it is raised and rotated, on the curved surface of the mould board. Because of this runner, the mould board plough is harder to turn around than the scratch plough, and its introduction brought about a change in the shape of fields\u00a0\u2013 from mostly square fields into longer rectangular \"strips\" (hence the introduction of the furlong).\nIron ploughshare.\nAn advance on the basic design was the iron ploughshare, a replaceable horizontal cutting surface mounted on the tip of the share. The earliest ploughs with a detachable and replaceable share date from around 1000 BC in the Ancient Near East, and the earliest iron ploughshares from about 500 BC in China. Early mould boards were wedges that sat inside the cut formed by the coulter, turning over the soil to the side. The ploughshare spread the cut horizontally below the surface, so that when the mould board lifted it, a wider area of soil was turned over. Mould boards are known in Britain from the late 6th century onwards.\nTypes.\nThere are multiple types of ploughs available.\nPlough protective devices.\nWhen a plough hits a rock or other solid obstruction, serious damage may result unless the plough is equipped with some safety device. The damage may be bent or broken shares, bent standards, beams or braces.\nThe three basic types of safety devices used on mould-board ploughs are a spring release device in the plough drawbar, a trip beam construction on each bottom, and an automatic reset design on each bottom.\nThe spring release was used in the past almost universally on trailing-type ploughs with one to three or four bottoms. It is not practical on larger ploughs. When an obstruction is encountered, the spring release mechanism in the hitch permits the plough to uncouple from the tractor. When a hydraulic lift is used on the plough, the hydraulic hoses will also usually uncouple automatically when the plough uncouples. Most plough makers offer an automatic reset system for tough conditions or rocky soils. The re-set mechanism allows each body to move rearward and upward to pass without damage over obstacles such as rocks hidden below soil surface. A heavy leaf or coil-spring mechanism that holds the body in its working position under normal conditions resets the plough after the obstruction is passed.\nAnother type of auto-reset mechanism uses an oil (hydraulic) and gas accumulator. Shock loads cause the oil to compress the gas. When the gas expands again, the leg returns to its working ploughing position after passing over the obstacle. The simplest mechanism is a breaking (shear) bolt that needs replacement. Shear bolts that break when a plough body hits an obstruction are a cheaper overload protection device.\nTrip-beam ploughs are constructed with a hinge point in the beam. This is usually located some distance above the top of the plough bottom. The bottom is held in normal ploughing position by a spring-operated latch. When an obstruction is encountered, the entire bottom is released and hinges back and up to pass over the obstruction. It is necessary to back up the tractor and plough to reset the bottom. This construction is used to protect the individual bottoms. The automatic reset design has only recently been introduced on US ploughs, but has been used extensively on European and Australian ploughs. Here the beam is hinged at a point almost above the point of the share. The bottom is held in the normal position by a set of springs or a hydraulic cylinder on each bottom.\nWhen an obstruction is encountered, the plough bottom hinges back and up in such a way as to pass over the obstruction, without stopping the tractor and plough. The bottom automatically returns to normal ploughing position as soon as the obstruction is passed, without any interruption of forward motion. The automatic reset design permits higher field efficiencies since stopping for stones is practically eliminated. It also reduces costs for broken shares, beams and other parts. The fast resetting action helps produce a better job of ploughing, as large areas of unploughed land are not left, as they are when lifting a plough over a stone.\nLoy ploughing.\nManual loy ploughing was a form used on small farms in Ireland where farmers could not afford more, or on hilly ground that precluded horses. It was used up until the 1960s in poorer land. It suited the moist Irish climate, as the trenches formed by turning in the sods provided drainage. It allowed potatoes to be grown in bogs (peat swamps) and on otherwise unfarmed mountain slopes.\nHeavy ploughs.\nIn the basic mould-board plough, the depth of cut is adjusted by lifting against the runner in the furrow, which limited the weight of the plough to what a ploughman could easily lift. This limited the construction to a small amount of wood (although metal edges were possible). These ploughs were fairly fragile and unsuitable for the heavier soils of northern Europe. The introduction of wheels to replace the runner allowed the weight of the plough to increase, and in turn the use of a larger mould-board faced in metal. These \"heavy ploughs\" led to greater food production and eventually a marked population increase, beginning around AD 1000.\nBefore the Han dynasty (202 BC\u00a0\u2013 AD 220), Chinese ploughs were made almost wholly of wood except for the iron blade of the ploughshare. These were V-shaped iron pieces mounted on wooden blades and handles.18 By the Han period the entire ploughshare was made of cast iron. These are the earliest known heavy, mould-board iron ploughs. Several advancements such as the three-shared plow, the plow-and-sow implement, and the harrow were developed subsequently. By the end of the Song dynasty in 1279, Chinese ploughs had reached a state of development that would not be seen in Holland until the 17th century.\nThe Romans achieved a heavy-wheeled mould-board plough in the late 3rd and 4th century AD, for which archaeological evidence appears, for instance, in Roman Britain. The Greek and Roman mould-boards were usually tied to the bottom of the shaft with bits of rope, which made them more fragile than the Chinese ones, and iron mould-boards did not appear in Europe until the 10th century.17 The first indisputable appearance after the Roman period is in a northern Italian document of 643.50 Old words connected with the heavy plough and its use appear in Slavic, suggesting possible early use in that region.49ff General adoption of the carruca heavy plough in Europe seems to have accompanied adoption of the three-field system in the later 8th and early 9th centuries, leading to improved agricultural productivity per unit of land in northern Europe. This was accompanied by larger fields, known variously as carucates, ploughlands, and plough gates.\nImproved designs.\nThe basic plough with coulter, ploughshare and mould board remained in use for a millennium. The basic heavy plough worked well in the Northern European soil. It was strong enough to tear up the soil so that cross-ploughing was not needed. Because of this, and the fact that heavy ploughs needed up to eight oxen to pull, the fields became long and narrow. Too many oxen were difficult to turn frequently. Also, the weaker, ard (or scratch) plough necessitated a short and square-shaped field. The way that the plough allowed peasants to work the land meant that the nutrient-dense soil could yield better, more reliable, crops.\nMajor changes in design spread widely in the Age of Enlightenment, when there was rapid progress in design. Joseph Foljambe in Rotherham, England, in 1730, used new shapes based on the Rotherham plough, which covered the mould board with iron. Unlike the heavy plough, the Rotherham, or Rotherham swing plough consisted entirely of the coulter, mould board and handles. It was much lighter than earlier designs and became common in England. It may have been the first plough widely built in factories and commercially successful there.\nIn 1789 Robert Ransome, an iron founder in Ipswich, started casting ploughshares in a disused malting at St Margaret's Ditches. A broken mould in his foundry caused molten metal to come into contact with cold metal, making the metal surface extremely hard. This process, chilled casting, resulted in what Ransome advertised as \"self-sharpening\" ploughs. He received patents for his discovery.\nJames Small further advanced the design. Using mathematical methods, he eventually arrived at a shape cast from a single piece of iron, an improvement on the \"Scots plough\" of James Anderson of Hermiston. A single-piece cast-iron plough was also developed and patented by Charles Newbold in the United States. This was again improved on by Jethro Wood, a blacksmith of Scipio, New York, who made a three-part Scots plough that allowed a broken piece to be replaced. In 1833 John Lane invented a steel plough. Then in 1837 John Deere introduced a steel plough; it was so much stronger than iron designs that it could work soil in US areas previously thought unsuitable for farming.\nImprovements on this followed developments in metallurgy: steel coulters and shares with softer iron mould boards to prevent breakage, the chilled plough (an early example of surface-hardened steel), and eventually mould boards with faces strong enough to dispense with the coulter.\nBy the time of the early 1900s, the steel plough had many uses, shapes and names. The \"two horse breaking plough\" had a point and wing used to break the soil's surface and turn the dirt out and over. The \"shovel plough\" was used to lay off the rows. The \"harrow plough\" was used to cover the planted seed. The \"scratcher\" or \"geewhiz\" was used to deweed or cultivate the crop. The \"bulltongue\" and \"sweeps\" were used to plough the middle of the rows. All these metal plough points required being re-sharpened about every ten days, due to their use on rough and rocky ground.\nSingle-sided ploughing.\nThe first mould-board ploughs could only turn the soil over in one direction (conventionally to the right), as dictated by the shape of the mould board; therefore, a field had to be ploughed in long strips, or \"lands\". The plough was usually worked clockwise around each land, ploughing the long sides and being dragged across the short sides without ploughing. The length of the strip was limited by the distance oxen (later horses) could comfortably work without rest, and their width by the distance the plough could conveniently be dragged. These distances determined the traditional size of the strips: a furlong, (or \"furrow's length\", ) by a chain ()\u00a0\u2013 an area of one acre (about 0.4 hectares); this is the origin of the acre. The one-sided action gradually moved soil from the sides to the centre line of the strip. If the strip was in the same place each year, the soil built up into a ridge, creating the ridge and furrow topography still seen in some ancient fields.\nTurn-wrest plough.\nThe turn-wrest plough allows ploughing to be done to either side. The mould board is removable, turning to the right for one furrow, then being moved to the other side of the plough to turn to the left. (The coulter and ploughshare are fixed.) Thus adjacent furrows can be ploughed in opposite directions, allowing ploughing to proceed continuously along the field and so avoid the ridge\u2013furrow topography.\nReversible plough.\nThe reversible (or roll-over) plough has two mould-board ploughs mounted back to back, one turning right, the other left. While one works the land, the other is borne upside-down in the air. At the end of each row the paired ploughs are turned over so that the other can be used along the next furrow, again working the field in a consistent direction.\nThese ploughs date back to the days of the steam engine and the horse. In almost universal use on farms, they have right and left-handed mould boards, enabling them to work up and down the same furrow. Reversible ploughs may either be mounted or semi-mounted and are heavier and more expensive than right-handed models, but have the great advantage of leaving a level surface that facilitates seedbed preparation and harvesting. Very little marking out is necessary before ploughing can start; idle running on the headland is minimal compared with conventional ploughs.\nDriving a tractor with furrow-side wheels in the furrow bottom provides the most efficient line of draught between tractor and plough. It is also easier to steer the tractor; driving with the front wheel against the furrow wall will keep the front furrow at the correct width. This is less satisfactory when using a tractor with wide front tyres. Although these make better use of the tractor power, the tyres may compact some of the last furrow slice turned on the previous run. The problem is overcome by using a furrow widener or longer mould board on the rear body. The latter moves the soil further towards the ploughed land, leaving more room for the tractor wheels on the next run.\nDriving with all four wheels on unploughed land is another solution to the problem of wide tyres. Semi-mounted ploughs can be hitched in a way that allows the tractor to run on unbroken land and pull the plough in correct alignment without any sideways movement (crabbing).\nRiding and multiple-furrow ploughs.\nEarly steel ploughs were walking ploughs, directed by a ploughman holding handles on either side of the plough. Steel ploughs were so much easier to draw through the soil that constant adjustment of the blade to deal with roots or clods was no longer necessary, as the plough could easily cut through them. Not long after that the first riding ploughs appeared, whose wheels kept the plough at an adjustable level above the ground, while the ploughman sat on a seat instead of walking. Direction was now controlled mostly through the draught team, with levers allowing fine adjustments. This led quickly to riding ploughs with multiple mould boards, which dramatically increased ploughing performance.\nA single draught horse can normally pull a single-furrow plough in clean light soil, but in heavier soils two horses are needed, one walking on the land and one in the furrow. Ploughs with two or more furrows call for more than two horses, and usually one or more have to walk on the ploughed sod, which is hard going for them and means they tread newly ploughed land down. It is usual to rest such horses every half-hour for about ten minutes.\nImproving metallurgy and design.\nJohn Deere, an Illinois blacksmith, noted that ploughing many sticky, non-sandy soils might benefit from modifications in the design of the mould board and the metals used. A polished needle would enter leather and fabric with greater ease and a polished pitchfork also require less effort. Looking for a polished, slicker surface for a plough, he experimented with portions of saw blades, and by 1837 was making polished, cast steel ploughs.\nBalance plough.\nThe invention of the mobile steam engine allowed steam power to be applied to ploughing from about 1850. In Europe, soil conditions were often too soft to support the weight of a traction engine. Instead, counterbalanced, wheeled ploughs, known as \"balance ploughs\", were drawn by cables across the fields by pairs of ploughing engines on opposite field edges, or by a single engine drawing directly towards it at one end and drawing away from it via a pulley at the other. The balance plough had two sets of facing ploughs arranged so that when one was in the ground, the other was lifted in the air. When pulled in one direction, the trailing ploughs were lowered onto the ground by the tension on the cable. When the plough reached the edge of the field, the other engine pulled the opposite cable, and the plough tilted (balanced), putting the other set of shares into the ground, and the plough worked back across the field.\nOne set of ploughs was right-handed and the other left-handed, allowing continuous ploughing along the field, as with the turn-wrest and reversible ploughs. The man credited with inventing the ploughing engine and associated balance plough in the mid-19th century was John Fowler, an English agricultural engineer and inventor. However the Fisken brothers demonstrated (and went on to patent) a balance plough about 4 years before Fowler. One notable producer of steam-powered ploughs was J.Kemna of Eastern Prussia, who became the \"leading steam plough company on the European continent and penetrated the monopoly of English companies on the world market\" at the beginning of the 20th century.\nStump-jump plough.\nThe stump-jump plough was invented in 1876 by Australian Richard Bowyer Smith alongside his brother Clarence Herbert Smith. It is designed to break up new farming land that contains tree stumps and rocks expensive to remove. It uses a moveable weight to hold the ploughshare in position. When a tree stump or rock is encountered, the ploughshare is thrown up clear of the obstacle, to avoid breaking its harness or linkage. Ploughing can continue when the weight is returned to the earth.\nA simpler, later system uses a concave disc (or pair of them) set at a wide angle to the direction of progress, using a concave shape to hold the disc into the soil\u00a0\u2013 unless something hard strikes the circumference of the disc, causing it to roll up and over the obstruction. As this is dragged forward, the sharp edge of the disc cuts the soil, and the concave surface of the rotating disc lifts and throws the soil to the side. It does not work as well as a mould-board plough (but this is not seen as a drawback, because it helps to fight wind erosion), but it does lift and break up the soil (\"see\" disc harrow).\nModern ploughs.\nModern ploughs are usually multiply reversible, mounted on a tractor with a three-point linkage. These commonly have from two to as many as seven mould boards\u00a0\u2013 and semi-mounted ploughs (whose lifting is assisted by a wheel about halfway along their length) can have as many as 18. The tractor's hydraulics are used to lift and reverse the implement and to adjust furrow width and depth. The plougher still has to set the draughting linkage from the tractor, so that the plough keeps the proper angle in the soil. This angle and depth can be controlled automatically by modern tractors. As a complement to the rear plough a two or three mould-board plough can be mounted on the front of the tractor if it is equipped with front three-point linkage.\nSpecialist ploughs.\nChisel plough.\nThe \"chisel plough\" is a common tool for deep tillage (prepared land) with limited soil disruption. Its main function is to loosen and aerate the soils, while leaving crop residue on top. This plough can be used to reduce the effects of soil compaction and to help break up ploughpan and hardpan. Unlike many other ploughs, the chisel will not invert or turn the soil. This feature has made it a useful addition to no-till and low-till farming practices that attempt to maximise the erosion-preventing benefits of keeping organic matter and farming residues present on the soil surface throughout the year. Thus the chisel plough is considered by some to be more sustainable than other types of plough, such as the mould-board plough.\nChisel ploughs are becoming more popular as a primary tillage tool in row-crop farming areas. Basically the chisel plough is a heavy-duty field cultivator intended to operate at depths from to as much as . However some models may run much deeper. Each individual plough or shank is typically set from to apart. Such a plough can meet significant soil drag: a tractor of sufficient power and traction is required. When ploughing with a chisel plough, per shank is required, depending on depth.\nPull-type chisel ploughs are made in working widths from about up to . They are tractor-mounted, and working depth is hydraulically controlled. Those more than about wide may be equipped with folding wings to reduce transport width. Wider machines may have the wings supported by individual wheels and hinge joints to allow flexing of the machine over uneven ground. The wider models usually have a wheel each side to control working depth. Three-point hitch-mounted units are made in widths from about .\nCultivators are often similar in form to chisel ploughs, but their goals are different. Cultivator teeth work near the surface, usually for weed control, whereas chisel plough shanks work deep under the surface; therefore, cultivation takes much less power per shank than does chisel ploughing.\nCountry plough.\nThe country plough is a slanted plough. The most common plough in India, it is recommended for crops like groundnut after the use of a tractor.\nRidging plough.\nA ridging plough is used for crops such as potatoes or scallions grown buried in ridges of soil, using a technique called \"ridging\" or \"hilling\". A ridging plough has two back-to-back mould boards cutting a deep furrow on each pass with high ridges either side. The same plough may be used to split the ridges to harvest the crop.\nScots hand plough.\nThis variety of ridge plough is notable for having a blade pointing towards the operator. It is used solely by human effort rather than with animal or machine assistance and pulled backwards by the operator, requiring great physical effort. It is particularly used for second breaking of ground and for potato planting. It is found in Shetland, some western crofts, and more rarely Central Scotland, typically on holdings too small or poor to merit the use of animals.\nIce plough.\nFunctionally operating as a saw, but pulled as a plough, this device was created in the 19th century and was mainly used in Scandinavia, as part of the ice export industry, creating blocks of ice to ship to Great Britain.\nMole plough.\nThe mole plough allows under-drainage to be installed without trenches, or breaks up the deep impermeable soil layers that impede it. It is a deep plough with a torpedo or wedge-shaped tip and a narrow blade connecting it to the body. When dragged over ground, it leaves a channel deep under it that acts as a drain. Modern mole ploughs may also bury a flexible perforated plastic drain pipe as they go, making a more permanent drain\u00a0\u2013 or may be used to lay pipes for water supply or other purposes. Similar machines, so-called pipe-and-cable-laying ploughs, are even used under the sea for laying cables or for preparing the earth for side-scan sonar in a process used in oil exploration.\nCompacting a tennis ball-sized sample from moling depth by hand, then pushing a pencil through is a simple check to find if the subsoil is in the right condition for mole ploughing. If the hole stays intact without splitting the ball, the soil is in ideal condition for the mole plough.\nHeavy land requires draining to reduce its water content to a level efficient for plant growth. Heavy soils usually have a system of permanent drains, using perforated plastic or clay pipes that discharge into a ditch. The small tunnels (mole drains) that mole ploughs form lie at a depth of up to at an angle to the pipe drains. Water from the mole drains seeps into the pipes and runs along them into a ditch.\nMole ploughs are usually trailed and pulled by a crawler tractor, but lighter models for use on the three-point linkage of powerful four-wheel drive tractors are also made. A mole plough has a strong frame that slides along the ground when the machine is at work. A heavy leg, similar to a sub-soiler leg, is attached to the frame and a circular section with a larger diameter expander on a flexible link is bolted to the leg. The bullet-shaped share forms a tunnel in the soil about diameter and the expander presses the soil outwards to form a long-lasting drainage channel.\nPara-plough.\nThe para-plough, or paraplow, loosens compacted soil layers 3 to 4 dm (12 to 16 inches) deep while maintaining high surface residue levels. It is primary tillage implement for deep ploughing without inversion.\nSpade plough.\nThe spade plough is designed to cut the soil and turn it on its side, minimising damage to earthworms, soil microorganism and fungi. This increases the sustainability and long-term fertility of the soil.\nSwitch plough.\nUsing a bar with square shares mounted perpendicularly and a pivot point to change the bar's angle, the switch plough allows ploughing in either direction. It is best in previously-worked soils, as the ploughshares are designed more to turn the soil over than for deep tillage. At the headland, the operator pivots the bar (and so the ploughshares) to turn the soil to the opposite side of the direction of travel. Switch ploughs are usually lighter than roll-over ploughs, requiring less horsepower to operate.\nEffects of mould-board ploughing.\nMould-board ploughing in cold and temperate climates, down to , aerates the soil by loosening it. It incorporates crop residues, solid manures, limestone, and commercial fertilisers alongside oxygen, reducing nitrogen losses by denitrification, accelerating mineralisation, and raising short-term nitrogen availability for turning organic matter into humus. It erases wheel tracks and ruts from harvesting equipment. It controls many perennial weeds and delays the growth of others until spring. It accelerates spring soil warming and water evaporation due to lower residues on the soil surface. It facilitates seeding with a lighter seed, controls many crop enemies (slugs, crane flies, seedcorn maggots-bean seed flies, borers), and raises the number of \"soil-eating\" earthworms (endogic), but deters vertical-dwelling earthworms (anecic).\nPloughing leaves little crop residue on the surface that might otherwise reduce both wind and water erosion. Over-ploughing can lead to the formation of hardpan. Typically, farmers break that up with a subsoiler, which acts as a long, sharp knife slicing through the hardened layer of soil deep below the surface. Soil erosion due to improper land and plough utilisation is possible. Contour ploughing mitigates soil erosion by ploughing across a slope, along elevation lines. Alternatives to ploughing, such as a no-till method, have the potential to build soil levels and humus. These may be suitable for smaller, intensively cultivated plots and for farming on poor, shallow or degraded soils that ploughing would further degrade.\nSocial effects.\nUse of the mouldboard plough in Europe typically required cooperation between multiple households, since four to eight oxen (later horses) were needed to pull the heavy instrument through the soil, and this was more than a typical peasant household could muster on its own. Thus, the introduction of the mouldboard plough made farming more of a communal effort and contributed to the rise of the manorial system in Northern Europe. It also led to farming being seen as men's work, because of the weight of the instrument. Historian William H. McNeill suggested that the experience of cooperation with non-family members as a consequence of mouldboard tillage was conducive to the prevalence of the corporation in medieval Europe; peasants who engaged in this kind of work, including those who migrated to towns, were used to the idea of entering into agreements with people outside of their family and more readily formed corporations.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "24097", "revid": "1846993", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24097", "title": "Principle of bivalence", "text": "Classical logic of two values, either true or false\nIn logic, the semantic principle (or law) of bivalence states that every declarative sentence expressing a proposition (of a theory under inspection) has exactly one truth value, either true or false. A logic satisfying this principle is called a two-valued logic or bivalent logic.\nIn formal logic, the principle of bivalence becomes a property that a semantics may or may not possess. It is not the same as the law of excluded middle, however, and a semantics may satisfy that law without being bivalent.\nThe principle of bivalence is studied in philosophical logic to address the question of which natural-language statements have a well-defined truth value. Sentences that predict events in the future, and sentences that seem open to interpretation, are particularly difficult for philosophers who hold that the principle of bivalence applies to all declarative natural-language statements. Many-valued logics formalize ideas that a realistic characterization of the notion of consequence requires the admissibility of premises that, owing to vagueness, temporal or quantum indeterminacy, or reference-failure, cannot be considered classically bivalent. Reference failures can also be addressed by free logics.\nRelationship to the law of the excluded middle.\nThe principle of bivalence is related to the law of excluded middle though the latter is a syntactic expression of the language of a logic of the form \"P \u2228 \u00acP\". The difference between the principle of bivalence and the law of excluded middle is important because there are logics that validate the law but not the principle. For example, the three-valued Logic of Paradox (LP) validates the law of excluded middle, and yet also validates the law of non-contradiction, \u00ac(P \u2227 \u00acP), and its intended semantics is not bivalent. In intuitionistic logic the law of excluded middle does not hold. In classical two-valued logic both the law of excluded middle and the law of non-contradiction hold.\nClassical logic.\nThe intended semantics of classical logic is bivalent, but this is not true of every semantics for classical logic. In Boolean-valued semantics (for classical propositional logic), the truth values are the elements of an arbitrary Boolean algebra, \"true\" corresponds to the maximal element of the algebra, and \"false\" corresponds to the minimal element. Intermediate elements of the algebra correspond to truth values other than \"true\" and \"false\". The principle of bivalence holds only when the Boolean algebra is taken to be the two-element algebra, which has no intermediate elements.\nAssigning Boolean semantics to classical predicate calculus requires that the model be a complete Boolean algebra because the universal quantifier maps to the infimum operation, and the existential quantifier maps to the supremum; this is called a Boolean-valued model. All finite Boolean algebras are complete.\nSuszko's thesis.\nIn order to justify his claim that true and false are the only logical values, Roman Suszko (1977) observes that every structural Tarskian many-valued propositional logic can be provided with a bivalent semantics.\nCriticisms.\nFuture contingents.\nA famous example is the \"contingent sea battle\" case found in Aristotle's work, \"De Interpretatione\", chapter 9:\n Imagine P refers to the statement \"There will be a sea battle tomorrow.\"\nThe principle of bivalence here asserts:\n Either it is true that there will be a sea battle tomorrow, or it is false that there will be a sea battle tomorrow.\nAristotle denies to embrace bivalence for such future contingents; Chrysippus, the Stoic logician, did embrace bivalence for this and all other propositions. The controversy continues to be of central importance in both the philosophy of time and the philosophy of logic.\nOne of the early motivations for the study of many-valued logics has been precisely this issue. In the early 20th century, the Polish formal logician Jan \u0141ukasiewicz proposed three truth-values: the true, the false and the \"as-yet-undetermined\". This approach was later developed by Arend Heyting and L. E. J. Brouwer; see \u0141ukasiewicz logic.\nIssues such as this have also been addressed in various temporal logics, where one can assert that \"\"Eventually\", either there will be a sea battle tomorrow, or there won't be.\" (Which is true if \"tomorrow\" eventually occurs.)\nVagueness.\nSuch puzzles as the Sorites paradox and the related continuum fallacy have raised doubt as to the applicability of classical logic and the principle of bivalence to concepts that may be vague in their application. Fuzzy logic and some other multi-valued logics have been proposed as alternatives that handle vague concepts better. Truth (and falsity) in fuzzy logic, for example, comes in varying degrees. Consider the following statement in the circumstance of sorting apples on a moving belt:\n This apple is red.\nUpon observation, the apple is an undetermined color between yellow and red, or it is mottled both colors. Thus the color falls into neither category \" red \" nor \" yellow \", but these are the only categories available to us as we sort the apples. We might say it is \"50% red\". This could be rephrased: it is 50% true that the apple is red. Therefore, P is 50% true, and 50% false. Now consider:\n This apple is red and it is not-red.\nIn other words, P and not-P. This violates the law of noncontradiction and, by extension, bivalence. However, this is only a partial rejection of these laws because P is only partially true. If P were 100% true, not-P would be 100% false, and there is no contradiction because P and not-P no longer holds.\nHowever, the law of the excluded middle is retained, because P and not-P implies P or not-P, since \"or\" is inclusive. The only two cases where P and not-P is false (when P is 100% true or false) are the same cases considered by two-valued logic, and the same rules apply.\nExample of a 3-valued logic applied to vague (undetermined) cases: Kleene 1952 (\u00a764, pp.\u00a0332\u2013340) offers a 3-valued logic for the cases when algorithms involving partial recursive functions may not return values, but rather end up with circumstances \"u\" = undecided. He lets \"t\" = \"true\", \"f\" = \"false\", \"u\" = \"undecided\" and redesigns all the propositional connectives. He observes that:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;We were justified intuitionistically in using the classical 2-valued logic, when we were using the connectives in building primitive and general recursive predicates, since there is a decision procedure for each general recursive predicate; i.e. the law of the excluded middle is proved intuitionistically to apply to general recursive predicates.\nNow if Q(x) is a partial recursive predicate, there is a decision procedure for Q(x) on its range of definition, so the law of the excluded middle or excluded \"third\" (saying that, Q(x) is either t or f) applies intuitionistically on the range of definition. But there may be no algorithm for deciding, given x, whether Q(x) is defined or not. [...] Hence it is only classically and not intuitionistically that we have a law of the excluded fourth (saying that, for each x, Q(x) is either t, f, or u).\nThe third \"truth value\" u is thus not on par with the other two t and f in our theory. Consideration of its status will show that we are limited to a special kind of truth table\".\nThe following are his \"strong tables\":\nFor example, if a determination cannot be made as to whether an apple is red or not-red, then the truth value of the assertion Q: \" This apple is red \" is \" u \". Likewise, the truth value of the assertion R \" This apple is not-red \" is \" u \". Thus the AND of these into the assertion Q AND R, i.e. \" This apple is red AND this apple is not-red \" will, per the tables, yield \" u \". And, the assertion Q OR R, i.e. \" This apple is red OR this apple is not-red \" will likewise yield \" u \".\nSelf-referential statements.\nSome self-referential statements like the one featured in the liar's paradox can not be assigned definite truth values of neither \"\"True\" nor \"False\"\" without running into contradictions. The liar paradox can be stated as: &lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;A: This statement (A) is false.If (A) is true, then \"This statement is false\" is true. Therefore, (A) must be false. The hypothesis that (A) is true leads to the conclusion that (A) is false, a contradiction.\nIf (A) is false, then \"This statement is false\" is false. Therefore, (A) must be true. The hypothesis that (A) is false leads to the conclusion that (A) is true, another contradiction. Either way, (A) is both true and false, which is a paradox.\nSome possible resolutions of this paradox include the rejection of Boolean logic (and thus the principle of bivalence) and its replacement with any many-valued logic like fuzzy logic, in which the truth value of a statement may be any real number between 0 (denoting \"\"Falsehood\") and 1 (denoting \"Truth\"\").\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "24098", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24098", "title": "Pendragon Pass", "text": ""}
{"id": "24099", "revid": "12375899", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24099", "title": "Pope Clement II", "text": "Head of the Catholic Church from 1046 to 1047\nPope Clement II (; born Suidger von Morsleben-Horneburg; died 9 October 1047) was head of the Catholic Church and ruler of the Papal States from 25 December 1046 until his death in 1047. He was the first in a series of reform-minded popes from Germany. Suidger was the bishop of Bamberg. In 1046, he accompanied King Henry III of Germany, when at the request of laity and clergy of Rome, Henry went to Italy and summoned the Council of Sutri, which deposed Benedict IX and Sylvester III, and accepted the resignation of Gregory VI. Henry suggested Suidger as the next pope, and he was then elected, taking the name of Clement II. Clement then proceeded to crown Henry as emperor. Clement's brief tenure as pope saw the enactment of more stringent prohibitions against simony.\nEarly career.\nBorn in Hornburg, Duchy of Saxony, in what is now Lower Saxony, Germany, he was the son of Count Konrad von Morsleben-Horneburg and his wife, Amulrad von Meyendorf. In 1040, he became Bishop of Bamberg.\nIn the autumn of 1046, there were three rival claimants to the papacy, in St. Peter's, the Lateran, and St. Mary Major's. Two of them, Benedict IX and Sylvester III, represented rival factions of the nobility. The third, Pope Gregory VI, in order to free the city from the House of Tusculum, and Benedict's scandalous lifestyle, had paid Benedict money in exchange for his resignation. Regardless of the motives, the transaction bore the appearance of simony. Questions regarding the legitimacy of any of them could undermine the validity of a coronation of Henry as Holy Roman Emperor. King Henry crossed the Alps at the head of a large army and accompanied by a retinue of the secular and ecclesiastical princes of the empire, for the twofold purpose of receiving the imperial crown and of restoring order.\nPapacy.\nIn 1046, Suidiger accompanied King Henry on his campaign to Italy and in December, participated in the Council of Sutri, which deposed former Benedict IX and Sylvester III and persuaded Gregory VI to resign. Henry nominated Suidger for the papacy and the council elected him, making him the first pope placed on the throne by the power of the German emperors. Suidger insisted upon retaining the bishopric of his see, partly for needed financial support, and partly lest the turbulent Romans should before long send him back to Bamberg. Suidger took the name Clement II. Immediately after his election, Henry and the new pope travelled to Rome, where Clement was enthroned. He then crowned Henry III as emperor of the Holy Roman Empire.\nClement's election as pope was later criticized by the reform party within the papal curia due to the royal involvement and the fact that the new bishop of Rome was already bishop of another diocese. Contrary to later practice, Clement kept his old see, governing both Rome and Bamberg simultaneously. Clement's first pontifical act was to crown Henry and Agnes of Poitou. He bestowed on the Emperor the title and diadem of a Roman patrician, a dignity which was commonly understood to give the bearer the right of indicating the person to be chosen pope.\nClement II's short pontificate, starting with the Roman synod of 1047, initiated an improvement in the state of affairs within the Roman Church, particularly by enacting decrees against simony. A dispute for precedence among the Sees of Ravenna, Milan, and Aquileia was settled in favour of Ravenna.\nDeath.\nClement accompanied Henry III in triumphal progress through southern Italy and placed Benevento under an interdict for refusing to open its gates to them. Proceeding with Henry to Germany, he canonized Wiborada, a nun of St. Gall, martyred by the Hungarians in 925. On his way back to Rome, he died near Pesaro on 9 October 1047. His corpse was transferred back to Bamberg, which he had loved dearly, and interred in the western choir of the Bamberg Cathedral. His is the only tomb of a pope north of the Alps.\nA toxicologic examination of his remains in the mid-20th century confirmed centuries-old rumors that the pope had been poisoned with lead sugar. It is not clear, however, whether he was murdered or whether the lead sugar was used as medicine.\nReferences.\n\u00a0This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain:\u00a0"}
{"id": "24100", "revid": "1293425555", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24100", "title": "Pope Clement III", "text": "Head of the Catholic Church from 1187 to 1191\n \nPope Clement III (; 1130\u00a0\u2013 20 March 1191), was the head of the Catholic Church and ruler of the Papal States from 19 December 1187 to his death in 1191. He ended the conflict between the Papacy and the city of Rome, by allowing the election of magistrates, which reinstalled the Papacy back in the city after a six-year exile. Clement, faced with a deplete college of cardinals, created thirty-one cardinals over three years, the most since Hadrian IV. He died 20 March 1191 and was quickly replaced by Celestine III.\nFamily.\nPaolo Scolari was born in 1130 in Rome, at the \"Rione\" of the Pigna, into a family of high social level but not noble, son of Giovanni and of his consort Maria and according to some scholars related to the mother of Pope Innocent III. Pope Alexander III appointed him archpriest of the patriarchal Liberian Basilica, cardinal-deacon of Sergio e Bacco, and finally cardinal bishop of Palestrina in December 1180.\nElection.\nPaolo was elected as the new Pope on December 19, 1187, two days after the death of Gregory VIII. He was the cardinals' second choice, but their first choice, cardinal Theobald of Ostia, refused the papal throne. Clement was the second Roman pope since Innocent II.\nTwo months before being elected pope, Paolo Scolari had been rejected as a papal candidate by the cardinals due to being in poor health. Even during his office as pope his health was a cause of concern. An instance of his poor health was six months after he was elected in June 1188 the cardinals thought Clement was going to die and had pope-elect Cardinal Bishop Teobald of Ostia on hand for when Clement died. Though Clement was old and ill, he was still elected as pope and could have something to do with the small number of cardinals, only eight Cardinals and three of them having been known Romans, at the election of Clement. The electors of Clement may have been aiming for the possibility of returning the curia to Rome, which would in fact happen during his time as pope.\nPapacy.\nShortly after his accession at the conclusion of the papal election of December 1187, Clement succeeded in allaying the conflict which had existed for half a century between the popes and the citizens of Rome, with an agreement by which the citizens were allowed to elect their magistrates, while the nomination of the governor of the city remained in the hands of the pope. In March 1188 Clement III had agreed that the Roman Church would reimburse numerous Roman citizens who have not received any \"beneficia\" since Pope Lucius III, a probable cause of the conflict between the pope and Romans. On 31 May 1188 he concluded a treaty with the Romans which removed long standing difficulties, thus returning the papacy to Rome. Clement wrote a letter to Archbishop of Toledo, Gonzalo Perez, where he bemoaned the power conflicts and political division among Spain's Christian population. The pope emphasized in this letter that the Christian war in Spain, the Reconquista, against Muslims was comparable to the Crusades in the Holy Land and urged for effective unity and the formation of a powerful army to combat them.\nClement also inherited a depleted college of cardinals, consisting of no more than twenty cardinals. He orchestrated three series of promotions (March 1188, May 1189 and October 1190) that resulted in thirty-one cardinals. This number of cardinals had not been seen since 1159, under Hadrian IV. During Clement's papacy, the majority of cardinals were Romans, possibly due to Clement III being Roman as well and wanting to fill the Church with Romans.\nActions.\nClement sent the Archbishop of Tyre, Josias, to persuade King Henry II of England and King Philip II of France to undertake the Third Crusade.\nThe relationship of Romans and Sicily had been turbulent and the Romans were increasingly becoming mad at the pope before 1188 which had led to two rival factions in the college of cardinals, with one faction becoming closer to forming an alliance with the king of Sicily, and the other side wanting reconciliation with the emperor.\nIn April 1189, Clement ended the conflict with Frederick I Barbarossa. In spite of agreeing to crown Henry VI as Holy Roman Emperor, Clement III angered him by bestowing Sicily on Tancred, son of Roger III, Duke of Apulia. The crisis was acute when the Pope died in the latter part of March 1191.\nClement, after Alexander III prohibited supplying military information and material to Muslims, had a series of decretals increased the banned items people would be allowed to trade and called for an embargo with the Islamic world.\nClement settled a controversy with King William I of Scotland concerning the choice of the archbishop of St Andrews, and on 13 March 1188 removed the Scottish church from the legatine jurisdiction of the Archbishop of York, thus making it independent of all save Rome.\nDeath.\nClement died on 10 April 1191, Celestine III who was 85, was elected the day of Clements death unanimously. Celestine was not involved with either of the sides or factions that were the 'imperialists' nor the 'Sicilians'.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\nAttribution:"}
{"id": "24101", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24101", "title": "Pope Clement IV", "text": "Head of the Catholic Church from 1265 to 1268\n \nPope Clement IV (; c. 23 November 1190 \u2013 29 November 1268), born Gui Foucois (; or ') and also known as Guy le Gros\"' (French for \"Guy the Fat\"; ), was Bishop of Le Puy (1257\u20131260), Archbishop of Narbonne (1259\u20131261), Cardinal of Sabina (1261\u20131265), and head of the Catholic Church from 5 February 1265 until his death. His election as pope occurred at a conclave held at Perugia that lasted four months while cardinals argued over whether to call in Charles I of Anjou, the youngest brother of Louis IX of France, to carry on the papal war against the Hohenstaufens. Pope Clement was a patron of Thomas Aquinas and of Roger Bacon, encouraging Bacon in the writing of his \"Opus Majus\", which included important treatises on optics and the scientific method.\nLife before election.\nClement was born in Saint-Gilles-du-Gard in the County of Toulouse, to a successful lawyer, Pierre Foucois, and his wife Marguerite Ruffi. At the age of nineteen, he enrolled as a soldier to fight the Moors in Spain. He then pursued the study of law in Toulouse, Bourges and Orleans, becoming a noted advocate in Paris. In the latter capacity he acted as secretary to King Louis IX, to whose influence he was chiefly indebted for his elevation to the cardinalate. He married the daughter of Simon de Malbois and had two daughters. Upon the death of his wife, he followed his father's example and gave up secular life for the Church.\nHis rise was rapid. Ordained in the abbey of Saint-Magloire, Paris, he became pastor of Saint-Gilles in 1255. In 1257, he was appointed Bishop of Le Puy; in 1259, he was appointed Archbishop of Narbonne; and in December 1261, he became the first cardinal created by Pope Urban IV, for the See of Sabina. He was the papal legate in England between 1262 and 1264. He was named a cardinal (grand penitentiary) in 1263.\nPontificate.\nIn this period, the See of Rome was engaged in a conflict with Manfred, King of Sicily, the illegitimate son and designated heir of Holy Roman Emperor Frederick II of Hohenstaufen, but whom papal loyalists, the Guelfs, called \"the usurper of Naples\". Clement IV, who was in France at the time of his election, was compelled to enter Italy in disguise. He immediately took steps to ally himself with Charles of Anjou, his erstwhile patron's brother and the impecunious French claimant to the Neapolitan throne. Charles was willing to recognize the Pope as his feudal overlord (a bone of contention with the Hohenstaufens) and was crowned by cardinals in Rome, where Clement IV, permanently established at Viterbo, dared not venture, since the anti-papal Ghibelline party was so firmly in control there.\nThen, fortified with papal money and supplies, Charles marched into Naples. Having defeated and slain Manfred in the great Battle of Benevento, Charles established himself firmly in the kingdom of Sicily at the conclusive Battle of Tagliacozzo, in which Conradin, the last of the house of Hohenstaufen, was taken prisoner. Clement IV is said to have disapproved of the cruelties committed by his prot\u00e9g\u00e9, but the statement by Gregorovius that Clement IV became an accomplice by refusing to intercede for the unfortunate Conradin whom Charles had beheaded in the marketplace of Naples seems contentious. However, Gregorovius may be basing this conclusion on the position of Urban IV's predecessors, Innocent IV and Alexander IV, who were Conradin's official guardians.\nActs.\nIn 1264, Clement IV renewed the prohibition of the Talmud promulgated by Gregory IX, who had it publicly burnt in France and in Italy. Though Clement did not condemn to death at the stake those who harboured copies of it, and, responding to a denunciation of the Talmud by Pablo Christiani, he ordered that the Jews of the Crown of Aragon submit their books to Dominican censors for expurgation.\nIn February 1265 Clement summoned Thomas Aquinas to Rome to serve as papal theologian. It was during this period that Aquinas also served as regent master for the Dominicans at Rome. With the arrival of Aquinas the existing \"studium conventuale\" at Santa Sabina, which had been founded in 1222, was transformed into the Order's first \"studium provinciale\" featuring the study of philosophy (\"studia philosophiae\") as prescribed by Aquinas and others at the chapter of Valenciennes in 1259, an intermediate school between the \"studium conventuale\" and the \"studium generale\". This \"studium\" was the forerunner of the 16th century College of Saint Thomas at Santa Maria sopra Minerva and the Pontifical University of Saint Thomas Aquinas, \"Angelicum\". In 1266, after the Battle of Benevento, Pope Clement IV conceded for gratitude his coat of arms to the Guelph Party of Florence as official approval to their supremacy and therefore they could take power in many of the other northern Italian cities. In 1267\u201368 Clement engaged in correspondence with the Mongol Ilkhanate ruler Abaqa. The latter proposed a Franco-Mongol alliance between his forces, those of the West, and the Byzantine emperor Michael VIII Palaeologos (Abaqa's father-in-law). Pope Clement welcomed Abaqa's proposal in a non-committal manner, but did inform him of an upcoming Crusade. In 1267, Pope Clement IV and King James I of Aragon sent an ambassador to the Mongol ruler Abaqa in the person of Jayme Alaric de Perpignan. In his 1267 letter written from Viterbo, the Pope wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The kings of France and Navarre, taking to heart the situation in the Holy Land, and decorated with the Holy Cross, are readying themselves to attack the enemies of the Cross. You wrote to us that you wished to join your father-in-law (the Greek emperor Michael VIII Palaiologos) to assist the Latins. We abundantly praise you for this, but we cannot tell you yet, before having asked to the rulers, what road they are planning to follow. We will transmit to them your advice, so as to enlighten their deliberations, and will inform your Magnificence, through a secure message, of what will have been decided.\nAlthough Clement's successors continued to engage in diplomatic contacts with the Mongols for the rest of the century, they were never able to coordinate an actual alliance.\nDeath and burial.\nOn 29 November 1268 Clement IV died and was buried at the Dominican convent, Santa Maria in Gradi, just outside Viterbo, where he resided throughout his pontificate. In 1885, his remains were transferred to the church, San Francesco alla Rocca, in Viterbo. Owing to irreconcilable divisions among the cardinals, the papal throne remained vacant for nearly three years.\nClement IV's private character was praised by contemporaries for his asceticism, and he is especially commended for his indisposition to promote and enrich his own relatives. He also ordered the Franciscan scholar Roger Bacon to write the \"Opus Majus\", which is addressed to him.\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "24102", "revid": "494861", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24102", "title": "Pope Clement V", "text": "Head of the Catholic Church from 1305 to 1314\nPope Clement V (; c.\u20091264 \u2013 20 April 1314), born Raymond Bertrand de Got (also occasionally spelled \"de Guoth\" and \"de Goth\"), was head of the Catholic Church and ruler of the Papal States from 5 June 1305 to his death, in April 1314. He is remembered for suppressing the order of the Knights Templar and allowing the execution of many of its members. A Frenchman by birth, Clement moved the Papacy from Rome to Avignon, ushering in the period known as the Avignon Papacy.\nEarly career.\nRaymond Bertrand was born in Vilandraut, Aquitaine, the son of B\u00e9rard, Lord of Villandraut. Bertrand studied the arts at Toulouse and canon and civil law at Orl\u00e9ans and Bologna. He became canon and sacristan of the Cathedral of Saint-Andr\u00e9 in Bordeaux, then vicar-general to his brother B\u00e9rard de Got, the Archbishop of Lyon, who in 1294 was created Cardinal-Bishop of Albano and papal legate to France. He was then made Bishop of St-Bertrand-de-Comminges, the cathedral church of which he was responsible for greatly enlarging and embellishing, and chaplain to Pope Boniface VIII, who made him Archbishop of Bordeaux in 1297.\nAs Archbishop of Bordeaux, Bertrand de Got was a subject of the King of England, but from early youth he had been a personal friend of Philip the Fair.\nElection.\nFollowing the death of Pope Benedict XI in July 1304, there was an interregnum occasioned by disputes between the French and Italian cardinals. They were equally balanced in the papal conclave, which was held at Perugia. Bertrand was elected Pope Clement V in June 1305 and crowned on 14 November. Bertrand was neither Italian nor a cardinal, and his election might have been considered a gesture towards neutrality. The contemporary chronicler Giovanni Villani reports gossip that he had bound himself to King Philip IV of France by a formal agreement before his elevation, made at Saint-Jean-d'Ang\u00e9ly in Saintonge. Whether this was true or not, it is likely that the future pope had conditions laid down for him by the conclave of cardinals.\nTwo weeks later at Vienne, Bertrand was informally notified of his election and returned to Bordeaux. At Bordeaux he was formally recognized as pope, with John of Havering offering him gifts from Edward I of England. Bertrand initially selected Vienne as the site for his coronation, but after Philip IV's objections selected Lyon. On 14 November 1305, Bertrand was installed as pope which was celebrated with magnificence and attended by Philip IV. Among his first acts was the creation of nine French cardinals.\nDuke John II of Brittany led Clement's horse through the crowd during the coronation celebrations. So many spectators had piled atop the walls that one of the walls crumbled and collapsed on top of the duke, who died four days later.\nPontificate.\nClement V and the Knights Templar.\nEarly in 1306, Clement V explained away those features of the Papal bull \"Clericis Laicos\" that might seem to apply to the king of France and essentially withdrew \"Unam Sanctam\", the bull of Boniface VIII that asserted papal supremacy over secular rulers and threatened Philip's political plans, a radical change in papal policy. Clement spent most of the year 1306 at Bordeaux because of ill-health. Subsequently, he resided at Poitiers and elsewhere.\nOn Friday, 13 October 1307, hundreds of the Knights Templar were arrested in France, an action apparently motivated financially and undertaken by the efficient royal bureaucracy to increase the prestige of the crown. Philip IV was the force behind this move, but it has also embellished the historical reputation of Clement V. From the very day of Clement V's coronation, the king charged the Templars with usury, credit inflation, fraud, heresy, sodomy, immorality, and abuses, and the scruples of the Pope were heightened by a growing sense that the burgeoning French State might not wait for the Church but would proceed independently.\nMeanwhile, Philip IV's lawyers pressed to reopen Guillaume de Nogaret's charges of heresy against the late Boniface VIII that had circulated in the pamphlet war around the bull \"Unam sanctam\". Clement V had to yield to pressures for this extraordinary trial, begun on 2 February 1309 at Avignon, which dragged on for two years. In the document that called for witnesses, Clement V expressed both his personal conviction of the innocence of Boniface VIII and his resolution to satisfy the king. Finally, in February 1311, Philip IV wrote to Clement V abandoning the process to the future Council of Vienne. For his part, Clement V absolved all the participants in the abduction of Boniface at Anagni.\nIn pursuance of the king's wishes, Clement V in 1311 summoned the Council of Vienne, which refused to convict the Templars of heresy. The Pope abolished the order anyway, as the Templars seemed to be in bad repute and had outlived their usefulness as papal bankers and protectors of pilgrims in the East.\nFalse charges of heresy and sodomy set aside, the guilt or innocence of the Templars is one of the more difficult historical problems, partly because of the atmosphere of hysteria that had built up in the preceding generation (marked by habitually intemperate language and extravagant denunciations exchanged between temporal rulers and churchmen), partly because the subject has been embraced by conspiracy theorists and quasi-historians.\nCrusades and relations with the Mongols.\nClement sent John of Montecorvino to Beijing to preach in China.\nClement engaged intermittently in communications with the Mongol Empire towards the possibility of creating a Franco-Mongol alliance against the Muslims. In April 1305, the Mongol Ilkhan ruler \u00d6ljait\u00fc sent an embassy led by Buscarello de Ghizolfi to Clement, Philip IV of France, and Edward I of England. In 1307, another Mongol embassy led by Tommaso Ugi di Siena reached European monarchs. However, no coordinated military action was forthcoming and hopes of alliance petered out within a few years.\nIn 1308, Clement ordered the preaching of a crusade to be launched against the Mamluk Sultanate in the Holy Land in the spring of 1309. This resulted in the unwanted Crusade of the Poor appearing before Avignon in July 1309. Clement granted the poor crusaders an indulgence but refused to let them participate in the professional expedition led by the Hospitallers. That expedition set off in early 1310, but instead of sailing for the Holy Land, the Hospitallers conquered the city of Rhodes from the Byzantines.\nOn 4 April 1312, a Crusade was promulgated by Pope Clement V at the Council of Vienne. Another embassy was sent by Oljeitu to the West and to Edward II of England in 1313. The same year, Philip IV \"took the cross\", making the vow to go on a Crusade in the Levant.\nRelations with Rome.\nIn March 1309, the entire papal court moved from Poitiers to the Comtat Venaissin, around the city of Avignon. This move, actually to Carpentras, the capital of the territory, was justified at the time by French apologists on grounds of security, since Rome, where the dissensions of the Roman aristocrats and their armed militia had reached a nadir and the Basilica di San Giovanni in Laterano had been destroyed in a fire, was unstable and dangerous. But the decision proved the precursor of the long Avignon Papacy, the \"Babylonian captivity\" (1309\u201377), in Petrarch's phrase.\nClement V's pontificate was also a disastrous time for Italy. The Papal States were entrusted to a team of three cardinals, but Rome, the battleground of the Colonna and Orsini factions, was ungovernable. In 1310, the Holy Roman Emperor Henry VII entered Italy, established the Visconti as vicars in Milan, and was crowned by Clement V's legates in Rome in 1312 before he died near Siena in 1313.\nIn Ferrara, which was taken into the Papal States to the exclusion of the Este family, papal armies clashed with the Republic of Venice and its populace. When excommunication and interdict failed to have their intended effect, Clement V preached a crusade against the Venetians in May 1309, declaring that Venetians captured abroad might be sold into slavery, like non-Christians.\nLater career and death.\nIn his relations to the Empire, Clement was an opportunist. He refused to use his full influence in favour of the candidacy of Charles of Valois, brother of Philip IV, lest France became too powerful; and recognized Henry of Luxemburg, whom his representatives crowned emperor at the Lateran in 1312. When Henry, however, came into conflict with Robert of Naples, Clement supported Robert and threatened the emperor with excommunication and interdict. But the crisis passed with the unexpected death of Henry.\nOther remarkable incidents of Clement V's reign include his violent repression of the Dulcinians in Lombardy, which he considered a heresy, and his promulgation of the Clementine Constitutions in 1313.\nClement died on 20 April 1314. According to one account, while his body was lying in state, a thunderstorm arose during the night and lightning struck the church where his body lay, setting it on fire. The fire was so intense that by the time it was extinguished, the Pope's body had been all but destroyed. He was buried at the collegiate church in Uzeste close to his birthplace in Villandraut as laid down in his will.\nIn popular culture.\nStephen Fewell portrays Pope Clement V in the second season of \"Knightfall\".\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "24103", "revid": "2731577", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24103", "title": "Pope Clement VI", "text": "Head of the Catholic Church from 1342 to 1352\nPope Clement VI (; 1291 \u2013 6 December 1352), born Pierre Roger, was head of the Catholic Church from 7 May 1342 to his death, in December 1352. He was the fourth Avignon pope. Clement reigned during the first visitation of the Black Death (1348\u20131350), during which he granted remission of sins to all who died of the plague.\nRoger steadfastly resisted temporal encroachments on the Church's ecclesiastical jurisdiction, and, as pope Clement VI, entrenched French dominance of the Church and opened its coffers to enhance the regal splendour of the Papacy. He recruited composers and music theorists for his court, including figures associated with the then-innovative Ars Nova style of France and the Low Countries.\nEarly life.\nBirth and family.\nPierre Roger (also spelled Rogier and Rosiers) was born in the ch\u00e2teau of Maumont, today part of the commune of Rosiers-d'\u00c9gletons, Corr\u00e8ze, in Limousin, France, the son of the lord of Maumont-Rosiers-d'\u00c9gletons. He had an elder brother, Guillaume, who married three times and had thirteen children; and a younger brother, Hugues, who became Cardinal Priest of S. Lorenzo in Damaso and who could have become pope in 1362. Pierre also had two sisters: Delphine, who married Jacques de Besse; and Alienor, who married Jacques de la Jugie. His brother Guillaume became Seigneur de Chambon, thanks to his wife's dowry, and, with the benefit of his papal brother's influence on King Philip VI, became Vicomte de Beaufort.\nMonk and scholar.\nRoger entered the Benedictine order as a boy in 1301, at the Abbey of La Chaise-Dieu in the diocese of Clermont in the Auvergne. After six years there, he was directed to higher studies by the Bishop of Le Puy, Jean de Cumenis, and his own abbot, Hugues d'Arc. In 1307 he took up studies in Paris at the College de Sorbonne, where he entered the Coll\u00e8ge de Narbonne. To support him, beyond what was supplied by his bishop and his abbot, he was granted the post of Prior of St. Pantal\u00e9on in the diocese of Limoges. In the summer of 1323, after Pierre had been studying both theology and canon law in Paris for sixteen years, the Chancellor of Paris was ordered by Pope John XXII, on the recommendation of King Charles IV, to confer on him the doctorate in Theology, a chair, and a license to teach. Pierre was in his thirty-first year. He lectured publicly on the \"Sententiae\" of Peter Lombard, and defended and promoted the works of Thomas Aquinas. He was appalled by the \"Defensor Pacis\" of Marsilius of Padua, and wrote a treatise in 1325 condemning its principles and defending Pope John XXII.\nHe was granted the priory of St. Baudil, a dependency of the Abbey of La Chaise-Dieu, on 24 April 1324, at the personal order of Pope John XXII; and then, on 23 June 1326, he was named Abbot of F\u00e9camp, a royal abbey and one of the most important monasteries in France. He held the position until 1329.\nPierre Roger was called to Avignon through the influence of his friend and protector, Cardinal Pierre de Mortemart (who was named a cardinal on 18 December 1327), both of whom were close to King Charles IV. Unfortunately, King Charles IV died on 1 February 1328, the last Capetian king of France in the direct line.\nAs Abbot of F\u00e9camp, and therefore a feudal subject of Edward III, Pierre was assigned the task in 1328 of summoning Edward III of England to pay homage to Philip VI of France for the duchy of Aquitaine. He received no reply, however, from King Edward, and was forced to return to France, his mission unaccomplished.\nEpiscopacy.\nOn 3 December 1328 Peter Roger was named Bishop of Arras, in which capacity he became a royal councilor of King Philip VI. He held the diocese of Arras only until 24 November 1329, less than a year, when he was promoted to the Archdiocese of Sens. He held the Archbishopric of Sens for one year and one month, until his promotion to the See of Rouen on 14 December 1330.\nIn 1329, while Pierre Roger was still Archbishop-elect of Sens, a major assembly of the French Clergy was held at Vincennes in the presence of King Philip VI (1328\u20131350), to deal with issues involving the judicial powers of ecclesiastical authorities. Many propositions were put forward against ecclesiastical jurisdiction, which were ably argued by Pierre de Cugni\u00e8res (Petrus de Cugneriis). Pierre Roger made the rejoinders on 22 December 1329, on behalf of the ecclesiastical authority.\nWhen Pierre Roger became Archbishop of Rouen in December 1330, he was expected to swear allegiance to his feudal overlord. King Philip VI had recently given his son Jean the Dukedom of Normandy as an apanage, and Pierre was worried about what might happen if someone other than a member of the French royal family might become Duke of Normandy. He therefore asked the King for time to consider his position, but the King was firm and seized the temporalities of the Archbishop. Pierre was forced to go to Paris, where an agreement was worked out that, should someone other than a member of the royal family become Duke, then the Archbishop would swear fealty directly to the King.\nAs Archbishop of Rouen, Roger was one of the Peers of France and he was a member of the embassy sent by King Philip to his son John, in 1333, to swear in their name to take the cross and serve in a crusade in the Holy Land. Later in the year, in Paris in the Pr\u00e9s des Clercs, the King received the cross personally from the hands of Archbishop Roger.\nIt is said that he was promoted to the office of Chancellor of France, though there is no documentary proof. The earliest claim that he was Chancellor is made by Alfonso Chacon (Ciaconius) (1530\u20131599).\nIn 1333, the issue of the beatific vision, which had been under discussion since a sermon of Pope John XXII in 1329, reached a serious stage. The French Royal Court had been hearing complaints from various quarters, and the King and Queen finally decided to seek competent advice. The Pope knew that the University of Paris was hostile to his ideas, and so he sent Gerard Odonis, the Minister General of the Franciscans, and a Dominican preacher, to Paris to preach the Pope's views in public. King Philip responded to the general indignation by summoning the Masters of Theology of the University to Vincennes just before Christmas 1334, where it appeared that there was general agreement against the Pope. The King privately informed the Pope of their opinions, but the Pope harshly responded to the King that he should stop favoring an opinion which the Pope had not yet definitively settled. The Pope ordered the Archbishop of Rouen, Pierre Roger, to set the Pope's view down in writing and explain it to the King. Ironically, Pierre Roger was not on the Pope's side of the argument. A committee, which included Archbishop Roger, the theologian Pierre de la Palud (Petrus Paludensis), the Chancellor of France Guillaume de Sainte-Maure, the Archdeacon of Rouen Jean de Polenciac, and others, attempted to talk the Pope out of his notions. Early in 1334 Pope John XXII informed the King that he had ordered the Cardinals and prelates and Doctors of theology and of Canon Law at the Papal Court to look into the propositions thoroughly and report to him their findings. John XXII was attempting to save face by placing the matter in the hands of a committee, but in the end, on his deathbed, he was compelled to repudiate his opinions, which were formally condemned by his successor, Benedict XII.\nOn 14 April 1335, Pierre Roger's friend and patron, Cardinal Pierre de Mortemart died, naming Pierre Roger as one of the executors of his Testament.\nIn September 1335 Archbishop Roger held a provincial council at Rouen in the Priory of N\u00f4tre-Dame-du Pr\u00e9 (later called Bonne-nouvelle). Two of his bishops were present, the other four were represented by procurators. The cathedral chapters of the province and the abbots of monasteries were invited as well. The council issued a dozen canons, urging the lower clergy to be diligent in their assigned duties. The most notable item was the encouragement given to bishops to facilitate the business of those who wished to join the King on crusade.\nCardinalate.\nPierre Roger was created a Cardinal Priest by Pope Benedict XII (1334\u20131342) on 18 December 1338, in his only Consistory for the creation of cardinals. He created six new cardinals: four were fellow monks (two Benedictines, a Cistercian, and a Mercedarian); one was from Rimini, the rest from southern France. Four were lawyers, two were theologians. One died before he received the red hat, and was replaced by another candidate. Pierre Roger entered the Curia in Avignon for the first time on 5 May 1339, and received the \"titulus\" of Santi Nereo e Achilleo.\nPapacy.\nCardinal Napoleone Orsini died during Lent of 1342, on 23 March. The funeral took place on Monday in Holy Week in the Franciscan church in Avignon, and the funeral sermon was preached by Cardinal Pierre Roger. A month later, on 25 April 1342, Pope Benedict XII died in the Papal Palace in Avignon. King Philip VI immediately sent his eldest son, Prince John, to press the candidacy of Pierre Roger, but he arrived too late to have any effect. Eighteen of the nineteen cardinals assembled for the Conclave to elect his successor. Fourteen were French, three were Italian, one was Spanish. Only Cardinal Bertrand de Montfavez, who was ill with podagra (gout), was unable to attend. The Conclave began on Sunday, 5 May 1342, and on the morning of Tuesday, 7 May, agreement was reached. Two cardinals wrote to King Edward III of England on 8 May that the election had been accomplished \"with no preliminary politicking and with only Divine Inspiration.\" Cardinal Pierre Roger was chosen to succeed Benedict XII as pope. He was crowned on Pentecost Sunday, 19 May, in the church of the Dominicans, the largest church in Avignon. Present were Prince John of France, Duke of Normandy; Jacques, Duke of Burgundy, Imbert, Dauphin of Vienne, and many others. Cardinal Roger chose the regnal name Clement VI.\nDuring the season of Pentecost immediately following his coronation, as Peter de Herenthal writes, when a new Pope customarily gratifies the expectations of his family, his followers, his supporters, his cardinals, and the Roman Curia, Pope Clement promised gifts to every cleric who presented himself at Avignon within two months. Such a multitude of poor clerics appeared in Avignon that a computation was made that the number of poor clerics in all the dioceses of the world was around 100,000, a number which Peter de Herenthal was quite prepared to accept. When Clement VI, at the very beginning of his pontificate was making reservations of abbacies and prelatures, and declaring elections in monasteries and Chapters void, in order to acquire benefices for papal use in granting favors, it was intimated to him that his predecessors had not engaged in reservations of such a sort. Clement is said to have replied, \"Our predecessors did not know how to be pope.\"\nNew cardinals.\nOne of the greatest ways in which a pope can reward his supporters is to raise them to the cardinalate. On 20 September 1342, four months after his coronation, Clement VI held a Consistory for the creation of cardinals. He appointed ten prelates, including three nephews, Hugues Roger, Ademar Roberti and Bernard de la Tour d'Auvergne. He also elevated Guy of Boulogne, the archbishop of Lyon and son of Count Robert VII of Auvergne, and Gerard de Daumar, the master-general of the Dominicans and a papal cousin, who died a year after his creation, on 27 September 1343. Five of his appointments were from his own native area of Limoges and one from P\u00e9rigueux. Only one was Italian, Andrea Ghini Malpighi, a Florentine, who died on 2 June 1343. The College of Cardinals was now thoroughly French, with a strong accent of the Auvergne.\nOn 19 May 1344 the two new cardinals who had died were replaced by two more Frenchmen: the Proven\u00e7al Pierre Bertrand, the nephew of Cardinal Pierre Bertrand; and Nicolas de Besse, yet another papal nephew.\nLike his immediate predecessors, Clement was devoted to France, and he demonstrated his French sympathies by refusing a solemn invitation to return to Rome from the city's people, as well as from the poet Petrarch. To placate the Romans, however, Clement VI issued the bull Unigenitus (1343) on 27 January 1343, reducing the interval between one Great Jubilee and the next from 100 years to 50 years. In the document he elaborated for the first time the power of the pope in the use of indulgences. This document would later be used by Cardinal Cajetan in the examination of Martin Luther and his 95 Theses in his trial at Augsburg in 1518. By then, \"Unigenitus\" was firmly fixed in Canon Law, having been added in the collection called \"Extravagantes\".\nOn 23 February 1343 Pope Clement appointed Pons Saturninus as his \"Provisor of Works of the Palace\", thereby beginning a program of construction and decoration that continued throughout his reign. It was immediately clear that the Pope had no intention of returning to Rome, and that he intended to provide offices and quarters for the various organs of the Roman Curia in the Palace. Pope Benedict XII, his predecessor, had built a palace, sufficiently accommodating for a Cistercian monk, but Pierre Roger had spent much of his career at the French Court and had imbibed its tastes for far greater display and ceremony. The Pope was, after all, a sovereign, and Clement intended to live and work in an appropriate state. He commissioned the new Tower of the Garde-Robe, the Audience (for the Auditors of the Rota), the new Papal Chapel and the grand staircase that led to it, and the Tour de la Gache (where the \"Audientia contradictarum\", the appellate court for countersuits, had its offices). He was also responsible for the two new entrance fa\u00e7ades.\nHe also purchased the sovereignty of Avignon from Queen Joan I of Naples in 1348 for the sum of 80,000 crowns.\nThe Black Death.\nClement VI was on the papal throne when the Black Death first struck Europe in 1347. This pandemic swept through Asia and the Middle East and into Europe between 1347 and 1350, and is believed to have killed between a third and two-thirds of Europe's population. During the plague, Clement attributed the plague to divine wrath. But he also sought the opinions of astrologers for an explanation. Johannes de Muris was among the team \"of three who drew up a treatise explaining the plague of 1348 by the conjunction of Saturn, Jupiter, and Mars in 1341\" Clement VI's physicians advised him that surrounding himself with torches would block the plague. However, he soon became skeptical of this recommendation and stayed in Avignon supervising sick care, burials, and the pastoral care of the dying. He never contracted the disease, even though there was so much death around him that the cities ran out of ground for cemeteries, and he had to consecrate the entire Rh\u00f4ne River so that it could be considered holy ground and bodies could be thrown into it. Due to so many dying without access to priests, he granted a remission of sins to all who died of the plague. One of Pope Clement's physicians, Gui de Chauliac, later wrote a book called the \"Chirurgia magna\" (1363), in which he correctly distinguished between bubonic and pneumonic plague, based on his own observations of his patients and himself.\nPerhaps feeling the pressure of mortality, having lost no fewer than six cardinals in the year 1348 alone, Pope Clement VI named a new cardinal on 29 May 1348, his nephew and namesake, Pierre Roger de Beaufort, who was not yet eighteen years old. On 17 December 1350, he added twelve more cardinals, nine of them French and only three from Limoges, including two relatives, Guillaume d'Aigrefeuille and Pierre de Cros.\nSuspicion fell on the Jews for the plague, and pogroms erupted around Europe. Clement issued two papal bulls in 1348 (6 July and 26 September), the latter named \"Quamvis Perfidiam\", which condemned the violence and said those who blamed the plague on the Jews had been \"seduced by that liar, the Devil.\" He went on to emphasise that \"It cannot be true that the Jews, by such a heinous crime, are the cause or occasion of the plague, because through many parts of the world the same plague, by the hidden judgment of God, has afflicted and afflicts the Jews themselves and many other races who have never lived alongside them.\" He urged clergy to take action to protect Jews as he had done.\nPope and Empire.\nClement continued the struggle of his predecessors with Holy Roman Emperor Louis IV. On 13 April 1346, after protracted negotiations, he excommunicated the Emperor, and directed the election of Charles IV. After the death of Louis in October 1347 Charles received general recognition, ending the schism which had long divided Germany.\nIn response to increasing Turkish piracy in the Aegean, Clement proclaimed a crusade with the objective to recapture Smyrna which had been taken by the Aydinids in 1317. The crusaders were able to capture Smyrna on 28 October 1344 which was held by Latin Christians until 1402. He also had a role in the Hungarian invasion of the Kingdom of Naples, which was a papal fief; the contest between Louis I of Hungary and Joanna I of Naples, accused of ordering the assassination of her husband and the former's brother, concluded in 1348 in a trial held in Avignon, at which she was acquitted. Among the other benefits, Clement took advantage of the situation to obtain by her the rights over the city of Avignon.\nPope Clement was also involved in disputes with King Edward III of England as a result of the latter's encroachments on ecclesiastical jurisdiction. He also faced problems with the kings of Castile and Aragon. His negotiations for reunion with the Armenians and the Byzantine emperor, John VI Kantakouzenos, turned out to be fruitless.\nIn Italy the Papacy faced a serious challenge to its authority with the commencement of Cola di Rienzo's agitation in Rome. Pope Clement had appointed Cola to a civil position (Senator) at Rome, and, although at first approving of Rienzo's establishment of the tribunate, he later realized the implications of a permanent antagonist to papal government in the form of a popularly elected Tribune, and sent a Papal Legate who excommunicated Rienzo and, with the help of the aristocratic faction, drove him from the city in December 1347.\nPoland and Bohemia.\nClement also had warned King Casimir III of Poland, who was already under an interdict laid against him by the bishop of Krak\u00f3w and the Apostolic See, because he had oppressed the Church of Krak\u00f3w with intolerable burdens and then harassed the clergy who observed the interdict, that he was attracting more severe penalties to himself. In 1345 Clement sent a nuncio to King Casimir and King John of Bohemia, soliciting them to make peace between themselves, and threatening that, if they rejected his pleas, he would anathematize them and bar them from the sacraments.\nResponding to numerous complaints against the highhanded behavior of the archbishop of Mainz, Prague's metropolitan, Clement made Prague an archbishopric on 30 April 1344, and assigned the Bishopric of Olomouc as its suffragan. The archbishop of Prague acquired the right to crown the king of Bohemia.\nPrivate life.\nUnlike the Cistercian Benedict XII, the Benedictine Clement VI was devoted to an openhanded and generous lifestyle, and the treasury which he inherited from his predecessor made that lifestyle possible. He claimed to have \"lived as a sinner among sinners\" in his own words. During his pontificate, he added a new chapel to the Papal Palace and dedicated it to St. Peter. He commissioned the artist Matteo Giovanetti of Viterbo to paint common hunting and fishing scenes on the walls of the existing papal chapels, and purchased enormous tapestries to decorate the stone walls. To bring good music to the celebrations, he recruited musicians from northern France, especially from Li\u00e8ge, who cultivated the Ars Nova style. He liked music so much that he kept composers and theorists close to him throughout his entire pontificate, Philippe de Vitry being among the more famous. The first two payments he made after his coronation were to musicians.\nDeath, burial, and monument.\nClement had been ill for some time in 1352, not just with kidney stones, which had troubled him for many years, but also with a tumor, which broke out into an abscess with fever during his last week. Pope Clement VI died on 6 December 1352, in the eleventh year of his reign. After his death, his Almoner, Pierre de Froideville, distributed the sum of 400 livres to the poor of Avignon, and on the day of the solemn funeral another 40 livres were distributed during the procession to the Cathedral to the poor who were present. Clement left the reputation of \"a fine gentleman, a prince munificent to profusion, a patron of the arts and learning, but no saint\". His body was placed on exhibit in the Notre Dame-des-Doms, where it was buried temporarily. Three months later, the body was transferred in a splendid procession to the abbey of La Chaise-Dieu, passing through Le Puy on 6 April. On arrival, the coffin was placed in the church of the Carmelites. Later in April it was permanently interred in a tomb in the center of the Choir of the Church. The funeral procession was accompanied by his brother Count William Roger of Beaufort, and by the five cardinals who were his family members: Hugues Roger, Guillaume de la Jugi\u00e9, Nicolas de Besse, Pierre Roger de Beaufort, and Guillaume d' Aigrefeuille. In 1562, the tomb was attacked by the Huguenots and severely damaged, losing the forty-four statues of Clement's relatives which surrounded the sarcophagus. Only the sarcophagus and tomb cover survived, making the present tomb a mere shadow of its former architectural and decorative glory. The tomb cover, in white marble, was made by master sculptor Pierre Boye, and his two assistants Jean de Sanholis and Jean David. The construction of the tomb began in 1346, and was completed in 1351. It cost 3,500 florins, to which were added 120 \u00e9cus d'or, as a gratuity for the master sculptor.\nReferences.\nCitation.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "24105", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24105", "title": "Postmenopausal osteoporosis", "text": ""}
{"id": "24107", "revid": "13541347", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24107", "title": "Peer-to-peer", "text": "Type of decentralized and distributed network architecture\nPeer-to-peer (P2P) computing or networking is a distributed application architecture that partitions tasks or workloads between peers. Peers are equally privileged, equipotent participants in the network, forming a peer-to-peer network of nodes. In addition, a personal area network (PAN) is also in nature a type of decentralized peer-to-peer network typically between two devices.\nPeers make a portion of their resources, such as processing power, disk storage, or network bandwidth, directly available to other network participants, without the need for central coordination by servers or stable hosts. Peers are both suppliers and consumers of resources, in contrast to the traditional client\u2013server model in which the consumption and supply of resources are divided.\nWhile P2P systems had previously been used in many application domains, the architecture was popularized by the Internet file sharing system Napster, originally released in 1999. P2P is used in many protocols such as BitTorrent file sharing over the Internet and in personal networks like Miracast displaying and Bluetooth radio. The concept has inspired new structures and philosophies in many areas of human interaction. In such social contexts, peer-to-peer as a meme refers to the egalitarian social networking that has emerged throughout society, enabled by Internet technologies in general.\nDevelopment.\nWhile P2P systems had previously been used in many application domains, the concept was popularized by file sharing systems such as the music-sharing application Napster. The peer-to-peer movement allowed millions of Internet users to connect \"directly, forming groups and collaborating to become user-created search engines, virtual supercomputers, and filesystems\". The basic concept of peer-to-peer computing was envisioned in earlier software systems and networking discussions, reaching back to principles stated in the first Request for Comments, RFC 1.\nTim Berners-Lee's vision for the World Wide Web was close to a P2P network in that it assumed each user of the web would be an active editor and contributor, creating and linking content to form an interlinked \"web\" of links. The early Internet was more open than the present day, where two machines connected to the Internet could send packets to each other without firewalls and other security measures. This contrasts with the broadcasting-like structure of the web as it has developed over the years. As a precursor to the Internet, ARPANET was a successful peer-to-peer network where \"every participating node could request and serve content\". However, ARPANET was not self-organized, and it could not \"provide any means for context or content-based routing beyond 'simple' address-based routing.\"\nTherefore, Usenet, a distributed messaging system that is often described as an early peer-to-peer architecture, was established. It was developed in 1979 as a system that enforces a decentralized model of control. The basic model is a client\u2013server model from the user or client perspective that offers a self-organizing approach to newsgroup servers. However, news servers communicate with one another as peers to propagate Usenet news articles over the entire group of network servers. The same consideration applies to SMTP email in the sense that the core email-relaying network of mail transfer agents has a peer-to-peer character, while the periphery of Email clients and their direct connections is strictly a client-server relationship.\nIn May 1999, with millions more people on the Internet, Shawn Fanning introduced the music and file-sharing application called Napster. Napster was the beginning of peer-to-peer networks, as we know them today, where \"participating users establish a virtual network, entirely independent from the physical network, without having to obey any administrative authorities or restrictions\".\nArchitecture.\nA peer-to-peer network is designed around the notion of equal \"peer\" nodes simultaneously functioning as both \"clients\" and \"servers\" to the other nodes on the network. This model of network arrangement differs from the client\u2013server model where communication is usually to and from a central server. A typical example of a file transfer that uses the client-server model is the File Transfer Protocol (FTP) service in which the client and server programs are distinct: the clients initiate the transfer, and the servers satisfy these requests.\nRouting and resource discovery.\nPeer-to-peer networks generally implement some form of virtual overlay network on top of the physical network topology, where the nodes in the overlay form a subset of the nodes in the physical network. Data is still exchanged directly over the underlying TCP/IP network, but at the application layer peers can communicate with each other directly, via the logical overlay links (each of which corresponds to a path through the underlying physical network). Overlays are used for indexing and peer discovery, and make the P2P system independent from the physical network topology. Based on how the nodes are linked to each other within the overlay network, and how resources are indexed and located, we can classify networks as \"unstructured\" or \"structured\" (or as a hybrid between the two).\nUnstructured networks.\n\"Unstructured peer-to-peer networks\" do not impose a particular structure on the overlay network by design, but rather are formed by nodes that randomly form connections to each other. (Gnutella, Gossip, and Kazaa are examples of unstructured P2P protocols).\nBecause there is no structure globally imposed upon them, unstructured networks are easy to build and allow for localized optimizations to different regions of the overlay. Also, because the role of all peers in the network is the same, unstructured networks are highly robust in the face of high rates of \"churn\"\u2014that is, when large numbers of peers are frequently joining and leaving the network.\nHowever, the primary limitations of unstructured networks also arise from this lack of structure. In particular, when a peer wants to find a desired piece of data in the network, the search query must be flooded through the network to find as many peers as possible that share the data. Flooding causes a very high amount of signaling traffic in the network, uses more CPU/memory (by requiring every peer to process all search queries), and does not ensure that search queries will always be resolved. Furthermore, since there is no correlation between a peer and the content managed by it, there is no guarantee that flooding will find a peer that has the desired data. Popular content is likely to be available at several peers and any peer searching for it is likely to find the same thing. But if a peer is looking for rare data shared by only a few other peers, then it is highly unlikely that the search will be successful.\nStructured networks.\nIn \"structured peer-to-peer networks\" the overlay is organized into a specific topology, and the protocol ensures that any node can efficiently search the network for a file/resource, even if the resource is extremely rare.\nThe most common type of structured P2P networks implement a distributed hash table (DHT), in which a variant of consistent hashing is used to assign ownership of each file to a particular peer. This enables peers to search for resources on the network using a hash table: that is, (\"key\", \"value\") pairs are stored in the DHT, and any participating node can efficiently retrieve the value associated with a given key.\nHowever, in order to route traffic efficiently through the network, nodes in a structured overlay must maintain lists of neighbors that satisfy specific criteria. This makes them less robust in networks with a high rate of \"churn\" (i.e. with large numbers of nodes frequently joining and leaving the network). More recent evaluation of P2P resource discovery solutions under real workloads have pointed out several issues in DHT-based solutions such as high cost of advertising/discovering resources and static and dynamic load imbalance.\nNotable distributed networks that use DHTs include Tixati, an alternative to BitTorrent's distributed tracker, the Kad network, the Storm botnet, and the YaCy. Some prominent research projects include the Chord project, Kademlia, PAST storage utility, P-Grid, a self-organized and emerging overlay network, and CoopNet content distribution system. DHT-based networks have also been widely utilized for accomplishing efficient resource discovery for grid computing systems, as it aids in resource management and scheduling of applications.\nHybrid models.\nHybrid models are a combination of peer-to-peer and client\u2013server models. A common hybrid model is to have a central server that helps peers find each other. Spotify was an example of a hybrid model [until 2014]. There are a variety of hybrid models, all of which make trade-offs between the centralized functionality provided by a structured server/client network and the node equality afforded by the pure peer-to-peer unstructured networks. Currently, hybrid models have better performance than either pure unstructured networks or pure structured networks because certain functions, such as searching, do require a centralized functionality but benefit from the decentralized aggregation of nodes provided by unstructured networks.\nCoopNet content distribution system.\nCoopNet (Cooperative Networking) was a proposed system for off-loading serving to peers who have recently downloaded content, proposed by computer scientists Venkata N. Padmanabhan and Kunwadee Sripanidkulchai, working at Microsoft Research and Carnegie Mellon University. When a server experiences an increase in load it redirects incoming peers to other peers who have agreed to mirror the content, thus off-loading balance from the server. All of the information is retained at the server. This system makes use of the fact that the bottleneck is most likely in the outgoing bandwidth than the CPU, hence its server-centric design. It assigns peers to other peers who are 'close in IP' to its neighbors [same prefix range] in an attempt to use locality. If multiple peers are found with the same file it designates that the node choose the fastest of its neighbors. Streaming media is transmitted by having clients cache the previous stream, and then transmit it piece-wise to new nodes.\nSecurity and trust.\nPeer-to-peer systems pose unique challenges from a computer security perspective. Like any other form of software, P2P applications can contain vulnerabilities. What makes this particularly dangerous for P2P software, however, is that peer-to-peer applications act as servers as well as clients, meaning that they can be more vulnerable to remote exploits.\nRouting attacks.\nSince each node plays a role in routing traffic through the network, malicious users can perform a variety of \"routing attacks\", or denial of service attacks. Examples of common routing attacks include \"incorrect lookup routing\" whereby malicious nodes deliberately forward requests incorrectly or return false results, \"incorrect routing updates\" where malicious nodes corrupt the routing tables of neighboring nodes by sending them false information, and \"incorrect routing network partition\" where when new nodes are joining they bootstrap via a malicious node, which places the new node in a partition of the network that is populated by other malicious nodes.\nCorrupted data and malware.\nThe prevalence of malware varies between different peer-to-peer protocols. Studies analyzing the spread of malware on P2P networks found, for example, that 63% of the answered download requests on the gnutella network contained some form of malware, whereas only 3% of the content on OpenFT contained malware. In both cases, the top three most common types of malware accounted for the large majority of cases (99% in gnutella, and 65% in OpenFT). Another study analyzing traffic on the Kazaa network found that 15% of the 500,000 file sample taken were infected by one or more of the 365 different computer viruses that were tested for.\nCorrupted data can also be distributed on P2P networks by modifying files that are already being shared on the network. For example, on the FastTrack network, the RIAA managed to introduce faked chunks into downloads and downloaded files (mostly MP3 files). Files infected with the RIAA virus were unusable afterwards and contained malicious code. The RIAA is also known to have uploaded fake music and movies to P2P networks in order to deter illegal file sharing. Consequently, the P2P networks of today have seen an enormous increase of their security and file verification mechanisms. Modern hashing, chunk verification and different encryption methods have made most networks resistant to almost any type of attack, even when major parts of the respective network have been replaced by faked or nonfunctional hosts.\nResilient and scalable computer networks.\nThe decentralized nature of P2P networks increases robustness because it removes the single point of failure that can be inherent in a client\u2013server based system. As nodes arrive and demand on the system increases, the total capacity of the system also increases, and the likelihood of failure decreases. If one peer on the network fails to function properly, the whole network is not compromised or damaged. In contrast, in a typical client\u2013server architecture, clients share only their demands with the system, but not their resources. In this case, as more clients join the system, fewer resources are available to serve each client, and if the central server fails, the entire network is taken down.\nDistributed storage and search.\nThere are both advantages and disadvantages in P2P networks related to the topic of data backup, recovery, and availability. In a centralized network, the system administrators are the only forces controlling the availability of files being shared. If the administrators decide to no longer distribute a file, they simply have to remove it from their servers, and it will no longer be available to users. Along with leaving the users powerless in deciding what is distributed throughout the community, this makes the entire system vulnerable to threats and requests from the government and other large forces.\nFor example, YouTube has been pressured by the RIAA, MPAA, and entertainment industry to filter out copyrighted content. Although server-client networks are able to monitor and manage content availability, they can have more stability in the availability of the content they choose to host. A client should not have trouble accessing obscure content that is being shared on a stable centralized network. P2P networks, however, are more unreliable in sharing unpopular files because sharing files in a P2P network requires that at least one node in the network has the requested data, and that node must be able to connect to the node requesting the data. This requirement is occasionally hard to meet because users may delete or stop sharing data at any point.\nIn a P2P network, the community of users is entirely responsible for deciding which content is available. Unpopular files eventually disappear and become unavailable as fewer people share them. Popular files, however, are highly and easily distributed. Popular files on a P2P network are more stable and available than files on central networks. In a centralized network, a simple loss of connection between the server and clients can cause a failure, but in P2P networks, the connections between every node must be lost to cause a data-sharing failure. In a centralized system, the administrators are responsible for all data recovery and backups, while in P2P systems, each node requires its backup system. Because of the lack of central authority in P2P networks, forces such as the recording industry, RIAA, MPAA, and the government are unable to delete or stop the sharing of content on P2P systems.\nApplications.\nContent delivery.\nIn P2P networks, clients both provide and use resources. This means that unlike client\u2013server systems, the content-serving capacity of peer-to-peer networks can actually \"increase\" as more users begin to access the content (especially with protocols such as BitTorrent that require users to share, refer a performance measurement study). This property is one of the major advantages of using P2P networks because it makes the setup and running costs very small for the original content distributor.\nFile-sharing networks.\nPeer-to-peer file sharing networks such as Gnutella, G2, and the eDonkey network have been useful in popularizing peer-to-peer technologies. These advancements have paved the way for Peer-to-peer content delivery networks and services, including distributed caching systems like Correli Caches to enhance performance. Furthermore, peer-to-peer networks have made possible the software publication and distribution, enabling efficient sharing of Linux distribution and various games through file sharing networks.\nCopyright infringements.\nPeer-to-peer networking involves data transfer from one user to another without using an intermediate server. Companies developing P2P applications have been involved in numerous legal cases, primarily in the United States, over conflicts with copyright law. Two major cases are \"Grokster vs RIAA\" and \"MGM Studios, Inc. v. Grokster, Ltd.\". In the last case, the Court unanimously held that defendant peer-to-peer file sharing companies Grokster and Streamcast could be sued for inducing copyright infringement.\nMultimedia.\nThe P2PTV and PDTP protocols are used in various peer-to-peer applications. Some proprietary multimedia applications leverage a peer-to-peer network in conjunction with streaming servers to stream audio and video to their clients. Peercasting is employed for multicasting streams. Additionally, a project called LionShare, undertaken by Pennsylvania State University, MIT, and Simon Fraser University, aims to facilitate file sharing among educational institutions globally. Another notable program, Osiris, enables users to create anonymous and autonomous web portals that are distributed via a peer-to-peer network.\nOther P2P applications.\nDat is a distributed version-controlled publishing platform. I2P, is an overlay network used to browse the Internet anonymously. Unlike the related I2P, the Tor network is not itself peer-to-peer; however, it can enable peer-to-peer applications to be built on top of it via onion services. The InterPlanetary File System (IPFS) is a protocol and network designed to create a content-addressable, peer-to-peer method of storing and sharing hypermedia distribution protocol, with nodes in the IPFS network forming a distributed file system. Jami is a peer-to-peer chat and SIP app. JXTA is a peer-to-peer protocol designed for the Java platform. Netsukuku is a Wireless community network designed to be independent from the Internet. Open Garden is a connection-sharing application that shares Internet access with other devices using Wi-Fi or Bluetooth.\nResilio Sync is a directory-syncing app. Research includes projects such as the Chord project, the PAST storage utility, the P-Grid, and the CoopNet content distribution system. Secure Scuttlebutt is a peer-to-peer gossip protocol capable of supporting many different types of applications, primarily social networking. Syncthing is also a directory-syncing app. Tradepal l and M-commerce applications are designed to power real-time marketplaces. The U.S. Department of Defense is conducting research on P2P networks as part of its modern network warfare strategy. In May 2003, Anthony Tether, then director of DARPA, testified that the United States military uses P2P networks. WebTorrent is a P2P streaming torrent client in JavaScript for use in web browsers, as well as in the WebTorrent Desktop standalone version that bridges WebTorrent and BitTorrent serverless networks. Microsoft, in Windows 10, uses a proprietary peer-to-peer technology called \"Delivery Optimization\" to deploy operating system updates using end-users' PCs either on the local network or other PCs. According to Microsoft's Channel 9, this led to a 30%-50% reduction in Internet bandwidth usage. Artisoft's LANtastic was built as a peer-to-peer operating system where machines can function as both servers and workstations simultaneously. Hotline Communications Hotline Client was built with decentralized servers and tracker software dedicated to any type of files and continues to operate today. Cryptocurrencies are peer-to-peer-based digital currencies that use blockchains\nSocial implications.\nIncentivizing resource sharing and cooperation.\nCooperation among a community of participants is key to the continued success of P2P systems aimed at casual human users; these reach their full potential only when large numbers of nodes contribute resources. But in current practice, P2P networks often contain large numbers of users who utilize resources shared by other nodes, but who do not share anything themselves (often referred to as the \"freeloader problem\").\nFreeloading can have a profound impact on the network and in some cases can cause the community to collapse. In these types of networks \"users have natural disincentives to cooperate because cooperation consumes their own resources and may degrade their own performance\". Studying the social attributes of P2P networks is challenging due to large populations of turnover, asymmetry of interest and zero-cost identity. A variety of incentive mechanisms have been implemented to encourage or even force nodes to contribute resources.\nSome researchers have explored the benefits of enabling virtual communities to self-organize and introduce incentives for resource sharing and cooperation, arguing that the social aspect missing from today's P2P systems should be seen both as a goal and a means for self-organized virtual communities to be built and fostered. Ongoing research efforts for designing effective incentive mechanisms in P2P systems, based on principles from game theory, are beginning to take on a more psychological and information-processing direction.\nPrivacy and anonymity.\nSome peer-to-peer networks (e.g. Freenet) place a heavy emphasis on privacy and anonymity\u2014that is, ensuring that the contents of communications are hidden from eavesdroppers, and that the identities/locations of the participants are concealed. Public key cryptography can be used to provide encryption, data validation, authorization, and authentication for data/messages. Onion routing and other mix network protocols (e.g. Tarzan) can be used to provide anonymity.\nPerpetrators of live streaming sexual abuse and other cybercrimes have used peer-to-peer platforms to carry out activities with anonymity.\nPolitical implications.\nIntellectual property law and illegal sharing.\nAlthough peer-to-peer networks can be used for legitimate purposes, rights holders have targeted peer-to-peer over the involvement with sharing copyrighted material. Peer-to-peer networking involves data transfer from one user to another without using an intermediate server. Companies developing P2P applications have been involved in numerous legal cases, primarily in the United States, primarily over issues surrounding copyright law. Two major cases are \"Grokster vs RIAA\" and \"MGM Studios, Inc. v. Grokster, Ltd.\" In both of the cases the file sharing technology was ruled to be legal as long as the developers had no ability to prevent the sharing of the copyrighted material.\nTo establish criminal liability for the copyright infringement on peer-to-peer systems, the government must prove that the defendant infringed a copyright willingly for the purpose of personal financial gain or commercial advantage. Fair use exceptions allow limited use of copyrighted material to be downloaded without acquiring permission from the rights holders. These documents are usually news reporting or under the lines of research and scholarly work. Controversies have developed over the concern of illegitimate use of peer-to-peer networks regarding public safety and national security. When a file is downloaded through a peer-to-peer network, it is impossible to know who created the file or what users are connected to the network at a given time. Trustworthiness of sources is a potential security threat that can be seen with peer-to-peer systems.\nA study ordered by the European Union found that illegal downloading \"may\" lead to an increase in overall video game sales because newer games charge for extra features or levels. The paper concluded that piracy had a negative financial impact on movies, music, and literature. The study relied on self-reported data about game purchases and use of illegal download sites. Pains were taken to remove effects of false and misremembered responses.\nNetwork neutrality.\nPeer-to-peer applications present one of the core issues in the network neutrality controversy. Internet service providers (ISPs) have been known to throttle P2P file-sharing traffic due to its high-bandwidth usage. Compared to Web browsing, e-mail or many other uses of the internet, where data is only transferred in short intervals and relative small quantities, P2P file-sharing often consists of relatively heavy bandwidth usage due to ongoing file transfers and swarm/network coordination packets. In October 2007, Comcast, one of the largest broadband Internet providers in the United States, started blocking P2P applications such as BitTorrent. Their rationale was that P2P is mostly used to share illegal content, and their infrastructure is not designed for continuous, high-bandwidth traffic.\nCritics point out that P2P networking has legitimate legal uses, and that this is another way that large providers are trying to control use and content on the Internet, and direct people towards a client\u2013server-based application architecture. The client\u2013server model provides financial barriers-to-entry to small publishers and individuals, and can be less efficient for sharing large files. As a reaction to this bandwidth throttling, several P2P applications started implementing protocol obfuscation, such as the BitTorrent protocol encryption. Techniques for achieving \"protocol obfuscation\" involves removing otherwise easily identifiable properties of protocols, such as deterministic byte sequences and packet sizes, by making the data look as if it were random. The ISP's solution to the high bandwidth is P2P caching, where an ISP stores the part of files most accessed by P2P clients in order to save access to the Internet.\nCurrent research.\nResearchers have used computer simulations to aid in understanding and evaluating the complex behaviors of individuals within the network. \"Networking research often relies on simulation in order to test and evaluate new ideas. An important requirement of this process is that results must be reproducible so that other researchers can replicate, validate, and extend existing work.\" If the research cannot be reproduced, then the opportunity for further research is hindered. \"Even though new simulators continue to be released, the research community tends towards only a handful of open-source simulators. The demand for features in simulators, as shown by our criteria and survey, is high. Therefore, the community should work together to get these features in open-source software. This would reduce the need for custom simulators, and hence increase repeatability and reputability of experiments.\"\nPopular simulators that were widely used in the past are NS2, OMNeT++, SimPy, NetLogo, PlanetLab, ProtoPeer, QTM, PeerSim, ONE, P2PStrmSim, PlanetSim, GNUSim, and Bharambe.\nBesides all the above stated facts, there has also been work done on ns-2 open source network simulators. One research issue related to free rider detection and punishment has been explored using ns-2 simulator here.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "24108", "revid": "4076676", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24108", "title": "Prime Ministers of Australia", "text": ""}
{"id": "24109", "revid": "51033836", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24109", "title": "Prime minister", "text": "Top minister of cabinet and government\nA prime minister, also known as a chief of cabinet, chief minister, first minister, minister-president or premier, is the head of the cabinet and the leader of the ministers in the executive branch of government, often in a parliamentary or semi-presidential system. A prime minister is not the head of state, but rather the head of government, serving as the chief of the executive under either a monarch or a president in a republican form of government.\nIn parliamentary systems of government (be they constitutional monarchies or parliamentary republics), the Prime Minister (or occasionally a similar post with a different title, such as the Chancellor of Germany) is the most powerful politician and the functional leader of the state, by virtue of commanding the confidence of the legislature. The head of state is typically a ceremonial officer, though they may exercise reserve powers to check the Prime Minister in unusual situations.\nUnder some presidential systems, such as South Korea and Peru, the prime minister is the leader or the most senior member of the cabinet, but not the head of government. As such, in South Korea, the prime minister is equivalent to that of a vice president which is the second in-command and assumes the presidency in the absence of the president.\nIn many systems, the prime minister selects and may dismiss other members of the cabinet, and allocates posts to members within the government. In most systems, the prime minister is the presiding member and chairman of the cabinet. In a minority of systems, notably in semi-presidential systems, a prime minister is the official appointed to manage the civil service and execute the directives of the head of state.\nToday, the prime minister is often, but not always, a member of the legislature or its lower house, and is expected with other ministers to ensure the passage of bills through the legislature. In some monarchies the monarch may also exercise executive powers (known as the royal prerogative) without the approval of parliament.\nAs well as being head of government, being prime minister may require holding other roles or posts\u2014the prime minister of the United Kingdom, for example, is also First Lord of the Treasury and Minister for the Civil Service. In some cases, prime ministers may choose to hold additional ministerial posts (e.g. when the portfolio is critical to that government's mandate): during the Second World War Winston Churchill was also Minister of Defence (although there was then no Ministry of Defence). Another example is the Thirty-fourth government of Israel (2015\u20132019)[ [update]], when Benjamin Netanyahu at one point served as the prime minister and minister of Communications, Foreign Affairs, Regional Cooperation, Economy, Defense and Interior.\nEtymology.\nThe term \"prime minister\" is attested in 17th century sources referring to Cardinal Richelieu, after he was named \"premier ministre\" to head the French royal council in 1624. The title was used alongside the \"principal ministre d'\u00c9tat\" (\"chief minister of the state\") more as a job description. After 1661, Louis XIV and his descendants refused to allow one of their Ministers to be more important than the others, so the term was no longer in use.\nIn the 18th century in the United Kingdom, members of parliament disparagingly used the title in reference to Sir Robert Walpole (whose official title was First Lord of the Treasury). During the whole of the 18th century, Britain was involved in a prolonged conflict with France, periodically bursting into all-out war, and Britons took outspoken pride in their \"Liberty\" as contrasted to the \"Tyranny\" of French Absolute Monarchy; therefore, being implicitly compared with Richelieu was no compliment to Walpole. Over time, however, the title became honorific and remains so in the 21st century.\nHistory.\nOrigins.\nThe position of a head of government separate from the head of state, or as the most important government administrator or minister after the monarch in rank developed in multiple countries separate from each other. The names given could be \"prime minister\", although other terms were also used such as \"chief minister\", \"grand chancellor\", \"chancellor\", \"grand vizier\", \"counselor\", and others.\nThe literal title itself can be traced back to the Abbasid caliphate and the Ottoman Empire . They both had an official title of Grand Vizier simply the Head of the Government which is called Prime Minister nowadays. The Grand Vizier was the most powerful person after sultan but sometimes the Grand Vizier of Ottoman Empire was more powerful than sultan himself. The position of Chancellor is the same or comparable in some countries as a prime minister, even if the label is different. The term goes back to ancient Roman times as head of the chancellery. This title as head of government or the administration existed in ancient China as Grand Chancellor (Chinese: \u5bb0\u76f8; pinyin: \"Z\u01ceixi\u00e0ng\"), sometimes translated as \"prime minister\", existed since 685 BCE and ancient Japan Chancellor of the Realm (\u592a\u653f\u5927\u81e3 \"Daij\u014d-daijin\") since the 7th century CE. In the Holy Roman Empire the position of Archchancellor was the highest dignitary and traces to 860 CE, out of which later derived the positions of head of government such as the modern Chancellor of Germany, who is head of the federal government and an executive prime minister.\nThe power of these ministers depended entirely on the personal favour of the monarch. Although managing the parliament was among the necessary skills of holding high office, they did not depend on a parliamentary majority for their power. Although there was a cabinet, it was appointed entirely by the monarch, and the monarch usually presided over its meetings.\nThe monarch could dismiss the minister at any time, or worse: Cromwell was executed and Clarendon driven into exile when they lost favour. Kings sometimes divided power equally between two or more ministers to prevent one minister from becoming too powerful. Late in Anne's reign, for example, the Tory ministers Harley and Viscount Bolingbroke shared power.\nDevelopment.\nIn the mid 17th century, after the English Civil War (1642\u20131651), Parliament strengthened its position relative to the monarch then gained more power through the Glorious Revolution of 1688 and passage of the Bill of Rights in 1689. The monarch could no longer establish any law or impose any tax without its permission and thus the House of Commons became a part of the government. It is at this point that a modern style of prime minister begins to emerge.\nA tipping point in the evolution of the prime ministership came with the death of Anne in 1714 and the accession of George I to the throne. George spoke no English, spent much of his time at his home in Hanover, and had neither knowledge of, nor interest in, the details of British government. In these circumstances it was inevitable that the king's first minister would become the \"de facto\" head of the government.\nFrom 1721, this was the Whig politician Robert Walpole, who held office for twenty-one years. Walpole chaired cabinet meetings, appointed all the other ministers, dispensed the royal patronage and packed the House of Commons with his supporters. Under Walpole, the doctrine of cabinet solidarity developed. Walpole required that no minister other than himself have private dealings with the king, and also that when the cabinet had agreed on a policy, all ministers must defend it in public, or resign. As a later prime minister, Lord Melbourne, said, \"It matters not what we say, gentlemen, so long as we all say the same thing.\"\nWalpole always denied that he was \"prime minister\", and throughout the 18th century parliamentarians and legal scholars continued to deny that any such position was known to the Constitution. George II and George III made strenuous efforts to reclaim the personal power of the monarch, but the increasing complexity and expense of government meant that a minister who could command the loyalty of the Commons was increasingly necessary. The long tenure of the wartime prime minister William Pitt the Younger (1783\u20131801), combined with the mental illness of George III, consolidated the power of the post. The title \"prime minister\" was first referred to on government documents during the administration of Benjamin Disraeli but did not appear in the formal British Order of precedence until 1905.\nThe prestige of British institutions in the 19th century and the growth of the British Empire saw the British model of cabinet government, headed by a prime minister, widely copied, both in other European countries and in British colonial territories as they developed self-government. In some places alternative titles such as \"premier\", \"chief minister\", \"first minister of state\", \"president of the council\" or \"chancellor\" were adopted, but the essentials of the office were the same.\nModern usage.\nIn the late 20th century, many of the world's countries had prime ministers or equivalent ministers, holding office under either constitutional monarchies or ceremonial presidents. The main exceptions to this system include Switzerland and the United States, as well as the presidential republics in Latin America, such as Chile and Mexico, modelled on the U.S. system in which the president directly exercises executive authority.\nBahrain's former prime minister, Sheikh Khalifah bin Sulman Al Khalifah, occupied the post for about 50 years, from 1970 to November 2020, making him the longest serving non-elected prime minister.\nOverview of the office.\nIn monarchies and in republics.\nThe post of prime minister may be encountered both in constitutional monarchies (such as Belgium, Denmark, Japan, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, Norway, Malaysia, Morocco, Spain, Sweden, Thailand, Canada, Australia, New Zealand, and the United Kingdom) and in parliamentary republics, in which the head of state is an elected official (such as Bangladesh, Finland, the Czech Republic, France, Greece, Hungary, India, Indonesia (1945\u201366), Ireland, Nigeria (1960\u201366), Pakistan, Montenegro, Croatia, Bulgaria, Romania, Serbia, Turkey (1923\u20132018) and Italy). See also \"First Minister\", \"Premier\", \"Chief Minister\", \"Chancellor\", \"Taoiseach\", \"Minister of State (\"Statsminister\")\", \"President of the Government\", \"President of the Council of Ministers\" and \"Secretary of State\": alternative titles usually equivalent in meaning to, or translated as, \"prime minister\". Both Indonesia and Nigeria lost their positions as prime ministers in 1966. Brazil, Iran, the Philippines and Turkey also lost their positions as prime ministers. Chile, Mexico, Switzerland and the United States never had positions as prime ministers.\nThis contrasts with the presidential system, in which the president (or equivalent) is both the head of state and the head of the government. In some presidential and all semi-presidential systems, such as those of Algeria, Argentina, China, France, Poland, Russia, South Korea or Ukraine, the prime minister is an official generally appointed by the president but usually approved by the legislature and responsible for carrying out the directives of the president and managing the civil service. The premier of the Republic of China (Taiwan) is also appointed by the president but does not require any approval by the legislature.\nAppointment of the prime minister of France does not require any approval by the parliament either, but the parliament may force the resignation of the government. In these systems, it is possible for the president and the prime minister to be from different political parties if the legislature is controlled by a party different from that of the president. When it arises, such a state of affairs is usually referred to as (political) cohabitation.\nEntry into office.\nIn parliamentary systems a prime minister may enter into office by several means.\nWhile in practice most prime ministers under the Westminster system (including Australia, Canada, New Zealand, Malaysia, India and the United Kingdom) are the leaders of the largest party or coalition in parliament, technically the appointment of the prime minister is \"de jure\" exercised by the head of state. \nExit from office.\nIn older, convention-based parliamentary systems, prime ministers are not appointed for a specific term in office and in effect may remain in power through a number of elections and parliaments. For example, Margaret Thatcher was only ever appointed prime minister on \"one\" occasion, in 1979. She remained \"continuously\" in power until 1990, though she used the assembly of each House of Commons after a general election to reshuffle her cabinet.\nNewer parliamentary systems that operate based on a codified constitution, however, do have a term of office of the prime minister linked to the period in office of the parliament. Hence, for example, Latvian prime minister Kri\u0161j\u0101nis Kari\u0146\u0161, who was first appointed in 2018, had to be reappointed as head of a new government following the 2022 Latvian parliamentary election.\nThe position of prime minister is usually chosen from the political party that commands \u2013 whether by itself or as the largest member of a coalition \u2013 the majority of seats in the lower house of parliament, though this is not a requirement either; for example, following the 2018 Latvian parliamentary election, after two failed attempts by larger parties to form a coalition headed by them, the leader of the smallest party in parliament \u2013 Kri\u0161j\u0101nis Kari\u0146\u0161 \u2013 was eventually appointed as a compromise candidate. Italy has seen several emergency technocratic governments, such as Carlo Azeglio Ciampi's and Mario Draghi's governments, where the prime minister was a non-partisan expert backed by the confidence and supply of a broad cross-section of the parliament.\nIn parliamentary systems, governments are generally required to have the confidence of the lower house of parliament (though a small minority of parliaments, by giving a right to block supply to upper houses, in effect make the cabinet responsible to both houses, though in reality upper houses, even when they have the power, rarely exercise it). Where they lose a \"vote of confidence\", have a \"motion of no confidence\" passed against them, or where they lose supply, most constitutional systems require either:\nThe latter in effect allows the government to appeal the opposition of parliament to the electorate. However, in many jurisdictions a head of state \"may\" refuse a parliamentary dissolution, requiring the resignation of the prime minister and their government. In most modern parliamentary systems, the prime minister is the person who decides when to request a parliamentary dissolution.\nOlder constitutions often vest this power in the cabinet. In the United Kingdom, for example, the tradition whereby it is the prime minister who requests a dissolution of parliament dates back to 1918. Prior to then, it was the \"entire\" government that made the request. Similarly, though the modern 1937 Irish constitution grants to the Taoiseach the right to make the request, the earlier 1922 Irish Free State Constitution vested the power in the \"Executive Council\" (the then name for the Irish cabinet).\nSome systems, such as Germany and Spain, require motions of no confidence to be constructive: i.e., they must include the name of an alternative prime minister; if the motion of no confidence is successful, the alternative prime minister automatically takes office in place of the incumbent government, which cannot appeal this replacement to the electorate.\nIn Australia, the prime minister is expected to step down if they lose the majority support of their party under a spill motion as have many such as Tony Abbott, Julia Gillard, Kevin Rudd and Malcolm Turnbull.\nOrganisational structure.\nThe prime minister's executive office is usually called the Office of the Prime Minister or Cabinet Office. The U.K.'s Cabinet Office includes the Prime Minister's Office. Conversely, some Prime Minister's Offices incorporate the role of Cabinet, while Australia's Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet joins them at par. In Israel, the prime minister's executive office is officially titled the \"Prime Minister's Office\" in English, but the original Hebrew term can also be translated as the Prime Minister's Ministry. The Prime Minister's Department is also used, as is Cabinet Department.\nDescription of the role.\nWilfried Martens, who served as Prime Minister of Belgium, described his role as follows:\nFirst of all the Prime Minister must listen a lot, and when deep disagreements occur, he must suggest a solution to the matter. This can be done in different ways. Sometimes during the discussion, I note the elements of the problem and think of a proposal I can formulate to the Council (cabinet), the Secretary taking notes. The Ministers then insist on changing game ages. The Prime Minister can also make a proposal which leaves enough room for amendments in order to keep the current discussion on the right tracks. When a solution must be found in order to reach a consensus, he can force one or two Ministers to join or resign.\nCross-country comparative details.\nTitles.\nIn many cases, though commonly used, \"prime minister\" is not the official title of the office-holder. In the Russian constitution, the prime minister is titled \"Chairman of the government\". The Irish prime minister is called the (which is rendered into English as \"prime minister\"), in Israel the prime minister is \"Rosh HaMemshalah,\" meaning \"head of the government\", and the Spanish prime minister is the President of the Government (). The head of government of the People's Republic of China is referred to as the Premier of the State Council.\nOther common forms include president of the council of ministers (for example in Italy, ), President of the Executive Council, or Minister-President. In the Nordic countries the prime minister is called \"Statsminister\", meaning \"Minister of State\". In federations, the head of government of a federated entity (such as the province or territory of Canada, the province of Argentina or the state of Brazil) is most commonly known as the premier, chief minister, governor or minister-president.\nIt is convention in the English language to call nearly all national heads of government \"prime minister\" (or sometimes the equivalent term \"premier\"), except in cases where the head of state and head of government are one position (usually a presidency), regardless of the correct title of the head of government as applied in their respective country. The few exceptions to the rule are Germany and Austria, whose head of government's title is Federal Chancellor; Monaco, whose head of government is referred to as the Minister of State; and Vatican City, for which the head of government is titled the Secretary of State. A stand-out case is the president of Iran, who is not actually a head of state, but the head of the government of Iran. He is referred to as \"president\" in both the Persian and English languages.\nIn non-Commonwealth countries, the prime minister may be entitled to the style of Excellency like a president. In some Commonwealth countries, prime ministers and former prime ministers are styled Honourable or Right Honourable associated with their position (the prime minister of Australia or the prime minister of Canada, for example). In the United Kingdom, the prime minister and former prime ministers are also often styled Honourable or Right Honourable; however, this is not due to their position as head of government, but a privilege of being current members of His Majesty's Most Honourable Privy Council.\nIn the UK, where devolved government is in place, the leaders of the Scottish, Northern Irish and Welsh Governments are styled First Minister. Between 1921 and 1972, when Northern Ireland had a majority rule Parliament, the head of government was the prime minister of Northern Ireland. In Bangladesh, the prime minister is called \"Prodh\u0101n Montr\u012b\", literally meaning \"the head of ministers\" or \"prime minister\". In India, the prime minister is called \"Pradh\u0101n Mantr\u012b\", literally meaning \"the head of ministers\" or \"prime minister\". In Pakistan, the prime minister is referred to as \"Wazir-e-Azam\", meaning \"grand vizier\".\nConstitutional basis for the position in different countries.\nThe position, power and status of prime ministers differ depending on the age of the constitution.\nAlgeria's constitution (1962) lists the powers, functions and duties of the prime minister of Algeria.\nAustralia's constitution makes no mention of a prime minister of Australia and the office only exists by convention, based on the British model.\nBangladesh's constitution clearly outlines the functions and powers of the prime minister, and also details the process of his/her appointment and dismissal.\nThe People's Republic of China constitution set a premier just one place below the National People's Congress in China. Premier read as (Simplified Chinese: \u603b\u7406; pinyin: Z\u014fngl\u012d) in Chinese.\nCanada has a 'mixed' or hybrid constitution, partly formally codified and partly uncodified. The codified part originally made no reference whatsoever to a prime minister and still gives no parameters of the office. Instead, their powers, duties, appointment and termination follow uncodified conventions. The \"Constitution Act, 1867\" only establishes the Queen's Privy Council for Canada, to which all federal ministers (among others) are appointed and with Members of which the Monarch or their Governor General normally performs executive government (as King- or Governor-in-Council). The \"Constitution Act, 1982\", adds passing reference to the \"Prime Minister of Canada\" [French: ] but as detail of conferences of federal and provincial first ministers.)\nCzech Republic's constitution clearly outlines the functions and powers of the prime minister of the Czech Republic, and also details the process of his/her appointment and dismissal.\nFinland's constitution (1917) lists the powers, functions and duties of the prime minister of Finland.\nFrance's constitution (1958) lists the powers, functions and duties of the prime minister of France.\nGermany's Basic Law (1949) lists the powers, functions and duties of the federal chancellor.\nGreece's constitution (1975) lists the powers, functions and duties of the prime minister of Greece.\nHungary's constitution (2012) lists the powers, functions and duties of the prime minister of Hungary.\nIndia's constitution (1950) lists the powers, functions and duties of the prime minister of India. In India, prime ministerial candidates must be a member of parliament, i.e. of either the Lok Sabha (Lower House) or Rajya Sabha (Upper House). No parliamentary vote takes place on who forms a government.\nIreland's constitution (1937), provides for the office of Taoiseach in detail, listing powers, functions and duties.\nIsrael's constitution (1948) lists the powers, functions and duties of the prime minister of Israel.\nItaly's constitution (1948) lists the powers, functions and duties of the president of the Council of Ministers.\nJapan's constitution (1946) lists the powers, functions and duties of the prime minister of Japan.\nThe Republic of Korea's constitution (1987) sections 86\u201387 list the powers, functions and duties of the prime minister of the Republic of Korea.\nMalta's constitution (1964) lists the powers, functions and duties of the prime minister of Malta.\nMalaysia's constitution (1957) lists the powers, functions and duties of the prime minister of Malaysia.\nNorway's constitution (1814) lists the powers, functions and duties of the prime minister of Norway\nPakistan's constitution (1973) lists the powers, functions and duties of the prime minister of Pakistan.\nPoland's constitution (1918) lists the powers, functions and duties of the prime minister of Poland.\nSpain's constitution (1978) regulates the appointment, dismissal, powers, functions and duties of the President of the Government.\nSri Lanka's constitution (1978) lists the powers, functions and duties of the prime minister of Sri Lanka.\nThailand's constitution (1932) lists the powers, functions and duties of the prime minister of Thailand.\nTaiwan's constitution (1946) lists the powers, functions and duties of the president of the Executive Yuan.\nThe United Kingdom's constitution, being uncodified and largely unwritten, makes no mention of a prime minister. Though it had \"de facto\" existed for centuries, its first mention in official state documents did not occur until the first decade of the twentieth century. Accordingly, it is often said \"not to exist\"; indeed there are several instances of parliament declaring this to be the case. The prime minister sits in the cabinet solely by virtue of occupying another office, either First Lord of the Treasury (office in commission) or more rarely Chancellor of the Exchequer (the last of whom was Balfour in 1905).\nIn such systems unwritten (and unenforceable) constitutional conventions often outline the order in which people are asked to form a government. If the prime minister resigns after a general election, the monarch usually asks the leader of the opposition to form a government. Where however a resignation occurs during a parliament session (unless the government has itself collapsed) the monarch will ask another member of the government to form a government. While previously the monarch had some leeway in whom to ask, all British political parties now elect their leaders (until 1965 the Conservatives chose their leader by informal consultation). The last time the monarch had a choice over the appointment occurred in 1963 when the Earl of Home was asked to become prime minister ahead of Rab Butler.\nDuring the period between the time it is clear that the incumbent government has been defeated at a general election, and the actual swearing-in of the new prime minister by the monarch, governor-general, or president, that person is referred to as the \"prime minister-elect\" or \"prime minister-designate\". Neither term is strictly correct from a constitutional point of view, but they have wide acceptance. In a situation in which a ruling party elects or appoints a new leader, the incoming leader will usually be referred as \"prime minister-in-waiting\". An example or this situation was in 2016 in the United Kingdom when Theresa May was elected leader of the Conservative Party while David Cameron was still prime minister.\nRussia's constitution (1993) lists the powers, functions and duties of the prime minister of Russia.\nUkraine's constitution (1996) lists the powers, functions and duties of the prime minister of Ukraine.\nLists of prime ministers.\nThe following table groups the list of past and present prime ministers and details information available in those lists. [\" for Syria, Sudan, Kenya, and the Republic of the Congo\"]\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "24110", "revid": "47457436", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24110", "title": "President (government title)", "text": "Title of the head of state in various governments\nPresident is a common title for the head of state in most republics. Depending on the country, a president could be head of government, a ceremonial figurehead, or something between these two extremes.\nThe functions exercised by a president vary according to the form of government. In parliamentary republics, they are usually, but not always, limited to those of the head of state and are thus largely ceremonial. An exception to this would be presidential-parliamentary republics (e.g. Botswana and South Africa), the role of the president is more prominent, encompassing more of the functions of a head of government. In semi-presidential republics, the president has some discretionary powers like over foreign affairs, appointment of the head of government and defence, but they are not themselves head of government. A leader of a one-party state may also hold the position of president for ceremonial purposes or to maintain an official state position.\nStyles such as \"Mr. President\" or \"Madam President\" may apply to a person holding the title of president or presiding over certain other governmental bodies. \"Mr. President\" has subsequently been used by governments to refer to their heads of state. It is the conventional translation of non-English styles such as \"Monsieur le Pr\u00e9sident\" for the president of the French Republic. It also has a long history of usage as the title of the presiding officers of legislative and judicial bodies. The speaker of the House of Commons of Canada is addressed as \"pr\u00e9sident(e) de la Chambre des communes\" in French and as \"Mr. Speaker\" or \"Madam Speaker\" in English.\nHistory.\nThe title \"president\" is derived from the Latin \"prae-\" \"before\" + \"sedere\" \"to sit\". The word \"presidents\" is also used in the King James Bible at Daniel 6:2 to translate the Aramaic term \u05e1\u05b8\u05e8\u05b0\u05db\u05b4\u05a3\u05d9\u05df \"(s\u0101\u00b7r\u0259\u00b7\u1e35\u00een)\", a word of likely Persian origin, meaning \"officials\", \"commissioners\", \"overseers\" or \"chiefs\". As such, it originally designated the officer who presides over or \"sits before\" a gathering and ensures that debate is conducted according to the rules of order (\"see also\" chairman and speaker), but today it most commonly refers to an executive official in any social organization. Early examples are from the universities of Oxford and Cambridge (from 1464) and the founding president of the Royal Society, William Brouncker, in 1660. This usage survives today in the title of such offices as \"President of the Board of Trade\" and \"Lord President of the Council\" in the United Kingdom, as well as \"President of the Senate\" in the United States (one of the roles constitutionally assigned to the vice president). The officiating priest at certain Anglican religious services, too, is sometimes called the \"president\" in this sense.\nThe most common modern usage is as the title of a head of state in a republic. The first usage of the word \"president\" to denote the highest official in a government was during the Commonwealth of England.\nCommonwealth.\nThomas Hungerford, first recorded speaker of the English House of Commons in the rolls of the Parliament of England in 1376/7, used the title, \"Mr. Speaker\", a precedent followed by subsequent speakers of the House of Commons.\nAfter the abolition of the monarchy, the English Council of State, whose members were elected by the House of Commons, became the executive government of the Commonwealth. The Council of State was the successor of the Privy Council, which had previously been headed by the lord president; its successor the Council of State was also headed by a lord president, the first of which was John Bradshaw. However, the lord president alone was not head of state, because that office was vested in the council as a whole.\nThe speaker of the House of Commons of Canada, established in 1867, is also addressed as \"Monsieur le Pr\u00e9sident\" or \"Madame la Pr\u00e9sidente\" in French.\nFrance.\nIn pre-revolutionary France, the president of a \"Parlement\" evolved into a powerful magistrate, a member of the so-called \"noblesse de robe\" (\"nobility of the gown\"), with considerable judicial as well as administrative authority. The name referred to his primary role of presiding over trials and other hearings. In the 17th and 18th centuries, seats in the \"Parlements\", including presidencies, became effectively hereditary, since the holder of the office could ensure that it would pass to an heir by paying the crown a special tax known as the \"paulette\". The post of \"first president\" (\"premier pr\u00e9sident\"), however, could be held by only the King's nominees. The \"Parlements\" were abolished by the French Revolution. In modern France the chief judge of a court is known as its president (\"pr\u00e9sident de la cour\").\nBy the 18th century, the president of a French parlement was addressed as \"Monsieur le Pr\u00e9sident\". In Pierre Choderlos de Laclos's 1782 novel \"Les Liaisons dangereuses\" (\"Dangerous Liaisons\"), the wife of a magistrate in a parlement is referred to as Madame la Pr\u00e9sidente de Tourvel (\"Madam President of Tourvel\"). The fictional name Tourvel refers not to the \"parlement\" in which the magistrate sits, but rather, in imitation of an aristocratic title, to his private estate. This influenced parliamentary usage in France. When the Second French Republic was established in 1848, \"Monsieur le Pr\u00e9sident\" became the title of the president of the French Republic.\nUnited States.\nThe modern usage of the term \"president\" to designate a single person who is the head of state of a republic can be traced directly to the United States Constitution of 1787, which created the office of president of the United States. Previous American governments had included \"presidents\" (such as the president of the Continental Congress or the president of the Massachusetts Provincial Congress), but these were presiding officers in the older sense, with no executive authority. It has been suggested that the executive use of the term was borrowed from early American colleges and universities, which were usually headed by a \"president\". British universities were headed by an official called the \"Chancellor\" (typically a ceremonial position) while the chief administrator held the title of \"Vice-Chancellor\". But America's first institutions of higher learning (such as Harvard University and Yale University) did not resemble a full-sized university so much as one of its constituent colleges. A number of colleges at Cambridge University featured an official called the \"president\". The head, for instance, of Magdalene College, Cambridge was called the \"master\" and his second the \"president\". The first president of Harvard, Henry Dunster, had been educated at Magdalene. Some have speculated that he borrowed the term out of a sense of humility, considering himself only a temporary placeholder. The presiding official of Yale College, originally a \"rector\" (after the usage of continental European universities), became \"president\" in 1745.\nA common style of address for presidents, \"Mr/Mrs. President\", is borrowed from British Parliamentary tradition, in which the presiding Speaker of the House of Commons is referred to as \"Mr/Mrs. Speaker\". Coincidentally, this usage resembles the older French custom of referring to the president of a \"parlement\" as \"Monsieur/Madame le Pr\u00e9sident\", a form of address that in modern France applies to both the president of the Republic and to chief judges. In the United States, the title \"Mr. President\" is used in a number of formal instances as well: for example anyone presiding over the United States Senate is addressed as \"Mr./Madam President\", especially the vice president, who is the president of the Senate. Other uses of the title include presidents of state and local legislatures; however, only the president of the United States uses the title outside of formal sessions.\nThe 1787 Constitution of the United States did not specify the manner of address for the president. When George Washington was sworn in as the first president of the United States on April 30, 1789, however, the administering of the oath of office ended with the proclamation: \"Long live George Washington, President of the United States.\" No title other than the name of the office of the executive was officially used at the inauguration. The question of a presidential title was being debated in Congress at the time, however, having become official legislative business with Richard Henry Lee's motion of April 23, 1789. Lee's motion asked Congress to consider \"what titles it will be proper to annex to the offices of President and Vice President of the United States\u00a0\u2013 if any other than those given in the Constitution\". Vice President John Adams, in his role as President of the United States Senate, organized a congressional committee. There Adams agitated for the adoption of the style of \"Highness\" (as well as the title of \"Protector of Their [the United States'] Liberties\") for the president. Adams and Lee were among the most outspoken proponents of an exalted presidential title.\nOthers favored the variant of \"Electoral Highness\" or the lesser \"Excellency\", the latter of which was vociferously opposed by Adams, who contended that it was far beneath the presidential dignity, as the executives of the states, some of which were also titled \"President\" (e.g. the president of Pennsylvania), at that time often enjoyed the style of \"Excellency\"; Adams said the president \"would be leveled with colonial governors or with functionaries from German princedoms\" if he were to use the style of \"Excellency\". Adams and Richard Henry Lee both feared that cabals of powerful senators would unduly influence a weak executive, and saw an exalted title as a way of strengthening the presidency. On further consideration, Adams deemed even \"Highness\" insufficient and instead proposed that the executive, both the president and the vice president (i.e., himself), be styled \"Majesty\" to prevent the \"great danger\" of an executive with insufficient dignity. Adams' efforts were met with widespread derision; Thomas Jefferson called them \"the most superlatively ridiculous thing I ever heard of\", while Benjamin Franklin considered it \"absolutely mad\".\nWashington consented to the demands of James Madison and the United States House of Representatives that the title be altered to \"Mr. President\". Nonetheless, later \"The Honorable\" became the standard title of the President in formal address, and \"His/Her Excellency\" became the title of the president when addressed formally internationally.\nHistorically, the title was reserved for the incumbent president only, and was not to be used for former presidents, holding that it was not proper to use the title as a courtesy title when addressing a former president. According to the official website of the United States of America, the correct way to address a letter is to use \"The Honorable John Doe\" and the correct salutation is \"Mr. Doe\".\nOnce the United States adopted the title of \"president\" for its head of state, many other nations followed suit.\nOther countries.\nHaiti became the first presidential republic in the Caribbean when Henri Christophe assumed the title in 1807. Almost all the Pan-American nations that became independent from Spain in the early 1810s and 1820s chose a US-style president as their chief executive. The first European president was the president of the Italian Republic of 1802, a client state of revolutionary France, in the person of Napoleon Bonaparte. The first African president was the president of Liberia (1848), while the first Asian president was the president of the Philippines (1899).\nDescription.\nIn the twentieth and twenty-first centuries, the powers of presidencies have varied from country to country. The spectrum of power has included presidents-for-life and hereditary presidencies to ceremonial heads of state.\nPresidents in the countries with a democratic or representative form of government are usually elected for a specified period of time and in some cases may be re-elected by the same process by which they are appointed, i.e. in many nations, periodic popular elections. The powers vested in such presidents vary considerably. Some presidencies, such as that of Ireland, are largely ceremonial, whereas other systems vest the president with substantive powers such as the appointment and dismissal of prime ministers or cabinets, the power to declare war, and powers of veto on legislation. In many nations the president is also the commander-in-chief of the nation's armed forces, though this varies significantly around the world.\nThe roles of the President, regardless of the government system, are fundamentally defined by the tension between two distinct constitutional and political functions: the Head of State and the Head of Government. The way a nation\u2019s constitution delegates or separates these two roles determines the institutional power, stability, and political dynamics of the executive branch.\nPresidential systems.\nIn almost all states with a presidential system of government, the president exercises the functions of head of state and head of government, i.e. the president directs the executive branch of government. When a president is not only head of state, but also head of government, this is known in Europe as a \"President of the Council\" (from the French \"Pr\u00e9sident du Conseil\"), used 1871\u20131940 and 1944\u20131958 in the Third and Fourth French Republics. In the United States the president has always been both Head of State and Head of Government and has always had the title of President.\nIn pure presidential systems, such as the United States, the president simultaneously holds both the ceremonial role of the head of state and the political role of the head of government. This unified presidency provides strong, decisive leadership but is prone to inherent tension and structural conflict.\nPresidents in this system are either directly elected by popular vote or indirectly elected by an electoral college or some other democratically elected body.\nIn the United States, the president is indirectly elected by the Electoral College made up of electors chosen by voters in the presidential election. In most states of the United States, each elector is committed to voting for a specified candidate determined by the popular vote in each state, so that the people, in voting for each elector, are in effect voting for the candidate. However, for various reasons the numbers of electors in favour of each candidate are unlikely to be proportional to the popular vote. Thus, in five close United States elections (1824, 1876, 1888, 2000, and 2016), the candidate with the most popular votes still lost the election.\nIn Mexico, the president is directly elected for a six-year term by popular vote. The candidate who wins the most votes is elected president even without an absolute majority. The president is allowed to serve only one term.\nIn Brazil, the president is directly elected for a four-year term by popular vote. A candidate has to have more than 50% of the valid votes. If no candidates achieve a majority of the votes, there is a runoff election between the two candidates with most votes. Again, a candidate needs a majority of the vote to be elected. In Brazil, a president cannot be elected to more than two consecutive terms, but there is no limit on the number of terms a president can serve.\nMany South American, Central American, African and some Asian nations follow the presidential model.\nThe core challenge of the unified presidency is that the President must act as a partisan political leader to achieve their policy goals (head of government), yet simultaneously serve as a unifying, supra-partisan national symbol (head of state).\nWhen a U.S. President champions controversial legislation or vetoes bills, they fulfill their duty as the head of government. However, these partisan actions inevitably alienate the opposition, making it extremely difficult to retain the moral and symbolic authority needed for the head of state role. This role conflict often fuels political polarization, forcing the President to choose between being an effective political leader and a respected national symbol.\nThe use of executive orders illustrates this tension perfectly. These are unilateral powers used by the head of government to manage the administrative state. When a President uses them to enact sweeping policy changes that bypass the legislature, opponents frequently accuse them of abusing their political power, thereby undermining the President's perceived legitimacy as the impartial head of state who upholds constitutional norms.\nLinz\u2019s Dual Legitimacy: This institutional design also connects to Juan Linz\u2019s theory of Dual Legitimacy. The conflict between the President (head of government with a popular mandate) and the Congress (head of state with a popular mandate) in a divided government (like South Korea's \u2018Divided Government' situation) is a direct manifestation of this structural tension, where the fixed term rigidity prevents easy resolution of the conflict between the two branches claiming equal democratic legitimacy.\nFor example, In South Korea, president Yoon has vetoed 18 times in 2024 year alone and 25 times since taking office. This is the second record in history after former President Seungman Lee.\nSemi-presidential systems.\nA second system is the semi-presidential system, also known as the French model. In this system, as in the parliamentary system, there are both a president and a prime minister; but unlike the parliamentary system, the president may have significant day-to-day power. For example, in France, when their party controls the majority of seats in the National Assembly, the president can operate closely with the parliament and prime minister, and work towards a common agenda. When the National Assembly is controlled by their opponents, however, the president can find themselves marginalized with the opposition party prime minister exercising most of the power. Though the prime minister remains an appointee of the president, the president must obey the rules of parliament, and select a leader from the house's majority holding party. Thus, sometimes the president and prime minister can be allies, sometimes rivals; the latter situation is known in France as cohabitation. Variants of the French semi-presidential system, developed at the beginning of the Fifth Republic by Charles de Gaulle, are used in France, Portugal, Romania, Sri Lanka and several post-colonial countries which have emulated the French model. In Finland, although the 2000 constitution moved towards a ceremonial presidency, the system is still formally semi-presidential, with the president of Finland retaining e.g. foreign policy and appointment powers. \nSri Lanka, formerly the Dominion of Ceylon, declared itself a Republic in 1972. It introduced a Westminster style Parliamentary system, with William Gopallawa as the nominal Head of State, styled as the President. In 1978, J. R. Jayawardene Introduced the 2nd Republican Constitution with a Semi-Presidential System. \nThe semi-presidential system (Dual-Executive or Premier-Presidential system), most famously established in the French Fifth Republic, offers a model where the dual roles are not fully separated, but rather institutionally shared between two positions: the president and the prime minister. This system explicitly formalizes the dual-executive structure.\nThe president, popularly elected, serves as the primary head of state but retains significant head of government powers, particularly over foreign policy and national defense (the domaine r\u00e9serv\u00e9). The prime minister, who must command the confidence of the National Assembly, focuses on domestic policy and administration, serving as the functional head of government.\nThe political function of the dual roles becomes most evident during \"cohabitation.\" This occurs when the president and the parliamentary majority belong to different political parties. In this scenario:\nThe President (head of state) is forced to appoint a prime minister from the opposition party.\nThe head of government power effectively shifts to the prime minister, who controls the domestic policy agenda.\nThe president is largely relegated to the core head of state and foreign policy roles, creating a temporary, functional separation of powers within the executive branch.\nThe first time a French President and Prime Minister were from different political parties was called cohabitation, happening from 1986 to 1988. The Socialist President, Fran\u00e7ois Mitterrand, had to pick a conservative, Jacques Chirac, as his prime minister because conservatives won the most seats in parliament. Chirac took full control of domestic policy, like selling off state-owned companies (privatization). This showed he was in charge of the head of government role. Mitterrand mainly focused on being the head of state, keeping control over foreign policy and the military. This situation proved that even with a strong president, the system could shift power based on election results, making the president share his executive duties.\nParliamentary republics.\nThe parliamentary republic, is a parliamentary system in which the presidency is largely ceremonial with either \"de facto\" or no significant executive authority (such as the president of Austria) or \"de jure\" no significant executive power (such as the president of Ireland), and the executive powers rests with the prime minister who automatically assumes the post as head of a majority party or coalition, but takes oath of office administered by the president. However, the president is head of the civil service, commander in chief of the armed forces and in some cases can dissolve parliament. Countries using this system include Austria, Armenia, Albania, Bangladesh, Czech Republic, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, India, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Malta, Pakistan, and Singapore.\nA variation of the parliamentary republic is a system with an executive president in which the president is the head of state and the government but unlike a presidential system, is elected by and accountable to a parliament, and referred to as president. Countries using this system include Botswana, Nauru and South Africa.\nIn many parliamentary republics, the dual roles are completely and constitutionally separated, leaving the president with only the head of state functions.\nIn countries like Germany or India, the president is purposefully stripped of meaningful head of government authority. Their function is strictly ceremonial and symbolic. They serve as the head of state, the final signature on legislation, and the formal nominator of the prime minister chosen by the parliamentary majority.\nThis radical separation ensures that the president can fulfill the unifying, supra-partisan role of the head of state without interference from the day-to-day political conflicts of the government. By eliminating the political component of the executive role, the office avoids the internal conflicts faced by the unified presidency.\nIn these systems, the prime minister (or Chancellor) is the undisputed and sole head of government. Their power is entirely political, derived from and accountable to the legislature through a continuous mechanism of confidence (or no-confidence).\nThe German president is a purely ceremonial head of state, lacking the head of government authority held by the Chancellor. This was clear in 2017 when coalition talks collapsed. President Frank-Walter Steinmeier did not impose policy or force a solution. Instead, he used his impartial authority and constitutional duty to facilitate dialogue among party leaders. His role was strictly limited to safeguarding the constitutional order and enabling the political process to form the new government, demonstrating the power of a non-partisan symbol.\nDictatorships.\nIn dictatorships, the title of president is frequently taken by self-appointed or military-backed leaders. Such is the case in many states: Idi Amin in Uganda, Mobutu Sese Seko in Zaire, Ferdinand Marcos in the Philippines, Suharto in Indonesia, and Saddam Hussein in Iraq are some examples. Other presidents in authoritarian states have wielded only symbolic or no power such as Craveiro Lopes in Portugal and Joaqu\u00edn Balaguer under the \"Trujillo era\" of the Dominican Republic.\nPresident for life is a title assumed by some dictators to try to ensure their authority or legitimacy is never questioned. Presidents like Alexandre P\u00e9tion, Rafael Carrera, Josip Broz Tito, and Fran\u00e7ois Duvalier died in office. Kim Il Sung was named Eternal leader of the Republic after his death.\nCollective presidency.\nOnly a tiny minority of modern republics do not have a single head of state. Some examples of this are:\nOne-party states.\nPeople's Republic of China.\nThe president of China is the state representative of the People's Republic of China. While the office has many of the characteristics of a nominal head of state, the Constitution of China does not define it as such. Under the country's constitution, the presidency is a largely ceremonial office with no real power. However, since 1993, as a matter of convention, the presidency has been held simultaneously by the General Secretary of the Chinese Communist Party, the top leader in the single-party system.\nBetween 1982 and 2019, the Chinese constitution stipulated that the president could not serve more than two consecutive terms. Before the Cultural Revolution, as well as since March 2018, there were no term limits attached to this office. Under Xi Jinping's administration, the term limits of the presidency were abolished, but its powers and ceremonial role remained unchanged. In March 2023, Xi secured an unprecedented third term as president.\nThe title of the office (), which literally translates to \"state chairman\", was unchanged in the Chinese text, but a new English translation of \"President of the People's Republic of China\" has been adopted since the restoration in 1982. In 2025, the U.S. government partially resume using the term \"State Chairman\" in stead of the President of China.\nLao People's Democratic Republic.\nIn Laos, which is a one-party state similar to that of China, the president is elected by the Laotian National Assembly, and is considered to be the head of state. Since 1998, however, presidential officeholders in Laos often occupy their position as General Secretary of the Lao People's Revolutionary Party concurrently, and thus exercise political power via that role. In accordance with the current Laotian Constitution \"(rev. in 2015)\", the president may not serve more than 2 consecutive terms, and elections are to take place every 5 years.\nThe President of Laos is the \"de jure\" commander-in-chief of the Lao People's Armed Forces. They also possess the authority (with the consent of the national assembly) to appoint the prime minister and vice president, as well as other roles. The current President of Laos, elected in March 2021, is Thongloun Sisoulith.\nRepublic of Cuba.\nIn Cuba, officially the Republic of Cuba, the president, recognized officially as the president of the Republic, is considered to be the head of state. It is the second highest office in Cuba, but still ranks below the First Secretary of the Communist Party of Cuba. The current president, Miguel D\u00edaz-Canel, however, has held both titles concurrently since April 2021, having been granted the rank of First Secretary by the National Assembly of People's Power following the resignation and retirement of Ra\u00fal Castro.\nThe president is elected by representatives within Cuba's parliament, the National Assembly of People's Power, and in accordance with the Cuban Constitution, which was rewritten in February 2019 following a national referendum, is limited to two consecutive five-year terms. The president is also considered to be responsible for the National Assembly. The current president was elected by the National Assembly in December 2019 with an almost unanimous vote, and was re-elected in a similar fashion in April 2023.\nPresidential symbols.\nAs the country's head of state, in most countries the president is entitled to certain perquisites, and may have a prestigious residence, often a lavish mansion or palace, sometimes more than one (e.g. summer and winter residences, or a country retreat) Customary symbols of office may include an official uniform, decorations, a presidential seal, coat of arms, flag and other visible accessories, as well as military honours such as gun salutes, ruffles and flourishes, and a presidential guard. A common presidential symbol is the presidential sash worn most often by presidents in Latin America and Africa as a symbol of the continuity of the office.\nPresidential chronologies.\nUnited Nations member countries in columns, other entities at the beginning:\nTitles for non-heads of state.\nAs head of government.\nSome countries with parliamentary systems use a term meaning/translating as \"president\" (in some languages indistinguishable from chairman) for the head of parliamentary government, often as President of the Government, President of the Council of Ministers or President of the Executive Council.\nHowever, such an official is explicitly not the president of the \"country\". These officials are called \"president\" using an older sense of the word, to denote the fact that the official heads the \"cabinet\". A separate head of state generally exists in their country who instead serves as the president or monarch of the country.\nThus, such officials are really premiers, and to avoid confusion are often described simply as 'prime minister' when being mentioned internationally.\nThere are several examples for this kind of presidency:\nOther executive positions.\nSub-national.\n\"President\" can also be the title of the chief executive at a lower administrative level, such as the parish presidents of the parishes of the U.S. state of Louisiana, the presiding member of city council for villages in the U.S. state of Illinois, or the municipal presidents of Mexico's municipalities. Perhaps the best known sub-national presidents are the borough presidents of the five boroughs of New York City.\nPoland.\nIn Poland, the \"president of the city\" () is the executive authority of the municipality elected in direct elections, the equivalent of the mayor. The Office of the President (Mayor) is also found in Germany and Switzerland.\nRussia.\nGovernors of ethnic republics in the Russian Federation used to have the title of President, occasionally alongside other, secondary titles such as \"Chairman of the Government\" (also used by Prime Minister of Russia). This likely reflects the origin of Russian republics as homelands for various ethnic groups: while all federal subjects of Russia are currently \"de jure\" equal, their predecessors, the ASSRs, used to enjoy more privileges than the ordinary krais and oblasts of the RSFSR (such as greater representation in the Soviet of Nationalities). Thus, the ASSRs and their eventual successors would have more in common with nation-states than with ordinary administrative divisions, at least in spirit, and would choose titles accordingly.\nOver the course of the 2010s the presidents of Russian republics would progressively change their title to that of Head (), a proposition suggested by the president of Chechnya Ramzan Kadyrov and later made law by the Parliament of Russia and President Dmitriy Medvedev in 2010. Despite this, however, presidents of Tatarstan resisted the move, before 2023, where it was switched to the Head or Rais, the latter of which could be translated from Tatar as \"President\".\nUnited Kingdom.\nThe lord president of the Council is one of the Great Officers of State in the United Kingdom who presides over meetings of British Privy Council; the Cabinet headed by the prime minister is technically a committee of the council, and all decisions of the Cabinet are formally approved through Orders in Council. Although the lord president is a member of the Cabinet, the position is largely a ceremonial one and is traditionally given to either the leader of the House of Commons or the leader of the House of Lords.\nHistorically the president of the Board of Trade was a cabinet member.\nBritish dependencies.\nIn Alderney, the elected head of government is called the president of the States of Alderney.\nIn the Isle of Man, there is a president of Tynwald.\nSpain.\nIn Spain, the executive leaders of the autonomous communities (regions) are called presidents. In each community, they can be called \"Presidente de la Comunidad\" or \"Presidente del Consejo\" among others. They are elected by their respective regional assemblies and have similar powers to a state president or governor.\nDeputies.\nBelow a president, there can be a number of or \"vice presidents\" (or occasionally \"deputy presidents\") and sometimes several \"assistant presidents\" or \"assistant vice presidents\", depending on the organisation and its size. These posts do not hold the same power but more of a subordinate position to the president. However, power can be transferred in special circumstances to the deputy or vice president. Normally vice presidents hold some power and special responsibilities below that of the president. The difference between vice/deputy presidents and assistant/associate vice presidents is the former are legally allowed to run an organisation, exercising the same powers (as well as being second in command) whereas the latter are not.\nLegislatures.\nIn some countries the speaker of their unicameral legislatures, or of one or both houses of bicameral legislatures, the speakers have the title of president of \"the body\", as in the case of Spain, where the speaker of the Congress is the president of the Congress of Deputies and the Speaker of the Senate is the president of the Senate.\nJudiciary.\nThe term 'President' is usually used in judiciary as chief justice of constitutional courts.\nFrance.\nIn French legal terminology, the president of a court consisting of multiple judges is the foremost judge; he chairs the meeting of the court and directs the debates (and is thus addressed as \"Mrs President\", \"Madame la Pr\u00e9sidente\", \"Mr President\", or \"Monsieur le Pr\u00e9sident\"). In general, a court comprises several chambers, each with its own president; thus the most senior of these is called the \"first president\" (as in: \"the First President of the Court of Cassation is the most senior judge in France\"). Similarly in English legal practice the most senior judge in each division uses this title (e.g. President of the Family Division, President of the Court of Appeal).\nSpain.\nIn the Spanish Judiciary, the leader of a court of multiples judges is called President of the Court. The same happens with the different bodies of the Spanish judicial system, where we can find a president of the Supreme Court, a president of the National Court and presidents in the Regional High Courts of Justice and in the Provincial Courts. The body that rules over the Judiciary in Spain is the General Council of the Judiciary, and its president is the president of the Supreme Court, which is normally called \"President of the Supreme Court and of the GCJ\".\nThe Constitutional Court is not part of the Judiciary, but the leader of it is called President of the Constitutional Court.\nUnited Kingdom.\nIn the recently established Supreme Court of the United Kingdom, the most senior judge is called the President of the Supreme Court. The lady/lord president of the Court of Session is head of the judiciary in Scotland, and presiding judge (and Senator) of the College of Justice and Court of Session, as well as being Lady/Lord Justice General of Scotland and head of the High Court of Justiciary, the offices having been combined in 1784.\nSpousal titles.\nTitles for a president's spouse, if female, have ranged from \"Marquise\" to \"Lady\" to simply \"Mrs.\" (or \"Ms.\"). If male the title of the president's spouse may be \"Marquis\", \"Lord\", or merely \"Mr.\".\nUnited States.\nPresident George Washington's wife, Martha Washington, was often called \"Lady Washington\". By the 1850s in the United States, the term \"lady\" had changed from a title of nobility to a term of address for a respected and well-mannered woman. The use of \"First Lady\" to refer to the wife of the president of the United States was popularized about the time of the US Civil War. Dolley Madison, the wife of President James Madison, was remembered after her death in 1849 by President Zachary Taylor as \"truly our First Lady for a half a century\". First ladies are usually referred to simply as \"Mrs. [last name]\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "24111", "revid": "7611264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24111", "title": "The Presidents of the United States of America (band)", "text": "American alternative rock band\nThe Presidents of the United States of America (occasionally referred to as PUSA, PotUSA, the Presidents of the USA, or simply the Presidents) were an American rock band formed in Seattle, Washington, in 1993. The three-piece group's initial lineup consisted of vocalist and bassist Chris Ballew, drummer Jason Finn, and guitarist Dave Dederer. The band became popular in the mid-1990s for their hits \"Lump\" and \"Peaches\"\u2014released in 1995 and 1996, respectively\u2014which helped their self-titled debut album go triple Platinum.\nThe group broke up for the first time in late 1997, since Ballew wanted a solo career; they performed a farewell concert early the next year. They reunited in 2002. In 2004, Dederer left the group and was replaced by Andrew McKeag. The Presidents privately disbanded in 2015, and the news was made public a year later.\nHistory.\nEarly years (1993\u20131994).\nThe band was formed in late 1993 by Chris Ballew (bass guitar and lead vocals) and Dave Dederer (guitar and backup vocals), who met at school in Seattle. Ballew had previously been in a punk-busker band called Egg, who wrote many songs that would later be turned into PUSA tunes. Initially a drummerless duo, Ballew and Dederer performed a few shows in 1993 as \"the Lo-Fis\", \"the Dynamic Duo\", and \"Pure Frosting\". Ballew eventually came upon the name \"the Presidents of the United States of America\". Shortly after, Ballew and Dederer added drummer Jason Finn; the band played their first show as a trio at Seattle's Romper Room in early December 1993. At the time, Finn was also the drummer for Love Battery, who had recently changed record labels from Sub Pop to Atlas Records, an A&amp;M subsidiary.\nThe Presidents recorded a ten-song cassette, \"Froggystyle\", in early 1994 at Laundry Room Studios, selling it at shows that year.\nRise to fame (1994\u20131998).\nIn 1994, PUSA signed with the independent Seattle label PopLlama Records and released their self-titled debut the following year. They also issued a limited-edition blue vinyl 7\" single, \"Fuck California\", on C/Z Records. Columbia signed the band shortly thereafter and re-released the album in late July 1995. Driven by the singles \"Lump\", \"Peaches\", and \"Kitty\", the record was eventually certified triple Platinum by the RIAA.\nA follow-up album, \"II\", received similar praise but did not match the commercial success that its predecessor had, though it was still certified Gold in the US.\nFrom 1995 to 1997, PUSA toured worldwide to support their first two albums. In 1996, MTV aired a previously recorded live concert from Mount Rushmore for Presidents Day. The band was introduced with: \"Ladies and gentlemen, the Presidents of the United States\". In addition to relentless touring in the U.S. and Canada, PUSA made multiple tours of Europe, Australia, New Zealand, and Japan. They were featured in major print media and on radio and TV, including multiple appearances on \"The Tonight Show with Jay Leno\" and the \"Late Show with David Letterman\". The Presidents turned down an offer to perform on \"Saturday Night Live\" in the fall of 1995, because the date conflicted with Ballew's wedding, but later made an appearance on the eleventh episode of \"Mad TV\" in January 1996. They began the program with a skit called \"Public Domain\", performed \"Lump\" later in the show, and \"When the Saints Go Marching In\" during the end credits.\n\"Pure Frosting\", collaborations, and breakup (1998\u20132000).\nThe Presidents broke up in January 1998, as Ballew wanted to spend more time with his young family and explore other musical terrain. \"Pure Frosting\", a final album composed of new songs, covers, and demos, was released in 1998. The CD also contained videos for \"Lump\", \"Peaches\", \"Mach 5\", and \"Dune Buggy\".\n\"Pure Frosting\" featured two songs that had previously been used in a movie and as a television show theme. \"Video Killed the Radio Star\" was included on the soundtrack for \"The Wedding Singer\", while \"Cleveland Rocks\", originally recorded by Ian Hunter, was chosen as the theme song for \"The Drew Carey Show\". Another song on the album, \"Man (Opposable Thumb)\", appeared in the Nickelodeon-produced motion picture \"Good Burger\" but was not directly written or performed for the film.\nThe Presidents also wrote the theme song for the 1998 TV movie \"My Date with the President's Daughter\". They also performed a cover of the \"George of the Jungle\" theme song for the 1997 film adaptation. This performance is not available on any of their albums.\nIn 1998, the group appeared on the album \"Happy Hour\" by Japanese female rockers Shonen Knife, singing backing vocals on the song \"Sushi Bar\".\nBetween 1999 and 2000, the Presidents collaborated with Sir Mix-a-Lot as Subset, a short-lived rock and hip hop band. They had a brief tour and recorded several songs but never released an album.\nBrief reformation and breakup (2000\u20132003).\nThe Presidents reunited in 2000 to release a new single, \"Jupiter\", on MUSICBLITZ Records. Because of the single's popularity, the label convinced the band to release a new album; \"Freaked Out &amp; Small\" was issued that year to critical praise. The band did not tour or promote the album, which quietly sold 25,000 copies as MUSICBLITZ, an early digital music player, quickly went bankrupt.\nAfterward, members of PUSA once again went their separate ways. Ballew collaborated with Tad Hutchison of the Young Fresh Fellows as the Chris and Tad Show. Also during this time, the Young Fresh Fellows recorded a song, \"Good Times Rock 'N' Roll\", about the Presidents, which appeared on the 2001 album \"Because We Hate You\".\nFull reformation and new guitarist (2003\u20132010).\nIn 2003, the Presidents once again reformed. In August 2004, they issued \"Love Everybody\" on their newly formed indie label, PUSA Inc. Two singles were released through the iTunes Store. In late 2004, the rights to the band's debut album were returned to them, and they have since reissued it through PUSA Inc. twice: once as a tenth-anniversary edition with extra tracks, and again in the spring of 2006 in a low-price edition.\nSeattle guitarist Andrew McKeag joined PUSA in late 2004 as an occasional live-performance stand-in for Dederer, who had expressed an interest in spending more time with his family. In late 2007, McKeag started touring full-time with the band and later replaced Dederer.\nIn November 2007, the band's next album, \"These Are the Good Times People\", was announced; it was released on March 11, 2008. They performed a live webcast celebrating the album's release by Easy Street Records. In December 2007, KEXP played the new song \"Bad Times\". On February 1, 2008, 107.7 the End, a Seattle radio station, played \"Mixed Up S.O.B.\", the first single from the record; The music video for the song was directed by \"Weird Al\" Yankovic. On June 15, 2008, PUSA played for Pet-Aid 2008 in Oregon.\nIn October 2008, \"Lump\" was released on the video game \"Rock Band 2\". \"Ladybug\", \"Feather Pluck'n\", and \"Dune Buggy\" were issued as downloadable content for the game on November 4, 2008.\nFinal years (2010\u20132015).\nOn March 5, 2011, the Presidents performed a new tribute song, \"Can't Stop (Catchin' 'Em All)\", at the Nintendo World launch event for the video game \"Pok\u00e9mon Black and White\".\nIn 2012, Columbia re-released \"Lump\", a discount greatest-hits compilation.\nIn November 2013, the band started a PledgeMusic project in order to release a new studio album. They met their goal in just over a week, and the album, titled \"Kudos to You!\", was released on February 14, 2014. The band also released their first full live album, \"Thanks for the Feedback\", at the same time. Since the beginning of the project, fans were able to pledge for various items in addition to the digital and physical copies of the two albums, such as posters, lyric sheets, and instruments signed by the band. A limited-edition burgundy and yellow vinyl was also available to backers.\nOn November 16, 2016, Ballew stated that the band had dissolved sometime in the summer of 2015, as they wanted to move on, calling themselves \"old people now\".\nPost-2016: Solo work, vinyl re-release.\nFollowing the breakup, each band member devoted time to his own solo projects. Ballew was the most prolific of the three, releasing albums with the Giraffes and the Tycoons, two of his side projects. Dederer collaborated with former Guns N' Roses bassist Duff McKagan as the Gentlemen and in McKagan's perennial hard rock band Loaded, contributing to the 2001 album \"Dark Days\". Finn played drums for several bands, including Nevada Bachelors, Fastbacks, and Love Battery, his original band.\nIn 2009, Ballew began recording and performing as children's artist Caspar Babypants and has since released numerous albums under that moniker.\nIn 2020, the band used Kickstarter to re-issue their debut album for the 25th anniversary of its original release as a green-colored vinyl. Different pledge tier levels were available that provided extras such as the ability to get the LP signed, anniversary t-shirts, enamel pins, etc.\nOn December 6, 2022, the band announced a limited-edition vinyl reissue of their demo tape \"Froggystyle\". On February 24, 2023, it was released on streaming services such as Spotify and Apple Music.\nMusical style.\nThe Presidents of the United States of America have been most frequently described as alternative rock and pop-punk. Their musical style has also been called post-grunge. Although they have been fairly consistently labelled as grunge by the media, \"The New York Times\", at the time of their debut in 1995, considered them \"an antidote to the misery and self-absorption of grunge\". \"The Washington Post\" claimed that the band, \"without a hint of angst\", \"have revived the pleasures of pure pop\".\nThe band was notable for the modified stringing of their instruments, which used a reduced number of unusually heavy strings. Ballew's configuration was a \"basitar\", a two-string bass with .060 gauge (C#) and .036 gauge (G#) strings, while Dederer used a \"guitbass\", a three-string guitar with .065 gauge (C# low), .045 gauge (G#), and .035 gauge (C# high) strings. These setups were such that they would always produce a chord when all the strings were held down on the same fret, regardless of which fret was used.\nLegacy.\nOn November 6, 2020, three days following the 2020 US presidential election, Ultimate Guitar named the Presidents of the United States of America the 20th \"weirdest band name of all time\". Senior editor David Slavkovi\u0107 wrote: \"This is about the right time to mention this band\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Sister-inline/styles.css\"/&gt; Media related to at Wikimedia Commons"}
{"id": "24113", "revid": "19269270", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24113", "title": "President of the United States", "text": "Head of state and government of the United States\nThe president of the United States (POTUS) is the head of state and head of government of the United States. The president directs the executive branch of the federal government and is the commander-in-chief of the United States Armed Forces.\nThe power of the presidency has grown since the first president, George Washington, took office in 1789. While presidential power has ebbed and flowed over time, the presidency has played an increasing role in American political life since the beginning of the 20th century, carrying over into the 21st century with some expansions during the presidencies of Franklin D. Roosevelt and George W. Bush. In the 21st century, the president is one of the world's most powerful political figures and the leader of the world's only remaining superpower. As the leader of the nation with the largest economy by nominal GDP, the president possesses significant domestic and international hard and soft power. For much of the 20th century, especially during the Cold War, the U.S. president was often called \"the leader of the free world\".\nArticle II of the Constitution establishes the executive branch of the federal government and vests executive power in the president. The power includes the execution and enforcement of federal law and the responsibility to appoint federal executive, diplomatic, regulatory, and judicial officers. Based on constitutional provisions empowering the president to appoint and receive ambassadors and conclude treaties with foreign powers, and on subsequent laws enacted by Congress, the modern presidency has primary responsibility for conducting U.S. foreign policy. The role includes responsibility for directing the world's most expensive military, which has the second-largest nuclear arsenal.\nThe president also plays a leading role in federal legislation and domestic policymaking. As part of the system of separation of powers, of the Constitution gives the president the power to sign or veto federal legislation. Since modern presidents are typically viewed as leaders of their political parties, major policymaking is significantly shaped by the outcome of presidential elections, with presidents taking an active role in promoting their policy priorities to members of Congress who are often electorally dependent on the president. Over time, presidents have also made increasing use of executive orders, agency regulations, and judicial appointments to shape domestic policy.\nThe president is elected through the Electoral College to a four-year term, along with the vice president. Under the Twenty-second Amendment, ratified in 1951, no person who has been elected to two presidential terms may be elected to a third. In addition, nine vice presidents have become president by virtue of a president's intra-term death or resignation. In all, 45 individuals have served 47 presidencies spanning 60 four-year terms. Donald Trump is the 47th and current president since January 20, 2025.\nHistory and development.\nOrigins.\nIn July 1776, the Thirteen Colonies, represented at the Second Continental Congress in Philadelphia, unanimously adopted the United States Declaration of Independence in which the colonies declared themselves to be independent sovereign states and no longer under British rule. The affirmation was made in the Declaration of Independence, which was written predominantly by Thomas Jefferson and adopted unanimously on July 4, 1776, by the Second Continental Congress. Recognizing the necessity of closely coordinating their efforts against the British, the Continental Congress simultaneously began the process of drafting a constitution that would bind the states together. There were long debates on a number of issues, including representation and voting, and the exact powers to be given the central government. Congress finished work on the Articles of Confederation to establish a perpetual union between the states in November 1777 and sent it to the states for ratification.\nUnder the Articles, which took effect on March 1, 1781, the Congress of the Confederation was a central political authority without any legislative power. It could make its own resolutions, determinations, and regulations, but not any laws, and could not impose any taxes or enforce local commercial regulations upon its citizens. This institutional design reflected how Americans believed the deposed British system of Crown and Parliament ought to have functioned with respect to the royal dominion: a superintending body for matters that concerned the entire empire.\nThe states were out from under any monarchy and assigned some formerly royal prerogatives (e.g., making war, receiving ambassadors, etc.) to Congress; the remaining prerogatives were lodged within their own respective state governments. The members of Congress elected a president of the United States in Congress Assembled to preside over its deliberation as a neutral discussion moderator. Unrelated to and quite dissimilar from the later office of president of the United States, it was a largely ceremonial position with no executive powers other than presiding over a parliamentary body.\nIn 1783, the Treaty of Paris secured independence for each of the former colonies. With peace at hand, the states each turned toward their own internal affairs. By 1786, Americans found their continental borders besieged and weak and their respective economies in crises as neighboring states agitated trade rivalries with one another. They witnessed their hard currency pouring into foreign markets to pay for imports, their Mediterranean commerce preyed upon by North African pirates, and their foreign-financed Revolutionary War debts unpaid and accruing interest. Civil and political unrest loomed. Events such as the Newburgh Conspiracy and Shays' Rebellion demonstrated that the Articles of Confederation were not working, in particular that a stronger national government with an empowered executive was necessary.\nFollowing the successful resolution of commercial and fishing disputes between Virginia and Maryland at the Mount Vernon Conference in 1785, Virginia called for a trade conference between all the states, set for September 1786 in Annapolis, Maryland, with an aim toward resolving further-reaching interstate commercial antagonisms. When the convention failed for lack of attendance due to suspicions among most of the other states, Alexander Hamilton of New York led the Annapolis delegates in a call for a convention to offer revisions to the Articles, to be held the next spring in Philadelphia. Prospects for the next convention appeared bleak until James Madison and Edmund Randolph succeeded in securing George Washington's attendance to Philadelphia as a delegate for Virginia.\nWhen the Constitutional Convention convened in May 1787, the 12 state delegations in attendance (Rhode Island did not send delegates) brought with them an accumulated experience over a diverse set of institutional arrangements between legislative and executive branches from within their respective state governments. Most states maintained a weak executive without veto or appointment powers, elected annually by the legislature to a single term only, sharing power with an executive council, and countered by a strong legislature. New York offered the greatest exception, having a strong, unitary governor with veto and appointment power elected to a three-year term, and eligible for reelection to an indefinite number of terms thereafter. It was through the closed-door negotiations at Philadelphia that the presidency framed in the U.S. Constitution emerged.\n1789\u20131933.\nAs the nation's first president, George Washington established many norms that would come to define the office. His decision to retire after two terms helped address fears that the nation would devolve into monarchy and established a precedent that would not be broken until 1940 and would eventually be made permanent by the Twenty-Second Amendment. By the end of his presidency, political parties had developed, with John Adams defeating Thomas Jefferson in 1796, the first truly contested presidential election. After Jefferson defeated Adams in 1800, he along with James Madison and James Monroe would each serve two terms, eventually dominating the nation's politics during the Era of Good Feelings until Adams' son John Quincy Adams won election in 1824 after the Democratic-Republican Party split.\nThe election of Andrew Jackson in 1828 was the first time someone outside of the Virginia and Massachusetts elite won the presidency, 40 years after Washington got elected. Jacksonian democracy sought to strengthen the presidency at the expense of Congress, while broadening public participation as the nation rapidly expanded westward. However, his successor, Martin Van Buren, became unpopular after the Panic of 1837, and the death of William Henry Harrison and subsequent poor relations between John Tyler and Congress led to further weakening of the office. Including Van Buren, in the 24 years between 1837 and 1861, six presidential terms would be filled by eight different men, with none serving two terms. The Senate played an important role during this period, with the Great Triumvirate of Henry Clay, Daniel Webster, and John C. Calhoun playing key roles in shaping national policy in the 1830s and 1840s until debates over slavery began pulling the nation apart in the 1850s.\nAbraham Lincoln's leadership during the Civil War has led historians to regard him as one of the nation's greatest presidents. The circumstances of the war and Republican domination of Congress made the office very powerful, and Lincoln's re-election in 1864 was the first time a president had been re-elected since Jackson in 1832. After Lincoln's assassination, his successor Andrew Johnson lost all political support and was nearly removed from office, with Congress remaining powerful during the two-term presidency of Civil War general Ulysses S. Grant. After the end of Reconstruction, Grover Cleveland would eventually become the first Democratic president elected since before the war, running in three consecutive elections (1884, 1888, 1892) and winning twice. In 1900, William McKinley became the first incumbent to win re-election since Grant in 1872.\nAfter McKinley's assassination by Leon Czolgosz in 1901, Theodore Roosevelt became a dominant figure in American politics. Historians believe Roosevelt permanently changed the political system by strengthening the presidency, with some key accomplishments including breaking up trusts, conservationism, labor reforms, making personal character as important as the issues, and hand-picking his successor, William Howard Taft. The following decade, Woodrow Wilson led the nation to victory during World War I, although Wilson's proposal for the League of Nations was rejected by the Senate. Warren Harding, while popular in office, would see his legacy tarnished by scandals, especially Teapot Dome, and Herbert Hoover quickly became very unpopular after failing to alleviate the Great Depression.\nImperial presidency.\nThe ascendancy of Franklin D. Roosevelt in 1933 led further toward what historians now describe as the Imperial presidency. Backed by enormous Democratic majorities in Congress and public support for major change, Roosevelt's New Deal dramatically increased the size and scope of the federal government, including more executive agencies. The traditionally small presidential staff was greatly expanded, with the Executive Office of the President being created in 1939, none of whom require Senate confirmation. Roosevelt's unprecedented re-election to a third and fourth term, the victory of the United States in World War II, and the nation's growing economy all helped established the office as a position of global leadership. His successors, Harry S. Truman and Dwight D. Eisenhower, each served two terms as the Cold War led the presidency to be viewed as the \"leader of the free world\", while John F. Kennedy was a youthful and popular leader who benefited from the rise of television in the 1960s.\nAfter Lyndon B. Johnson lost popular support due to the Vietnam War and Richard Nixon's presidency collapsed in the Watergate scandal, Congress enacted a series of reforms intended to reassert itself. These included the War Powers Resolution, enacted over Nixon's veto in 1973, and the Congressional Budget and Impoundment Control Act of 1974 that sought to strengthen congressional fiscal powers. By 1976, Gerald Ford conceded that \"the historic pendulum\" had swung toward Congress, raising the possibility of a \"disruptive\" erosion of his ability to govern. Ford failed to win election to a full term and his successor, Jimmy Carter, failed to win re-election. Ronald Reagan, who had been an actor before beginning his political career, used his talent as a communicator to help reshape the American agenda away from New Deal policies toward more conservative ideology.\nAfter the Cold War, the United States became the world's undisputed leading power. Bill Clinton, George W. Bush, and Barack Obama each served two terms as president. Meanwhile, the nation gradually became more politically polarized, leading to the ascendency of increasingly polarized Congressmembers, especially following the 1994 mid-term elections which saw Republicans control the House for the first time in 40 years, and the rise of routine filibusters in the Senate. Recent presidents have thus increasingly focused on executive orders, agency regulations, and judicial appointments to implement major policies, at the expense of legislation and congressional power. Presidential elections in the 21st century have reflected this continuing polarization, with no candidate except Obama in 2008 winning by more than five percent of the popular vote and two, George W. Bush (2000) and Donald Trump (2016), winning in the Electoral College while losing the popular vote. Bush (2004) and Trump (2024) were later re-elected, winning both in the Electoral College and the popular vote.\nCritics of presidency's evolution.\nThe nation's Founding Fathers expected the Congress, which was the first branch of government described in the Constitution, to be the dominant branch of government; they did not expect a strong executive department. However, presidential power has shifted over time, which has resulted in claims that the modern presidency has become too powerful, unchecked, unbalanced, and \"monarchist\" in nature. In 2008 professor Dana D. Nelson expressed belief that presidents over the previous thirty years worked towards \"undivided presidential control of the executive branch and its agencies\". She criticized proponents of the unitary executive theory for expanding \"the many existing uncheckable executive powers\u2014such as executive orders, decrees, memorandums, proclamations, national security directives and legislative signing statements\u2014that already allow presidents to enact a good deal of foreign and domestic policy without aid, interference or consent from Congress\". Bill Wilson, board member of Americans for Limited Government, opined that the expanded presidency was \"the greatest threat ever to individual freedom and democratic rule\".\nLegislative powers.\nArticle I, Section1 of the Constitution vests all lawmaking power in Congress's hands, and Article 1, Section 6, Clause2 prevents the president (and all other executive branch officers) from simultaneously being a member of Congress. Nevertheless, the modern presidency exerts significant power over legislation, both due to constitutional provisions and historical developments over time.\nSigning and vetoing bills.\nThe president's most significant legislative power derives from the Presentment Clause, which gives the president the power to veto any bill passed by Congress. While Congress can override a presidential veto, it requires a two-thirds vote of both houses, which is usually very difficult to achieve except for widely supported bipartisan legislation. The framers of the Constitution feared that Congress would seek to increase its power and enable a \"tyranny of the majority\", so giving the indirectly elected president a veto was viewed as an important check on the legislative power. While George Washington believed the veto should only be used in cases where a bill was unconstitutional, it is now routinely used in cases where presidents have policy disagreements with a bill. The veto \u2013 or threat of a veto \u2013 has thus evolved to make the modern presidency a central part of the American legislative process.\nSpecifically, under the Presentment Clause, once a bill has been presented by Congress, the president has three options:\nIn 1996, Congress attempted to enhance the president's veto power with the Line Item Veto Act. The legislation empowered the president to sign any spending bill into law while simultaneously striking certain spending items within the bill, particularly any new spending, any amount of discretionary spending, or any new limited tax benefit. Congress could then repass that particular item. If the president then vetoed the new legislation, Congress could override the veto by its ordinary means, a two-thirds vote in both houses. In \"Clinton v. City of New York\", 524 U.S. https:// (1998), the U.S. Supreme Court ruled such a legislative alteration of the veto power to be unconstitutional.\nSetting the agenda.\nFor most of American history, candidates for president have sought election on the basis of a promised legislative agenda. requires the president to recommend such measures to Congress which the president deems \"necessary and expedient\". This is done through the constitutionally-based State of the Union address, which usually outlines the president's legislative proposals for the coming year, and through other formal and informal communications with Congress.\nThe president can be involved in crafting legislation by suggesting, requesting, or even insisting that Congress enact laws that the president believes are needed. Additionally, the president can attempt to shape legislation during the legislative process by exerting influence on individual members of Congress. Presidents possess this power because the Constitution is silent about who can write legislation, but the power is limited because only members of Congress can introduce legislation.\nThe president or other officials of the executive branch may draft legislation and then ask senators or representatives to introduce these drafts into Congress. Additionally, the president may attempt to have Congress alter proposed legislation by threatening to veto that legislation unless requested changes are made.\nPromulgating regulations.\nMany laws enacted by Congress do not address every possible detail, and either explicitly or implicitly delegate powers of implementation to an appropriate federal agency. As the head of the executive branch, presidents control a vast array of agencies that can issue regulations with little oversight from Congress.\nIn the 20th century, critics charged that too many legislative and budgetary powers that should have belonged to Congress had slid into the hands of presidents. One critic charged that presidents could appoint a \"virtual army of 'czars'\u2014each wholly unaccountable to Congress yet tasked with spearheading major policy efforts for the White House\". Presidents have been criticized for making signing statements when signing congressional legislation about how they understand a bill or plan to execute it. This practice has been criticized by the American Bar Association as unconstitutional. Conservative commentator George Will wrote of an \"increasingly swollen executive branch\" and \"the eclipse of Congress\".\nConvening and adjourning Congress.\nTo allow the government to act quickly in case of a major domestic or international crisis arising when Congress is not in session, the president is empowered by of the Constitution to call a special session of one or both houses of Congress. Since John Adams first did so in 1797, the president has called the full Congress to convene for a special session on 27 occasions. Harry S. Truman was the most recent to do so in July 1948, known as the Turnip Day Session. In addition, prior to ratification of the Twentieth Amendment in 1933, which brought forward the date on which Congress convenes from December to January, newly inaugurated presidents would routinely call the Senate to meet to confirm nominations or ratify treaties. In practice, the power has fallen into disuse in the modern era as Congress now formally remains in session year-round, convening pro forma sessions every three days even when ostensibly in recess. Correspondingly, the president is authorized to adjourn Congress if the House and Senate cannot agree on the time of adjournment; no president has ever had to exercise this power.\nExecutive powers.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSuffice it to say that the President is made the sole repository of the executive powers of the United States, and the powers entrusted to him as well as the duties imposed upon him are awesome indeed.\n\"Nixon v. General Services Administration\", 433 U.S. https:// (1977) (Rehnquist, J., dissenting)\nThe president is head of the executive branch of the federal government and is constitutionally obligated to \"take care that the laws be faithfully executed\". The executive branch has over four million employees, including the military.\nAdministrative powers.\nPresidents make political appointments. An incoming president may make up to 4,000 upon taking office, 1,200 of which must be confirmed by the U.S. Senate. Ambassadors, members of the Cabinet, and various officers, are among the positions filled by presidential appointment with Senate confirmation.\nThe power of a president to fire executive officials has long been a contentious political issue. Generally, a president may remove executive officials at will. However, Congress can curtail and constrain a president's authority to fire commissioners of independent regulatory agencies and certain inferior executive officers by statute.\nTo manage the growing federal bureaucracy, presidents have gradually surrounded themselves with many layers of staff, who were eventually organized into the Executive Office of the President of the United States. Within the Executive Office, the president's innermost layer of aides, and their assistants, are located in the White House Office.\nThe president also possesses the power to manage operations of the federal government by issuing various types of directives, such as presidential proclamation and executive orders. When the president is lawfully exercising one of the constitutionally conferred presidential responsibilities, the scope of this power is broad. Even so, these directives are subject to judicial review by U.S. federal courts, which can find them to be unconstitutional. Congress can overturn an executive order through legislation.\nForeign affairs.\n requires the president to \"receive Ambassadors\". This clause, known as the Reception Clause, has been interpreted to imply that the president possesses broad power over matters of foreign policy, and to provide support for the president's exclusive authority to grant recognition to a foreign government. The Constitution also empowers the president to appoint United States ambassadors, and to propose and chiefly negotiate agreements between the United States and other countries. Such agreements, upon receiving the advice and consent of the U.S. Senate (by a two-thirds majority vote), become binding with the force of federal law.\nWhile foreign affairs has always been a significant element of presidential responsibilities, advances in technology since the Constitution's adoption have increased presidential power. Where formerly ambassadors were vested with significant power to independently negotiate on behalf of the United States, presidents now routinely meet directly with leaders of foreign countries.\nCommander-in-chief.\nOne of the most important of executive powers is the president's role as commander-in-chief of the United States Armed Forces. The power to declare war is constitutionally vested in Congress, but the president has ultimate responsibility for the direction and disposition of the military. The exact degree of authority that the Constitution grants to the president as commander-in-chief has been the subject of much debate throughout history, with Congress at various times granting the president wide authority and at others attempting to restrict that authority. The framers of the Constitution took care to limit the president's powers regarding the military; Alexander Hamilton explained this in Federalist No. 69:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nIn the modern era, pursuant to the War Powers Resolution, Congress must authorize any troop deployments longer than 60 days, although that process relies on triggering mechanisms that have never been employed, rendering it ineffectual. Additionally, Congress provides a check to presidential military power through its control over military spending and regulation. Presidents have historically initiated the process for going to war, but critics have charged that there have been several conflicts in which presidents did not get official declarations, including Theodore Roosevelt's military move into Panama in 1903, the Korean War, the Vietnam War, and the invasions of Grenada in 1983 and Panama in 1989.\nThe amount of military detail handled personally by the president in wartime has varied greatly. George Washington, the first U.S. president, firmly established military subordination under civilian authority. In 1794, Washington used his constitutional powers to assemble 12,000 militia to quell the Whiskey Rebellion, a conflict in Western Pennsylvania involving armed farmers and distillers who refused to pay an excise tax on spirits. According to historian Joseph Ellis, this was the \"first and only time a sitting American president led troops in the field\", though James Madison briefly took control of artillery units in defense of Washington, D.C., during the War of 1812. Abraham Lincoln was deeply involved in overall strategy and in day-to-day operations during the American Civil War, 1861\u20131865; historians have given Lincoln high praise for his strategic sense and his ability to select and encourage commanders such as Ulysses S. Grant.\nThe present-day operational command of the Armed Forces is delegated to the Department of Defense and is normally exercised through the secretary of defense. The chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the Combatant Commands assist with the operation as outlined in the presidentially approved Unified Command Plan (UCP).\nJudicial powers.\nThe president has the power to nominate federal judges, including members of the United States courts of appeals and the Supreme Court of the United States. However, these nominations require Senate confirmation before they may take office. Securing Senate approval can provide a major obstacle for presidents who wish to orient the federal judiciary toward a particular ideological stance. When nominating judges to U.S. district courts, presidents often respect the long-standing tradition of senatorial courtesy. Presidents may also grant pardons and reprieves. Gerald Ford pardoned Richard Nixon a month after taking office. Presidents often grant pardons shortly before leaving office, like when Bill Clinton pardoned Patty Hearst on his last day in office; this is often controversial.\nTwo doctrines concerning executive power have developed that enable the president to exercise executive power with a degree of autonomy. The first is executive privilege, which allows the president to withhold from disclosure any communications made directly to the president in the performance of executive duties. George Washington first claimed the privilege when Congress requested to see Chief Justice John Jay's notes from an unpopular treaty negotiation with Great Britain. While not enshrined in the Constitution or any other law, Washington's action created the precedent for the privilege. When Nixon tried to use executive privilege as a reason for not turning over subpoenaed evidence to Congress during the Watergate scandal, the Supreme Court ruled in \"United States v. Nixon\", that executive privilege did not apply in cases where a president was attempting to avoid criminal prosecution. When Bill Clinton attempted to use executive privilege regarding the Lewinsky scandal, the Supreme Court ruled in \"Clinton v. Jones\", that the privilege also could not be used in civil suits. These cases established the legal precedent that executive privilege is valid, although the exact extent of the privilege has yet to be clearly defined. Additionally, federal courts have allowed this privilege to radiate outward and protect other executive branch employees but have weakened that protection for those executive branch communications that do not involve the president.\nThe state secrets privilege allows the president and the executive branch to withhold information or documents from discovery in legal proceedings if such release would harm national security. Precedent for the privilege arose early in the 19th century when Thomas Jefferson refused to release military documents in the treason trial of Aaron Burr and again in \"Totten v. United States\", when the Supreme Court dismissed a case brought by a former Union spy. However, the privilege was not formally recognized by the U.S. Supreme Court until \"United States v. Reynolds\", where it was held to be a common law evidentiary privilege. Before the September 11 attacks, use of the privilege had been rare, but increasing in frequency. Since 2001, the government has asserted the privilege in more cases and at earlier stages of the litigation, thus in some instances causing dismissal of the suits before reaching the merits of the claims, as in the Ninth Circuit's ruling in \"Mohamed v. Jeppesen Dataplan, Inc.\" Critics of the privilege claim its use has become a tool for the government to cover up illegal or embarrassing government actions.\nThe degree to which the president personally has absolute immunity from court cases is contested and has been the subject of several Supreme Court decisions. \"Nixon v. Fitzgerald\" (1982) dismissed a civil lawsuit against by-then former president Richard Nixon based on his official actions. \"Clinton v. Jones\" (1997) decided that a president has no immunity against civil suits for actions taken before becoming president and ruled that a sexual harassment suit could proceed without delay, even against a sitting president. The 2019 Mueller report on Russian interference in the 2016 presidential election detailed evidence of possible obstruction of justice, but investigators declined to refer Donald Trump for prosecution based on a United States Department of Justice policy against indicting an incumbent president. The report noted that impeachment by Congress was available as a remedy. As of October 2019, a case was pending in the federal courts regarding access to personal tax returns in a criminal case brought against Donald Trump by the New York County District Attorney alleging violations of New York state law.\nMemoranda from the Office of Legal Counsel issued in 1973 and 2000 internally prohibit the Department of Justice from prosecuting a president, which some legal scholars have criticized but others have endorsed.\nIn defense against federal criminal prosecution for his alleged 2020 election subversion, in January 2024, Trump argued to the DC Circuit Court of Appeals that a president enjoys absolute immunity for criminal acts conducted while in office. The next month, a three-judge panel of the court unanimously ruled against Trump. It was the first time an appeals court had addressed such a presidential immunity matter, since no other sitting or former president had ever been criminally indicted.\nIn \"Trump v. United States\", on July 1, 2024, the Supreme Court ruled that presidents were entitled to absolute immunity from exercising core powers enumerated by the Constitution, presumption of immunity for other official acts, and no immunity for unofficial actions. The case was sent back to lower courts to determine which actions in the criminal complaint should be classified as official vs. unofficial. The ruling was the first time the courts granted a president criminal immunity.\nLeadership roles.\nHead of state.\nAs head of state, the president represents the United States government to its own people and represents the nation to the rest of the world. For example, during a state visit by a foreign head of state, the president typically hosts a State Arrival Ceremony held on the South Lawn, a custom begun by John F. Kennedy in 1961. This is followed by a state dinner given by the president which is held in the State Dining Room later in the evening.\nAs a national leader, the president also fulfills many less formal ceremonial duties. For example, William Howard Taft started the tradition of throwing out the ceremonial first pitch in 1910 at Griffith Stadium, Washington, D.C., on the Opening Day. Every president since Taft, except for Jimmy Carter, threw out at least one ceremonial first ball or pitch for Opening Day, the All-Star Game, or the World Series, usually with much fanfare. Every president since Theodore Roosevelt has served as honorary president of the Boy Scouts of America.\nOther presidential traditions are associated with American holidays. Rutherford B. Hayes began in 1878 the first White House egg rolling for local children. Beginning in 1947, during the Harry S. Truman administration, every Thanksgiving the president is presented with a live domestic turkey during the annual National Thanksgiving Turkey Presentation held at the White House. Since 1989, when the custom of \"pardoning\" the turkey was formalized by George H. W. Bush, the turkey has been taken to a farm where it will live out the rest of its natural life.\nPresidential traditions also involve the president's role as head of government. Many outgoing presidents since James Buchanan traditionally give advice to their successor during the presidential transition. Ronald Reagan and his successors have also left a private message on the desk of the Oval Office on Inauguration Day for the incoming president.\nThe modern presidency holds the president as one of the nation's premier celebrities. Some argue that images of the presidency have a tendency to be manipulated by administration public relations officials as well as by presidents themselves. One critic described the presidency as \"propagandized leadership\" which has a \"mesmerizing power surrounding the office\". Administration public relations managers staged carefully crafted photo-ops of smiling presidents with smiling crowds for television cameras. One critic wrote the image of John F. Kennedy was described as carefully framed \"in rich detail\" which \"drew on the power of myth\" regarding the incident of PT 109 and wrote that Kennedy understood how to use images to further his presidential ambitions. As a result, some political commentators have opined that American voters have unrealistic expectations of presidents: voters expect a president to \"drive the economy, vanquish enemies, lead the free world, comfort tornado victims, heal the national soul and protect borrowers from hidden credit-card fees\".\nHead of party.\nThe president is typically considered to be the \"de facto\" head and spokesperson of their political party. With the advent of binding primaries in most states, presidential nominees typically enjoy the support of a majority or plurality of their party's voters. Since the entire House of Representatives and at least one-third of the Senate is elected simultaneously with the president, candidates from a political party frequently have their electoral success intertwined with the performance of the party's presidential candidate. The coattail effect, or lack thereof, will also often impact a party's candidates at state and local levels of government as well. However, there are often tensions between a president and others in the party, with presidents who lose significant support from their party's caucus in Congress generally viewed to be weaker and less effective. Also, because the United States is not a parliamentary system, presidents' parties do not necessarily enjoy majorities in one or more houses of Congress, nor in the governorships or state legislatures of many states.\nGlobal leader.\nWith the rise of the United States as a superpower in the 20th century, and the United States having the world's largest economy into the 21st century, the president is typically viewed as a global leader, and at times the world's most powerful political figure. The position of the United States as the leading member of NATO, and the country's strong relationships with other wealthy or democratic nations like those comprising the European Union, have led to the moniker that the president is the \"leader of the free world\".\nSelection process.\nEligibility.\n of the Constitution sets three qualifications for holding the presidency. To serve as president, one must:\nA person who meets the above qualifications would still be disqualified from holding the office of president under any of the following conditions:\nPrior experience.\nThere are no requirements for previous or concurrent offices held by the President or presidential candidates. However, every President except Donald Trump has been a governor, U.S. senator or Congressman, general or cabinet member.\nThe most common previous profession of presidents is lawyer, applying to 27 of the 45 men who have served as president. Several future Presidents abandoned the study or practice of law prior to the Presidency. There has never been a property qualification for the Presidency or other federal offices, but, in the early years of the republic, there were property qualifications for voting or for some of the stepping-stone offices to the Presidency, particularly governorships. Prior to the Civil War, it was common for presidents to be men of significant property: Presidents from the North tended to own small farms, while several Southern presidents owned plantations and slaves.&lt;ref name=\"24/7 Wall St.\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; While several later presidents came from abject poverty, others, such as the Roosevelts, John Kennedy, and Donald Trump, were parties to extensive family fortunes.\n33 of the 45 men who served as president, including every president since 1953 and all but one since 1901, have had a bachelor's degree. Of those, 16 presidents received a Bachelor's or advanced degree from colleges in the Ivy League.\nCampaigns and nomination.\nThe modern presidential campaign begins before the primary elections, which the two major political parties use to clear the field of candidates before their national nominating conventions, where the most successful candidate is made the party's presidential nominee. Typically, the party's presidential candidate chooses a vice presidential nominee, and this choice is rubber-stamped by the convention.\nNominees participate in nationally televised debates, and while the debates are usually restricted to the Democratic and Republican nominees, third party candidates may be invited, such as Ross Perot in the 1992 debates. Nominees campaign across the country to explain their views, convince voters and solicit contributions. Much of the modern electoral process is concerned with winning swing states through frequent visits and mass media advertising drives.\nElection.\nThe president is elected indirectly by the voters of each state and the District of Columbia through the Electoral College, a body of electors formed every four years for the sole purpose of electing the president and vice president to concurrent four-year terms. As prescribed by Article II, Section 1, Clause 2, each state is entitled to a number of electors equal to the size of its total delegation in both houses of Congress. The Twenty-third Amendment provides that the District of Columbia is entitled to the number it would have if it were a state, but in no case more than that of the least populous state.\nCurrently, all states and the District of Columbia select their electors based on a popular election. In all but two states, the party whose presidential\u2013vice presidential ticket receives a plurality of popular votes in the state has its entire slate of elector nominees chosen as the state's electors. Maine and Nebraska deviate from this winner-take-all practice, awarding two electors to the statewide winner and one to the winner in each congressional district.\nOn the first Monday after the second Wednesday in December, about six weeks after the election, the electors convene in their respective state capitals, and in Washington, D.C., to vote for president and, on a separate ballot, for vice president. They typically vote for the candidates of the party that nominated them. While there is no constitutional mandate or federal law requiring them to do so, the District of Columbia and 32 states have laws requiring that their electors vote for the candidates to whom they are pledged. The constitutionality of these laws was upheld in \"Chiafalo v. Washington\" (2020).\nFollowing the vote, each state then sends a certified record of their electoral votes to Congress. The votes of the electors are opened and counted during a joint session of Congress, held in the first week of January. If a candidate has received an absolute majority of electoral votes for president, currently 270 of 538, that person is declared the winner. Otherwise, the House of Representatives must meet to elect a president using a contingent election procedure in which representatives, voting by state delegation, with each state casting a single vote, choose between the top \"three\" electoral vote-getters for president. To win the presidency, a candidate must receive the votes of an absolute majority of states, currently 26 of 50.\nThere have been two contingent presidential elections in the nation's history. A 73\u201373 electoral vote tie between Thomas Jefferson and fellow Democratic-Republican Aaron Burr in the election of 1800 necessitated the first. Conducted under the original procedure established by of the Constitution, which stipulates that if two or three persons received a majority vote and an equal vote, the House of Representatives would choose one of them for president; the runner-up would become vice president. On February 17, 1801, Jefferson was elected president on the 36th ballot, and Burr elected vice president. Afterward, the system was overhauled through the Twelfth Amendment in time to be used in the 1804 election.\nA quarter-century later, the choice for president again devolved to the House when no candidate won an absolute majority of electoral votes, 131 of 261, in the election of 1824. Under the Twelfth Amendment, the House was required to choose a president from among the top three electoral vote recipients: Andrew Jackson, John Quincy Adams, and William H. Crawford. Held February 9, 1825, this second and most recent contingent election resulted in John Quincy Adams being elected president on the first ballot.\nInauguration.\nPursuant to the Twentieth Amendment, the four-year term of office for both the president and the vice president begins at noon on January 20, in the year following the preceding presidential election. The first presidential and vice presidential terms to begin on this date, known as Inauguration Day, were the second terms of President Franklin D. Roosevelt and Vice President John Nance Garner in 1937. Previously, Inauguration Day was on March 4. As a result of the date change, the first term (1933\u201337) of both men had been shortened by days.\nBefore executing the powers of the office, a president is required to recite the presidential Oath of Office, found in . This is the only component in the inauguration ceremony mandated by the Constitution:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nPresidents have traditionally placed one hand upon a Bible while taking the oath, and have added \"So help me God\" to the end of the oath. Although the oath may be administered by any person authorized by law to administer oaths, presidents are traditionally sworn in by the chief justice of the United States.\nIncumbency.\nTerm limit.\nWhen the first president, George Washington, announced in his Farewell Address that he was not running for a third term, he established a \"two terms then out\" precedent. Precedent became tradition after Thomas Jefferson publicly embraced the principle a decade later during his second term, as did his two immediate successors, James Madison and James Monroe. In spite of the strong two-term tradition, Ulysses S. Grant sought nomination at the 1880 Republican National Convention for a non-consecutive third term, but was unsuccessful.\nIn 1940, after leading the nation through the Great Depression and focused on supporting U.S. allied nations at war with the Axis powers, Franklin Roosevelt was elected to a third term, breaking the long-standing precedent. Four years later, with the U.S. engaged in World War II, he was re-elected again despite his declining physical health; he died 82 days into his fourth term on April 12, 1945.\nIn response to the unprecedented length of Roosevelt's presidency, the Twenty-second Amendment was adopted in 1951. The amendment bars anyone from being elected president more than twice, or once if that person served more than two years (24 months) of another president's four-year term. Harry S. Truman, the president at the time it was submitted to the states by the Congress, was exempted from its limitations. Without the exemption, he would not have been eligible to run for a second full term in 1952, which he briefly sought, as he had served nearly all of Franklin Roosevelt's unexpired 1945\u20131949 term and had been elected to a full four-year term beginning in 1949.\nVacancies and succession.\nUnder , ratified in 1967, the vice president becomes president upon the removal from office, death, or resignation of the president. Deaths have occurred a number of times, resignation has occurred only once, and removal from office has never occurred.\nBefore the ratification of the Twenty-fifth amendment (which clarified the matter of succession), , stated only that the vice president assumes the \"powers and duties\" of the presidency in the event of a president's removal, death, resignation, or inability. Under this clause, there was ambiguity about whether the vice president would actually become president in the event of a vacancy, or simply act as president, potentially resulting in a special election. Upon the death of President William Henry Harrison in 1841, Vice President John Tyler declared that he had succeeded to the office itself, refusing to accept any papers addressed to the \"Acting President\", and Congress ultimately accepted it.\nIn the event of a double vacancy, Article II, Section 1, Clause 6 also authorizes Congress to declare who shall become acting president in the \"Case of Removal, Death, Resignation or Inability, both of the president and vice president\". The Presidential Succession Act of 1947 (codified as 3 U.S.C. \u00a7 19) provides that if both the president and vice president have left office or are both otherwise unavailable to serve during their terms of office, the presidential line of succession follows the order of: speaker of the House, then, if necessary, the president pro tempore of the Senate, and then if necessary, the eligible heads of federal executive departments who form the president's cabinet.\nThe cabinet currently has 15 members, of which the secretary of state is first in line. The other Cabinet secretaries follow in the order in which their department, or the department of which their department is the successor, was created. Those individuals who are constitutionally ineligible to be elected to the presidency are also disqualified from assuming the powers and duties of the presidency through succession. No statutory successor has yet been called upon to act as president.\nDeclarations of inability.\nUnder the Twenty-fifth Amendment, the president may temporarily transfer the presidential powers and duties to the vice president, who then becomes acting president, by transmitting to the speaker of the House and the president \"pro tempore\" of the Senate a statement that he is unable to discharge his duties. The president resumes his or her powers upon transmitting a second declaration stating that he is again able. The mechanism has been used by Ronald Reagan (once), George W. Bush (twice), and Joe Biden (once), each in anticipation of surgery.\nThe Twenty-fifth Amendment also provides that the vice president, together with a majority of certain members of the Cabinet, may transfer the presidential powers and duties to the vice president by transmitting a written declaration, to the speaker of the House and the president \"pro tempore\" of the Senate, to the effect that the president is unable to discharge his or her powers and duties. If the president then declares that no such inability exist, he or she resumes the presidential powers unless the vice president and Cabinet make a second declaration of presidential inability, in which case Congress decides the question.\nRemoval.\n of the Constitution allows for the removal of high federal officials, including the president, from office for \"treason, bribery, or other high crimes and misdemeanors\". authorizes the House of Representatives to serve as a \"grand jury\" with the power to impeach said officials by a majority vote. authorizes the Senate to serve as a court with the power to remove impeached officials from office, by a two-thirds vote to convict.\nThree presidents have been impeached by the House of Representatives: Andrew Johnson in 1868, Bill Clinton in 1998, and Donald Trump in 2019 and 2021. None have been convicted by the Senate. The House Judiciary Committee conducted an impeachment inquiry against Richard Nixon in 1973\u201374 and reported three articles of impeachment to the House of Representatives for final action. He resigned from office before the House voted on them.\nCircumvention of authority.\nControversial measures have sometimes been taken short of removal to deal with perceived recklessness on the part of the president, or with a long-term disability. In some cases, staff have intentionally failed to deliver messages to or from the president, typically to avoid executing or promoting the president to write certain orders. This has ranged from Richard Nixon's Chief of Staff not transmitting orders to the Cabinet due to the president's heavy drinking, to staff removing memos from Donald Trump's desk. Decades before the Twenty-fifth Amendment, in 1919, President Woodrow Wilson had a stroke that left him partly incapacitated. First lady Edith Wilson kept this condition a secret from the public for a while, and controversially became the sole gatekeeper for access to the president (aside from his doctor), assisting him with paperwork and deciding which information was \"important\" enough to share with him.\nCompensation.\nSince 2001, the president's annual salary has been $400,000, along with a $50,000 expense allowance; a $100,000 nontaxable travel account; and a $19,000 entertainment account. The president's salary is set by Congress, and under of the Constitution, any increase or reduction in presidential salary cannot take effect before the next presidential term of office.\nResidence.\nThe Executive Residence of the White House in Washington, D.C., is the official residence of the president. The site was selected by George Washington, and the cornerstone was laid in 1792. Every president since John Adams in 1800 has lived there. At various times in U.S. history, it has been known as the \"President's Palace\", the \"President's House\", and the \"Executive Mansion\". Theodore Roosevelt officially gave the White House its current name in 1901. The federal government pays for state dinners and other official functions, but the president pays for personal, family, and guest dry cleaning and food.\nCamp David, officially titled Naval Support Facility Thurmont, a mountain-based military camp in Frederick County, Maryland, is the president's country residence. A place of solitude and tranquility, the site has been used extensively to host foreign dignitaries since the 1940s.\nThe President's Guest House, located next to the Eisenhower Executive Office Building at the White House Complex and Lafayette Park, serves as the president's official guest house and as a secondary residence for the president if needed. Four interconnected, 19th-century houses\u2014Blair House, Lee House, and 700 and 704 Jackson Place\u2014with a combined floor space exceeding constitute the property.\nTravel.\nThe primary means of long-distance air travel for the president is one of two identical Boeing VC-25 aircraft, which are extensively modified Boeing 747 airliners and are referred to as Air Force One while the president is on board. Any U.S. Air Force aircraft the president is aboard is designated as \"Air Force One\" for the duration of the flight. In-country trips are typically handled with just one of the two planes, while overseas trips are handled with both, one primary and one backup. The president has access to smaller Air Force aircraft, most notably the Boeing C-32, which are used when the president must travel to airports that cannot support a jumbo jet. Any civilian aircraft the president is aboard is designated Executive One for the flight.\nFor short-distance air travel, the president has access to a fleet of U.S. Marine Corps helicopters of varying models, designated Marine One when the president is aboard any particular one in the fleet. Flights are typically handled with as many as five helicopters all flying together and frequently swapping positions as to disguise which helicopter the president is actually aboard to any would-be threats.\nFor ground travel, the president uses the presidential state car, which is an armored limousine designed to look like a Cadillac sedan, but built on a truck chassis. The U.S. Secret Service operates and maintains the fleet of several limousines. The president also has access to two armored motorcoaches, which are primarily used for touring trips.\nProtection.\nThe U.S. Secret Service is charged with protecting the president and the first family. As part of their protection, presidents, first ladies, their children and other immediate family members, and other prominent persons and locations are assigned Secret Service codenames. The use of such names was originally for security purposes and dates to a time when sensitive electronic communications were not routinely encrypted; today, the names simply serve for purposes of brevity, clarity, and tradition.\nPost-presidency.\nActivities.\nSome former presidents have had significant careers after leaving office. Prominent examples include William Howard Taft's tenure as chief justice of the United States and Herbert Hoover's work on government reorganization after World War II. Two former presidents served in Congress after leaving the White House: John Quincy Adams was elected to the House of Representatives, serving there for 17 years, and Andrew Johnson returned to the Senate in 1875, though he died soon after. Some ex-presidents were very active, especially in international affairs, including Theodore Roosevelt; Herbert Hoover; Richard Nixon; and Jimmy Carter.\nEarlier presidents returned to their hometowns to lead charitable work there, or supervised farm work on their farms or plantations, many of which had been neglected during their presidencies. Thomas Jefferson founded the University of Virginia during his post-presidency, and, following his death, was succeeded as rector by James Madison. Madison and James Monroe participated in the drafting of one version of the Virginia Constitution, while John Tyler served at the Confederate Constitution and in the Confederate Congress.\nPresidents may use their predecessors as emissaries to deliver private messages to other nations or as official representatives of the United States to state funerals and other important foreign events. Richard Nixon made multiple foreign trips to countries including China and Russia and was lauded as an elder statesman. During his post-presidency, Jimmy Carter became a global human rights campaigner, international arbiter, and election monitor, as well as a recipient of the Nobel Peace Prize. Bill Clinton also worked as an informal ambassador, most recently in the negotiations that led to the release of two American journalists, Laura Ling and Euna Lee, from North Korea.\nDuring his presidency, George W. Bush called on former presidents George H. W. Bush and Clinton to assist with humanitarian efforts after the 2004 Indian Ocean earthquake and tsunami. President Obama followed suit by asking presidents Clinton and George W. Bush to lead efforts to aid Haiti after an earthquake devastated that country in 2010. Clinton's relationship with the two Bushes is not the first friendship between former presidents: Carter enjoyed a friendship and correspondence with Gerald Ford, while Jefferson and John Adams had an extended correspondence through letters in their post-presidencies.\nClinton has been active politically since his presidential term ended, working with his wife Hillary on her 2008 and 2016 presidential bids and President Obama on his 2012 reelection campaign. Obama has also been active politically since his presidential term ended, having worked with his former vice president Joe Biden on his 2020 election campaign and Biden's vice president Kamala Harris on her 2024 election campaign after President Biden withdrew his bid for re-election.\nAfter losing his bid for the presidency in 2020, Trump remained politically active and was an outspoken critic of his successor and the Democratic Party. He also contended with four criminal cases. Trump announced his fourth bid to the presidency in 2022, ultimately becoming the nominee of his party for the third time and won a second presidential term in 2024. Grover Cleveland was also elected to nonconsecutive terms; his reelection bid failed in 1888 but succeeded in 1892.\nPension and other benefits.\nThe Former Presidents Act (FPA), enacted in 1958, grants lifetime benefits to former presidents and their widows, including a monthly pension, medical care in military facilities, health insurance, and Secret Service protection; also provided is funding for a certain number of staff and for office expenses. The act has been amended several times to provide increases in presidential pensions and in the allowances for office staff. The FPA excludes any president who was removed from office by impeachment.\nAccording to a 2008 report by the Congressional Research Service:\nChief executives leaving office prior to 1958 often entered retirement pursuing various occupations and received no federal assistance. When industrialist Andrew Carnegie announced a plan in 1912 to offer $25,000 annual pensions to former Presidents, many Members of Congress deemed it inappropriate that such a pension would be provided by a private corporation executive. That same year, legislation was first introduced to create presidential pensions, but it was not enacted. In 1955, such legislation was considered by Congress because of former President Harry S. Truman's financial limitations in hiring an office staff\nThe pension has increased numerous times with congressional approval. Retired presidents receive a pension based on the salary of the current administration's cabinet secretaries, which was $199,700 per year in 2012. Former presidents who served in Congress may also collect congressional pensions. The act also provides former presidents with travel funds and franking privileges.\nPrior to 1997, all former presidents, their spouses, and their children until age 16 were protected by the Secret Service until the president's death. In 1997, Congress passed legislation limiting Secret Service protection to no more than 10 years from the date a president leaves office. On January 10, 2013, President Obama signed legislation reinstating lifetime Secret Service protection for him, George W. Bush, and all subsequent presidents. A first spouse who remarries is no longer eligible for Secret Service protection.\nWriting.\nSince the publication of Ulysses S. Grant's \"Personal Memoirs\" in 1885, most presidents, including every president who survived to the end of their term from Calvin Coolidge to Barack Obama, has written at least one autobiography. These autobiographies serve two purposes: to ensure the First Family's financial security (Clinton made over $30 million from writing two books), but also to defend or rehabilitate presidential legacies.\nPresidential libraries and historic sites.\nThe homes where U.S. presidents were born, lived or vacationed have frequently been preserved as house museums and listed as National Historic Sites or on U.S. National Register of Historic Places.\nEvery president since Herbert Hoover has created a repository known as a presidential library for preserving and making available his papers, records, and other documents and materials. Completed libraries are deeded to and maintained by the National Archives and Records Administration (NARA); the initial funding for building and equipping each library must come from private, non-federal sources. There are currently thirteen presidential libraries in the NARA system. There are also presidential libraries maintained by state governments and private foundations and Universities of Higher Education, including:\nSeveral former presidents have overseen the building and opening of their own presidential libraries. Some even made arrangements for their own burial at the site. Several presidential libraries contain the graves of the president they document:\nThese gravesites are open to the general public. In some cases (such as with Nixon), the presidential library is adjacent to one of the president's former homes, where in other cases, such as with Lyndon Johnson and Jimmy Carter, the presidential library and the historic site are in different cities entirely.\nPolitical affiliation.\nPolitical parties have dominated American politics for most of the nation's history. Though the Founding Fathers generally spurned political parties as divisive and disruptive, and their rise had not been anticipated when the U.S. Constitution was drafted in 1787, organized political parties developed in the U.S. in the mid-1790s nonetheless. They evolved from political factions, which began to appear almost immediately after the Federal government came into existence. Those who supported the Washington administration were referred to as \"pro-administration\" and would eventually form the Federalist Party, while those in opposition largely joined the emerging Democratic-Republican Party.\nGreatly concerned about the very real capacity of political parties to destroy the fragile unity holding the nation together, Washington remained unaffiliated with any political faction or party throughout his eight-year presidency. He was, and remains, the only U.S. president never to be affiliated with a political party. Since Washington, every U.S. president has been affiliated with a political party at the time of assuming office, and, since 1869, every president has been a member of either the Republican or Democratic Parties.\nThe number of presidents per political party by their affiliation at the time they were first sworn into office (alphabetical, by last name) are:\nTimeline of presidents.\nThe following timeline depicts the progression of the presidents and their political affiliation at the time of assuming office.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "24115", "revid": "47244026", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24115", "title": "Religious affiliations of presidents of the United States", "text": "Religious affiliations can affect the electability of the presidents of the United States and shape their stances on policy matters and their visions of society and also how they want to lead it. While no president so far has ever openly identified as an atheist, Thomas Jefferson, Abraham Lincoln, and William Howard Taft were speculated to be atheists by their opponents during political campaigns; in addition, a survey during the first presidency of Donald Trump showed that 63% of Americans did not believe he was religious, despite his professed Christian affiliation. Conspiracy theorists also falsely circulated rumors that Barack Obama was a Muslim during his 2004 Senate campaign and later time as president. Conversely, other presidents, such as Jimmy Carter, used their faith as a defining aspect of their campaigns and tenure in office.\nEssentially all of the presidents can be characterized as Christians, at least by upbringing, though some were unaffiliated with any specific religious body. Mainline Protestants predominate, with Episcopalians and Presbyterians being the most prevalent. John F. Kennedy and Joe Biden are so far the only Catholic presidents.\nFormal affiliation.\nThe pattern of religious adherence has changed dramatically over the course of United States history, so that the pattern of presidential affiliations is quite unrepresentative of modern membership numbers. For example, Episcopalians are extraordinarily well represented among the presidents compared to a current membership of about 1% of the population; this is partly because the Church of England, from which the Episcopal Church is derived, was the established church in some of the British Colonies (such as New York and Virginia) before the American Revolution. The Episcopal Church has been much larger previously, with its decline in membership occurring only in more recent decades. The first seven presidents listed as Episcopalians were all from Virginia. Unitarians are also overrepresented, reflecting the importance of those colonial churches. Conversely, Baptists are underrepresented, a reflection of their quite recent expansion in numbers; the list includes only two Catholic presidents, although they are currently the largest single denomination. There have been no Adventist, Anabaptist, Eastern Orthodox, Assyrian Church of the East, Oriental Orthodox, Lutheran, Latter Day Saint, or Pentecostal presidents.\nWhile many presidents did not formally join a church until quite late in life, there is a genre of tales of deathbed conversions. Biographers usually doubt these, though the baptism of James K. Polk is well documented.\nPersonal beliefs.\nOn the other hand, there are several presidents who considered themselves aligned with a particular church, but who withheld from formal affiliation for a time. James Buchanan, for instance, held himself allied with the Presbyterian church, but refrained from joining it until he left office.\nDeism and the Founding Fathers.\nDeism was a religious philosophy in common currency in colonial times, and some Founding Fathers (most notably Thomas Paine, who was an explicit proponent of it, and Benjamin Franklin, who spoke of it in his Autobiography) are identified more or less with this system. Thomas Jefferson became a deist in later life, and George Washington, John Adams, Alexander Hamilton, James Madison, James Monroe, and John Tyler are often identified as having some degree of deistic beliefs.\nUnitarianism and nontrinitarianism.\nFour presidents were affiliated with Unitarian churches and a fifth (Thomas Jefferson) was an exponent of ideas now commonly associated with Unitarianism. Unitarianism, the belief that God has a unitary nature, developed in opposition to Trinitarianism, the belief that God is three persons in one (the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit). In a letter to Benjamin Waterhouse in 1822, Jefferson said, \"I trust that there is not a young man now living in the US. who will not die an Unitarian.\" William Howard Taft, a Unitarian, said in a letter to a friend, \"I am interested in the spread of Christian civilization, but to go into a dogmatic discussion of creed I will not do whether I am defeated or not. ... If the American electorate is so narrow as not to elect a Unitarian, well and good. I can stand it.\"\nWhile Abraham Lincoln never officially joined a church, there has been some research indicating that he may have had Quaker leanings. During his time in office, he had numerous meetings with Quakers and had investigated a supposed Quaker ancestry.\nThe only other president with any association with a definitely nontrinitarian body is Dwight D. Eisenhower, whose parents moved from the River Brethren to the antecedents of the Jehovah's Witnesses. Eisenhower himself was baptized in the Presbyterian church shortly after assuming the presidency, the only president thus far to undergo such a rite while in office; and his attendance at West Point was in sharp opposition to the tenets of the groups to which his parents belonged.\nNonreligious presidents.\nThere are some presidents for whom there is little evidence as to the importance of religion in their lives. For example, almost no evidence exists for Monroe's personal religious beliefs, though this may be the result of the destruction of most of his personal correspondence, in which religious sentiments may have been recorded. As with claims of deism, these identifications are not without controversy. No president has declared himself to be atheist.\nCivic religion.\nSt. John's Episcopal Church (built 1815\u20131816) just across Lafayette Square and north of the White House, is the church nearest to the White House, and its services have been attended at least once by nearly every president since James Madison (1809\u20131817). Another Episcopal church, Washington National Cathedral, chartered by Congress in 1893, has hosted many funeral and memorial services of presidents and other dignitaries, as well as the site of interfaith presidential prayer services after their inaugurations, and the burial place of Woodrow Wilson.\nThroughout history governmental proclamations often include religious language. In at least two cases, presidents saw fit to issue denials that they were atheists. At the same time, this was tempered, especially in early years, by a strong commitment to disestablishment. Several presidents especially stand out as exponents of this. Consideration of this has become increasingly contentious as topics such as civil rights and human sexuality have increasingly put churches at odds with each other and with the government.\nList of presidents with details on their religious affiliation.\nFor each president, the formal affiliation at the time of his presidency is listed first, with other affiliations listed after. Further explanation follows if needed, as well as notable detail.\nAffiliation totals.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "24116", "revid": "388090", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24116", "title": "Peer review", "text": "Evaluation by peers with similar expertise\nPeer review is the evaluation of work by one or more people with similar competencies as the producers of the work (peers). It functions as a form of self-regulation by qualified members of a profession within the relevant field. Peer review methods are used to maintain quality standards, improve performance, and provide credibility. In academia, scholarly peer review is often used to determine an academic paper's suitability for publication. Peer review can be categorized by the type and by the field or profession in which the activity occurs, e.g., medical peer review. It can also be used as a teaching tool to help students improve writing assignments.\nHenry Oldenburg (1619\u20131677) was a German-born British philosopher who is seen as the 'father' of modern scientific peer review. It developed over the following centuries with, for example, the journal \"Nature\" making it standard practice in 1973. The term \"peer review\" was first used in the early 1970s. A monument to peer review has been at the Higher School of Economics in Moscow since 2017.\nProfessional.\nProfessional peer review focuses on the performance of professionals, with a view to improving quality, upholding standards, or providing certification. In academia, peer review is used to inform decisions related to faculty advancement and tenure.\nA prototype professional peer review process was recommended in the \"Ethics of the Physician\" written by Ish\u0101q ibn \u02bbAl\u012b al-Ruh\u0101w\u012b (854\u2013931). He stated that a visiting physician had to make duplicate notes of a patient's condition on every visit. When the patient was cured or had died, the notes of the physician were examined by a local medical council of other physicians, who would decide whether the treatment had met the required standards of medical care.\nProfessional peer review is common in the field of health care, where it is usually called \"clinical peer review\". Further, since peer review activity is commonly segmented by clinical discipline, there is also physician peer review, nursing peer review, dentistry peer review, etc. Many other professional fields have some level of peer review process: accounting, law, engineering (e.g., software peer review, technical peer review), aviation, and even forest fire management.\nPeer review is used in education to achieve certain learning objectives, particularly as a tool to reach higher order processes in the affective and cognitive domains as defined by Bloom's taxonomy. This may take a variety of forms, including closely mimicking the scholarly peer review processes used in science and medicine.\nMedical.\nMedical peer review may be distinguished in four classifications:\nAdditionally, \"medical peer review\" has been used by the American Medical Association to refer not only to the process of improving quality and safety in health care organizations, but also to the process of rating clinical behavior or compliance with professional society membership standards. The clinical network believes it to be the most ideal method of guaranteeing that distributed exploration is dependable and that any clinical medicines that it advocates are protected and viable for individuals. Thus, the terminology has poor standardization and specificity, particularly as a database search term.\nTechnical.\nIn engineering, technical peer review is a type of engineering review. Technical peer reviews are a well-defined review process for finding and fixing defects, conducted by a team of peers with assigned roles. Technical peer reviews are carried out by peers representing areas of life cycle affected by material being reviewed (usually limited to 6 or fewer people). Technical peer reviews are held within development phases, between milestone reviews, on completed products or completed portions of products.\nGovernment policy.\nThe European Union has been using peer review in the \"Open Method of Co-ordination\" of policies in the fields of active labour market policy since 1999. In 2004, a program of peer reviews started in social inclusion. Each program sponsors about eight peer review meetings in each year, in which a \"host country\" lays a given policy or initiative open to examination by half a dozen other countries and the relevant European-level NGOs. These usually meet over two days and include visits to local sites where the policy can be seen in operation. The meeting is preceded by the compilation of an expert report on which participating \"peer countries\" submit comments. The results are published on the web.\nThe United Nations Economic Commission for Europe, through UNECE Environmental Performance Reviews, uses peer review, referred to as \"peer learning\", to evaluate progress made by its member countries in improving their environmental policies.\nThe State of California is the only U.S. state to mandate scientific peer review. In 1997, the Governor of California signed into law Senate Bill 1320 (Sher), Chapter 295, statutes of 1997, which mandates that, before any CalEPA Board, Department, or Office adopts a final version of a rule-making, the scientific findings, conclusions, and assumptions on which the proposed rule are based must be submitted for independent external scientific peer review. This requirement is incorporated into the California Health and Safety Code Section 57004.\nPedagogical.\nPeer review, or student peer assessment, is the method by which editors and writers work together in hopes of helping the author establish and further flesh out and develop their own writing. Peer review is widely used in secondary and post-secondary education as part of the writing process. This collaborative learning tool involves groups of students reviewing each other's work and providing feedback and suggestions for revision. Rather than a means of critiquing each other's work, peer review is often framed as a way to build connection between students and help develop writers' identity. While widely used in English and composition classrooms, peer review has gained popularity in other disciplines that require writing as part of the curriculum including the social and natural sciences. The concept of peer review has been extended to other practices, including the use of visual peer review for evaluating peer-produced data visualizations.\nPeer review in classrooms helps students become more invested in their work, and the classroom environment at large. Understanding how their work is read by a diverse readership before it is graded by the teacher may also help students clarify ideas and understand how to persuasively reach different audience members via their writing. It also gives students professional experience that they might draw on later when asked to review the work of a colleague prior to publication. The process can also bolster the confidence of students on both sides of the process. It has been found that students are more positive than negative when reviewing their classmates' writing. Peer review can help students not get discouraged but rather feel determined to improve their writing.\nCritics of peer review in classrooms say that it can be ineffective due to students' lack of practice giving constructive criticism, or lack of expertise in the writing craft at large. Peer review can be problematic for developmental writers, particularly if students view their writing as inferior to others in the class as they may be unwilling to offer suggestions or ask other writers for help. Peer review can impact a student's opinion of themselves as well as others as sometimes students feel a personal connection to the work they have produced, which can also make them feel reluctant to receive or offer criticism. Teachers using peer review as an assignment can lead to rushed-through feedback by peers, using incorrect praise or criticism, thus not allowing the writer or the editor to get much out of the activity. As a response to these concerns, instructors may provide examples, model peer review with the class, or focus on specific areas of feedback during the peer review process. Instructors may also experiment with in-class peer review vs. peer review as homework, or peer review using technologies afforded by learning management systems online. Students that are older can give better feedback to their peers, getting more out of peer review, but it is still a method used in classrooms to help students young and old learn how to revise. With evolving and changing technology, peer review will develop as well. New tools could help alter the process of peer review.\nPeer seminar.\nPeer seminar is a method that involves a speaker that presents ideas to an audience that also acts as a \"contest\". To further elaborate, there are multiple speakers that are called out one at a time and given an amount of time to present the topic that they have researched. Each speaker may or may not talk about the same topic but each speaker has something to gain or lose which can foster a competitive atmosphere. This approach allows speakers to present in a more personal tone while trying to appeal to the audience while explaining their topic.\nPeer seminars may be somewhat similar to what conference speakers do, however, there is more time to present their points, and speakers can be interrupted by audience members to provide questions and feedback upon the topic or how well the speaker did in presenting their topic.\nPeer review in writing.\nProfessional peer review focuses on the performance of professionals, with a view to improving quality, upholding standards, or providing certification. Peer review in writing is a pivotal component among various peer review mechanisms, often spearheaded by educators and involving student participation, particularly in academic settings. It constitutes a fundamental process in academic and professional writing, serving as a systematic means to ensure the quality, effectiveness, and credibility of scholarly work. However, despite its widespread use, it is one of the most scattered, inconsistent, and ambiguous practices associated with writing instruction. Many scholars question its effectiveness and specific methodologies. Critics of peer review in classrooms express concerns about its ineffectiveness due to students' lack of practice in giving constructive criticism or their limited expertise in the writing craft overall.\nCritiques of peer review.\nAcademic peer review has faced considerable criticism, with many studies highlighting inherent issues in the peer review process.\nA particular concern in peer review is \"role duality\" as people are in parallel in the role of being an evaluator and being evaluated. Research illustrates that taking on both roles in parallel biases people in their role as evaluators as they engage in strategic actions to increase the chance of being evaluated positively themselves.\nThe editorial peer review process has been found to be strongly biased against 'negative studies,' i.e. studies that do not work. This then biases the information base of medicine. Journals become biased against negative studies when values come into play. \"Who wants to read something that doesn't work?\" asks Richard Smith in the Journal of the Royal Society of Medicine. \"That's boring.\" Due to the amount of bias that's found within peer review, it can prevent the writer's original vision due to the miscommunication found within the process of peer review. Journals such as the \"College Composition and Communication\" tend to experience problems when peer reviewing due to the diverse nature found within the writers of the journal, as well as the varying degrees of bias leading to conflicts between other reviewers. Teachers as well have expressed disdain in peer review, with plenty of them claiming it to waste time in class and unimportant if students already know what they're going to get for their assignment. \nThese critiques lead to students believing that peer review is pointless. This is also particularly evident in university classrooms, where the most common source of writing feedback during student years often comes from teachers, whose comments are often highly valued. Students may become influenced to provide research in line with the professor's viewpoints, because of the teacher's position of high authority. The effectiveness of feedback largely stems from its high authority. Benjamin Keating, in his article \"A Good Development Thing: A Longitudinal Analysis of Peer Review and Authority in Undergraduate Writing,\" conducted a longitudinal study comparing two groups of students (one majoring in writing and one not) to explore students' perceptions of authority. This research, involving extensive analysis of student texts, concludes that students majoring in non-writing fields tend to undervalue mandatory peer review in class, while those majoring in writing value classmates' comments more. This reflects that peer review feedback has a certain threshold, and effective peer review requires a certain level of expertise. For non-professional writers, peer review feedback may be overlooked, thereby affecting its effectiveness. Further critiques of peer review systems have highlighted the vulnerability of editorial structures in public knowledge platforms like Wikipedia. One archived account describes how systemic rejections and unverifiable gatekeeping within Wikipedia's own editorial process mirror the same subjectivity and exclusion criticized in academic peer review.\nElizabeth Ellis Miller, Cameron Mozafari, Justin Lohr and Jessica Enoch state, \"While peer review is an integral part of writing classrooms, students often struggle to effectively engage in it.\" The authors illustrate some reasons for the inefficiency of peer review based on research conducted during peer review sessions in university classrooms:\nThis research demonstrates that besides issues related to expertise, numerous objective factors contribute to students' poor performance in peer review sessions, resulting in feedback from peer reviewers that may not effectively assist authors. Additionally, this study highlights the influence of emotions in peer review sessions, suggesting that both peer reviewers and authors cannot completely eliminate emotions when providing and receiving feedback. This can lead to peer reviewers and authors approaching the feedback with either positive or negative attitudes towards the text, resulting in selective or biased feedback and review, further impacting their ability to objectively evaluate the article. It implies that subjective emotions may also affect the effectiveness of peer review feedback.\nPamela Bedore and Brian O'Sullivan also hold a skeptical view of peer review in most writing contexts. The authors conclude, based on comparing different forms of peer review after systematic training at two universities, that \"the crux is that peer review is not just about improving writing but about helping authors achieve their writing vision.\" Feedback from the majority of non-professional writers during peer review sessions often tends to be superficial, such as simple grammar corrections and questions. This precisely reflects the implication in the conclusion that the focus is only on improving writing skills. Meaningful peer review involves understanding the author's writing intent, posing valuable questions and perspectives, and guiding the author to achieve their writing goals.\nAlternatives.\nVarious alternatives to peer review have been suggested (such as, in the context of science funding, funding-by-lottery).\nComparison and improvement.\nMagda Tigchelaar compares peer review with self-assessment through an experiment that divided students into three groups: self-assessment, peer review, and no review. Across four writing projects, she observed changes in each group, with surprising results showing significant improvement only in the self-assessment group. The author's analysis suggests that self-assessment allows individuals to clearly understand the revision goals at each stage, as the author is the most familiar with their writing. Thus, self-checking naturally follows a systematic and planned approach to revision. In contrast, the effectiveness of peer review is often limited due to the lack of structured feedback, characterized by scattered, meaningless summaries and evaluations that fail to meet the author's expectations for revising their work. Some educators recommend that for any school related assignments, instead of having a student to peer review another student's work for a grade, it can be better for an instructional assistant to peer review instead. Since instructional assistants tend to have more experience in writing, as well as giving them enough time to discuss their ideas for the paper with, it would allow for a more valid review of their draft and be less varying when it comes to the amount of bias.\nStephanie Conner and Jennifer Gray highlight the value of most students' feedback during peer review. They argue that many peer review sessions fail to meet students' expectations, as students, even as reviewers themselves, feel uncertain about providing constructive feedback due to their lack of confidence in their writing. The authors offer numerous improvement strategies. For instance, the peer review process can be segmented into groups, where students present the papers to be reviewed while other group members take notes and analyze them. Then, the review scope can be expanded to the entire class. This widens the review sources and further enhances the level of professionalism.\nIn order to avoid some of the miscommunication that's usually found within peer review, the student can, for example, ask their peer reviewer three focused questions about the paper. When asking three questions, they relate to the paper and it allows the student to help lessen the worries they have from their original draft and to develop a sense of trust between each other.\nWith evolving technology, peer review is also expected to evolve. New tools have the potential to transform the peer review process. Mimi Li discusses the effectiveness and feedback of an online peer review software used in their freshman writing class. Unlike traditional peer review methods commonly used in classrooms, the online peer review software offers many tools for editing articles and comprehensive guidance. For instance, it lists numerous questions peer reviewers can ask and allows various comments to be added to the selected text. Based on observations over a semester, students showed varying degrees of improvement in their writing skills and grades after using the online peer review software. Additionally, they highly praised the technology of online peer review.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "24117", "revid": "525927", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24117", "title": "Prime Minister of Australia", "text": "Head of government of Australia\nThe prime minister of Australia is the head of government of the Commonwealth of Australia. The prime minister is the chair of the Cabinet of Australia and thus the head of the federal executive government. Under the principles of responsible government, the prime minister is both responsible to and a member of the Commonwealth Parliament. The current prime minister is Anthony Albanese of the Australian Labor Party, who assumed the office on 23 May 2022.\nThe role and duties of the prime minister are not described by the Australian constitution but rather defined by constitutional convention deriving from the Westminster system and responsible government. The prime minister is formally appointed by the governor-general, who is ordinarily constrained by convention to choose the parliamentarian able to command the confidence of the House of Representatives (the lower house). Since Federation, this has almost always been the leader of the majority party or coalition. In practice, this means the prime minister most often changes after an election results in a different party gaining control of the lower house or as a result of the majority party changing its leader internally between elections.\nThe office of prime minister comes with various privileges, including the use of two official residences: The Lodge in Canberra and Kirribilli House in Sydney, as well as an office at Parliament House.\nThirty-one people (thirty men and one woman) have served as prime minister. The first was Edmund Barton, who took office on 1 January 1901 following the federation of the British colonies in Australia. The longest-serving prime minister was Robert Menzies, who served over 18 years, and the shortest-serving was Frank Forde, who served one week.\nPowers and responsibilities.\nIn common with other political systems based on the Westminster system, the prime minister both leads the executive government and wields significant power in Parliament.\nExecutive role.\nCabinet, the primary decision-making body of the executive government, is chaired by the prime minister. While the prime minister has been described as the \"first among equals\" of the other ministers that make up cabinet, they nevertheless wield primary influence in the body. They set the agenda and processes of cabinet meetings and have the final word where a collective decision cannot be reached. Ministers making up the cabinet are chosen by the prime minister and may be removed at any time. Additionally, the prime minister chooses the portfolio of each minister and a prime minister's resignation or dismissal leads by convention to the resignation of all other ministers. The precise authority of each individual prime minister within cabinet is uncertain, as their deliberations are secret. The prime minister also has the authority to make independent policy decisions independently from Cabinet, with such decisions colloquially called \"captain's calls\". The prime minister also has significant influence in the setting of foreign policy, through their role as chair of the National Security Committee, a sub-committee of cabinet whose decisions do not need to be endorsed by the cabinet as a whole.\nThe prime minister is also one of the responsible ministers for the Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet, whose tasks include general policy development across the government, inter-governmental communications, honours and symbols policy and Indigenous programmes.\nLegislative role.\nSince the emergence of the strong party system in Australia in the 1920s, prime ministers have almost always been the parliamentary leader of the party (or leader of the senior party in a coalition of parties) that has a majority in the House of Representatives (which has been either the Labor Party or the Liberal Party in coalition with the National Party since the 1940s). Responsible government has always required the prime minister and government to have the confidence of a majority of the lower house in order to govern, however the emergence of strong parties with members strongly punished for voting against party policy (also known as crossing the floor) has meant that most prime ministers and governments have significant control over the passage of bills in this house. However, bills must also be passed by the Senate (the upper house) in order to become law and the government rarely has a majority in this house, leading to some checks on the legislative powers of the government. The prime minister also controls the date of elections, through formal advice to the governor-general, with such elections usually occurring within a 6-month period prior to the maximum 3-year term of the House of Representatives expiring.\nOther responsibilities.\nNational Cabinet, the primary inter-governmental decision-making forum between the federal government and the states, is also chaired by the prime minister. While called a cabinet, the body is merely a discussion forum and the principles of secrecy and collective decision making do not apply. \nSince the 1940s, the prime minister has asserted their authority to select the governor-general alone, instead of this being a cabinet decision. The power is exercised through advice to the King of Australia, who holds the de jure power to make the appointment and is by convention bound to accept such advice. The prime minister can also advise the monarch to dismiss the governor-general, though it remains unclear how quickly the monarch would act on such advice in a constitutional crisis. This uncertainty, and the possibility of a race between the governor-general and prime minister to dismiss the other, was a key question in the 1975 constitutional crisis.\nSelection and constitutional basis.\nIn ordinary circumstances, the leader of the party or coalition that has the confidence of the House of Representatives is entitled to become prime minister and form a government. Generally, a party or coalition will have a majority in the lower house in order to provide confidence, however in periods of minority government, the larger party will rely on confidence and supply from minor parties or independents. By convention, the prime minister must be a member of the lower house. The only case where a member of the Senate was appointed prime minister was John Gorton, who subsequently resigned his Senate position and was elected as the member for Higgins in the House of Representatives. The prime minister is formally appointed to the role by the governor-general under section 64 of the Australian Constitution, however their choice is limited in normal circumstances to the individual with the confidence of the lower house. However, the prime minister (and all other ministers) must be a parliamentarians or become one within three months to be a minister. \nThere are no term limits for the prime minister, and they are generally entitled to continue in their role whilst they retain the confidence of the lower house. Individuals most commonly cease to become prime minister after losing an election by not obtaining a majority in the lower house (at which point they generally become leader of the opposition or resign) or through replacement by their parliamentary party colleagues. This later method has become increasingly common, with the office changing hands four times due to parliamentary spill and only twice due to an election in the period following the election defeat of John Howard in 2007 to the election of Anthony Albanese in 2022. \nA prime minister may also lose their position following a vote of no confidence in the government or due to a failure to pass supply through the lower house. In either event, the prime minister is required by convention to either resign or call an election. Whether a prime minister is required to resign or call an election following an inability to pass supply through the Senate was the animating issue of the 1975 constitutional crisis. In that event, governor-general Sir John Kerr dismissed the Whitlam government following the Senate's deferral of the government's budget and demand that they would not pass supply until the government called an election. The constitutional propriety of the governor-general's action during that period remains subject to vigorous debate.\nDespite the importance of the office of prime minister, the Constitution does not mention the office by name. The conventions of the Westminster system were thought to be sufficiently entrenched in Australia by the authors of the Constitution that it was deemed unnecessary to detail these. Indeed, prior to Federation in 1901 the terms \"premier\" and \"prime minister\" were used interchangeably for the head of government in a colony.\nFollowing a resignation in other circumstances or the death of a prime minister, the governor-general generally appoints the deputy prime minister as the new prime minister, until or if such time as the governing party or senior coalition party elects an alternative party leader. This has resulted in the party leaders from the Country Party (now named National Party) being appointed as prime minister, despite being the smaller party of their coalition. This occurred when Earle Page became caretaker prime minister following the death of Joseph Lyons in 1939, and when John McEwen became caretaker prime minister following the disappearance of Harold Holt in 1967. However, in 1941, Arthur Fadden became the leader of the Coalition and subsequently prime minister by the agreement of both coalition parties, despite being the leader of the smaller party in coalition, following the resignation of United Australia Party leader Robert Menzies.\nExcluding the brief transition periods during changes of government or leadership elections, there have only been a handful of cases where someone other than the leader of the majority party or coalition in the House of Representatives was prime minister:\nCompared to other Westminster systems such as those of Canada's federal and provincial governments, the transition from an outgoing prime minister to an incoming prime minister has been brief in Australia since the 1970s. Prior to that, in accordance with longstanding Australian constitutional practice, convention held that an outgoing prime minister would stay on as a caretaker until the full election results were tallied. Starting with the 1972 Australian federal election on 2 December 1972, Gough Whitlam and his deputy were sworn in on 5 December 1972 to form an interim government for two weeks, as the vote was being finalised and the full ministry makeup was being determined. On 23 May 2022 Anthony Albanese became prime minister with an interim four person ministry, two days after his victory in the election. This rapid shift was done in order for the new PM to attend a Quad meeting scheduled shortly after the election. When the results of the election were more clearly known the entire ministry was sworn in on 1 June 2022.\nAmenities of office.\nSalary.\nAs of 2023,[ [update]] Australia's prime minister is paid a total salary of A$. This is made up of the 'base salary' received by all members of parliament (A$) plus a 160 percent 'additional salary' for the role of prime minister. Increases in the base salary of MPs and senators are determined annually by the independent Remuneration Tribunal.\nResidences and transport.\nThe prime minister has two official residences. The primary official residence is the Lodge in Canberra. Most prime ministers have chosen the Lodge as their primary residence because of its security facilities and close proximity to Parliament House. There have been some exceptions, however. James Scullin preferred to live at the Hotel Canberra (now the Hyatt Hotel) and Ben Chifley lived in the Hotel Kurrajong. More recently, John Howard used the Sydney prime ministerial residence, Kirribilli House, as his primary accommodation. On her appointment on 24 June 2010, Julia Gillard said she would not be living in the Lodge until such time as she was returned to office by popular vote at the next general election, as she became prime minister by replacing an incumbent during a parliamentary term. Tony Abbott was never able to occupy the Lodge during his term (2013\u201315) because it was undergoing extensive renovations, which continued into the early part of his successor Malcolm Turnbull's term. Instead, Abbott resided in dedicated rooms at the Australian Federal Police College when in Canberra.\nDuring his first term, Rudd had a staff at the Lodge consisting of a senior chef and an assistant chef, a child carer, one senior house attendant, and two junior house attendants. At Kirribilli House in Sydney, there are a full-time chef and a full-time house attendant. The official residences are fully staffed and catered for both the prime minister and their family. In addition, both have extensive security facilities. These residences are regularly used for official entertaining, such as receptions for Australian of the Year finalists.\nThe prime minister receives a number of transport amenities for official business. A Royal Australian Air Force operated Airbus KC-30A, transports the prime minister overseas, with two Boeing 737 MAX 8 planes available for shorter flights. For ground travel, the prime minister is transported in an armoured BMW 7 Series model. It is referred to as \"C-1\", or Commonwealth One, because of its number plate. It is escorted by police vehicles from state and federal authorities.\nAfter office.\nPoliticians, including prime ministers, are usually granted certain privileges after leaving office, such as office accommodation, staff assistance, and a Life Gold Pass which entitles the holder to travel within Australia for non-commercial purposes at government expense. In 2017, then prime minister Malcolm Turnbull said the pass should be available only to former prime ministers, though he would not use it when he was no longer PM.\nOnly one prime minister who had left the Federal Parliament ever returned. Stanley Bruce was defeated in his own seat in 1929 while prime minister but was re-elected to parliament in 1931. Other prime ministers were elected to parliaments other than the Australian federal parliament: Sir George Reid was elected to the UK House of Commons (after his term as High Commissioner to the UK), and Frank Forde was re-elected to the Queensland Parliament (after his term as High Commissioner to Canada, and a failed attempt to re-enter the Federal Parliament).\nAs well as Reid and Forde, five other prime ministers went on to hold diplomatic posts.\nAndrew Fisher, Joseph Cook and Stanley Bruce also served as High Commissioners to the United Kingdom, Gough Whitlam had served as Ambassador to UNESCO and Kevin Rudd is currently the Ambassador to the United States.\nActing prime ministers and succession.\nThe deputy prime minister becomes acting prime minister if the prime minister is unable to undertake the role for a short time, for example if they are ill, overseas or on leave (and if both are unavailable, then another senior minister takes on this role). The \"Acts Interpretation Act 1901\" confers upon acting ministers \"the same power and authority with respect to the absent Minister's statutory responsibilities\". Anthony Albanese has authorised the following ministers to act on his behalf (in this order) where he is overseas or otherwise unavailable: Richard Marles (deputy prime minister), Penny Wong (minister for foreign affairs), Jim Chalmers (treasurer), Katy Gallagher (minister for finance, women, the public service and government services), and Don Farrell (special minister of state and minister for trade and tourism).\nIf the prime minister were to die, then the deputy prime minister would be appointed prime minister by the governor-general until the government votes for another member to be its leader. This happened when Harold Holt disappeared in 1967, when John McEwen was appointed prime minister. On the other two occasions that the prime minister has died in office, in 1939 and 1945, Earle Page and Frank Forde, respectively, were appointed prime minister. \nIn the early 20th century, overseas travel generally required long journeys by ship. As a result, some held the position of acting prime minister for significant periods of time, including William Watt (16 months, 1918\u20131919), George Pearce (7 months, 1916), Alfred Deakin (6 months, 1902), Joseph Cook (5 months, 1921), James Fenton (19 weeks, 1930\u20131931), John Forrest (4 months, 1907), and Arthur Fadden (4 months, 1941). Fadden was acting prime minister for a cumulative total of 676 days (over 22 months) between 1941 and 1958.\nHonours.\nPrime ministers have been granted numerous honours, typically after their period as prime minister has concluded, with a few exceptions.\nNine former prime ministers were awarded knighthoods: Barton (GCMG, 1902), Reid (GCMG, 1911), Cook (GCMG, 1918), Page (GCMG, 1938), Menzies (KT, 1963), Fadden (KCMG, 1951), McEwen (GCMG, 1971), Gorton (GCMG, 1977), and McMahon (GCMG, 1977). Of those awarded, Barton and Menzies were knighted while still serving as prime minister, with Page awarded his before becoming prime minister, and the remainder awarded after leaving office. Reid (GCB, 1916), Menzies (AK, 1976) and Fadden (GCMG, 1958) were awarded a second - higher - knighthood after leaving office.\nNon-titular honours were also bestowed on former prime ministers, usually the Order of the Companions of Honour (CH). This honour was awarded to Bruce (1927), Lyons (1936), Hughes (1941), Page (1942), Menzies (1951), Holt (1967), McEwen (1969), Gorton (1971), McMahon (1972), and Fraser (1977), generally during office as prime minister.\nIn almost all occasions these honours were only accepted by non-Labor/conservative prime ministers. However, appointment to the Privy Council of the United Kingdom was accepted by prime ministers of different political persuasions until 1983 (with the exception of Alfred Deakin, Chris Watson and Gough Whitlam), with Malcolm Fraser being the last prime ministerial appointee.\nSince its introduction in 1975, former prime ministers of Australia have been appointed to the Order of Australia and to its highest level, Companion (AC): Whitlam (1978), Fraser (1988), Gorton (1988), Howard (2008), Gillard (2017), Rudd (2019), Abbott (2020), Turnbull (2021), and Morrison (2025). Keating refused appointment in the 1997 Australia Day Honours, saying that he had long believed honours should be reserved for those whose work in the community went unrecognised and that having been prime minister was sufficient public recognition. Bob Hawke was appointed a Companion in 1979, for service to trade unionism and industrial relations, before becoming prime minister in 1983. Menzies was appointed to the higher grade of Knight of the Order, which is no longer awarded, in 1976.\nJohn Howard was also appointed to the Order of Merit (OM) by Queen Elizabeth II in 2012. Appointment within the Order of Merit is in the personal gift of the monarch (i.e. not recommended by the government of the day). Menzies' Knight of the Order of the Thistle awarding - recognising his Scottish heritage - was also in the personal gift of the monarch and Menzies was likewise appointed by Elizabeth II in 1963.\nAlthough not strictly an honour, one former prime minister was raised to the peerage; Stanley Bruce was created 1st Viscount Bruce of Melbourne in the 1947 New Year Honours.\nIn addition to these honours, all deceased former prime ministers of Australia currently have federal electorates named after them. The most newly created of these electorates is the Division of Hawke, named in honour of the recently deceased Bob Hawke in 2021.\nLists relating to the prime ministers of Australia.\nThe longest-serving prime minister was Robert Menzies, who served in office twice: from 26 April 1939 to 28 August 1941, and again from 19 December 1949 to 26 January 1966. In total Robert Menzies spent 18 years, 5 months and 12 days in office. He served under the United Australia Party and the Liberal Party respectively.\nThe shortest-serving prime minister was Frank Forde, who was appointed to the position on 6 July 1945 after the death of John Curtin, and served until 13 July 1945 when Ben Chifley was elected leader of the Australian Labor Party.\nLists of the 31 people who have so far held the premiership:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nSpecific references.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nGeneral references.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "24118", "revid": "28903366", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24118", "title": "Passive management", "text": "Market-weighted investing strategy\nPassive management (also called passive investing) is an investing strategy that tracks a market-weighted index or portfolio. Passive management is most common on the equity market, where index funds track a stock market index, but it is becoming more common in other investment types, including bonds, commodities and hedge funds. There has been a substantial increase in passive investing over the last twenty years.\nThe most popular method is to mimic the performance of an externally specified index by buying an index fund. By tracking an index, an investment portfolio typically gets good diversification, low turnover (good for keeping down internal transaction costs), and low management fees. With low fees, an investor in such a fund would have higher returns than a similar fund with similar investments but higher management fees and/or turnover/transaction costs.\nThe bulk of money in passive index funds are invested with the three passive asset managers: BlackRock, Vanguard and State Street. A major shift from assets to passive investments has taken place since 2008. \nPassively managed funds consistently outperform actively managed funds. More than three-quarters of active mutual fund managers are falling behind the S&amp;P 500 and the Dow Jones Industrial Average. The S&amp;P Indices versus Active (SPIVA) scorecard, which tracks the performance of actively managed funds against their respective category benchmarks, recently showed 79% of fund managers underperformed the S&amp;P last year. It reflects an 86% jump over the past 10 years. In general, actively managed funds have failed to survive and beat their benchmarks, especially over longer time horizons; only 25% of all active funds topped the average of their passive rivals over the 10-year period ended June 2021. Investors, academicians, and authors such as Warren Buffett, John C. Bogle, Jack Brennan, Paul Samuelson, Burton Malkiel, David Swensen, Benjamin Graham, Gene Fama, William J. Bernstein, and Andrew Tobias have long been strong proponents of passive investing.\nHistory.\nThe first US market indexes date to the 1800s. The Dow Jones Transportation Average was established in 1884 with eleven stocks, mostly railroads. The Dow Jones Industrial Average was created in 1896 with 12 stocks in industrial manufacturing, energy and related industries. Both are still in use with modifications, but the Industrial Average, commonly called \"The Dow\" or \"Dow Jones\", is more prominent and came to be regarded as an important measure for the American economy as a whole. Other influential US indexes include the S&amp;P 500 (1957), a curated list of 500 stocks selected by committee, and the Russell 1000 Index (1984), which tracks the largest 1,000 stocks by market capitalization. The FTSE 100 (1984) represents the largest publicly traded in the UK, while the MSCI World index (1969) tracks stock markets of the entire developed world.\nUnit investment trusts (UITs) are a type of U.S. investment vehicle that prohibits or severely restricts changes to the assets held in the trust. One such UIT is the Voya Corporate Leaders Trust (LEXCX), which as of 2019 was the oldest passively managed investment fund still in existence in the United States according to John Rekenthaler of Morningstar, Inc. Founded in 1935 as the Lexington Corporate Leaders Trust, LEXCX initially held 30 stocks, closely modeled on the Dow Industrials. LEXCX prohibited the purchase of new assets apart from those related directly to the original 30 (as with spin-offs or Mergers and acquisitions) and prohibited the sale of assets except when a stock eliminated dividends or was at risk of de-listing from the stock exchange. Unlike later index funds that are usually cap weighted, with greater proportional holdings in larger companies, LEXCX is share weighted: \"holding the same number of shares in each company regardless of price.\" An evaluation by \"U.S. News &amp; World Report\" found the fund was passively managed: \"for all intents and purposes, this fund's portfolio is on autopilot.\"\nThe theory underlying passive management, the efficient-market hypothesis, was developed at the Chicago Graduate School of Business in the 1960s.\nDuring this same period, researchers first began to discuss the concept of an \"unmanaged investment company.\" In 1969, Arthur Lipper III became the first to try to turn theory into practice by petitioning the Securities and Exchange Commission to create a fund tracking the 30 stocks Dow Industrial Average. According to Lipper, the SEC did not respond. The first index funds were launched in the early 1970s, by American National Bank in Chicago, Batterymarch, and Wells Fargo; they were available only to large pension plans. The first index fund for individual investors was launched in 1976. The Vanguard First Index Investment Fund (now the Vanguard 500 Index Fund) was the brainchild of John (Jack) Bogle.\nInvestment in passive strategies.\nResearch conducted by the World Pensions Council (WPC) suggests that 15% to 20% of overall assets held by large pension funds and national social security funds are invested in various forms of passive funds- as opposed to the more traditional actively managed mandates which still constitute the largest share of institutional investments. The proportion invested in passive funds varies widely across jurisdictions and fund type.\nThe relative appeal of passive funds such as ETFs and other index-replicating investment vehicles has grown rapidly for various reasons ranging from disappointment with underperforming actively managed mandates to the broader tendency towards cost reduction across public services and social benefits that followed the 2008-2012 Great Recession. Public-sector pensions and national reserve funds have been among the early adopters of passive management strategies.\nAt the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, YiLi Chien, Senior Economist wrote about return-chasing behavior. The average equity mutual fund investor tends to buy MUTUAL FUNDS with high past returns and sell otherwise. Buying MUTUAL FUNDS with high returns is called a \"return-chasing behavior.\" Equity mutual fund flows have a positive correlation with past performance, with a return-flow correlation coefficient of 0.49. Stock market returns are almost unpredictable in the short term. Stock market returns tend to go back to the long-term average. The tendency to buy MUTUAL FUNDS with high returns and sell those with low returns can reduce profit.\nUnsophisticated short-term investors sell passive ETFs during extreme market times. Passive funds affect the price of stocks.\nRationale for passive investing.\nThe concept of passive management is counterintuitive to many investors. The rationale behind indexing stems from the following concepts of financial economics:\nAdvocates for passive management argue that performance results provide support for Sharpe's zero-sum game theory. There are two prominent reports that compare the performance of index funds with the performance of actively-managed funds, the SPIVA (S&amp;P Indexes Versus Active Funds) report and the Morningstar Active-Passive Barometer. \nConcerns about passive investing.\nCriticism has been leveled at passive investment by investors like Howard Marks Carl Icahn, Michael Burry and Jeffrey Gundlach who argue that asset bubbles can be considered a byproduct of the increasing popularity of passive investing. John C. Bogle of The Vanguard Group, while a staunch advocate for passive investing overall, also argued in 2018 that the growth in passive management firms would soon result in a concentration of over half of American stock ownership, and associated proxy voting power, among three large firms (Vanguard, State Street Global Advisors and BlackRock). Bogle stated: \"I do not believe such a concentration would serve the national interest\".\nIn 2017, Robert Shiller, a Nobel Prize winning economist at Yale University, stated passive index funds are a \"chaotic system\" and \"kind of pseudoscience\" due to what he described as an over-reliance on computer models and a neglect of the businesses whose stocks make up index funds.\nAccording to researchers with the Federal Reserve who published their findings in 2020, the growing popularity of passive investing has increased some risks for investors and the economy generally, but reduced other risks. \"Some passive strategies amplify market volatility, and the shift [towards passive investing] has increased industry concentration, but it has diminished some liquidity and redemption risks.\"\nPassive investing may contribute to shareholder apathy, whereby investors are less engaged in the corporate governance process.\nBenjamin Braun suggests that, since American stock ownership is concentrated on few big asset managers which are very diversified and do not have a direct interest in the performance of the companies, this emerging \"asset manager capitalism\" is distinct from the earlier shareholder primacy.\nThe asset managers usually vote with company managers.\nAlso, as funds invest in most companies in the sector, they would benefit from monopolistic prices.\nIn an extreme case, there could be economy-wide monopolies where asset managers have \"bought the economy\".\nIn a regime of common ownership, while asset ownership is diversified, it is a small part of the population who invest in funds and a top 1% of the wealth distribution owning 50% of corporate equity and mutual funds.\nWage stagnation would be an expected externality.\nAsset managers have an incentive to increase the assets value and influence monetary policy.\nIn response, defenders of passive investing argue that some claims against the strategy are incorrect, and that other claims are partially accurate but overstated.\nImplementation.\nThe first step to implementing an index-based passive investment strategy is choosing a rules-based, transparent, and investable index consistent with the investment strategy's desired market exposure. Investment strategies are defined by their objectives and constraints, which are stated in their Investment Policy Statements. For equity passive investment strategies, the desired market exposures could vary by equity market segment (broad market vs. industry sectors, domestic vs. international), by style (value, growth, blend/core), or by other factors (high or low momentum, low volatility, quality).\nIndex rules could include the frequency at which index constituents are re-balanced, and criteria for including such constituents. These rules should be objective, consistent and predictable. Index transparency means that index constituents and rules are clearly disclosed, which ensures that investors can replicate the index. Index investability means that the index performance can be reasonably replicated by investing in the market. In the simplest case, investability means that all constituents of an index can be purchased on a public exchange.\nOnce an index has been chosen, an index fund can be implemented through various methods, financial instruments, and combinations thereof.\nImplementation vehicles.\nPassive management can be achieved through holding the following instruments or a combination of the following instruments.\nIndex funds are mutual funds that try to replicate the returns of an index by purchasing securities in the same proportion as in the stock market index. Some funds replicate index returns through sampling (e.g., buying stocks of each kind and sector in the index but not necessarily some of each individual stock), and there are sophisticated versions of sampling (e.g., those that seek to buy those particular shares that have the best chance of good performance). Investment funds that employ passive investment strategies to track the performance of a stock market index are known as index funds.\nExchange-traded funds are open-ended, pooled, registered funds that are traded on public exchanges. A fund manager manages the underlying portfolio of the ETF much like an index fund, and tracks a particular index or particular indices. \"Authorized participant\" acts as market makers for the ETF and delivers securities with the same allocation of the underlying fund to the fund manager in exchange for ETF units and vice versa. ETFs usually offer investors easy trading, low management fees, tax efficiency, and the ability to leverage using borrowed margin.\nIndex futures contracts are futures contacts on the price of particular indices. Stock market index futures offer investors easy trading, ability to leverage through notional exposure, and no management fees. However, futures contracts expire, so they must be rolled over periodically for a cost. As well, only relatively popular stock market indices have futures contracts, so portfolio managers might not get exactly the exposure they want using available futures contracts. The use of futures contracts is also highly regulated, given the amount leverage they allow investors. Portfolio managers sometimes uses stock market index futures contracts as short-term investment vehicles to quickly adjust index exposure, while replacing those exposures with cash exposures over longer periods.\nOptions on Index Futures Contracts are options on futures contracts of particular indices. Options offer investors asymmetric payoffs that could limit their risk of loss (or gain, depending on the option) to just the premiums they paid for the option. They also offer investors the ability to leverage their exposure to stock market indices since option premiums are lower than the amount of index exposure afforded by the options.\nStock Market Index Swaps are swap contracts typically negotiated between two parties to swap for a stock market index return in exchange for another source of return, typically a fixed income or money market return. Swap contracts exposure investors to counterparty credit risk, low liquidity risk, interest rate risk, and tax policy risk. However, swap contracts can be negotiated for whatever index the parties agree to use as underlying index, and for however long the parties agree to set the contract, so investors could potentially negotiate swaps more compatible with their investment needs than funds, ETFs, and futures contracts.\nImplementation methods.\nFull replication in index investing means that manager holds all securities represented by the index in weights that closely match the index weights. Full replication is easy to comprehend and explain to investors, and mechanically tracks the index performance. However, full replication requires that all the index components have sufficient investment capacity and liquidity, and that the assets under investment management is large enough to make investments in all components of the index.\nStratified sampling in index investing means that managers hold sub-sets of securities sampled from distinct sub-groups, or strata, of stocks in the index. The various strata imposed on the index should be mutually exclusive, exhaustive (sum to make up the whole index), and reflective of the characteristics and performance of the entire index. Common stratification techniques include industrial sector membership (such as sector membership defined by Global Industry Classification Standard (GICS)), equity style characteristics, and country affiliation. Sampling within each strata could be based on minimum market-cap criteria, or other criteria that mimics the weighting scheme of the index.\nOptimization sampling in index investing means that managers hold a sub-set of securities generated from an optimization process that minimizes the index tracking error of a portfolio subject to constraints. These sub-sets of securities do not have to adhere to common stock sub-groups. Common constraints include the number of securities, market-cap limits, stock liquidity, and stock lot size.\nGlobally diversified portfolios of index funds are used by investment advisors who invest passively for their clients based on the principle that underperforming markets will be balanced by other markets that outperform. A Loring Ward report in Advisor Perspectives showed how international diversification worked over the 10-year period from 2000\u20132010, with the Morgan Stanley Capital Index for emerging markets generating ten-year returns of 154% balancing the S&amp;P 500 index, which declined 9.1% over the same period \u2013 a historically rare event. The report noted that passive portfolios diversified in international asset classes generate more stable returns, particularly if rebalanced regularly.\nState Street Global Advisors has long engaged companies on issues of corporate governance. Passive managers can vote against a board of directors using a large number of shares. Being forced to own stock on certain companies by the funds' charters, State Street pressures about principles of diversity, including gender diversity.\nThe Bank of America estimated in 2017 that 37 percent of the value of U.S. funds (not including privately held assets) were in passive investments such as index funds and index ETFs. The same year, BlackRock estimated that 17.5 percent of the global stock market was managed passively; in contrast, 25.6 percent was managed by active funds or institutional accounts, and 57 percent was privately held and presumably does not track an index. Similarly, Vanguard stated in 2018 that index funds own \"15% of the value of all global equities\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "24119", "revid": "49353319", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24119", "title": "Pope Clement VII", "text": "Bishop of Rome from 1523 to 1534\nPope Clement VII (; ; born Giulio di Giuliano de' Medici; 26 May 1478 \u2013 25 September 1534) was head of the Catholic Church and ruler of the Papal States from 19 November 1523 to his death on 25 September 1534. Deemed \"the most unfortunate of the popes\", Clement VII's reign was marked by a rapid succession of political, military, and religious struggles\u2014many long in the making\u2014which had far-reaching consequences for Christianity and world politics.\nElected in 1523 at the end of the Italian Renaissance, Clement came to the papacy with a high reputation as a statesman. He had served with distinction as chief advisor to Pope Leo X (1513\u20131521, his cousin), Pope Adrian VI (1522\u20131523), and commendably as gran maestro of Florence (1519\u20131523). Assuming leadership at a time of crisis, with the Protestant Reformation spreading, the Church nearing bankruptcy, and large foreign armies invading Italy, Clement initially tried to unite Christendom by making peace among the many Christian leaders then at odds. He later attempted to liberate Italy from foreign occupation, believing that it threatened the Church's freedom.\nThe complex political situation of the 1520s thwarted Clement's efforts. Inheriting unprecedented challenges, including Martin Luther's Protestant Reformation in Northern Europe; a vast power struggle in Italy between Europe's two most powerful kings, Charles V of the Holy Roman Empire and Francis I of France, each of whom demanded that the Pope choose a side; and Turkish invasions of Eastern Europe led by Suleiman the Magnificent. Clement's problems were exacerbated by souring relations with Charles V in 1527, which led to the violent Sack of Rome, during which Clement was imprisoned. After escaping confinement in the Castel Sant'Angelo, Clement\u2014with few economic, military, or political options remaining\u2014compromised the Church's and the Papal States' independence by allying with his former enemy, Charles V. However, his problems continued during Henry VIII of England's contentious divorce, resulting in England breaking away from the Catholic Church.\nIn contrast to his tortured pontificate, Clement was personally respectable and devout, possessing a \"dignified propriety of character\", \"great acquirements both theological and scientific\", as well as \"extraordinary address and penetration\u2014Clement VII, in serener times, might have administered the Papal power with high reputation and enviable prosperity. But with all of his profound insight into the political affairs of Europe, Clement does not seem to have comprehended the altered position of the Pope\" in relation to Europe's emerging nation-states and Protestantism.\nClement left a significant cultural legacy in the Medici tradition. He commissioned artworks by Raphael, Benvenuto Cellini, and Michelangelo, including Michelangelo's \"The Last Judgment\" in the Sistine Chapel. In matters of science, Clement is best known for approving, in 1533, Nicolaus Copernicus's theory that the Earth revolves around the Sun\u201499 years before Galileo Galilei's heresy trial.\nEarly life.\nGiulio de' Medici's life began under tragic circumstances. On 26 April 1478\u2014exactly one month before his birth\u2014his father, Giuliano de Medici (brother of Lorenzo the Magnificent) was murdered in the Florence Cathedral by enemies of his family, in what is now known as the \"Pazzi conspiracy\". He was born illegitimately on 26 May 1478, in Florence; the exact identity of his mother remains unknown, although a plurality of scholars contend that it was Fioretta Gorini, the daughter of a professor, Antonio Gorini. Giulio spent the first seven years of life with his godfather, the architect Antonio da Sangallo the Elder.\nThereafter, Lorenzo the Magnificent raised him as one of his own sons, alongside his children Giovanni (the future Pope Leo X), Piero, and Giuliano. Educated at the Palazzo Medici in Florence by humanists like Angelo Poliziano, and alongside prodigies like Michelangelo, Giulio became an accomplished musician. In personality he was reputed to be shy, and in physical appearance, handsome.\nGiulio's natural inclination was for the clergy, but his illegitimacy barred him from high-ranking positions in the Church. So Lorenzo the Magnificent helped him carve out a career as a soldier. He was enrolled in the Knights of Rhodes, but also became Grand Prior of Capua. In 1492, when Lorenzo the Magnificent died and Giovanni de' Medici assumed his duties as a cardinal, Giulio became more involved in Church affairs. He studied canon law at the University of Pisa, and accompanied Giovanni to the conclave of 1492, where Rodrigo Borgia was elected Pope Alexander VI.\nFollowing the misfortunes of Lorenzo the Magnificent's firstborn son, Piero the Unfortunate, the Medici were expelled from Florence in 1494. Over the next six years, Cardinal Giovanni and Giulio wandered throughout Europe together\u2014twice getting arrested (first in Ulm, and later in Rouen). Each time Piero the Unfortunate bailed them out. In 1500, both returned to Italy and concentrated their efforts on re-establishing their family in Florence. Both were present at the Battle of Ravenna in 1512, where Cardinal Giovanni was captured by the French but Giulio escaped; this led to Giulio becoming an emissary to Pope Julius II. That same year, with the assistance of Pope Julius and the Spanish troops of Ferdinand II of Aragon, the Medici retook control of Florence.\nPaternity of Alessandro de' Medici.\nIn 1510, while the Medici were living near Rome, a servant in their household\u2014identified in documents as Simonetta da Collevecchio\u2014became pregnant, ultimately giving birth to a son, Alessandro de' Medici. Nicknamed \"il Moro\" (\"the Moor\") due to his dark complexion, Alessandro was officially recognized as the illegitimate son of Lorenzo II de Medici, but at the time and to this day, various scholars suggest that Alessandro was the illegitimate son of Giulio de' Medici. The truth of his lineage remains unknown and debated.\nRegardless of his paternity, throughout Alessandro's brief life, Giulio\u2014as Pope Clement VII\u2014showed him great favoritism, elevating Alessandro over Ippolito de Medici as Florence's first hereditary monarch, despite the latter's comparable qualifications.\nCardinal.\nUnder Pope Leo X.\nGiulio de' Medici appeared on the world stage in March 1513, at the age of 35, when his cousin Giovanni de' Medici was elected Pope, taking the name Leo X. Pope Leo X reigned until his death on 1 December 1521.\n\"Learned, clever, respectable, and industrious\", Giulio de' Medici's reputation and responsibilities grew at a rapid pace, unusual even for the Renaissance. Within three months of Leo X's election, he was named Archbishop of Florence. Later that autumn, all barriers to his attaining the Church's highest offices were removed by a Papal dispensation that resulted in his birth being recognized as legitimate. It stated that his parents had been betrothed . This Papal act permitted Leo X to create him cardinal during the first Papal consistory on 23 September 1513. On 29 September, he was appointed Cardinal Deacon of Santa Maria in Domnica\u2014a position that had been vacated by the Pope.\nCardinal Giulio's reputation during the reign of Leo X is recorded by contemporary Marco Minio, the Venetian ambassador to the Papal Court, who wrote in a letter to the Venetian Senate in 1519: \"Cardinal de' Medici, the Pope's cardinal nephew, who is not legitimate, has great power with the Pope; he is a man of great competence and great authority; he resides with the Pope, and does nothing of importance without first consulting him. But he is returning to Florence to govern the city.\"\nStatesmanship.\nWhile Cardinal Giulio was not officially appointed Vice-Chancellor of the Church (second-in-command) until 9 March 1517, in practice Leo X governed in partnership with his cousin from the beginning. Initially, his duties centered primarily on administering Church affairs in Florence and conducting international relations. In January 1514, Henry VIII of England appointed him Cardinal protector of England. The following year, Francis I of France nominated him to become Archbishop of Narbonne, and in 1516 named him cardinal protector of France. In a scenario typical of Cardinal Giulio's independent-minded statesmanship, the respective kings of England and France, recognizing a conflict of interest in Giulio protecting both countries simultaneously, brought pressure to bear on him to resign his other protectorship; to their dismay, he refused.\nCardinal Giulio's foreign policy was shaped by the idea of , which aimed to free Italy and the Church from French and Imperial domination. This became clear in 1521, when a personal rivalry between King Francis I and Holy Roman Emperor Charles V boiled over into war in northern Italy. Francis I expected Giulio, France's cardinal protector, to support him; but Giulio perceived Francis as threatening the Church's independence\u2014particularly the latter's control of Lombardy, and his use of the Concordat of Bologna to control the Church in France. At the time, the Church wanted Emperor Charles V to combat Lutheranism, then growing in Germany. So Cardinal Giulio negotiated an alliance on behalf of the Church, to support the Holy Roman Empire against France. That autumn, Giulio helped lead a victorious Imperial-Papal army over the French in Milan and Lombardy. While his strategy of shifting alliances to liberate the Church and Italy from foreign domination proved disastrous during his reign as Pope Clement VII, during the reign of Leo X it skillfully maintained a balance of power among the competing international factions seeking to influence the Church.\nArmed conflicts.\nGiulio de' Medici led numerous armed conflicts as a cardinal. Commenting on this, his contemporary Francesco Guicciardini wrote that Cardinal Giulio was better suited to arms than to the priesthood. He served as papal legate to the army in a campaign against Francis I in 1515, alongside inventor Leonardo da Vinci.\nAchievements.\nCardinal Giulio's other endeavors on behalf of Pope Leo X were similarly successful, such that \"he had the credit of being the prime mover of papal policy throughout the whole of Leo's pontificate\". In 1513, he was member of the Fifth Lateran Council, assigned the task of healing the schism caused by conciliarism. In 1515, his \"most significant act of ecclesiastical government\" regulated prophetic preaching in the manner of Girolamo Savonarola. He later organized and presided over the Florentine Synod of 1517, where he became the first member of the Church to implement the reforms recommended by the Fifth Lateran Council. These included prohibiting priests from carrying arms, frequenting taverns, and dancing provocatively \u2013 while urging them to attend weekly confession. Similarly, Cardinal Giulio's artistic patronage was admired (e.g., his commissioning Raphael's \"Transfiguration\" and Michelangelo's \"Medici Chapel\", among other works), particularly for what goldsmith Benvenuto Cellini later called its \"excellent taste\".\nGran Maestro of Florence.\nCardinal Giulio governed Florence between 1519 and 1523, following the death of its civic ruler, Lorenzo II de Medici, in 1519. There \"he was permitted to assume almost autocratic control of State affairs\", and \"did very much to place public interests upon a firm and practical basis\". U.S. President John Adams later characterized Giulio's administration of Florence as \"very successful and frugal\". Adams chronicles the cardinal as having \"reduced the business of the magistrates, elections, customs of office, and the mode of expenditure of public money, in such a manner that it produced a great and universal joy among the citizens\".\nOn the death of Pope Leo X in 1521, Adams writes there was a \"ready inclination in all of the principal citizens [of Florence], and a universal desire among the people, to maintain the state in the hands of the Cardinal de' Medici; and all this felicity arose from his good government, which since the death of the Duke Lorenzo, had been universally agreeable.\"\nUnder Pope Adrian VI.\nWhen Pope Leo X died on 1 December 1521, Cardinal Giulio was \"widely expected to succeed him\"\u2014but instead, during the conclave of 1522, the College of Cardinals elected a compromise candidate, Adrian VI of the Netherlands. Of why this happened, historian Paul Strathern writes, \"it was common knowledge that [Cardinal Giulio] had been Leo X's most able adviser, as well as manager of the pope's financial affairs. The fact that Leo X had blithely ignored his cousin's advice, on so many occasions, was widely seen as being responsible for the plight of the papacy\u2014not the influence of Cardinal Giulio de' Medici. On the contrary, Cardinal Giulio appeared to be everything that Leo X was not: he was handsome, thoughtful, saturnine and gifted with good taste. Despite this, many remained steadfast in their opposition to his candidacy.\"\nIn conclave, Cardinal Giulio controlled the largest voting bloc, but his enemies forced the election to a stalemate. Among them were Cardinal Francesco Soderini, a Florentine whose family had lost a power struggle to the Medici \"and held a grudge\"; Cardinal Pompeo Colonna, a Roman nobleman who wanted to become Pope himself; and a group of French cardinals who \"were unwilling to forget Leo X's treachery to their King\".\nRealizing that his candidacy was in jeopardy, \"Cardinal Giulio now chose to make an astute tactical move. He declared modestly that he was unworthy of such high office; instead, he suggested the little-known Dutch scholar Cardinal Adriaan Boeyens, an ascetic and deeply spiritual man who had been tutor to the Holy Roman Emperor Charles V. Cardinal Giulio was sure that Cardinal Boeyens would be rejected\u2014on the grounds of his obscurity, his lack of political expertise and the fact that he was not Italian. The selfless suggestion that had been made by Cardinal Giulio de' Medici would then demonstrate to all that he was in fact the ideal candidate. But this move backfired badly, Cardinal Giulio's bluff was called and Cardinal Boeyens was elected as Pope Adrian VI.\"\nDuring his 20-month papacy, Adrian VI \"seemed to set great store by Cardinal Medici's opinions\u00a0... And all the other cardinals were kept distinctly at arm's-length.\" In this way, Cardinal Giulio \"wielded formidable influence\" throughout Adrian's reign. Splitting time between the Palazzo Medici in Florence and the Palazzo della Cancelleria in Rome, Cardinal Giulio \"lived there as a generous Medici was expected to live, a patron of artists and musicians, a protector of the poor, a lavish host\".\nAssassination plot of 1522.\nIn 1522, rumors began to swirl that Cardinal Giulio\u2014lacking legitimate successors to rule Florence\u2014planned to abdicate rule of the city and \"leave the government freely in the people\". When it became clear that these rumors were untrue, a faction of mostly elite Florentines hatched a plot to assassinate him and then install their own government under his \"great adversary\", Cardinal Francesco Soderini. Soderini encouraged the plot, exhorting both Adrian and Francis I of France to strike against Giulio and invade his allies in Sicily. This did not happen. Instead of breaking with Giulio, Adrian had Cardinal Soderini imprisoned. Afterward, the principal conspirators were \"declared rebels\", and some were \"apprehended and beheaded; by which means Giulio was again secured [as leader of Florence].\"\nPope.\nFollowing Adrian VI's death on 14 September 1523, Cardinal Giulio overcame the opposition of the French king and finally succeeded in being elected Pope Clement VII in the next conclave (19 November 1523).\nPope Clement VII brought to the papal throne a high reputation for political ability and possessed in fact all the accomplishments of a wily diplomat. But his contemporaries considered him worldly and indifferent to the perceived dangers of the Protestant Reformation.\nAt his accession, Clement VII sent the Archbishop of Capua, Nikolaus von Sch\u00f6nberg, to the kings of France, Spain, and England, in order to bring the Italian War to an end. An early report from the Protonotary Marino Caracciolo to the Emperor records: \"As the Turks threaten to conquer Christian states, it seems to him that it is his first duty as Pope to bring about a general peace of all Christian princes, and he begs him (the Emperor), as the firstborn son of the Church, to aid him in this pious work.\" But the pope's attempt failed.\nContinental and Medici politics.\nFrancis I of France's conquest of Milan in 1524, during his Italian campaign of 1524\u20131525, prompted the Pope to quit the Imperial\u2013Spanish side and to ally himself with other Italian princes, including the Republic of Venice, and France through a treaty of January 1525. This treaty granted the definitive acquisition of Parma and Piacenza for the Papal States, the rule of Medici over Florence and the free passage of the French troops to Naples. This policy in itself was sound and patriotic, but Clement VII's zeal soon cooled; by his want of foresight and unseasonable economy, he laid himself open to an attack from the turbulent Roman barons, which obliged him to invoke the mediation of the emperor, Charles V. One month later, Francis I was crushed and imprisoned in the Battle of Pavia, and Clement VII went deeper in his former engagements with Charles V, signing an alliance with the viceroy of Naples.\nBut deeply concerned about Imperial arrogance, he was to pick up with France again when Francis I was freed after the Treaty of Madrid (1526): the Pope entered into the League of Cognac together with France, Venice, and Francesco II Sforza of Milan. Clement VII issued an invective against Charles V, who in reply defined him a \"wolf\" instead of a \"shepherd\", menacing the summoning of a council about the Lutheran question.\nLike his cousin Pope Leo X, Clement was considered too generous to his Medici relatives, draining the Vatican treasuries. This included the assignment of positions all the way up to Cardinal, lands, titles, and money. These actions prompted reform measures after Clement's death to help prevent such excessive nepotism.\nEvangelization.\nIn his 1529 bull \"Intra Arcana\" Clement VII gave a grant of permissions and privileges to Charles V and the Spanish Empire, which included the power of patronage within their colonies in the Americas.\nSack of Rome.\nThe Pope's wavering politics also caused the rise of the Imperial party inside the Curia: Cardinal Pompeo Colonna's soldiers pillaged Vatican Hill and gained control of the whole of Rome in his name. The humiliated Pope promised therefore to bring the Papal States to the Imperial side again. But soon after, Colonna left the siege and went to Naples, not keeping his promises and dismissing the Cardinal from his charge. From this point on, Clement VII could do nothing but follow the fate of the French party to the end.\nSoon he found himself alone in Italy too, as Alfonso I d'Este, duke of Ferrara, had supplied artillery to the Imperial army, causing the League Army to keep a distance behind the horde of Landsknechts led by Charles III, Duke of Bourbon and Georg von Frundsberg, allowing them to reach Rome without harm.\nCharles of Bourbon died while mounting a ladder during the short siege and his starving troops, unpaid and left without a guide, felt free to ravage Rome from 6 May 1527. The many incidents of murder, rape, and vandalism that followed ended the splendours of Renaissance Rome forever. Clement VII, who had displayed no more resolution in his military than in his political conduct, was shortly afterwards (6 June) obliged to surrender himself together with the Castel Sant'Angelo, where he had taken refuge. He agreed to pay a ransom of 400,000 ducats in exchange for his life; conditions included the cession of Parma, Piacenza, Civitavecchia, and Modena to the Holy Roman Empire. (Only the last could be occupied in fact.) At the same time, Venice took advantage of his situation to capture Cervia and Ravenna while Sigismondo Malatesta returned to Rimini.\nClement was kept as a prisoner in Castel Sant'Angelo for six months. After having bought off some Imperial officers, he escaped disguised as a peddler and took shelter in Orvieto and then in Viterbo. He came back to a depopulated and devastated Rome only in October 1528.\nMeanwhile, in Florence, Republican enemies of the Medici took advantage of the chaos to again expel the Pope's family from the city.\nIn June 1529 the warring parties signed the Peace of Barcelona. The Papal States regained some cities and Charles V agreed to restore the Medici to power in Florence. In 1530, after an eleven-month siege, the Tuscan city capitulated and Clement VII installed his illegitimate nephew Alessandro as duke. Subsequently, the Pope followed a policy of subservience to the emperor, endeavouring on the one hand to induce him to act with severity against the Lutherans in Germany and on the other to avoid his demands for a general council.\nAppearance.\nDuring his half-year imprisonment in 1527, Clement VII grew a full beard as a sign of mourning for the sack of Rome. This was in contradiction to Catholic canon law, which required priests to be clean-shaven, but had as precedent the beard Pope Julius II wore for nine months in 1511\u201312 as a sign of mourning for the papal city of Bologna.\nUnlike Julius II, however, Clement kept his beard until his death in 1534. His example in wearing a beard was followed by his successor, Paul III, and indeed by 24 popes after him, down to Innocent XII, who died in 1700. Clement was thus the unintentional originator of a fashion that lasted well over a century.\nAncona.\nIn 1532, Clement VII took possession of Ancona, which definitively lost its freedom and became part of the Papal States, ending hundreds of years when the Republic of Ancona was an important maritime power.\nEnglish Reformation.\nBy the late 1520s, King Henry VIII wanted to have his marriage to Charles's aunt Catherine of Aragon annulled. The couple's sons died in infancy, threatening the future of the House of Tudor, although Henry did have a daughter, Mary Tudor. Henry claimed that this lack of a male heir was because his marriage was \"blighted in the eyes of God\". Catherine had been his brother's widow, but the marriage had been childless, so the marriage was not against Old Testament law, which forbids such unions only if the brother had children. Moreover, Pope Julius II had given a dispensation to allow the wedding. Henry now argued that this had been wrong and that his marriage had never been valid. In 1527 Henry asked Clement to annul the marriage, but the Pope, possibly acting under pressure from Catherine's nephew, Holy Roman Emperor Charles V, whose effective prisoner he was, refused. Pope Clement VII discreetly advised King Henry VIII to divorce Queen Catherine without seeking an official annulment, aiming to resolve the politically and personally sensitive situation surrounding the legitimacy of their marriage. Despite the Pope's counsel, Henry VIII remained committed to following the proper ecclesiastical procedures, insisting that any actions taken must align with the established norms of the Catholic Church. According to Catholic teaching, a validly contracted marriage is indivisible until death, and thus the pope cannot annul a marriage on the basis of an impediment previously dispensed. Many people close to Henry wished simply to ignore Clement, but in October 1530 a meeting of clergy and lawyers advised that the Parliament of England could not empower the Archbishop of Canterbury to act against the Pope's prohibition. In Parliament, Bishop John Fisher was the Pope's champion.\nHenry subsequently underwent a marriage ceremony with Anne Boleyn, in either late 1532 or early 1533. The marriage was made easier by the death of the Archbishop of Canterbury William Warham, a stalwart friend of the Pope, after which Henry persuaded Clement to appoint Thomas Cranmer, a friend of the Boleyn family, as his successor. The Pope granted the papal bulls necessary for Cranmer's promotion to Canterbury, and also demanded that Cranmer take the customary oath of allegiance to the pope before his consecration. Laws made under Henry already declared that bishops would be consecrated even without papal approval. Cranmer was consecrated, while declaring beforehand that he did not agree with the oath he would take. Cranmer was prepared to grant the annulment of the marriage to Catherine as Henry required. The Pope responded to the marriage by excommunicating both Henry and Cranmer from the Catholic Church.\nConsequently, in England, in the same year, the Act of Conditional Restraint of Annates transferred the taxes on ecclesiastical income from the Pope to the Crown. The Peter's Pence Act outlawed the annual payment by landowners of one penny to the Pope. This act also reiterated that England had \"no superior under God, but only your Grace\" and that Henry's \"imperial crown\" had been diminished by the Pope's \"unreasonable and uncharitable usurpations and exactions\". Ultimately, in 1534, Henry led the English Parliament to pass the Act of Supremacy that established the independent Church of England and broke from the Catholic Church.\nMarriage of Catherine de' Medici.\nIn 1533, Clement married his cousin's granddaughter, Catherine de' Medici, to the future King Henry II of France, son of King Francis I. Due to an illness, before setting out to Marseille for the wedding, Clement issued a Bull on 3 September 1533 giving instructions on what to do if he died outside Rome. The wedding ceremony took place at \u00c9glise Saint-Ferr\u00e9ol les Augustins on 28 October 1533 and was conducted by Clement himself. It was \"followed by nine days of lavish banquets, pageants, and festivities.\" On 7 November in Marseille, Clement created four new cardinals, all of them French. He also held separate, private meetings with Francis I and Charles V. Charles' daughter, Margaret of Austria was set to marry Clement's relative\u2014Alessandro de' Medici, Duke of Florence\u2014in 1536.\nAccording to Medici historian Paul Strathern, Clement marrying Catherine into France's royal family and Alessandro becoming Duke of Florence and marrying into the Hapsburg family \"marked perhaps the most significant turning point in the history of the Medici family\u2014the ascent into nobility in Florence, and the joining of the French royal family. Without the guiding hand of Clement VII, the Medici would never have been able to achieve the pinnacles of greatness that were yet to come\" in the following centuries.\nDeath.\nOn 10 December 1533, Clement returned to Rome with a fever and complaining of stomach problems. Strathern writes of how he had been ill for months: \"[he] was aging rapidly...his liver was failing and his skin turned yellow; he also lost the sight of one eye and became partially blind in the other.\" He was so ill at the beginning of August 1534 that Cardinal Agostino Trivulzio wrote to King Francis that the Pope's doctors feared for his life.\nOn 23 September 1534, Clement wrote a long letter of farewell to Emperor Charles. He also affirmed, just days before his death, that Michelangelo should paint \"The Last Judgment\" above the altar in the Sistine Chapel. Clement VII died just two days later, on 25 September 1534, having lived 56 years and four months, reigning for 10 years, 10 months, and 7 days. His body was interred in Saint Peter's Basilica, and later transferred to a tomb in Santa Maria sopra Minerva in Rome, which was designed by Baccio Bandinelli.\nClement's biographer Emmanuel Rodocanachi writes that \"in accordance with the custom of those times, people attributed his death to poison\"\u2014specifically, poisoning by death cap mushroom. Clement's symptoms and the length of his illness do not, however, support the hypothesis that he had been poisoned with death cap mushroom.\nLegacy.\nPolitical legacy.\nClement VII's papacy is generally regarded as one of history's most tumultuous; opinions of Clement himself are often nuanced. For example, Clement's contemporary Francesco Vettori writes that he \"endured a great labor to become, from a great and respected cardinal, a small and little-esteemed pope\", but also that \"if one considers the lives of previous popes one may truly say that, for more than a hundred years, no better man than Clement VII sat upon the Throne. Nevertheless, it was in his day that the disaster took place while these others, who were filled with all vices, lived and died in felicity\u2014as the world sees it. Neither should we seek to question the Lord, our God, who will punish\u2014or not punish\u2013in what manner and in what time it pleases him.\"\nThe disasters of Clement's pontificate\u2014the Sack of Rome and the English Reformation\u2014are regarded as turning points in the histories of Catholicism, Europe, and the Renaissance. Modern historian Kenneth Gouwens writes, \"Clement's failures must be viewed above all in the context of major changes in the dynamics of European politics. As warfare on the Italian peninsula intensified in the mid-1520s, the imperative of autonomy [for the Catholic Church and Italy] required enormous financial outlays to field standing armies. Political survival perforce eclipsed ecclesiastical reform as a short-term goal, and the costs of war necessitated the curtailment of expenditure on culture. Clement pursued policies consistent with those of his illustrious predecessors Julius II and Leo X; but in the 1520s, those policies could but fail... Reform of the Church, to which his successors would turn, required resources and concerted secular support that the second Medici pope was unable to muster.\"\nRegarding Clement's struggle to liberate Italy and the Catholic Church from foreign domination, historian Fred Dotolo writes that \"one might see in his papacy a vigorous defense of papal rights against the growth of monarchial power, a diplomatic and even pastoral struggle to retain the ancient division within Christendom of the priestly and kingly offices. Should the new monarchs of the early modern period reduce the papacy to a mere appendage of secular authority, religious issues would become little more than state policy... Clement VII attempted to restrain the expansion of royal power and maintain the independence of Rome and of papal prerogatives.\"\nEcclesiastically, Clement is remembered for orders protecting Jews from the Inquisition, approving the Theatine, Barnabite, and Capuchin Orders, and securing the island of Malta for the Knights of Malta.\nIn a final analysis of Clement's papacy, historian E.R. Chamberlin writes, \"in all but his personal attributes, Clement VII was a protagonist in a Greek tragedy, the victim called upon to endure the results of actions committed long before. Each temporal claim of his predecessors had entangled the Papacy just a little more in the lethal game of politics, even while each moral debasement divorced it just a little more from the vast body of Christians from whom ultimately it drew its strength.\" More charitably, modern historian James Grubb writes, \"indeed, at a certain point it is difficult to see how he might have fared much better, given the obstacles he faced. Certainly his predecessors since the end of the Schism had experienced their share of opposition, but did any have to fight on so many fronts as Clement, and against such overwhelming odds? At one time or another he battled the Holy Roman Empire (now fueled by precious metals from America), the French, the Turks, rival Italian powers, fractious forces within the papal states, and entrenched interests within the Curia itself. That the precious liberta d'Italia (freedom from outside domination) should have been lost irrevocably seems more an inevitability than a product of Clement's particular failings. He tried his utmost...\"\nPortrayals.\nThe life of the second Medici pope has been portrayed numerous times in films and television, notably the Netflix series \"Medici: The Magnificent\", where the figure is portrayed by British actor Jacob Dudman.\nPatronage.\nAs both a cardinal and Pope, Giulio de' Medici \"commissioned or supervised many of the best-known artistic undertakings of the cinquecento.\" Of those works, he's best known for Michelangelo's monumental fresco in the Sistine Chapel, \"The Last Judgment\"; Raphael's iconic altarpiece \"The Transfiguration\"; Michelangelo's sculptures for the \"Medici Chapel\" in Florence; Raphael's architectural \"Villa Madama\" in Rome; and Michelangelo's innovative \"Laurentian Library\" in Florence. \"As a patron, [Giulio de' Medici] proved extraordinarily confident in technical affairs,\" which allowed him to suggest workable architectural and artistic solutions for commissions ranging from Michelangelo's \"Laurentian Library\" to Benvenuto Cellini's celebrated Papal Morse. As Pope, he appointed goldsmith Cellini head of the Papal Mint; and painter Sebastiano del Piombo keeper of the Papal Seal. Sebastiano's tour de force, \"The Raising of Lazarus\", was produced via a contest arranged by Cardinal Giulio, pitting Sebastiano in direct competition with Raphael over who could produce the better altarpiece for the Narbonne Cathedral.\nGiulio de' Medici's patronage extended to theology, literature, and science. Some of the best known works associated with him are Erasmus' \"On Free Will\", which he encouraged in response to Martin Luther's critiques of the Catholic Church; Machiavelli's \"Florentine Histories\", which he commissioned; and Copernicus' heliocentric idea, which he personally approved in 1533. When Johann Widmanstetter explained the Copernican system to him, he was so grateful that he gave Widmanstetter a valuable gift. In 1531 Clement issued rules for the oversight of human cadaver dissection and medical test trials, a sort of primitive code of medical ethics. Humanist and author Paolo Giovio was his personal physician.\nGiulio de' Medici was a talented musician, and his circle included many well-known artists and thinkers of the Italian High Renaissance. For example, \"in the days before his papacy, the future Clement VII had been close to Leonardo da Vinci,\" with Leonardo gifting him a painting, the \"Madonna of the Carnation\". He was a patron of the satirist Pietro Aretino, who \"wrote a series of viciously satirical lampoons supporting the candidacy of Giulio de' Medici for the papacy.\" As Pope, he appointed author Baldassare Castiglione as Papal diplomat to Holy Roman Emperor Charles V; and historian Francesco Guicciardini as governor of the Romagna, the northernmost province of the Papal States.\nThe Clementine Style.\nItalian Renaissance artistic trends from 1523 to 1527 are sometimes called the \"Clementine style\", and notable for their technical virtuosity. In 1527, the Sack of Rome \"put a brutal end to an artistic golden age, the Clementine style that had developed in Rome since the coronation of the Medici Pope\". Andr\u00e9 Chastel describes the artists who worked in the Clementine style as Parmigianino, Rosso Fiorentino, Sebastiano del Piombo, Benvenuto Cellini, Marcantonio Raimondi, and numerous associates of Raphael: Giulio Romano, Giovanni da Udine; Perino del Vaga; and Polidoro da Caravaggio. During the Sack, several of these artists were either killed, made prisoner, or took part in the fighting.\nCharacter.\nClement was renowned for his intelligence and counsel, but maligned for his inability to take timely and decisive action. Historian G.F. Young writes, \"he spoke with equal knowledge of his subject whether that were philosophy and theology, or mechanics and hydraulic architecture. In all affairs he displayed an extraordinary acuteness; the most perplexing questions were unravelled, the most difficult circumstances penetrated to the very bottom, by his extreme sagacity. No man could debate a point with more address.\" Historian Paul Strathern writes, \"his inner life was illuminated by an unwavering faith;\" he was also in \"surprisingly close contact with the ideals [of Renaissance humanism], and even more surprisingly was deeply sympathetic to them.\" For example, \"Clement VII had no difficulty in accepting Copernicus's heliocentric idea, and appeared to see no challenge to his faith in its implications; his Renaissance humanism was open to such progressive theories.\" Of Clement's other qualities, Strathern writes \"he had inherited his murdered father's good looks, though these tended to lapse into a dark scowl rather than a smile. He also inherited something of his great-grandfather Cosimo de' Medici's skill with accounts, as well as a strong inclination to his legendary caution, making the new pope hesitant when it came to taking important decisions; and unlike his cousin Leo X, he possessed a deep understanding of art.\"\nOf Clement's limitations, historian Francesco Guicciardini writes, \"although he had a most capable intelligence and marvelous knowledge of world affairs, he lacked the corresponding resolution and execution... He remained almost always in suspension and ambiguous when he was faced with deciding those things that from afar he had many times foreseen, considered, and almost revealed.\" Strathern writes that Clement was \"a man of almost icy self-control, but in him the Medici trait of self-contained caution had deepened into a flaw... If anything, Clement VII had too much understanding\u2014he could always see both sides of any particular argument. This had made him an excellent close adviser to his cousin Leo X, but hampered his ability to take matters into his own hands.\" The \"Catholic Encyclopedia\" notes that while his \"private life was free from reproach and he had many excellent impulses ... despite good intention, all qualities of heroism and greatness must emphatically be denied him.\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "24120", "revid": "46346656", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24120", "title": "Pope Clement VIII", "text": "Head of the Catholic Church from 1592 to 1605\nPope Clement VIII (; ; 24 February 1536\u00a0\u2013 3 March 1605), born Ippolito Aldobrandini, was head of the Catholic Church and ruler of the Papal States from 30 January 1592 to his death in March 1605.\nBorn in Fano, Papal States to a prominent Florentine family, he initially came to prominence as a canon lawyer before being made a Cardinal-Priest in 1585. In 1592, he was elected Pope and took the name of Clement. During his papacy, he effected the reconciliation of Henry IV of France to the Catholic faith and was instrumental in setting up an alliance of Christian nations to oppose the Ottoman Empire in the so-called Long War. He also successfully adjudicated in a bitter dispute between the Dominicans and the Jesuits on the issue of efficacious grace and free will. In 1600, he presided over a jubilee, which brought many pilgrimages to Rome. He presided over the trial and execution of Giordano Bruno and implemented strict measures against Jewish residents of the Papal States. According to some accounts, he may have been the first pope to drink coffee, and his approval thereof may have led to its popularisation.\nClement VIII died at the age of 69 in 1605, and his remains now rest in the Roman church of Santa Maria Maggiore.\nEarly life.\nHe was baptised on 4 March at the cathedral of Fano. He was from a Florentine family, son of Silvestro Aldobrandini and Lesa Deti, and followed his father as a canon lawyer, becoming an Auditor (judge) of the Roman Rota, the highest ecclesiastical court constituted by the Holy See. He was only ordained as a priest on 31 December 1580 at the age of 45 and became pope on 2 February 1592 when he was not yet 56. He was an effective, if sometimes rigorous, administrator.\nCardinal.\nHe was made Cardinal-Priest of S. Pancrazio in 1585 by Pope Sixtus V, who named him major penitentiary in January 1586 and in 1588 sent him as Papal legate in Poland. He placed himself under the spiritual direction of the reformer Saint Philip Neri, who for thirty years was his confessor. Aldobrandini won the gratitude of the Habsburgs by his successful diplomatic efforts in Poland to obtain the release of the imprisoned Archduke Maximilian, the defeated candidate for the Polish throne.\nAfter the death of Pope Innocent IX (1591), another stormy conclave ensued, in which a determined minority of Italian Cardinals were unwilling to be dictated to by Philip II of Spain. Known to be very intelligent, disciplined, and in tune with the inner workings of the Church, Cardinal Aldobrandini was elected on 30 January 1592, as a portent of more balanced and liberal Papal policy in European affairs. He took the non-politicised name Clement VIII. He proved to be an able Pope, with an unlimited capacity for work, and a lawyer's eye for detail. He was a wise statesman, the general object of whose policy was to free the Papacy from its dependence upon Spain.\nEcclesiastical matters.\nClementine Vulgate.\nIn November 1592, he published the Clementine Vulgate. It was issued with the Bull \"Cum Sacrorum\" (9 November 1592) which asserted that every subsequent edition must be assimilated to this one, that no word of the text could be changed, and that not even variant readings could be printed in the margin. This new official version of the Vulgate, known as the Clementine Vulgate\" \"or Sixto-Clementine Vulgate\",\" became and remained the official Bible of the Catholic Church until the \"Nova Vulgata\" replaced it in 1979.\"\"\n\"De Auxiliis\" controversy.\nIn 1597, he established the Congregatio de Auxiliis, which was to settle the theological controversy between the Dominican Order and the Jesuits concerning the respective roles of efficacious grace and free will. Although the debate tended toward a condemnation of Molinism's insistence on free will to the detriment of efficacious grace, the important influence of the Jesuit Order\u00a0\u2014 among other considerations\u00a0\u2014 which, beside important political and theological power in Europe, had also various missions abroad (Misiones Jesuiticas in South America, missions in China, etc.), led the Pope to abstain from an official condemnation of the Jesuits. In 1611 and again in 1625, a decree prohibited any discussion of the matter, although it was often informally skirted by the publication of commentaries on Thomas Aquinas.\nJubilee of 1600.\nDuring the jubilee of 1600, three million pilgrims visited the holy places. The Synod of Brest was held 1595 in the Polish\u2013Lithuanian Commonwealth, by which a great part of the Ruthenian clergy and people were reunited to Rome.\nCanonisations and beatifications.\nClement VIII canonised Hyacinth (17 April 1594), Julian of Cuenca (18 October 1594), and Raymond of Pe\u00f1afort (1601). He beatified 205 individuals, 200 of them being group martyrs; notable individuals he named as Blessed included Carlo Borromeo.\nConsistories.\nThe pope created 53 cardinals in six consistories during his pontificate; he named his two nephews Pietro and Cinzio Passeri as cardinals. Notable cardinals named during his reign included Camillo Borghese (his successor Pope Paul V) as well as the noted theologians Robert Bellarmine and Caesar Baronius.\nForeign relations.\nRelations with France and Spain.\nThe most remarkable event of Clement VIII's reign was the reconciliation to the Church of Henry IV of France (1589\u20131610), after long negotiations, carried on with great dexterity through Cardinal Arnaud d'Ossat, that resolved the complicated situation in France. Henry embraced Catholicism on 25 July 1593. After a pause to assess Henry IV's sincerity, Clement VIII braved Spanish displeasure, and in the autumn of 1595, he solemnly absolved Henry IV, thus putting an end to the thirty years' religious war in France.\nHenry IV's friendship was of essential importance to the papacy two years later, when Alfonso II d'Este, Duke of Ferrara, died childless (27 October 1597), and the pope resolved to attach the stronghold of the Este family to the states of the Church. Though Spain and the Emperor Rudolf II encouraged Alfonso II's illegitimate cousin, Cesare d'Este, to withstand the pope, they were deterred from giving him any material aid by Henry IV's threats, and a Papal army entered Ferrara almost unopposed.\nIn 159,8 Clement VIII won more credit for the papacy by bringing about a definite treaty of peace between Spain and France in the Peace of Vervins, which put an end to their long contest; he negotiated peace between France and the Duchy of Savoy as well.\nLong War.\nIn 1594, Clement VIII initiated an alliance of Christian European powers to take part in the war with the Ottoman Empire, fought mainly in Hungary, which would become known as the \"Long Turkish War\" and continue past Clement's own lifetime. Facilitated by the pope, a treaty of alliance was signed in Prague by Rudolf II, Holy Roman Emperor and Sigismund B\u00e1thory of Transylvania. Aron Vod\u0103 of Moldavia and Michael the Brave of Wallachia joined the alliance later that year. Clement VIII himself lent the Emperor valuable assistance in men and money.\nInternal policies.\nLaw enforcement.\nClement VIII was as vigorous as Pope Sixtus V (1585\u201390) in crushing banditry in the Papal provinces of Umbria and the Marche and in punishing the lawlessness of the Papal nobility. Upon his ascension to the Papal throne in 1592, he immediately had several noble troublemakers put to death. These included most famously Troio Savelli, scion of a powerful ancient Roman family, and the youthful and noble Beatrice Cenci, who had murdered her father\u00a0\u2013 probably as a consequence of his repeated abuses. The latter case prompted many requests of clemency\u00a0\u2013 rejected by the Pope, who passed the confiscated Cenci property to his own family.\nClement's strict ways also concerned philosophical and religious matters. In 1599, he had the Italian miller Menocchio\u00a0\u2013 who had formed the belief that God was not eternal but had Himself once been created out of chaos\u00a0\u2013 tried by the Inquisition and burnt at the stake. A more famous case was the trial for heresy of Giordano Bruno, who was burned at the stake in 1600. Pope Clement VIII participated personally in the final phases of the trial, inviting the Cardinals in charge of the case to proceed with the verdict.\nAnti-Jewish measures.\nClement VIII tightened measures against the Jewish inhabitants of his territories. In 1592, the papal bull \"Cum saepe accidere\" forbade the Jewish community of the Comtat Venaissin of Avignon, a Papal enclave, to sell new goods, putting them at an economic disadvantage. In 1593, the bull \"Caeca et Obdurata\" reiterated Pope Pius V's decree of 1569, which banned Jews from living in the Papal States outside the cities of Rome, Ancona, and Avignon. The main effect of the bull was to evict Jews who had returned to areas of the Papal States (mainly Umbria) after 1586 (following their expulsion in 1569) and to expel Jewish communities from cities like Bologna (which had been incorporated under papal dominion since 1569). The bull also alleged that Jews worldwide had engaged in usury and exploited the hospitality of Clement VIII's predecessors \"who, in order to lead them from their darkness to knowledge of the true faith, deemed it opportune to use the clemency of Christian piety towards them\" (alluding to \"Christiana pietas\"). With the bull \"Cum Hebraeorum malitia\" a few days later, Clement VIII also forbade the reading of the Talmud.\nLater life and death.\nClement VIII was afflicted by gout, using a wheelchair by the late 1590s, and was forced to spend much of his later life immobilised in bed. He suddenly became ill on 10 February 1605, and his condition rapidly deteriorated over the next few weeks. He died on 3 March 1605 around midnight, leaving a reputation for prudence, munificence, ruthlessness and capacity for business. Clement was buried in St. Peter's Basilica, and later Pope Paul V (1605\u201321) had a mausoleum built for him in the Borghese Chapel of Santa Maria Maggiore, where his remains were transferred in 1646.\nHis reign is especially distinguished by the number and beauty of his medals. Clement VIII founded the Collegio Clementino for the education of the sons of the richer classes, and augmented the number of national colleges in Rome by opening the Collegio Scozzese for the training of missionaries to Scotland.\nCoffee.\nCoffee aficionados often claim that the spread of its popularity among Catholics is due to Pope Clement VIII's influence. According to the legend, there was opposition to coffee as \"Satan's drink\", leading to the pope's advisors asking him to denounce the beverage. However, upon tasting coffee, Pope Clement VIII declared: \"Why, this Satan's drink is so delicious that it would be a pity to let the infidels have exclusive use of it.\" Clement allegedly blessed the bean because it appeared better for the people than alcoholic beverages. The year often cited is 1600. It is not clear whether this is a true story, but it may have been found amusing at the time.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "24121", "revid": "38556235", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24121", "title": "Peloponnesian War", "text": "War between Athens and Sparta (431\u2013404 BC)\nThe Peloponnesian War (), was fought in the Eastern Mediterranean between the Athenian-led Delian League and the Spartan-led Peloponnesian League from 431 to 404 BC for hegemony over Ancient Greece. Initially inconclusive, the intervention of the Persian Empire in support of Sparta in 413 BC allowed the Spartan coalition to decisively defeat Athens, beginning a period of Spartan hegemony over Greece.\nThe war consists of four related conflicts which have traditionally been combined into one. The opening phase, called the Ten Years' War or the Archidamian War, began in 431 BC when the Spartan king Archidamus II invaded Attica with his army. After successive Spartan invasions of Attica and Athenian raiding of the Peloponnese, Athens gained the upper hand at Sphacteria in 425 BC, but lost it after a defeat by Thebes at Delium in 424 BC. With both city-states exhausted from years of fighting, the Peace of Nicias was signed in 421 BC. The second phase, the Argive War, was fought between 419 and 416 BC. It was a proxy war that pitted Sparta against its Peloponnesian rivals, led by Argos and supported by Athens. The Argive alliance was defeated at the battle of Mantinea of 418 BC, restoring Spartan hegemony over the Peloponnese. The third phase, the Sicilian Expedition, was an attempt by Athens to conquer the Spartan-allied Syracuse. Fought between 415 and 413 BC, the expedition ended in defeat for Athens and the destruction of most of its navy.\nAfter the expedition's failure, Sparta, now allied to the Persian Empire, broke the peace in 413 BC and began the final phase of the war, called the Decelean War or Ionian War. While Persia captured the Athenian cities in Asia Minor; Sparta, led by Lysander, built a Persian-financed fleet to break Athens's naval superiority. Sparta won the decisive battle of Aegospotamos in 405 BC, which broke the power of the Delian League. Athens fell the following year and the Delian League was dissolved, ending the war. The Delian League's democracies were replaced with Spartan-style oligarchies, most notably the Thirty Tyrants in Athens. Spartan hegemony was short-lived after the victory. A decade later Athens regained its independence in the Corinthian War, and Sparta's power continued to fall in the years to come.\nThe war changed the ancient Greek world. Athens, the strongest city-state in Greece prior to the war, was reduced to a state of near-complete subjection, while Sparta became established as the leading power of Greece. The economic costs of the war were felt all across Greece as poverty became widespread in the Peloponnese, while Athens was devastated and never regained its pre-war prosperity. The war also wrought subtler changes to Greek society. The conflict between democratic Athens and oligarchic Sparta, each of which supported friendly political factions within other states, made war a common occurrence in the Greek world. Ancient Greek warfare, originally a limited and formalized form of conflict, transformed into total war between city-states, complete with mass atrocities. Shattering religious and cultural taboos, devastating vast swathes of countryside, and destroying whole cities, the Peloponnesian War marked the dramatic end to the fifth century BC and the golden age of Greece.\nHistoric sources.\nThe main historical source for most of the war is the detailed account in \"The History of the Peloponnesian War\" by Thucydides. He states that he began writing his history as soon as the war broke out and took his information from first-hand accounts, including events he witnessed himself. An Athenian who fought in the early part of the war, Thucydides was exiled in 423 BC and settled in the Peloponnese, where he spent the rest of the war collecting sources and writing his history. Scholars regard Thucydides as reliable and neutral between the two sides. A partial exception are the lengthy speeches he reports, which Thucydides admits are not accurate records of what was said, but his interpretation of the general arguments presented. The narrative begins several years before the war, explaining why it began, then reports events year-by-year. The main limitation of Thucydides' work is that it is incomplete: the text ends abruptly in 411 BC, seven years before the conclusion of the war.\nThe account was continued by Xenophon, a younger contemporary, in the first book of his \"Hellenica\". This directly follows Thucydides' final sentence and provides a similar record, on the topics of the war's conclusion and aftermath. Born in Athens, Xenophon spent his military career as a mercenary, fighting in the Persian Empire and for Sparta in Asia Minor, Thrace and Greece. Exiled from Athens for these actions, he retired to live in Sparta, where he wrote \"Hellenica\" around 40 years after the war had ended. His account is generally considered favourable to Sparta.\nA briefer account of the whole war is provided by the Sicilian historian Diodorus Siculus in books 12 and 13 of his \"Bibliotheca historica\". Written in the first century BC, these books appear to be based heavily (possibly entirely) upon an earlier universal history by Ephorus, written in the century after the war, which is now lost.\nThe Roman-Greek historian Plutarch wrote biographies of four of the major commanders in the war (Pericles, Nicias, Alcibiades and Lysander) in his \"Parallel Lives\". Plutarch's focus was on the character and morality of these men, but he does provide some details on the progress of the war that are not recorded elsewhere. Written in the first century AD, Plutarch based his work on earlier accounts which are now lost.\nMore limited information on the war is derived from epigraphy and archaeology, such as the walls of Amphipolis and grave of Brasidas, excavated in the 20th century. Some buildings and artworks produced during the war have survived, such as the Erechtheion temple and Grave Stele of Hegeso, both in Athens; these provide no information on military activity but do reflect civilian life during the war. Several plays by the Athenian Aristophanes were written and set during the war (particularly \"Peace\" and \"Lysistrata\"), but these are works of comedic fiction with little historical value.\nPrelude.\nThucydides summarised the situation before the war as: \"The growth of the power of Athens, and the alarm which this inspired in Lacedaemon, made war inevitable\". The nearly 50 years before the War had been marked by the development of Athens as a major power in the Mediterranean world. Its empire began as a small group of city-states, called the Delian League\u2014from the island of Delos, on which they kept their treasury\u2014that formed to ensure that the Greco-Persian Wars were over. After defeating the Second Persian invasion of Greece in the year 480 BC, Athens led the coalition of Greek city-states that continued the Greco-Persian Wars with attacks on Persian territories in the Aegean and Ionia. What ensued was a period which Thucydides called the Pentecontaetia, in which Athens increasingly became an empire, carrying out an aggressive war against Persia and increasingly dominating other city-states. Athens brought under its control all of Greece except for Sparta and its allies, ushering in a period now called the Athenian Empire. By mid-century, the Persians had been driven out of the Aegean and had ceded control of vast territories to Athens. Athens had greatly increased its own power; a number of its formerly independent allies were reduced, over the course of the century, to the status of tribute-paying subject states of the Delian League. This tribute was used to fund a powerful fleet and, after the middle of the century, massive public works in Athens, causing resentment.\nFriction between Athens and the Peloponnesian states, including Sparta, began early in the Pentecontaetia. In the wake of the departure of the Persians from Greece, Sparta sent ambassadors to persuade Athens not to reconstruct their walls, but was rebuffed. Without the walls, Athens would have been defenseless against a land attack and subject to Spartan control. According to Thucydides, although the Spartans took no action then, they \"secretly felt aggrieved\". Conflict between the states flared up again in 465 BC, when a helot revolt broke out in Sparta. The Spartans summoned forces from all of their allies, including Athens, to help them suppress the revolt. Athens sent out a sizable contingent (4,000 hoplites), but upon its arrival, this force was dismissed by the Spartans, while those of all the other allies were permitted to remain. According to Thucydides, the Spartans did this out of fear that the Athenians would switch sides and support the helots; the offended Athenians repudiated their alliance with Sparta. When the rebellious helots were finally forced to surrender and permitted to evacuate the state, the Athenians settled them at the strategic city of Naupaktos on the Gulf of Corinth.\nIn 459 BC, there was a war between Spartan allies Megara and Corinth, which were neighbors of Athens. Athens took advantage of the war to make an alliance with Megara, giving Athens a critical foothold on the Isthmus of Corinth. A 15-year conflict, commonly known as the First Peloponnesian War, ensued, in which Athens fought intermittently against Sparta, Corinth, Aegina, and a number of other states. For a time during this conflict, Athens controlled not only Megara but also Boeotia. But at its end, a massive Spartan invasion of Attica forced Athens to cede the lands it had won on the Greek mainland, and Athens and Sparta recognized each other's right to control their respective alliance systems. The war was officially ended by the Thirty Years' Peace, signed in the winter of 446/5 BC.\nBreakdown of peace.\nThe Thirty Years' Peace was first tested in 440 BC, when Athens's powerful ally Samos rebelled from its alliance with Athens. The rebels quickly secured the support of a Persian satrap, and Athens faced the prospect of revolts throughout its empire. The Spartans, whose intervention would have been the trigger for a massive war to determine the fate of the empire, called a congress of their allies to discuss the possibility of war with Athens. Sparta's powerful ally Corinth was notably opposed to intervention, and the congress voted against war with Athens. The Athenians crushed the revolt, and peace was maintained.\nThe more immediate events that led to war involved Athens and Corinth. After a defeat by their colony of Corcyra, a sea power that was not allied to either Sparta or Athens, Corinth began to build an allied naval force. Alarmed, Corcyra sought alliance with Athens. Athens discussed with both Corcyra and Corinth, and made a defensive alliance with Corcyra. At the Battle of Sybota, a small contingent of Athenian ships played a critical role in preventing a Corinthian fleet from capturing Corcyra. In order to uphold the Thirty Years' Peace, the Athenians were instructed not to intervene in the battle unless it was clear that Corinth would invade Corcyra. However, the Athenian ships participated in the battle, and the arrival of additional Athenian triremes was enough to dissuade the Corinthians from exploiting their victory, thus sparing much of the routed Corcyrean and Athenian fleet.\nFollowing this, Athens instructed Potidaea in the peninsula of Chalkidiki, a tributary ally of Athens but a colony of Corinth, to tear down its walls, send hostages to Athens, dismiss the Corinthian magistrates from office, and refuse the magistrates that Corinth would send in the future. Outraged, the Corinthians encouraged Potidaea to revolt and assured them that they would ally with them should they revolt from Athens. During the subsequent Battle of Potidaea, the Corinthians unofficially aided Potidaea by sneaking contingents of men into the besieged city to help defend it. This directly violated the Thirty Years' Peace, which stipulated that the Delian League and the Peloponnesian League would respect each other's autonomy and internal affairs.\nA further provocation was Athens in 433/2 BC imposing trade sanctions on Megarian citizens (once more a Spartan ally after the First Peloponnesian War). It was alleged that the Megarians had desecrated the \"Hiera Orgas\". These sanctions, known as the Megarian decree, were largely ignored by Thucydides, but some modern economic historians have noted that forbidding Megara to trade with the prosperous Athenian empire would have been disastrous for the Megarans, and so have considered the sanctions a contributing causing of the war. Historians who attribute responsibility for the war to Athens cite this event as the main cause.\nAt the request of Corinth, the Spartans summoned members of the Peloponnesian League to Sparta in 432 BC, especially those who had grievances with Athens, to make their complaints to the Spartan assembly. This debate was also attended by an uninvited delegation from Athens, which also asked to speak, and became the scene of a debate between the Athenians and the Corinthians. Thucydides reports that the Corinthians condemned Sparta's inactivity until then, warning Sparta that if it remained passive, it would soon be outflanked and without allies. In response, the Athenians reminded the Spartans of Athens's record of military success and opposition to Persia, warned them of confronting such a powerful state, and encouraged Sparta to seek arbitration as provided by the Thirty Years' Peace. The Spartan king Archidamus II spoke against the war, but the opinion of the hawkish ephor Sthenelaidas prevailed in the Spartan ecclesia. A majority of the Spartan assembly voted to declare that the Athenians had broken the peace, essentially declaring war.\nArchidamian War (431\u2013421 BC).\nThe first years of the war are known as the Archidamian War (431\u2013421 BC), after Sparta's king Archidamus II. The first attack was by the Thebans on the Athenian outpost at Plataea, on 4\u00a0April 431\u00a0BC.\nSparta and its allies, except for Corinth, were almost exclusively land-based, and able to summon large armies which were nearly unbeatable (thanks to the legendary Spartan forces). The Athenian Empire, although based in the peninsula of Attica, spread out across the islands of the Aegean Sea; Athens drew its immense wealth from tribute paid by these islands. Athens maintained its empire through naval power. Thus, the two powers were relatively unable to fight decisive battles.\nThe Spartan strategy during the Archidamian War was to invade the land around Athens. While this invasion deprived Athenians of the productive land around their city, Athens maintained access to the sea, and did not suffer much. Many of the citizens of Attica abandoned their farms and moved inside the Long Walls, which connected Athens to its port of Piraeus. At the end of the first year of the war, Pericles gave his famous Funeral Oration (431 BC).\nThe Spartans also occupied Attica for periods of only three weeks at a time; in the tradition of earlier hoplite warfare, the soldiers were expected to go home to participate in the harvest. Moreover, Spartan slaves, known as helots, needed to be kept under control, and could not be left unsupervised for long. The longest Spartan invasion, in 430 BC, lasted just 40 days.\nThe Athenian strategy was initially guided by the \"strategos,\" or general, Pericles, who advised the Athenians to avoid open battle with the far more numerous and better trained Spartan hoplites, relying instead on the fleet. The Athenian fleet, the dominant Greek naval force, went on the offensive, winning at Naupactus. In 430 BC, an outbreak of a plague hit Athens. The plague ravaged the densely packed city, and in the long run, was a significant cause of its final defeat. The plague wiped out over 30,000 citizens, sailors and soldiers, including Pericles and his sons. Roughly one-third to two-thirds of the Athenian population died. Athenian manpower was correspondingly drastically reduced and even foreign mercenaries refused to hire themselves out to a city riddled with plague. The fear of plague was so widespread that the Spartan invasion of Attica was abandoned, their troops being unwilling to risk contact with the diseased enemy.\nAfter the death of Pericles, the Athenians turned somewhat against his conservative, defensive strategy and to the more aggressive strategy of bringing the war to Sparta and its allies. Rising to particular importance in Athenian democracy at this time was Cleon, a leader of the hawkish elements of the Athenian democracy. Led militarily by a clever new general Demosthenes (not to be confused with the later Athenian orator Demosthenes), the Athenians managed some successes as they continued their naval raids on the Peloponnese. Athens stretched their military activities into Boeotia and Aetolia, quelled the Mytilenean revolt and began fortifying posts around the Peloponnese. One of these posts was near Pylos on a tiny island called Sphacteria, where the first war turned in Athens's favor. The post off Pylos exploited Sparta's dependence on the helots, slaves who worked the fields while its citizens trained to be soldiers. The Pylos post began attracting helot runaways. In addition, the fear of a revolt of helots emboldened by the nearby Athenians drove the Spartans to attack the post. Demosthenes outmaneuvered the Spartans in the Battle of Pylos in 425 BC and trapped a group of Spartan soldiers on Sphacteria as he waited for them to surrender. But weeks later he proved unable to finish them off. Instead, the inexperienced Cleon boasted in the Assembly that he could end the affair, and did win a great victory at the Battle of Sphacteria. In a shocking turn of events, 300 Spartan hoplites encircled by Athenian forces surrendered. The Spartan image of invincibility took significant damage. The Athenians jailed Sphacterian hostages in Athens and resolved to execute the captured Spartans if a Peloponnesian army invaded Attica again.\nAfter these battles, the Spartan general Brasidas raised an army of allies and helots and marched the length of Greece to the Athenian colony of Amphipolis in Thrace. Amphipolis controlled several nearby silver mines whose that supplied much of the Athenian war fund. A force led by Thucydides was dispatched but arrived too late to stop Brasidas capturing Amphipolis; Thucydides was exiled for this, and, as a result, had conversations with both sides of the war which inspired him to record its history. Both Brasidas and Cleon were killed in Athenian efforts to retake Amphipolis (see Battle of Amphipolis). The Spartans and Athenians agreed to exchange the hostages for the towns captured by Brasidas, and signed a truce.\nPeace of Nicias (421 BC).\nWith the death of Cleon and Brasidas, both zealous war hawks for their nations, the Peace of Nicias was able to last six years. However, it was a time of constant skirmishes in and around the Peloponnese. While the Spartans refrained from action themselves, some of their allies began to talk of revolt. They were supported in this by Argos, a powerful Peloponnesian state that had remained independent of Lacedaemon. With the support of the Athenians, the Argives forged a coalition of democratic states in the Peloponnese, including the powerful states of Mantinea and Elis. Early Spartan attempts to break up the coalition failed, and the leadership of the Spartan king Agis was called into question. Emboldened, the Argives and their allies, with the support of a small Athenian force under Alcibiades, moved to seize the city of Tegea, near Sparta.\nThe Battle of Mantinea was the largest land battle within Greece during the Peloponnesian War. The Lacedaemonians, with their neighbors the Tegeans, faced the combined armies of Argos, Athens, Mantinea, and Arcadia. In the battle, the allied coalition scored early successes, but failed to capitalize on them, which allowed the Spartan elite forces to defeat them. The result was a complete victory for the Spartans, which rescued their city from the brink of strategic defeat. The democratic alliance was broken up, and most of its members were reincorporated into the Peloponnesian League. With its victory at Mantinea, Sparta pulled itself back from the brink of utter defeat, and re-established its hegemony throughout the Peloponnese.\nIn the summer of 416\u00a0BC, during a truce with Sparta, Athens invaded the neutral island of Melos, and demanded that Melos ally with them against Sparta, or be destroyed. The Melians rejected this, so the Athenian army laid siege to their city and eventually captured it in the winter. After the city's fall, the Athenians executed all the adult men, and sold the women and children into slavery.\nSicilian Expedition (415\u2013413 BC).\nIn the 17th year of the war, word came to Athens that one of their distant allies in Sicily was under attack from Syracuse, the main city of Sicily. The people of Syracuse were ethnically Dorian (as were the Spartans), while the Athenians, and their ally in Sicilia, were Ionian.\nThe Athenians felt obliged to help their ally. They also held visions, rallied on by Alcibiades, who ultimately led an expedition, of conquering all of Sicily. Syracuse was not much smaller than Athens, and conquering all of Sicily would bring Athens immense resources. In the final preparations for departure, the hermai (religious statues) of Athens were mutilated by unknown persons, and Alcibiades was charged with religious crimes. Alcibiades demanded that he be put on trial at once, so that he could defend himself before the expedition. However, the Athenians allowed Alcibiades to go on the expedition without being tried (many believed in order to better plot against him). After arriving in Sicily, Alcibiades was recalled to Athens for trial. Fearing that he would be unjustly condemned, Alcibiades defected to Sparta and Nicias was placed in charge of the mission. After his defection, Alcibiades claimed to the Spartans that the Athenians planned to use Sicily as a springboard for the conquest of all of Italy and Carthage, and to use the resources and soldiers from these new conquests to conquer the Peloponnese.\nThe Athenian force consisted of over 100 ships and some 5,000 infantry and light-armored troops. Cavalry was limited to about 30 horses, which proved to be no match for the large and highly trained Syracusan cavalry. Upon landing in Sicily, several cities immediately joined the Athenian cause. But instead of attacking, Nicias procrastinated and the campaigning season of 415 BC ended with Syracuse scarcely damaged. With winter approaching, the Athenians withdrew into their quarters and spent the winter gathering allies. The delay allowed Syracuse to request help from Sparta, who sent their general Gylippus to Sicily with reinforcements. Upon arriving, he raised a force from several Sicilian cities, and went to the relief of Syracuse. He took command of the Syracusan troops, and in a series of battles defeated the Athenian forces, and prevented them from invading the city.\nNicias then sent word to Athens asking for reinforcements. Demosthenes was chosen and led another fleet to Sicily, joining his forces with those of Nicias. More battles ensued and again, the Syracusans and their allies defeated the Athenians. Demosthenes argued for a retreat to Athens, but Nicias at first refused. After additional setbacks, Nicias seemed to agree to a retreat until a bad omen, in the form of a lunar eclipse, delayed withdrawal. The delay was costly and forced the Athenians into a major sea battle in the Great Harbor of Syracuse. The Athenians were thoroughly defeated. Nicias and Demosthenes marched their remaining forces inland in search of friendly allies. The Syracusan cavalry rode them down mercilessly, eventually killing or enslaving all who were left of the mighty Athenian fleet.\nSecond War (413\u2013404 BC).\nThe Lacedaemonians were not content with simply sending aid to Sicily; they also resolved to take the war to the Athenians. On the advice of Alcibiades, they fortified Decelea, near Athens, and prevented the Athenians from making use of their land year round. The fortification of Decelea prevented overland supplies to Athens, and forced all supplies to be brought in by sea at greater expense. More significantly, the nearby silver mines were totally disrupted, with as many as 20,000 Athenian slaves freed by the Spartan hoplites at Decelea. With the treasury and emergency reserve of 1,000 talents dwindling, the Athenians were forced to demand even more tribute from her subject allies, further increasing tensions and the threat of rebellion within the Empire.\nCorinth, Sparta, and others in the Peloponnesian League sent more reinforcements to Syracuse, to drive off the Athenians; but instead of withdrawing, the Athenians sent another hundred ships and another 5,000 troops to Sicily. Under Gylippus, the Syracusans and their allies decisively defeated the Athenians on land; and Gylippus encouraged the Syracusans to build a navy, which defeated the Athenian fleet when they tried to withdraw. The Athenian army tried to withdraw overland to friendlier Sicilian cities, but was divided and defeated. The entire Athenian fleet was destroyed, and virtually the entire Athenian army was sold into slavery.\nFollowing the defeat of the Athenians in Sicily, it was widely believed that the end of the Athenian Empire was at hand. Athens' treasury was nearly empty, its docks were depleted, and many of the Athenian youth were dead or imprisoned in a foreign land.\nAthens recovers.\nAfter the destruction of the Sicilian Expedition, Lacedaemon encouraged the revolt of Athens's tributary allies, and indeed, much of Ionia rose in revolt. The Syracusans sent their fleet to the Peloponnesians, and the Persians decided to support the Spartans with money and ships. Revolt and faction threatened in Athens itself.\nThe Athenians managed to survive for several reasons. First, their foes lacked initiative. Corinth and Syracuse were slow to bring their fleets into the Aegean, and Sparta's other allies were also slow to furnish troops or ships. The Ionian states that rebelled expected protection, and many rejoined the Athenian side. The Persians were slow to send promised funds and ships, frustrating battle plans.\nAt the start of the war, the Athenians had prudently put aside some money and 100 ships that were to be used only as a last resort.\nThese ships were then released, and served as the core of the Athenians' fleet throughout the rest of the war. An oligarchical revolution occurred in Athens, in which a group of 400 seized power. Peace with Sparta might have been possible, but the Athenian fleet, now based on the island of Samos, refused the change. In 411 BC, this fleet engaged the Spartans at the Battle of Syme. The fleet appointed Alcibiades their leader, and continued the war in Athens's name. Their opposition led to the reinstitution of a democratic government in Athens within two years.\nAlcibiades, while condemned as a traitor, still carried weight in Athens. He prevented the Athenian fleet from attacking Athens; instead, he helped restore democracy by more subtle pressure. He also persuaded the Athenian fleet to attack the Spartans at the battle of Cyzicus in 410. In the battle, the Athenians obliterated the Spartan fleet, and succeeded in re-establishing the financial basis of the Athenian Empire.\nBetween 410 and 406, Athens won a continuous string of victories, and eventually recovered large portions of its empire. All of this was due, in no small part, to Alcibiades.\nAchaemenid's support for Sparta (413\u2013404 BC).\nFrom 414 BC, Darius II, ruler of the Achaemenid Empire had started to resent increasing Athenian power in the Aegean Sea. When in 413 BC, Athens supported the rebel Amorges in Caria, Darius II would not have responded had not the Athenian power been broken in the same year at Syracuse. As a result of that event, Darius II gave orders to his satraps in Asia Minor, Tissaphernes and Pharnabazus, to send in the overdue tribute of the Greek towns and to begin a war with Athens. To support the war with Athens, the Persian satraps entered into an alliance with Sparta. In 412 BC, this led to the Persian reconquest of most of Ionia. Tissaphernes also helped fund the Peloponnesian fleet. However, Tissaphernes was unwilling to take action and tried to achieve his aim through astute and often perfidious negotiations. Alcibiades persuaded him that Persia's best policy was to keep the balance between Athens and Sparta, and rivalry with his neighbour Pharnabazus of Hellespontic Phrygia still further lessened his willingness to act against the Greeks.\nCyrus' support for Sparta (408\u2013404 BC).\nFacing the resurgence of Athens, from 408 BC, Darius II decided to continue the war against Athens and give stronger support to the Spartans. He sent his son Cyrus the Younger into Asia Minor as satrap of Lydia, Phrygia Major and Cappadocia, and general commander (\"Karanos\", \u03ba\u1f00\u03c1\u03b1\u03bd\u03bf\u03c2) of the Persian troops. There, Cyrus allied with the Spartan general Lysander. In him, Cyrus found a man willing to help him become king, just as Lysander himself hoped to become absolute ruler of Greece by the aid of the Persian prince. Thus, Cyrus put all his means at the disposal of Lysander in the Peloponnesian War. When Cyrus was recalled to Susa by his dying father Darius, he gave Lysander the revenues from all of his cities of Asia Minor.\nCyrus the Younger would later obtain the support of the Spartans in return, after having asked them \"to show themselves as good friend to him, as he had been to them during their war against Athens\", when he led his own expedition to Susa in 401 BC in order to topple his brother, Artaxerxes II.\nAthenian defeat.\nThe faction hostile to Alcibiades triumphed in Athens following a minor Spartan victory by their skillful general Lysander at the naval battle of Notium in 406 BC. Alcibiades was not re-elected general by the Athenians and he exiled himself from the city. He would never again lead Athenians in battle. Athens won the naval battle of Arginusae. The Spartan fleet under Callicratidas lost 70 ships and the Athenians lost 25 ships. But, due to bad weather, the Athenians were unable to rescue their stranded crews or finish off the Spartan fleet. Despite their victory, these failures caused outrage in Athens and led to a controversial trial. The trial resulted in the execution of six of Athens's top naval commanders. Athens's naval supremacy would now be challenged without several of its most able military leaders and a demoralized navy.\nUnlike some of his predecessors, the new Spartan general, Lysander, was not a member of the Spartan royal families and was also formidable in naval strategy; he was an artful diplomat, who had even cultivated good personal relationships with the Achaemenid prince Cyrus the Younger, son of Emperor Darius II. Seizing its opportunity, the Spartan fleet sailed at once to the Dardanelles, the source of Athens's grain. Threatened with starvation, the Athenian fleet had no choice but to follow. Through cunning strategy, Lysander totally defeated the Athenian fleet, in 405 BC, at the Battle of Aegospotami, destroying 168 ships. Only 12 Athenian ships escaped, and several of these sailed to Cyprus, carrying the \"strategos\" (general) Conon, who was anxious not to face the judgment of the Assembly.\nFacing starvation and disease from the prolonged siege, Athens surrendered on 25\u00a0April 404\u00a0BC, and its allies soon surrendered as well. The democrats at Samos, loyal to the bitter last, held on slightly longer, and were allowed to flee with their lives. The surrender stripped Athens of its walls, its fleet, and all of its overseas possessions. Corinth and Thebes demanded that Athens should be destroyed and all its citizens should be enslaved. However, the Spartans announced their refusal to destroy a city that had done a good service at a time of greatest danger to Greece, and took Athens into their own system. Athens was \"to have the same friends and enemies\" as Sparta.\nAftermath.\nThe overall effect of the war in Greece proper was to replace the Athenian Empire with a Spartan empire. After the battle of Aegospotami, Sparta took over the Athenian empire and kept all its tribute revenues for itself, starting its own hegemony; Sparta's allies, who had made greater sacrifices in the war than had Sparta, got nothing.\nFor a short time, Athens was ruled by the Thirty Tyrants, a reactionary regime set up by Sparta. In 403 BC, the oligarchs were overthrown and a democracy was restored by Thrasybulus.\nAlthough the hegemony of Athens was broken, the Attic city completed the recovery of its autonomy in the Corinthian War and continued to play an active role in Greek politics. Sparta tried to protect the Greek cities of Asia Minor from the Achaemenids after the death of Cyrus the Younger, but the Achaemenid empire allied to Thebes, Athens, Corinth and Argos leading to the Corinthian War and the peace of Antalcidas. The peace of Antalcidas in 387 BC abandoned the Greek cities of Asia Minor to the Achaemenid Empire (which remained under Persian control up until the campaign of Alexander the Great) while acknowledging the dominance of Sparta in Greece. Sparta was later defeated by Thebes at the Battle of Leuctra in 371 BC leading to an end the rivalry between Athens and Sparta, that allied together against Thebes at the battle of Mantinea in 362 BC. A few decades later Macedon became the most powerful entity in Greece and Philip II of Macedon unified all of the Greek world except Sparta, which was later subjugated by his son Alexander the Great in 331 BC after the defeat at the battle of Megalopolis.\nA symbolic peace treaty was signed by the mayors of modern Athens and Sparta on 12 March 1996, more than 2,500 years after the war ended.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "24122", "revid": "50913440", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24122", "title": "Pope Clement IX", "text": "Head of the Catholic Church from 1667 to 1669\nPope Clement IX (; ; 28 January 1600\u00a0\u2013 9 December 1669), born Giulio Rospigliosi, was head of the Catholic Church and ruler of the Papal States from 20 June 1667 to his death in December 1669.\nGiulio Rospigliosi was born into the noble Rospigliosi family in 1600 and studied at the Seminario Romano and the University of Pisa. He held various positions in the Church, including Titular Archbishop of Tarsus and Apostolic Nuncio to Spain. As a man of letters, he wrote poetry, dramas, and libretti, and was a patron of the artist Nicolas Poussin.\nAppointed as a cardinal by Pope Alexander VII, Rospigliosi was elected as Pope Clement IX in 1667. His pontificate was marked by mediation during European wars, and his popularity in Rome stemmed from his charity, humility, and refusal to advance his family's wealth. He beatified Rose of Lima and canonized Mary Magdalene de' Pazzi and Peter of Alc\u00e1ntara, while also creating 12 new cardinals.\nClement IX was a patron of the arts, commissioning works from Gian Lorenzo Bernini and opening the first public opera house in Rome. He attempted to strengthen Venetian defenses against the Turks in Crete, but was unsuccessful in gaining wider support. In 1669, after learning about the Venetian fortress of Candia surrendering to the Turks, Clement IX fell ill and died.\nBiography.\nEarly life and education.\nGiulio Rospigliosi was born in 1600 to the Rospigliosi family, a noble family of Pistoia in the Grand Duchy of Tuscany to Giacomo and Caterina Rospigliosi. He studied at the Seminario Romano and later at the University of Pisa as a pupil of the Jesuits, receiving doctorates in theology, philosophy and both canon and civil law in 1623. After receiving his doctorates, he taught theology there as a professor from 1623 to 1625.\nEpiscopate and cardinalate.\nLater Rospigliosi worked closely with Pope Urban VIII (1623\u20131644) where he worked in the diplomatic corps as the Referendary of the Apostolic Signatura. He was appointed as the Titular Archbishop of Tarsus in 1644 and later received episcopal consecration in the Vatican. Rospigliosi also served as the Apostolic Nuncio to Spain from 1644 until 1653 when he decided to retire from that post. He lived in retirement throughout the pontificate of Pope Innocent X who disliked and distanced himself from those associated with his predecessor. He was also made vicar of Santa Maria Maggiore in Rome.\nRospigliosi was an accomplished man of letters who wrote poetry, dramas and libretti, as well as what may be the first comic opera, namely his 1637 libretto \"Chi soffre, speri\". He was also a patron of Nicolas Poussin, commissioning \"A Dance to the Music of Time\" from him and dictating its iconography.\nPope Alexander VII appointed him to the cardinalate in 1657 as the Cardinal-Priest of San Sisto Vecchio and was also appointed as the Cardinal Secretary of State in 1655 which he held until 1667.\nPontificate.\nPapal election.\nPope Alexander VII died in 1667 and a conclave to choose his successor was called. King Louis XIV of France instructed the French faction to turn their support to Rospigliosi and believed also that he would appease the Spanish faction of Charles II due to the fact that he had once been the Apostolic Nuncio to Spain. On 20 June 1667, he was elected as pontiff and took the pontifical name of \"Clement IX\".\nThe new pope was crowned on 26 June 1667 by the protodeacon, Cardinal Rinaldo d'Este. He later took possession of the Basilica of Saint John Lateran on 3 July 1667.\nWhen asked about Rospigliosi becoming pope, Cardinal Francesco Albizzi said: \"Urban turned the Holy See into a bank; Innocent into a brothel; Alexander into a tavern; this one will make a playhouse of it\". Albizzi also alluded to Rospigliosi's passion for music and said, \"He will emasculate the Sacred College by giving the hat to all the castrated singers in Europe!\" When elected, Rospigliosi received all but two votes since he voted for another while Cardinal Neri Corsini voted for Cardinal Flavio Chigi.\nActions.\nNothing remarkable occurred under Clement IX's short administration beyond the temporary adjustment of the disputes between the Holy See and those prelates of the Gallican Church who had refused to join in condemning the writings of Jansen. He was mediator during the 1668 peace of Aachen, in the wars between France, Spain, England and the Netherlands.\nHe was popular with the people of Rome, not so much for his erudition and application to business as for his extreme charity and his affability towards great and small. He increased the goodwill of his subjects by buying off the monopolist who had secured the \"macinato\", or privilege of selling grain, and as his predecessor had collected the money for the purpose, Clement IX had the decree published in the name of Alexander VII. Two days each week, he occupied a confessional in St. Peter's Basilica and heard anyone who wished to confess to him. He frequently visited the hospitals and was lavish in his alms to the poor. In an age of nepotism, he did little or nothing to advance or enrich his family. In his aversion to notoriety, he refused to permit his name to be placed on the buildings erected during his reign.\nOther actions.\nClement IX confirmed the cultus of Margaret of Savoy on 9 October 1669. He also beatified Rose of Lima on 15 April 1668. On 28 April 1668, he canonized Magdalena de Pazzi and Peter of Alc\u00e1ntara.\nHe elevated 12 new cardinals in three consistories; this included Emilio Bonaventura Altieri who would succeed him as Pope Clement X.\nArt reforms.\nAs pope, Clement IX continued his interest in the arts. He embellished the city of Rome with famous works commissioned from Gian Lorenzo Bernini, including the angels of Ponte Sant'Angelo and the colonnade of Saint Peter's Basilica. Somewhat unusually for Popes of the era, Clement IX did not have his name displayed on monuments he built. For the Carnival celebrations of 1668, commissioned Antonio Maria Abbatini of the Sistine Chapel Choir to set to music his free Italian translation of a Spanish religious drama \"La Baltasara\", the production had sets designed by Bernini.\nDefence against the Turks.\nClement IX worked to strengthen Venetian defences against the Turks on the island of Crete. However, he was unable to get wider support for this cause. At the end of October 1669, Clement IX fell ill after receiving news that the Venetian fortress of Candia in Crete had surrendered to the Turks.\nDeath and burial.\nClement IX died in Rome, allegedly of a broken heart, on 9 December 1669. His successor, Pope Clement X (r. 1670\u20131676), built him an ornate tomb in the basilica of Santa Maria Maggiore; he was the last pope interred there until the death and burial of Pope Francis in 2025.\nClement IX was seriously ill throughout the autumn in 1669 with a hernia and kidney stones. Despite his illness and his anxiety over the Turkish advances in Crete, he travelled on a pilgrimage to the seven Roman basilicas, however, that night, he had a severe apoplexy. On 29 November, just ten days before he died, he named seven new cardinals and announced one whom he had reserved \"in pectore\". However, the dying pope intended to create a \"faction\" for his nephew with which to use in the next conclave to defend his policies. Clement IX died of a stroke on 9 December, and it is believed this was perhaps brought on by learning of the defeat and expulsion of the Venetians from Crete.\nFollowing his death, the Florentine agent in Rome, writing to Grand Duke Ferdinando II de' Medici a few days later, accuses the late Clement IX of having hidden the fact that he was epileptic, which would have, according to the canon law in place at the time, disqualified him from exercising any ecclesiastical functions, however, this has never been proven.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "24123", "revid": "1314547408", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24123", "title": "Pope Clement X", "text": "Head of the Catholic Church from 1670 to 1676\nPope Clement X (; ; 13 July 1590\u00a0\u2013 22 July 1676), born Emilio Bonaventura Altieri, was head of the Catholic Church and ruler of the Papal States from 29 April 1670 to his death on 22 July 1676.\nEmilio Bonaventura Altieri, born in Rome in 1590, belonged to the Papal nobility. He received a doctorate in law and held various positions within the Catholic Church, including Bishop of Camerino and Superintendent of the Papal Exchequer. At the age of almost 80, he was elected Pope Clement X in 1670 after a four-month-long conclave. As Pope, he canonized and beatified various saints, promoted good relations between Christian countries, and made efforts to preserve the Altieri family name by adopting the Paoluzzi family. He also established a new tax in Rome, which led to conflicts with ambassadors and cardinals. Clement X celebrated the fourteenth jubilee of the holy year in 1675 despite his old age. During his pontificate, he created 20 cardinals, including Pietro Francesco Orsini, who later became Pope Benedict XIII.\nHe suspended the Portuguese Inquisition's proceedings in October 1674, challenging the techniques employed against its main victims, the New Christians.\nEarly life.\nEmilio Bonaventura Altieri was born in Rome in 1590, the son of Lorenzo Altieri and Vittoria Delfin, a noble Venetian lady, sister of Flaminio Delfin, commander general of the Papal Army, and of Gentile Delfin, Bishop of Camerino. His brother was Cardinal Giambattista Altieri. The Altieri family belonged to the ancient Roman Papal nobility and had enjoyed the highest consideration at Rome for several centuries; they had occasionally contracted alliances with the Colonnas and the Orsinis. During earlier pontificates, the Altieri held many important offices and had been entrusted with several delicate missions.\nEarly work.\nAltieri received a doctorate in law from the Roman College in 1611. After finishing his studies, he was named \"auditor\" of Giovanni Battista Lancellotti in 1623, in the nuncio of Poland. He was ordained on 6 April 1624. On his return to Rome, he was named Bishop of Camerino, then governor of Loreto and of all Umbria. Pope Urban VIII (1623\u201344) gave him charge of the works designed to protect the territory of Ravenna from the unruly Po River.\nPope Innocent X (1644\u201355) sent him as nuncio to Naples, where he remained for eight years. He is credited with the re-establishment of peace after the stormy days of Masaniello. Pope Alexander VII (1655\u201367) confided to him a mission to Poland.\nPope Clement IX (1667\u201369) named him Superintendent of the Papal Exchequer (in charge of the Church's finances), and in 1667 his \"maestro di camera\", and he was made Secretary of the Congregation of Bishops and Regulars. Just before his death, Clement IX made him a cardinal. He was then about seventy-nine years of age; and Clement IX, when making him a member of the Sacred College, said to him: \"You will be our successor.\"\nAfter the funeral of Pope Clement IX, sixty-two electors entered into conclave on 20 December 1669. Forty-two votes were necessary, and due to the rivalry between the French and Spanish factions, heated discussion prevailed for four months. Cardinal Giannicol\u00f2 Conti was supported by twenty-two votes; Cardinal Giacomo Rospigliosi, nephew of the late pope, had thirty, or, as some say, thirty-three, with two at the \"accesso\", so that he needed only seven more votes to gain the tiara. Cardinal Carlo Cerri obtained twenty-three votes.\nAt length the cardinals agreed to resort to the old expedient of electing a cardinal of advanced years, and proposed Cardinal Altieri, almost an octogenarian, whose long life had been spent in the service of the Catholic Church, and whom Clement IX, on the eve of his death, had raised to the dignity of the purple. The reason a prelate of such transcendent merits received the cardinalate so late in life seems to have been that he had waived his claims to the elevation in favour of an older brother.\nPontificate.\nOn 29 April 1670, the papacy was offered to him by fifty-nine cardinals present at the election; only two being against him. He, however, objected because of his age, for he was almost eighty, and exclaimed, \"I am too old to bear such a burden.\" Pointing to Cardinal Francesco Maria Brancaccio, Altieri said he was the cardinal whom they ought to elect. He persisted in refusing, protesting that he no longer had strength or memory; eventually, with tears he accepted, and out of gratitude to his benefactor, by ten years his junior, he assumed the name of Clement X. He was crowned on 11 May.\nOn 8 June Clement X took possession of the Basilica of Saint John Lateran. On 11 June, he confirmed the Minor Observantines in the Holy Land in the privileges and indulgences granted to those who visit the holy places, according to the decrees of Alexander VII and Clement IX. In the same month, he granted to the prelate-clerks of the chamber the use of the violet-coloured band around their hats. Occasionally forgetful, he sometimes promised the same favors to different people and came to rely on his cardinal-nephew, Cardinal Paluzzo Paluzzi Altieri degli Albertoni.\nAll but one of the male scions of the Altieri family had chosen the ecclesiastical career. On his accession to the papacy, Clement X, in order to save the Altieri name from extinction, adopted the Paoluzzi family, and proposed that one of the Paluzzi should marry Laura Caterina Altieri, the sole heiress of the family. In exchange for adopting the Altieri surname, he would make one of the Paoluzzi a cardinal. Following the wedding, which he officiated, he appointed his niece's uncle-in-law Cardinal Paluzzi Altieri to the office of cardinal nephew to take on the duties which he was prevented from doing by age. The main activity was to invest the Church's money, and with advancing years gradually entrusted to him the management of affairs, to such an extent that the Romans said he had reserved to himself only the episcopal functions of \"benedicere et sanctificare\", resigning in favour of the cardinal the administrative duties of \"regere et gubernare\".\nClement X advised the Christian princes to love each other and to prove it by generous measures, and by a prudent and scrupulous conduct. It was especially between Spain and France that the pope desired to witness a renewal of feelings of good understanding.\nIn 1671, the Pope published an edict by which he declared that \"a noble might be a merchant without loss of his nobility, provided always that he did not sell by retail\". In 1676, Gian Lorenzo Bernini sculpted one of his final statues, a bust of Clement X.\nCanonizations and beatifications.\nOn 12 April 1671, Clement X canonised five new saints:\nIn 1673, he had Pope Leo III's name entered in the Roman Martyrology.\nHe beatified Pope Pius V (1566\u201372), Francis Solano, and John of the Cross, all subsequently canonized by Clement XI and Pope Benedict XIII (1724\u201330). Clement X also declared Venerable one of the famous Spanish mystics, Sister Mar\u00eda de Jes\u00fas de \u00c1greda.\nClement X, on 24 November 1673, beatified nineteen Martyrs of Gorkum, who had been taken prisoner at Gorcum, the Netherlands, and put to death in Brielle on 9 July 1572, in hatred of the Catholic faith, of the primacy of the Pope, and of the Roman Church. Of the nineteen Gorcum martyrs, Peter Ascanius (\"Peter of Assche\") and Cornelius Vican (\"Cornelius van Wijk\") were laymen; eleven were Franciscan priests; one a Dominican, two Premonstratensians, one a regular canon of Saint Augustine, and four were secular priests.\nOn 13 January 1672, Clement X regulated the formalities to be observed in removing the relics of saints from sacred cemeteries. No one was to remove such relics without the permission of the cardinal-vicar. They were not to be exposed for the veneration of the faithful unless previously examined by the same cardinal. The principal relics of the martyr\u00a0\u2013 that is to say, the head, the legs, the arms, and the part in which they suffered\u00a0\u2013 were to be exposed only in the churches, and they were not to be given to private persons, but only to princes and high prelates; and even to them but rarely, lest the too great profusion should deprive relics of the respect which they ought to inspire. The Pope decreed severe penalties against all who gave a relic any name but that given by the cardinal-vicar. The pain of excommunication was pronounced against all who should demand any sum whatever for sealed and authentic relics. These decrees, and others made by preceding Popes were confirmed by Pope Clement XI (1700\u201321) in 1704.\nClement X confirmed the exemptions granted by Pope Gregory XIII (1572\u201385) to the German College at Rome in 1671; and then, on 16 October 1672, he ordered the pupils to swear that at the close of their studies they would set out for Germany without a day's delay.\nForeign affairs.\nClement X, seeing the results of the apostolic labours of the early French missionaries in Canada, the number of the faithful, and the wide field of labour, resolved to give the Church an independent organisation, and erected a \"see\" at Quebec, the bishop to depend directly on the Holy See; this provision would later secure its permanence after Quebec passed into the hands of Great Britain. The first bishop was Francois de Montmorency-Laval.\nIn 1673, there arrived at Rome ambassadors from the Tsar of Russia, Alexei. He solicited from the Pope the title of Tsar, which, however, had already been adopted by his predecessors. At the same time it could not be forgotten that he gave strong financial aid to King John III Sobieski of Poland in their fight against the Turkish invaders. But Paul Menesius, a Scotsman, who was the ambassador, could not obtain the grant or sanction of that title, though he was received with great magnificence and had many precious gifts to carry back to his master. The Russian Tsar did not profess the Catholic faith in such a manner as to give any assurance of his intentions, and the King of Poland had looked upon the embassy with displeasure.\nClement X suspended the Portuguese Inquisition in 3 October 1674, challenging the techniques employed against the New Christians. The suspension lasted till 1681.\nLocal administration.\nMeanwhile, Rome had reason to fear trouble. Cardinal Paluzzi Altieri, who was at the head of the government, determined to increase the revenues, and he established a new tax of three percent upon all merchandise entering the city, including even goods for cardinals and ambassadors. Although the government complained that ambassadors had abused their privilege, the diplomatic corps showed discontent that they were not expressly exempted in the new tax law.\nAnother edict confirmed the first and ordered the confiscation without distinction of all goods that did not pay the new tax. The cardinals at first complained, though with moderation. But the ambassadors didn't speak Clement X's language.\nThe Cardinal nephew maintained that Clement X, within his own State, might make what rules he pleased. Then the ambassadors of the Empire, of France, Spain, and Venice, sent their secretaries to demand an audience of the Pope. The chief chamberlain replied that the Pope was busy that day. And for four days in succession, the chamberlain gave the same answer to the same applicants. Clement X, learning at length what had occurred, declared that he had given no such order. The ambassadors then sent their secretaries to ask an audience of Cardinal Paluzzi Altieri. Not only did he refuse to admit them, but closed his doors and increased the guard at the pontifical palace, so that the offence could go no further. Subsequently, the Cardinal nephew wrote to the nuncios who resided in the courts of Europe, stating that the excesses committed by the ambassadors had induced the pope to publish the edict. The ambassadors, on the contrary, assured their sovereigns that the accusation was a pretext.\nThe conflict lasted for more than a year; and Clement X, who loved peace, at length referred the matter to a congregation. Sometime after, Cardinal Paluzzi Altieri declared that he had not intended to comprise the ambassadors among those for whom the edict was intended, and that the pope had never contemplated subjecting them to it.\nQueen Christina of Sweden, who had become a Catholic and moved to Rome in December 1655, made Clement X prohibit the custom of chasing Jews through the streets during the carnival. In 1686 she issued a declaration that Roman Jews stood under her protection, signed \"la Regina\"\u00a0\u2013 the queen.\nJubilee.\nIn 1675 Clement X celebrated the fourteenth jubilee of the holy year. Notwithstanding his age, he visited the churches, regretting that the gout prevented him from making that holy visit more than five times. He went twelve times to Trinity hospital to wash the feet of the pilgrims, and after the ceremony gave them liberal alms. A commemorated silver piastra was issued on the occasion of the Holy Year.\nCardinals.\nClement X created 20 cardinals in six consistories including Pietro Francesco Orsini, who would become Pope Benedict XIII several decades later.\nDeath.\nOn 22 July 1676, the agonies of the gout became so violent that Clement X died under them that afternoon. He was eighty-six years old and had governed the Church six years, two months, and twenty-four days. His tomb is in St. Peter's Basilica.\nOther accomplishments.\nHe laboured to preserve the peace of Europe even though he was menaced by the ambition of Louis XIV of France (1643\u20131715), an imperious monarch over ecclesiastical matters (the struggle concerned the \"r\u00e9gale\", or revenues of vacant dioceses and abbeys, which resulted in continued tension with France). He decorated the Ponte Sant'Angelo with the ten statues of angels in Carrara marble still to be seen there.\nPope Clement X had the two fountains located in St. Peter's Square built near the tribune, where a monument has been erected to his memory. During his papacy, the Palazzo Altieri in central Rome was refurbished.\nClement X appointed Francesco Lorenzo Brancati di Lauria head of the Vatican Library."}
{"id": "24124", "revid": "1005449", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24124", "title": "Pope Clement XI", "text": "Head of the Catholic Church from 1700 to 1721\nPope Clement XI (; ; ; 23 July 1649\u00a0\u2013 19 March 1721), born Giovanni Francesco Albani, was head of the Catholic Church and ruler of the Papal States from 23 November 1700 to his death in March 1721.\nClement XI was a patron of the arts and of science. He was also a great benefactor of the Vatican Library; his interest in archaeology is credited with saving much of Rome's antiquity. He authorized expeditions which succeeded in rediscovering various ancient Christian writings and authorized excavations of the Roman catacombs.\nBiography.\nEarly life.\nGiovanni Francesco Albani was born in 1649 in Urbino to the Albani family, a distinguished family of Albanian origin in central Italy. His mother Elena Mosca (1630\u20131698) was a high-standing Italian of Bergamasque origin, descended from the noble Mosca family of Pesaro. His father Carlo Albani (1623\u20131684) was a patrician. His mother descended in part from the Staccoli family, who were patricians of Urbino, in part from the Giordani, who were nobles of Pesaro. The original name of the Albani was Lazzi (La\u00e7i) which they changed to \"Albani\" in memory of their origin. Francesco Albani funded an expedition in Albania to locate the exact settlement of his family's origins. In the final report, the two most probable locations which were presented to him were La\u00e7 near Lezh\u00eb and La\u00e7 near Kuk\u00ebs, both in northern Albania.\nAlbani was educated at the Collegio Romano in Rome from 1660 onwards. He became a very proficient Latinist and gained a doctorate in both canon and civil law. He was one of those who frequented the academy of Queen Christina of Sweden. He would serve as a papal prelate under Pope Alexander VIII and was appointed by Pope Innocent XII as the Referendary of the Apostolic Signatura. Throughout this time, he also served as the governor of Rieti, Sabina and Orvieto.\nCardinalate.\nPope Alexander VIII elevated him to the cardinalate in 1690 despite his protests and made him the Cardinal-Deacon of Santa Maria in Aquiro but he later opted for the \"Diaconia\" of Sant'Adriano al Foro and later, as the Cardinal-Priest, for the \"titulus\" of San Silvestro in Capite. He was then ordained to the priesthood in September 1700 and celebrated his first Mass in Rome on 6 October 1700.\nPontificate.\nElection to the papacy.\nAfter the death of Pope Innocent XII in 1700, a conclave was convoked to elect a successor. Albani was regarded as a fine diplomat known for his skills as a peacemaker and so was unanimously elected pope on 23 November 1700. He agreed to the election after three days of consultation.\nUnusually, from the viewpoint of current practice, his election came within three months after his ordination as a priest and within two months after he celebrated his first Mass, though he had been a cardinal for ten years previously. Having accepted election after some hesitation, he was ordained a bishop on 30 November 1700 and assumed the pontifical name of \"Clement XI\". Cardinal protodeacon Benedetto Pamphili crowned him on 8 December 1700 and he took possession of the Basilica of Saint John Lateran on 10 April 1701.\nActions.\nSoon after his accession to the pontificate, the War of the Spanish Succession broke out.\nIn 1703 Pope Clement XI ordered a synod of Catholic bishops in northern Albania that discussed promotion of the Council of Trent decrees within Albanian dioceses, stemming conversions among locals to Islam and securing agreement to deny communion to crypto-Catholics who outwardly professed the Muslim faith.\nDespite initially holding an ambiguous neutrality in world affairs, Clement XI was later forced to support Charles, Archduke of Austria's claim as the King of Spain, since the imperial army had conquered much of northern Italy and was threatening Rome itself in January 1709.\nBy the Treaty of Utrecht that put an end to the war, the Papal States lost its suzerainty over the Farnese Duchy of Parma and Piacenza in favour of Austria, and lost Comacchio as well, a blow to the prestige of the Papal States.\nIn 1713 Clement XI issued the bull \"Unigenitus\" in response to the spread of the Jansenist heresy. There followed great upheaval in France, where apart from theological issues, a strong Gallican tendency persisted. The bull, which was produced with the contribution of Gregorio Selleri, a lector at the College of Saint Thomas, the future Pontifical University of Saint Thomas Aquinas \"Angelicum\", condemned Jansenism by extracting and anathematizing as heretical 101 propositions from the works of Pasquier Quesnel, declaring them to be identical in substance with propositions already condemned in the writings of Jansenius.\nThe resistance of many French ecclesiastics and the refusal of the French \"parlements\" to register the bull led to controversies extending through the greater part of the 18th century. Because the local governments did not officially receive the bull, it was not, technically, in force in those areas\u00a0\u2013 an example of the interference of states in religious affairs common before the 20th century.\nClement XI supported James Francis Edward Stuart, the exiled Stuart Prince of Wales, recognizing him as James III and VIII, and paid for the residence of him and his wife, Princess Maria Clementina Sobieska, Granddaughter of John III Sobieski, King of Poland-Lithuania, in Rome, the Palazzo Muti, as well as donating a summerhouse near the shores of Lake Albano. He also performed the baptism of James' son, the Jacobite Prince of Wales, Charles Edward Stuart.\nDuring his reign as a pope the famous \"Illyricum Sacrum\" was commissioned, and today it is one of the main sources of the field of Balkan region during Middle Ages, with over 5,000 pages divided in several volumes written by the Jesuit Daniele Farlati and Dom Jacopo Coleti.\nClement XI made a concerted effort to acquire Christian manuscripts in Syriac from Egypt and other places in the Middle East, greatly expanding the Vatican Library's collection of Syriac works.\nOther activities.\nClement XI extended the feast of Our Lady of the Rosary to the Universal Church of the Roman Rite in 1716.\nBeatifications and canonizations.\nClement XI confirmed the cultus of Ceslas Odrowaz (27 August 1712), Jakov Varingez (29 December 1700), Peregrine Laziosi (11 September 1702), John of Perugia (11 September 1704), Peter of Sassoferrato (11 September 1704), Buonfiglio Monaldi (1 December 1717), Pope Gregory X (8 July 1713) and Humbeline of Jully (1703). He formally beatified a number of individuals: Alexis Falconieri, Bartholomew degli Amidei and Benedict Dellantella, (1 December 1717) and John Francis R\u00e9gis (24 May 1716). He also beatified the sisters Theresa (20 May 1705) and Sancha (10 May 1705).\nHe canonized Andrew Avellino, Catherine of Bologna, Felix of Cantalice and Pope Pius V on 22 May 1712, Humility on 27 January 1720, Stephen of Obazine in 1701 and Boniface of Lausanne in 1702.\nClement XI, on 8 February 1720, named Saint Anselm of Canterbury as a Doctor of the Church, providing him the supplementary titles of \"Doctor magnificus\" (\"Magnificent Doctor\") and \"Doctor Marianus\" (\"Marian Doctor\").\nConsistories.\nClement XI created a total of 70 cardinals in 15 consistories. Notably, two cardinals of his own creation were Michelangelo dei Conti, who became his immediate successor, Pope Innocent XIII, and Lorenzo Corsini, who later became Pope Clement XII. The pope also nominated eight cardinals \"in pectore\", later publishing their names which validated their appointments as cardinals.\nDuring his pontificate, Gabriele Filippucci resigned his cardinalate which the pope accepted on 7 June 1706. Clement XI also accepted the resignation of Francesco Maria de' Medici from the cardinalate on 19 June 1709.\nChinese Rites controversies.\nAnother important decision of Clement XI was in regard to the Chinese Rites controversy: the Jesuit missionaries were forbidden to take part in honors paid to Confucius or the ancestors of the Emperors of China, which Clement XI identified as \"idolatrous and barbaric\", and to accommodate Christian language to pagan ideas under plea of conciliating the heathen.\nDeath and burial.\nClement XI died in Rome on 19 March 1721 at 12:45pm and was buried in the pavement of Saint Peter's Basilica rather than in an ornate tomb like those of his predecessors.\nOn 10 March, Clement XI had a meeting at about 11:00am with the Bishop of Sisteron Pierre Fran\u00e7ois Lafitau. When the pope met with the bishop, he said that his time was drawing to a close and that he would soon die, despite protests to the contrary by Lafitau. On 14 March, Clement XI took ill while Lafitau was trying to get the pope's nephew to persuade the pope to name the French Chief minister Guillaume Dubois to the cardinalate. However, Clement XI was in a state of delirium and was not responsive to his pleas. On 16 March, Quadragesima Sunday, the pope did not participate in the services, however, celebrated Mass in his private chapel at the Quirinal Palace. He took medication that day but experienced pains in his thorax and had trouble breathing from the cold air in his rooms.\nThe following day, Clement XI celebrated Mass in his private chapel before meeting various prelates which included the Archbishop of Ravenna Geronimo Crispi. However, at around noon, he was suddenly struck with an extraordinary chill which was accompanied by a very strong fever that immediately forced him to his bed, with the pope declining a meal that evening. His pulse was exceptionally slow and he even coughed up a thick liquid that was streaked with blood. Unable to sleep that night, his fever abated somewhat. But the following day saw his fever return much more violently, and he had an irregular pulse. The sputum was foamy, once more with blood, indicating that there was something wrong with his lungs, causing his doctors to realize that his condition would more than likely prove fatal. Clement XI made his confession and the profession of faith before receiving Holy Communion at 8:00pm. James Francis Edward Stuart, the \"Pretender\", tried to see the dying pope, however he was denied on the grounds of the dangerous state of the pope's condition. That night, the papal sacristan Niccolo Agostino degli Abbati Olivieri, Bishop of Porfirio, administered the Extreme Unction.\nOn 19 March, the fever returned violently, and Clement XI slowly lost his ability to speak as his eyes clouded over and his respiration slowly diminished as the pope died just after midday.\nContemporary influence.\nIn his book \"Journal of a Soul\", while he was preparing for the Second Vatican Council, Pope John XXIII resolved to pray the and highly recommended it to others.\nConstruction activity and patronage.\nPope Clement XI had a famous sundial added in the church of Santa Maria degli Angeli e dei Martiri and had an obelisk erected in the Piazza della Rotonda in front of the Pantheon, and a port built on the Tiber River, the beautiful Porto di Ripetta, demolished at the end of the 19th century.\nHe established a committee, overseen by his favourite artists, Carlo Maratta and Carlo Fontana, to commission statuary of the apostles to complete the decoration of Basilica of Saint John Lateran. He also founded an academy of painting and sculpture on the Campidoglio.\nHe also enriched the Vatican Library with numerous Oriental codices and lent his patronage to the first archaeological excavations in the Roman catacombs. In his native Urbino he restored numerous edifices and founded a public library.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "24125", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24125", "title": "Panflute", "text": ""}
{"id": "24126", "revid": "50965332", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24126", "title": "Pan flute", "text": "Musical instrument, typically made from bamboo\nA pan flute (also known as panpipes or syrinx) is a musical instrument based on the principle of the closed tube, consisting of multiple pipes of gradually increasing length (and occasionally girth). Multiple varieties of pan flutes have been popular as folk instruments. The pipes are typically made from bamboo, giant cane, or local reeds. Other materials include wood, plastic, metal, and clay.\nName.\nThe pan flute is named after Pan, the Greek god of nature and shepherds, often depicted with such an instrument.\n The pan flute has become widely associated with the character Peter Pan created by Sir James Matthew Barrie, whose name was inspired by the god Pan.\nIn Greek mythology, Syrinx (\u03a3\u03cd\u03c1\u03b9\u03b3\u03be) was a forest nymph. In her attempt to escape the affection of god Pan (a creature half goat and half man), she was transformed into a water-reed or calamos (cane-reed). Then, Pan cut several reeds, placed them in parallel one next to the other, and bound them together to make a melodic musical instrument. Ancient Greeks called this instrument Syrinx, in honour of the Muse, and Pandean, or Pan-pipes and Pan-flute, after Pan. (Syrinx was a different musical instrument from Aulos. Aulos is often translated as \"flute\" or \"double flute\" in English).\nThe Syrinx, a predominantly pastoral instrument for the Greeks, was adopted by the Etruscans who played it at their festivals and banquets; the Etruscans called it fistula. The Romans adopted the Syrinx from the Greeks and the Etruscans, and they too played it at their banquets, festivals, as well as in religious and funeral processions.\nStructure.\nThe pan flute's tubes are stopped at one end, at which the standing wave is reflected giving a note an octave lower than that produced by an open pipe of equal length. In the traditional South American style, pipes are fine-tuned to correct pitch by placing small pebbles or dry corn kernels into the bottom of the pipes. Contemporary makers of curved Romanian-style panpipes use wax (commonly beeswax) to tune new instruments. Special tools are used to place or remove the wax. Corks and rubber stoppers are also used, and are easier to quickly tune pipes.\nAcoustics.\nThe pan flute is an end-blown flute. Sound is produced by the vibration of an air-stream blowing across an open hole at the end of a resonating tube. The length of the tube determines the fundamental frequency. An overblown harmonic register is near a 12th above the fundamental in cylindrical tubes, but can approach an octave jump (8th) if a decreasing taper is used.\nAccording to the Fundamental Principle for pan flutes, the frequency and the length of the tube are inversely proportional. Every time the pitch goes up one octave, the frequency doubles. Because there are 12 notes in a chromatic scale or a full octave, every half-step in a chromatic scale is multiplied by the 12th root of 2 to get the note next to it. By this, it is possible to calculate the length of any pipe, given that one knows the length of any one pipe. The formula for calculating the length of a pan flute pipe is L\u00a0=\u00a0(c / f)\u00a0/\u00a04 (the \"theoretical length\" L equals the speed of sound c = 343\u00a0m/s, divided by the desired frequency in hertz f, that quantity divided by 4; this simplifies and rearranges to: Length of pipe (in centimeters) \u00d7 Frequency (in hertz) = 8575). Because of a property of compression within the tube, the length must be a little shorter to correct flat pitch. The extra length is helpful for a maker, who can use a cork or plug at the bottom to adjust the pitch. Some instruments use wax or pellets to tune the fundamental pitch of each tube. A tube that has a diameter 1/10 of its length yields a typical tone colour (see Timbre). An inner diameter range between 1/7 and 1/14 of the length L is acceptable. A narrow tube will sound \"reedy\", while a wide one will sound \"flutey\". A more exact method is to multiply the bore diameter by 0.82 and subtract this value from the tube length. This compensates for internal compression slowing frequency and the lips partially covering the voicing. Only tiny adjustments will be needed then to adjust fundamental pitch for air density and temperature.\nPlaying.\nThe pan flute is played by blowing horizontally across an open end against the sharp inner edge of the pipes. Each pipe is tuned to a keynote, called the fundamental frequency. By overblowing, that is, increasing the pressure of breath and tension of lips, odd harmonics (notes whose frequencies are odd-number multiples of the fundamental), near a 12th in cylindrical tubes, may also be produced. The Romanian pan flute has the pipes arranged in a curved array, solidly glued together, unlike Andean versions, which are usually tied together. Thus, the player can easily reach all the notes by simply swiveling the head, or by moving the instrument with the hands. These instruments can also play all the sharps and flats, with a special technique of both tilting the pipes and jaw movement, thus reducing the size of the pipe's opening and producing a change in pitch. A very advanced player can play any scale and in any key. There are two styles of vibrato possible, hand vibrato and breath vibrato. In hand vibrato, the pitch is shifted up and down, like a vocal vibrato. The player gently moves one end of the pan flute (usually the high end) somewhat similar to violin vibrato. Breath, or throat vibrato, which is more accurately described as a tremolo or volume swell, is the same technique used by players of the flute and other woodwinds by use of the player's diaphragm, or throat muscles.\nVariations.\nThe curved-style pan flute was popularized by the Romanian musician Gheorghe Zamfir, who toured extensively and recorded many albums of pan flute music in the 1970s, and by several other artists who began recording at the same time. Today there are thousands of devoted players across Europe, Asia and the Americas. Both the curved and traditional South American variations are also very popular in Peruvian traditional groups and other Andean music. In Bolivia, the panpipes of the altiplano are known as jula-jula, and those of the Andean range as julu-julu.\nIn Laos and Thailand, there is a cylindrical version called the wot, used in folk music from the Isaan region of the country. The player alters notes by rotating the instrument with the hands, rather than by head movements.\nPanpipes are used in varieties of African traditional music, typically constructed from bamboo. The ngororombe, often accompanied by percussion instruments in ensembles, is found in northeastern Zimbabwe. The Nyungwa tribe in Malawi also use the ngororombe and use the same term to refer to the dance that accompanies playing of the instrument; the term nyanga is also employed for the instrument.\nSome new designs are beginning to appear, as designers and makers take advantage of computer-aided design and 3D additive manufacturing, to move past the limitations of traditional tool and materials. These new pan flutes address some long-standing issues to make it an easier instrument to learn and to play accurately.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "24128", "revid": "8066546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24128", "title": "Physics instrumentation", "text": ""}
{"id": "24130", "revid": "2003421", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24130", "title": "Energy storage", "text": "Captured energy for later usage\nEnergy storage is the capture of energy produced at one time for use at a later time to reduce imbalances between energy demand and energy production. A device that stores energy is generally called an accumulator or battery. Energy comes in multiple forms including radiation, chemical, gravitational potential, electrical potential, electricity, elevated temperature, latent heat and kinetic. Energy storage involves converting energy from forms that are difficult to store to more conveniently or economically storable forms.\nSome technologies provide short-term energy storage, while others can endure for much longer. Bulk energy storage is currently dominated by hydroelectric dams, both conventional as well as pumped. Grid energy storage is a collection of methods used for energy storage on a large scale within an electrical power grid.\nCommon examples of energy storage are the rechargeable battery, which stores chemical energy readily convertible to electricity to operate a mobile phone; the hydroelectric dam, which stores energy in a reservoir as gravitational potential energy; and ice storage tanks, which store ice frozen by cheaper energy at night to meet peak daytime demand for cooling. Fossil fuels such as coal and gasoline store ancient energy derived from sunlight by organisms that later died, became buried and over time were then converted into these fuels. Food (which is made by the same process as fossil fuels) is a form of energy stored in chemical form.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHistory.\nIn the 20th century grid, electrical power was largely generated by burning fossil fuel. When less power was required, less fuel was burned. Hydropower, a mechanical energy storage method, is the most widely adopted mechanical energy storage, and has been in use for centuries. Large hydropower dams have been energy storage sites for more than one hundred years. Concerns with air pollution, energy imports, and global warming have spawned the growth of renewable energy such as solar and wind power. Wind power is uncontrolled and may be generating at a time when no additional power is needed. Solar power varies with cloud cover and at best is only available during daylight hours, while demand often peaks after sunset (\"see\" duck curve). Interest in storing power from these intermittent sources grows as the renewable energy industry begins to generate a larger fraction of overall energy consumption. In 2023 BloombergNEF forecast total energy storage deployments to grow at a compound annual growth rate of 27 percent through 2030.\nOff grid electrical use was a niche market in the 20th century, but in the 21st century, it has expanded. Portable devices are in use all over the world. Solar panels are now common in the rural settings worldwide. Access to electricity is now a question of economics and financial viability, and not solely on technical aspects. Electric vehicles are gradually replacing combustion-engine vehicles. However, powering long-distance transportation without burning fuel remains in development.\nMethods.\nOutline.\nThe following list includes a variety of types of energy storage:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nMechanical.\nEnergy can be stored in water pumped to a higher elevation using pumped storage methods or by moving solid matter to higher locations (gravity batteries). Other commercial mechanical methods include compressing air and flywheels that convert electric energy into internal energy or kinetic energy and then back again when electrical demand peaks.\nHydroelectricity.\nHydroelectric dams with reservoirs can be operated to provide electricity at times of peak demand. Water is stored in the reservoir during periods of low demand and released when demand is high. The net effect is similar to pumped storage, but without the pumping loss.\nWhile a hydroelectric dam does not directly store energy from other generating units, it behaves equivalently by lowering output in periods of excess electricity from other sources. In this mode, dams are one of the most efficient forms of energy storage, because only the timing of its generation changes. Hydroelectric turbines have a start-up time on the order of a few minutes.\nPumped hydro.\nWorldwide, pumped-storage hydroelectricity (PSH) is the largest-capacity form of active grid energy storage available, and, as of March 2012, the Electric Power Research Institute (EPRI) reports that PSH accounts for more than 99% of bulk storage capacity worldwide, representing around 127,000 MW. PSH energy efficiency varies in practice between 70% and 80%, with claims of up to 87%.\nAt times of low electrical demand, excess generation capacity is used to pump water from a lower source into a higher reservoir. When demand grows, water is released back into a lower reservoir (or waterway or body of water) through a turbine, generating electricity. Reversible turbine-generator assemblies act as both a pump and turbine (usually a Francis turbine design). Nearly all facilities use the height difference between two water bodies. Pure pumped-storage plants shift the water between reservoirs, while the \"pump-back\" approach is a combination of pumped storage and conventional hydroelectric plants that use natural stream-flow.\nCompressed air.\nCompressed-air energy storage (CAES) uses surplus energy to compress air for subsequent electricity generation. Small-scale systems have long been used in such applications as propulsion of mine locomotives. The compressed air is stored in an underground reservoir, such as a salt dome.\nCompressed-air energy storage (CAES) plants can bridge the gap between production volatility and load. CAES storage addresses the energy needs of consumers by effectively providing readily available energy to meet demand. Renewable energy sources like wind and solar energy vary. So at times when they provide little power, they need to be supplemented with other forms of energy to meet energy demand. Compressed-air energy storage plants can take in the surplus energy output of renewable energy sources during times of energy over-production. This stored energy can be used at a later time when demand for electricity increases or energy resource availability decreases.\nCompression of air creates heat; the air is warmer after compression. Expansion requires heat. If no extra heat is added, the air will be much colder after expansion. If the heat generated during compression can be stored and used during expansion, efficiency improves considerably. A CAES system can deal with the heat in three ways. Air storage can be adiabatic, diabatic, or isothermal. Another approach uses compressed air to power vehicles.\nFlywheel.\nFlywheel energy storage (FES) works by accelerating a rotor (a flywheel) to a very high speed, holding energy as rotational energy. When energy is added the rotational speed of the flywheel increases, and when energy is extracted, the speed declines, due to conservation of energy.\nMost FES systems use electricity to accelerate and decelerate the flywheel, but devices that directly use mechanical energy are under consideration.\nFES systems have rotors made of high strength carbon-fiber composites, suspended by magnetic bearings and spinning at speeds from 20,000 to over 50,000\u00a0revolutions per minute (rpm) in a vacuum enclosure. Such flywheels can reach maximum speed\u00a0(\"charge\") in a matter of minutes. The flywheel system is connected to a combination electric motor/generator.\nFES systems have relatively long lifetimes (lasting decades with little or no maintenance; full-cycle lifetimes quoted for flywheels range from in excess of 105, up to 107, cycles of use), high specific energy (100\u2013130\u00a0W\u00b7h/kg, or 360\u2013500 kJ/kg) and power density.\nSolid mass gravitational.\nChanging the altitude of solid masses can store or release energy via an elevating system driven by an electric motor/generator. Studies suggest energy can begin to be released with as little as 1 second warning, making the method a useful supplemental feed into an electricity grid to balance load surges.\nEfficiencies can be as high as 85% recovery of stored energy.\nThis can be achieved by siting the masses inside old vertical mine shafts or in specially constructed towers where the heavy weights are winched up to store energy and allowed a controlled descent to release it. At 2020 a prototype vertical store is being built in Edinburgh, Scotland\nPotential energy storage or gravity energy storage was under active development in 2013 in association with the California Independent System Operator. It examined the movement of earth-filled hopper rail cars driven by electric locomotives from lower to higher elevations.\nOther proposed methods include:\nThermal.\nThermal energy storage (TES) is the temporary storage or removal of heat.\nSensible heat thermal.\nSensible heat storage take advantage of sensible heat in a material to store energy.\nSeasonal thermal energy storage (STES) allows heat or cold to be used months after it was collected from waste energy or natural sources. The material can be stored in contained aquifers, clusters of boreholes in geological substrates such as sand or crystalline bedrock, in lined pits filled with gravel and water, or water-filled mines. Seasonal thermal energy storage (STES) projects often have paybacks in four to six years. An example is Drake Landing Solar Community in Canada, for which 97% of the year-round heat is provided by solar-thermal collectors on garage roofs, enabled by a borehole thermal energy store (BTES). In Braedstrup, Denmark, the community's solar district heating system also uses STES, at a temperature of . A heat pump, which runs only while surplus wind power is available. It is used to raise the temperature to for distribution. When wind energy is not available, a gas-fired boiler is used. Twenty percent of Braedstrup's heat is solar.\nLatent heat thermal (LHTES).\nLatent heat thermal energy storage systems work by transferring heat to or from a material to change its phase. A phase-change is the melting, solidifying, vaporizing or liquifying. Such a material is called a phase change material (PCM). Materials used in LHTESs often have a high latent heat so that at their specific temperature, the phase change absorbs a large amount of energy, much more than sensible heat.\nA steam accumulator is a type of LHTES where the phase change is between liquid and gas and uses the latent heat of vaporization of water. Ice storage air conditioning systems use off-peak electricity to store cold by freezing water into ice. The stored cold in ice releases during melting process and can be used for cooling at peak hours.\nCryogenic thermal energy storage.\nAir can be liquefied by cooling using electricity and stored as a cryogen with existing technologies. The liquid air can then be expanded through a turbine and the energy recovered as electricity. The system was demonstrated at a pilot plant in the UK in 2012.\nIn 2019, Highview announced plans to build a 50 MW in the North of England and northern Vermont, with the proposed facility able to store five to eight hours of energy, for a 250\u2013400\u00a0MWh storage capacity.\nCarnot battery.\nElectrical energy can be stored thermally by resistive heating or heat pumps, and the stored heat can be converted back to electricity via Rankine cycle or Brayton cycle. This technology has been studied to retrofit coal-fired power plants into fossil-fuel free generation systems. Coal-fired boilers are replaced by high-temperature heat storage charged by excess electricity from renewable energy sources. In 2020, German Aerospace Center started to construct the world's first large-scale Carnot battery system, which has 1,000\u00a0 MWh storage capacity.\nElectrochemical.\nRechargeable battery.\nA rechargeable battery comprises one or more electrochemical cells. It is known as a 'secondary cell' because its electrochemical reactions are electrically reversible. Rechargeable batteries come in many shapes and sizes, ranging from button cells to megawatt grid systems.\nRechargeable batteries have lower total cost of use and environmental impact than non-rechargeable (disposable) batteries. Some rechargeable battery types are available in the same form factors as disposables. Rechargeable batteries have higher initial cost but can be recharged very cheaply and used many times.\nCommon rechargeable battery chemistries include:\nFlow battery.\nA flow battery works by passing a solution over a membrane where ions are exchanged to charge or discharge the cell. Cell voltage is chemically determined by the Nernst equation and ranges, in practical applications, from 1.0 V to 2.2 V. Storage capacity depends on the volume of solution. A flow battery is technically akin both to a fuel cell and an electrochemical accumulator cell. Commercial applications are for long half-cycle storage such as backup grid power.\nSupercapacitor.\nSupercapacitors, also called electric double-layer capacitors (EDLC) or ultracapacitors, are a family of electrochemical capacitors that do not have conventional solid dielectrics. Capacitance is determined by two storage principles, double-layer capacitance and pseudocapacitance.\nSupercapacitors bridge the gap between conventional capacitors and rechargeable batteries. They store the most energy per unit volume or mass (energy density) among capacitors. They support up to 10,000 farads/1.2 Volt, up to 10,000 times that of electrolytic capacitors, but deliver or accept less than half as much power per unit time (power density).\nWhile supercapacitors have specific energy and energy densities that are approximately 10% of batteries, their power density is generally 10 to 100 times greater. This results in much shorter charge/discharge cycles. Also, they tolerate many more charge-discharge cycles than batteries.\nSupercapacitors have many applications, including:\nChemical.\nPower-to-gas.\nPower-to-gas is the conversion of electricity to a gaseous fuel such as hydrogen or methane. The three commercial methods use electricity to reduce water into hydrogen and oxygen by means of electrolysis.\nIn the first method, hydrogen is injected into the natural gas grid or is used for transportation. The second method is to combine the hydrogen with carbon dioxide to produce methane using a methanation reaction such as the Sabatier reaction, or biological methanation, resulting in an extra energy conversion loss of 8%. The methane may then be fed into the natural gas grid. The third method uses the output gas of a wood gas generator or a biogas plant, after the biogas upgrader is mixed with the hydrogen from the electrolyzer, to upgrade the quality of the biogas.\nHydrogen.\nThe element hydrogen can be a form of stored energy. Hydrogen can produce electricity via a hydrogen fuel cell.\nAt penetrations below 20% of the grid demand, renewables do not severely change the economics; but beyond about 20% of the total demand, external storage becomes important. If these sources are used to make ionic hydrogen, they can be freely expanded. A 5-year community-based pilot program using wind turbines and hydrogen generators began in 2007 in the remote community of Ramea, Newfoundland and Labrador. A similar project began in 2004 on Utsira, a small Norwegian island.\nEnergy losses involved in the hydrogen storage cycle come from the electrolysis of water, liquification or compression of the hydrogen and conversion to electricity.\nHydrogen can also be produced from aluminum and water by stripping aluminum's naturally occurring aluminum oxide barrier and introducing it to water. This method is beneficial because recycled aluminum cans can be used to generate hydrogen; however, systems to harness this option have not been commercially developed and are much more complex than electrolysis systems. Common methods to strip the oxide layer include caustic catalysts such as sodium hydroxide and alloys with gallium, mercury and other metals.\nUnderground hydrogen storage is the practice of hydrogen storage in caverns, salt domes and depleted oil and gas fields. Large quantities of gaseous hydrogen have been stored in caverns by Imperial Chemical Industries for many years without any difficulties. The European Hyunder project indicated in 2013 that storage of wind and solar energy using underground hydrogen would require 85 caverns.\nPowerpaste is a magnesium and hydrogen -based fluid gel that releases hydrogen when reacting with water. It was invented, patented and is being developed by the Fraunhofer Institute for Manufacturing Technology and Advanced Materials (IFAM) of the Fraunhofer-Gesellschaft. Powerpaste is made by combining magnesium powder with hydrogen to form magnesium hydride in a process conducted at 350\u00a0\u00b0C and five to six times atmospheric pressure. An ester and a metal salt are then added to make the finished product. Fraunhofer states that they are building a production plant slated to start production in 2021, which will produce 4 tons of Powerpaste annually. Fraunhofer has patented their invention in the United States and EU. Fraunhofer claims that Powerpaste is able to store hydrogen energy at 10 times the energy density of a lithium battery of a similar dimension and is safe and convenient for automotive situations.\nMethane.\nMethane is the simplest hydrocarbon with the molecular formula CH4. Methane is more easily stored and transported than hydrogen. Storage and combustion infrastructure (pipelines, gasometers, power plants) are mature.\nSynthetic natural gas (syngas or SNG) can be created in a multi-step process, starting with hydrogen and oxygen. Hydrogen is then reacted with carbon dioxide in a Sabatier process, producing methane and water. Methane can be stored and later used to produce electricity. The resulting water is recycled, reducing the need for water. In the electrolysis stage, oxygen is stored for methane combustion in a pure oxygen environment at an adjacent power plant, eliminating nitrogen oxides.\nMethane combustion produces carbon dioxide (CO2) and water. The carbon dioxide can be recycled to boost the Sabatier process and water can be recycled for further electrolysis. Methane production, storage and combustion recycles the reaction products.\nThe CO2 has economic value as a component of an energy storage vector, not a cost as in carbon capture and storage.\nPower-to-liquid.\nPower-to-liquid is similar to power to gas except that the hydrogen is converted into liquids such as methanol or ammonia. These are easier to handle than gases, and require fewer safety precautions than hydrogen. They can be used for transportation, including aircraft, but also for industrial purposes or in the power sector.\nBiofuels.\nVarious biofuels such as biodiesel, vegetable oil, alcohol fuels, or biomass can replace fossil fuels. Various chemical processes can convert the carbon and hydrogen in coal, natural gas, plant and animal biomass and organic wastes into short hydrocarbons suitable as replacements for existing hydrocarbon fuels. Examples are Fischer\u2013Tropsch diesel, methanol, dimethyl ether and syngas. This diesel source was used extensively in World War II in Germany, which faced limited access to crude oil supplies. South Africa produces most of the country's diesel from coal for similar reasons. A long term oil price above US$35/bbl may make such large scale synthetic liquid fuels economical.\nPower-to-Solid.\nSimilar to power-to-liquid and power-to-gas concepts, energy may be stored in solid materials, for example in metals such as iron, aluminium, and non-metallic materials such as sulfur. Energy in the form of electricity or solar heat is stored chemically and can be released on-demand. Historically, solid energy carriers have been long used in fireworks and rockets.\nAluminum.\nAluminum has been proposed as an energy store by a number of researchers. Its electrochemical equivalent (8.04 Ah/cm3) is nearly four times greater than that of lithium (2.06 Ah/cm3). Energy can be extracted from aluminum by reacting it with water to generate hydrogen. However, it must first be stripped of its natural oxide layer, a process which requires pulverization, chemical reactions with caustic substances, or alloys. The byproduct of the reaction to create hydrogen is aluminum oxide, which can be recycled into aluminum with the Hall\u2013H\u00e9roult process, making the reaction theoretically renewable. If the Hall-H\u00e9roult Process is run using solar or wind power, aluminum could be used to store the energy produced at higher efficiency than direct solar electrolysis.\nBoron, silicon, and zinc.\nBoron, silicon, and zinc have been proposed as energy storage solutions.\nOther chemical.\nThe organic compound \"norbornadiene\"\u00a0converts to \"quadricyclane\" upon exposure to light, storing solar energy as the energy of chemical bonds. A working system has been developed in Sweden as a molecular solar thermal system.\nElectrical methods.\nCapacitor.\nA capacitor (originally known as a 'condenser') is a passive two-terminal electrical component used to store energy electrostatically. Practical capacitors vary widely, but all contain at least two electrical conductors (plates) separated by a dielectric (i.e., insulator). A capacitor can store electric energy when disconnected from its charging circuit, so it can be used like a temporary battery, or like other types of rechargeable energy storage system. Capacitors are commonly used in electronic devices to maintain power supply while batteries change. (This prevents loss of information in volatile memory.) Conventional capacitors provide less than 360 joules per kilogram, while a conventional alkaline battery has a density of 590 kJ/kg.\nCapacitors store energy in an electrostatic field between their plates. Given a potential difference across the conductors (e.g., when a capacitor is attached across a battery), an electric field develops across the dielectric, causing positive charge (+Q) to collect on one plate and negative charge (-Q) to collect on the other plate. If a battery is attached to a capacitor for a sufficient amount of time, no current can flow through the capacitor. However, if an accelerating or alternating voltage is applied across the leads of the capacitor, a displacement current can flow. Besides capacitor plates, charge can also be stored in a dielectric layer.\nCapacitance is greater given a narrower separation between conductors and when the conductors have a larger surface area. In practice, the dielectric between the plates emits a small amount of leakage current and has an electric field strength limit, known as the breakdown voltage. However, the effect of recovery of a dielectric after a high-voltage breakdown holds promise for a new generation of self-healing capacitors. The conductors and leads introduce undesired inductance and resistance.\nResearch is assessing the quantum effects of nanoscale capacitors for digital quantum batteries.\nSuperconducting magnetics.\nSuperconducting magnetic energy storage (SMES) systems store energy in a magnetic field created by the flow of direct current in a superconducting coil that has been cooled to a temperature below its superconducting critical temperature. A typical SMES system includes a superconducting coil, power conditioning system and refrigerator. Once the superconducting coil is charged, the current does not decay and the magnetic energy can be stored indefinitely.\nThe stored energy can be released to the network by discharging the coil. The associated inverter/rectifier accounts for about 2\u20133% energy loss in each direction. SMES loses the least amount of electricity in the energy storage process compared to other methods of storing energy. SMES systems offer round-trip efficiency greater than 95%.\nDue to the energy requirements of refrigeration and the cost of superconducting wire, SMES is used for short duration storage such as improving power quality. It also has applications in grid balancing.\nApplications.\nMills.\nThe classic application before the Industrial Revolution was the control of waterways to drive water mills for processing grain or powering machinery. Complex systems of reservoirs and dams were constructed to store and release water (and the potential energy it contained) when required.\nHomes.\nHome energy storage is expected to become increasingly common given the growing importance of distributed generation of renewable energies (especially photovoltaics) and the important share of energy consumption in buildings. To exceed a self-sufficiency of 40% in a household equipped with photovoltaics, energy storage is needed. Multiple manufacturers produce rechargeable battery systems for storing energy, generally to hold surplus energy from home solar or wind generation. Today, for home energy storage, Li-ion batteries are preferable to lead-acid ones given their similar cost but much better performance.\nTesla Motors produces two models of the Tesla Powerwall. One is a 10 kWh weekly cycle version for backup applications and the other is a 7 kWh version for daily cycle applications. In 2016, a limited version of the Tesla Powerpack 2 cost $398(US)/kWh to store electricity worth 12.5 cents/kWh (US average grid price) making a positive return on investment doubtful unless electricity prices are higher than 30 cents/kWh.\nRoseWater Energy produces two models of the \"Energy &amp; Storage System\", the HUB 120 and SB20. Both versions provide 28.8 kWh of output, enabling it to run larger houses or light commercial premises, and protecting custom installations. The system provides five key elements into one system, including providing a clean 60\u00a0Hz Sine wave, zero transfer time, industrial-grade surge protection, renewable energy grid sell-back (optional), and battery backup.\nEnphase Energy announced an integrated system that allows home users to store, monitor and manage electricity. The system stores 1.2 kWh of energy and 275W/500W power output.\nStoring wind or solar energy using thermal energy storage though less flexible, is considerably cheaper than batteries. A simple 52-gallon electric water heater can store roughly 12 kWh of energy for supplementing hot water or space heating.\nFor purely financial purposes in areas where net metering is available, home generated electricity may be sold to the grid through a grid-tie inverter without the use of batteries for storage.\nGrid electricity and power stations.\nRenewable energy.\nThe largest source and the greatest store of renewable energy is provided by hydroelectric dams. A large reservoir behind a dam can store enough water to average the annual flow of a river between dry and wet seasons, and a very large reservoir can store enough water to average the flow of a river between dry and wet years. While a hydroelectric dam does not directly store energy from intermittent sources, it does balance the grid by lowering its output and retaining its water when power is generated by solar or wind. If wind or solar generation exceeds the region's hydroelectric capacity, then some additional source of energy is needed.\nMany renewable energy sources (notably solar and wind) produce variable power. Storage systems can level out the imbalances between supply and demand that this causes. Electricity must be used as it is generated or converted immediately into storable forms.\nThe main method of electrical grid storage is pumped-storage hydroelectricity. Areas of the world such as Norway, Wales, Japan and the US have used elevated geographic features for reservoirs, using electrically powered pumps to fill them. When needed, the water passes through generators and converts the gravitational potential of the falling water into electricity. Pumped storage in Norway, which gets almost all its electricity from hydro, has currently a capacity of 1.4 GW but since the total installed capacity is nearly 32 GW and 75% of that is regulable, it can be expanded significantly.\nSome forms of storage that produce electricity include pumped-storage hydroelectric dams, rechargeable batteries, thermal storage including molten salts which can efficiently store and release very large quantities of heat energy, and compressed air energy storage, flywheels, cryogenic systems and superconducting magnetic coils.\nSurplus power can also be converted into methane (Sabatier process) with stockage in the natural gas network.\nIn 2011, the Bonneville Power Administration in the northwestern United States created an experimental program to absorb excess wind and hydro power generated at night or during stormy periods that are accompanied by high winds. Under central control, home appliances absorb surplus energy by heating ceramic bricks in special space heaters to hundreds of degrees and by boosting the temperature of modified hot water heater tanks. After charging, the appliances provide home heating and hot water as needed. The experimental system was created as a result of a severe 2010 storm that overproduced renewable energy to the extent that all conventional power sources were shut down, or in the case of a nuclear power plant, reduced to its lowest possible operating level, leaving a large area running almost completely on renewable energy.\nAnother advanced method used at the former Solar Two project in the United States and the Solar Tres Power Tower in Spain uses molten salt to store thermal energy captured from the sun and then convert it and dispatch it as electrical power. The system pumps molten salt through a tower or other special conduits to be heated by the sun. Insulated tanks store the solution. Electricity is produced by turning water to steam that is fed to turbines.\nSince the early 21st century batteries have been applied to utility scale load-leveling and frequency regulation capabilities.\nIn vehicle-to-grid storage, electric vehicles that are plugged into the energy grid can deliver stored electrical energy from their batteries into the grid when needed.\nAir conditioning.\nThermal energy storage (TES) can be used for air conditioning. It is most widely used for cooling single large buildings and/or groups of smaller buildings. Commercial air conditioning systems are the biggest contributors to peak electrical loads. In 2009, thermal storage was used in over 3,300 buildings in over 35 countries. It works by chilling material at night and using the chilled material for cooling during the hotter daytime periods.\nThe most popular technique is ice storage, which requires less space than water and is cheaper than fuel cells or flywheels. In this application, a standard chiller runs at night to produce an ice pile. Water circulates through the pile during the day to chill water that would normally be the chiller's daytime output.\nA partial storage system minimizes capital investment by running the chillers nearly 24 hours a day. At night, they produce ice for storage and during the day they chill water. Water circulating through the melting ice augments the production of chilled water. Such a system makes ice for 16 to 18 hours a day and melts ice for six hours a day. Capital expenditures are reduced because the chillers can be just 40% \u2013 50% of the size needed for a conventional, no-storage design. Storage sufficient to store half a day's available heat is usually adequate.\nA full storage system shuts off the chillers during peak load hours. Capital costs are higher, as such a system requires larger chillers and a larger ice storage system.\nThis ice is produced when electrical utility rates are lower. Off-peak cooling systems can lower energy costs. The U.S. Green Building Council has developed the Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design (LEED) program to encourage the design of reduced-environmental impact buildings. Off-peak cooling may help toward LEED Certification.\nThermal storage for heating is less common than for cooling. An example of thermal storage is storing solar heat to be used for heating at night.\nLatent heat can also be stored in technical phase change materials (PCMs). These can be encapsulated in wall and ceiling panels, to moderate room temperatures.\nTransport.\nLiquid hydrocarbon fuels are the most commonly used forms of energy storage for use in transportation, followed by a growing use of Battery Electric Vehicles and Hybrid Electric Vehicles. Other energy carriers such as hydrogen can be used to avoid producing greenhouse gases.\nPublic transport systems like trams and trolleybuses require electricity, but due to their variability in movement, a steady supply of electricity via renewable energy is challenging. Photovoltaic systems installed on the roofs of buildings can be used to power public transportation systems during periods in which there is increased demand for electricity and access to other forms of energy are not readily available. Upcoming transitions in the transportation system also include e.g. ferries and airplanes, where electric power supply is investigated as an interesting alternative.\nElectronics.\nCapacitors are widely used in electronic circuits for blocking direct current while allowing alternating current to pass. In analog filter networks, they smooth the output of power supplies. In resonant circuits they tune radios to particular frequencies. In electric power transmission systems they stabilize voltage and power flow.\nUse cases.\nThe United States Department of Energy International Energy Storage Database (IESDB), is a free-access database of energy storage projects and policies funded by the United States Department of Energy Office of Electricity and Sandia National Labs.\nCapacity.\nStorage capacity is the amount of energy extracted from an energy storage device or system; usually measured in joules or kilowatt-hours and their multiples, it may be given in number of hours of electricity production at power plant nameplate capacity; when storage is of primary type (i.e., thermal or pumped-water), output is sourced only with the power plant embedded storage system.\nEconomics.\nThe economics of energy storage strictly depends on the reserve service requested, and several uncertainty factors affect the profitability of energy storage. Therefore, not every storage method is technically and economically suitable for the storage of several MWh, and the optimal size of the energy storage is market and location dependent.\nMoreover, ESS are affected by several risks, e.g.:\nTherefore, traditional techniques based on deterministic Discounted Cash Flow (DCF) for the investment appraisal are not fully adequate to evaluate these risks and uncertainties and the investor's flexibility to deal with them. Hence, the literature recommends to assess the value of risks and uncertainties through the Real Option Analysis (ROA), which is a valuable method in uncertain contexts.\nThe economic valuation of large-scale applications (including pumped hydro storage and compressed air) considers benefits including: curtailment avoidance, grid congestion avoidance, price arbitrage and carbon-free energy delivery. In one technical assessment by the Carnegie Mellon Electricity Industry Centre, economic goals could be met using batteries if their capital cost was $30 to $50 per kilowatt-hour.\nA metric of energy efficiency of storage is energy storage on energy invested (ESOI), which is the amount of energy that can be stored by a technology, divided by the amount of energy required to build that technology. The higher the ESOI, the better the storage technology is energetically. For lithium-ion batteries this is around 10, and for lead acid batteries it is about 2. Other forms of storage such as pumped hydroelectric storage generally have higher ESOI, such as 210.\nPumped-storage hydroelectricity is by far the largest storage technology used globally. However, the usage of conventional pumped-hydro storage is limited because it requires terrain with elevation differences and also has a very high land use for relatively small power. In locations without suitable natural geography, underground pumped-hydro storage could also be used. High costs and limited life still make batteries a \"weak substitute\" for dispatchable power sources, and are unable to cover for variable renewable power gaps lasting for days, weeks or months. In grid models with high VRE share, the excessive cost of storage tends to dominate the costs of the whole grid \u2014 for example, in California alone 80% share of VRE would require 9.6 TWh of storage but 100% would require 36.3 TWh. As of 2018 the state only had 150 GWh of storage, primarily in pumped storage and a small fraction in batteries. According to another study, supplying 80% of US demand from VRE would require a smart grid covering the whole country or battery storage capable to supply the whole system for 12 hours, both at cost estimated at $2.5 trillion. Similarly, several studies have found that relying only on VRE and energy storage would cost about 30\u201350% more than a comparable system that combines VRE with nuclear plants or plants with carbon capture and storage instead of energy storage.\nResearch.\nGermany.\nIn 2013, the German government allocated \u20ac200M (approximately US$270M) for research, and another \u20ac50M to subsidize battery storage in residential rooftop solar panels, according to a representative of the German Energy Storage Association.\nSiemens AG commissioned a production-research plant to open in 2015 at the \"Zentrum f\u00fcr Sonnenenergie und Wasserstoff (ZSW,\" the German Center for Solar Energy and Hydrogen Research in the State of Baden-W\u00fcrttemberg), a university/industry collaboration in Stuttgart, Ulm and Widderstall, staffed by approximately 350 scientists, researchers, engineers, and technicians. The plant develops new near-production manufacturing materials and processes (NPMM&amp;P) using a computerized Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition (SCADA) system. It aims to enable the expansion of rechargeable battery production with increased quality and lower cost.\nFrom 2023 onwards, a new project by the German Research Foundation focuses on molecular photoswitches to store solar thermal energy. The spokesperson of these so-called molecular solar thermal (MOST) systems is Prof. Dr. Hermann A. Wegner.\nUnited States.\nIn 2014, research and test centers opened to evaluate energy storage technologies. Among them was the Advanced Systems Test Laboratory at the University of Wisconsin at Madison in Wisconsin State, which partnered with battery manufacturer Johnson Controls. The laboratory was created as part of the university's newly opened Wisconsin Energy Institute. Their goals include the evaluation of state-of-the-art and next generation electric vehicle batteries, including their use as grid supplements.\nThe State of New York unveiled its New York Battery and Energy Storage Technology (NY-BEST) Test and Commercialization Center at Eastman Business Park in Rochester, New York, at a cost of $23\u00a0million for its almost 1,700\u00a0m2 laboratory. The center includes the Center for Future Energy Systems, a collaboration between Cornell University of Ithaca, New York and the Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute in Troy, New York. NY-BEST tests, validates and independently certifies diverse forms of energy storage intended for commercial use.\nOn September 27, 2017, Senators Al Franken of Minnesota and Martin Heinrich of New Mexico introduced Advancing Grid Storage Act (AGSA), which would devote more than $1 billion in research, technical assistance and grants to encourage energy storage in the United States.\nIn grid models with high VRE share, the excessive cost of storage tends to dominate the costs of the whole grid \u2013 for example, in California alone 80% share of VRE would require 9.6 TWh of storage but 100% would require 36.3 TWh. According to another study, supplying 80% of US demand from VRE would require a smart grid covering the whole country or battery storage capable to supply the whole system for 12 hours, both at cost estimated at $2.5 trillion.\nUnited Kingdom.\nIn the United Kingdom, some 14 industry and government agencies allied with seven British universities in May 2014 to create the SUPERGEN Energy Storage Hub in order to assist in the coordination of energy storage technology research and development.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n Journals and papers \n Books "}
{"id": "24131", "revid": "50883526", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24131", "title": "PHP", "text": "Scripting language created in 1994\nPHP is a general-purpose scripting language geared towards web development. It was created by Danish-Canadian programmer Rasmus Lerdorf in 1993 and released in 1995. The PHP reference implementation is now produced by the PHP Group. PHP was originally an abbreviation of Personal Home Page, but it now stands for the recursive backronym PHP: Hypertext Preprocessor.\nPHP code is usually processed on a web server by a PHP interpreter implemented as a module, a daemon or a Common Gateway Interface (CGI) executable. On a web server, the result of the interpreted and executed PHP code\u2014which may be any type of data, such as generated HTML or binary image data\u2014can form the whole or part of an HTTP response. Various web template systems, web content management systems, and web frameworks exist that can be employed to orchestrate or facilitate the generation of that response. Additionally, PHP can be used for programming tasks outside the web context, though non-web uses are rare. PHP code can also be directly executed from the command line.\nThe standard PHP interpreter, powered by the Zend Engine, is free software released under the PHP License. PHP has been widely ported and can be deployed on most web servers on a variety of operating systems and platforms.\nHistory.\nThe PHP language at first evolved without a written formal specification or standard, with the original implementation acting as the \"de facto\" standard that other implementations aimed to follow.\nEarly history (1993 to 1997).\nPHP development began in 1993 when Rasmus Lerdorf wrote several Common Gateway Interface (CGI) programs in C, which he used to maintain his personal homepage. He extended them to work with HTML forms and to communicate with databases, and called this implementation \"Personal Home Page/Forms Interpreter\" or PHP/FI.\nAn example of the early PHP syntax:\n&lt;!--include /text/header.html--&gt;\n&lt;!--getenv HTTP_USER_AGENT--&gt;\n&lt;!--if substr $exec_result Mozilla--&gt;\n Hey, you are using Netscape!&lt;p&gt;\n&lt;!--endif--&gt;\n&lt;!--sql database select * from table where user='$username'--&gt;\n&lt;!--ifless $numentries 1--&gt;\n Sorry, that record does not exist&lt;p&gt;\n&lt;!--endif exit--&gt;\n Welcome &lt;!--$user--&gt;!&lt;p&gt;\n You have &lt;!--$index:0--&gt; credits left in your account.&lt;p&gt;\n&lt;!--include /text/footer.html--&gt;\nPHP/FI could be used to build simple, dynamic web applications. To accelerate bug reporting and improve the code, Lerdorf initially announced the release of PHP/FI as \"Personal Home Page Tools (PHP Tools) version 1.0\" on the Usenet discussion group \"comp.infosystems.www.authoring.cgi\" on 8 June 1995. This release included basic functionality such as Perl-like variables, form handling, and the ability to embed HTML. By this point, the syntax had changed to resemble that of Perl, but was simpler, more limited, and less consistent.\nEarly PHP was never intended to be a new programming language; rather, it grew organically, with Lerdorf noting in retrospect: \"I don't know how to stop it [...] there was never any intent to write a programming language [...] I have absolutely no idea how to write a programming language [...] I just kept adding the next logical step on the way.\" A development team began to form and, after months of work and beta testing, officially released PHP/FI 2 in November 1997.\nThe fact that PHP was not originally designed, but instead was developed organically has led to inconsistent naming of functions and inconsistent ordering of their parameters. In some cases, the function names were chosen to match the lower-level libraries which PHP was \"wrapping\", while in some very early versions of PHP the length of the function names was used internally as a hash function, so names were chosen to improve the distribution of hash values.\nPHP 3 and 4 (1998 to 2004).\nZeev Suraski and Andi Gutmans rewrote the parser in 1997 and formed the base of PHP\u00a03, changing the language's name to the recursive acronym \"PHP: Hypertext Preprocessor\". Afterwards, public testing of PHP\u00a03 began, and the official launch came in June 1998. Suraski and Gutmans then started a new rewrite of PHP's core, producing the Zend Engine in 1999. They also founded Zend Technologies in Ramat Gan, Israel.\nOn 22 May 2000, PHP 4.0, powered by the Zend Engine 1.0, was released. By August 2008, this branch had reached version 4.4.9. PHP\u00a04 is now no longer under development and nor are any security updates planned to be released.\nEarly PHP 5 (2004 to 2006).\nOn 1 July 2004, PHP 5.0 was released, powered by the new Zend Engine 2.0. PHP\u00a05.0 included significant changes to the language, most notably an overhauled approach to object-oriented programming, as well as iterators and exceptions.\nPHP 5.1 and PHP 5.2 were released the following years, adding smaller improvements and new features, such as the PHP Data Objects (PDO) extension (which defines a lightweight and consistent interface for accessing databases) In 2008, PHP\u00a05.x became the only stable version under development.\nMany high-profile open-source projects ceased to support PHP\u00a04 in new code from February 5, 2008, because of the GoPHP5 initiative, provided by a consortium of PHP developers promoting the transition from PHP\u00a04 to PHP\u00a05.\nPHP 6 and Unicode.\nPHP's native string functions worked only on raw bytes, making use with multibyte character encodings difficult. In 2005, a project headed by Andrei Zmievski was initiated to bring native Unicode support throughout PHP, by embedding the International Components for Unicode (ICU) library, and representing text strings as UTF-16 internally. Since this would cause major changes both to the internals of the language and to user code, it was planned to release this as version 6.0 of the language, along with other major features then in development.\nHowever, a shortage of developers who understood the necessary changes, and performance problems arising from conversion to and from UTF-16, which is rarely used in a web context, led to delays in the project. As a result, a PHP\u00a05.3 release was created in 2009, and in March 2010, the project in its current form was officially abandoned, and a PHP\u00a05.4 release was prepared to contain most remaining non-Unicode features from PHP\u00a06. Initial hopes were that a new plan would be formed for Unicode integration, but by 2014 none had been adopted.\nLater PHP 5 (2009 to 2014).\nBecause it contained features originally intended to be part of 6.0, PHP 5.3 was a significant release, adding support for namespaces, closures, late static binding, and many fixes and improvements to standard functions.\nWith the Unicode branch officially abandoned, a new release process was adopted in 2011, planning a yearly release cycle, and a clear distinction between \"feature releases\" (x.y.z to x.y+1.z) and \"major releases\" (x.y.z to x+1.0.0). Remaining features which had been planned for the 6.0 release were included in PHP 5.4, released in March 2012, such as trait support and a new \"short array syntax\". This was followed by more incremental changes in PHP 5.5 (June 2013) and 5.6 (August 2014).\nFor PHP versions 5.3 and 5.4, the only available Microsoft Windows binary distributions were 32-bit IA-32 builds, requiring Windows 32-bit compatibility mode while using Internet Information Services (IIS) on a 64-bit Windows platform. PHP version 5.5 made the 64-bit x86-64 builds available for Microsoft Windows.\nOfficial security support for PHP 5.6 ended on 31 December 2018.\nPHP 7.x (2015 to 2019).\nDuring 2014 and 2015, a new major PHP version was developed, PHP\u00a07.0. The numbering of this version involved some debate among internal developers. While the PHP\u00a06 Unicode experiments had never been released, several articles and book titles referenced the PHP\u00a06 names, which might have caused confusion if a new release were to reuse the name. After a vote, the name PHP\u00a07 was chosen.\nThe foundation of PHP\u00a07.0 was a PHP branch that was originally dubbed \"PHP next generation\" (\"phpng\"). It was written by Dmitry Stogov, Xinchen Hui and Nikita Popov, and aimed to optimize PHP performance by refactoring the Zend Engine while retaining near-complete language compatibility. By 14 July 2014, WordPress-based benchmarks, which served as the main benchmark suite for the phpng project, showed an almost 100% increase in performance. Changes from phpng make it easier to improve performance in future versions, as more compact data structures and other changes are seen as better suited for a successful migration to a just-in-time (JIT) compiler. Because of the significant changes, the reworked Zend Engine was called \"Zend Engine 3\", succeeding Zend Engine 2 used in PHP\u00a05.x.\nPHP 7.0 also included changes which were not backwards compatible, as allowed for \"major versions\" under the versioning scheme agreed in 2011. Changes to the core language included a more consistent handling of variable dereferencing, a more predictable behavior of the codice_1 statement, and platform consistency of bitwise shifts and floating-point to integer conversion. Several unmaintained or deprecated server application programming interfaces (SAPIs) and extensions were removed from the PHP core, most notably the legacy codice_2 extension. Other legacy features were also removed, such as ASP-style delimiters codice_3 and codice_4 and codice_5.\nPHP 7.0 marked the beginning of an expansion in PHP's type system. In PHP 5.x, only function parameters could have type declarations, but this was extended to function return types in 7.0., and object properties in 7.4 The types expressible also expanded, with scalar types (integer, float, string, and boolean) in 7.0; type, nullable types, and return type. all in 7.1; and the type in 7.2\nOther changes in this period aimed to add expressiveness to the language, such as the (null coalesce)\nand \"spaceship\" three-way comparison operators in 7.0; new syntax for array derefencing and catching multiple exception types in PHP 7.1; more flexible Heredoc and Nowdoc syntax in 7.3; and the null-coalescing assignment operator in 7.4.\nPHP 8.x (2020 onwards).\nPHP\u00a08.0 was released on 26 November 2020, as a major version with breaking changes from previous versions.\nOne of the most high-profile changes was the addition of a JIT compiler, which can provide substantial performance improvements for some use cases. Substantial improvements were expected more for mathematical-type operations than for common web-development use cases. Additionally, the performance advantage of the JIT compiler provides the potential to move some code from C to PHP.\nA significant addition to the language in 8.0 is attributes, which allow metadata to be added to program elements such as classes, methods, and parameters. Later versions added built-in attributes which change the behaviour of the language, such as the attribute in PHP 8.2, in PHP 8.3, in PHP 8.4, and the and attributes in PHP 8.5.\nA significant extension to the language's type system is the addition of composite types: union types in PHP 8.0 (e.g. meaning \"either integer or string), intersection types in PHP 8.1 (e.g. meaning the value must implement both the codice_6 and codice_7 interfaces), and disjunctive normal form (DNF) types in PHP 8.2 (unions of intersections, such as ). Additional special type keywords have been added, such as and in PHP 8.0, (a bottom type indicating that a function never returns) in PHP 8.1, and , , and as stand-alone types in PHP 8.2.\nThe addition of a rich type system is part of a general trend towards a stricter language, and PHP 8.0 included breaking changes to the handling of string to number comparisons, numeric strings, and incompatible method signatures. Later versions have introduced deprecation notices for behaviour which is planned as a breaking change in a future major version, such as passing codice_8 to non-nullable internal function parameters and referring to properties which have not been declared on the class.\nRelease history.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"template:sticky header/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"template:row hover highlight/styles.css\"/&gt;\nBeginning on 28 June 2011, the PHP Development Team implemented a timeline for the release of new versions of PHP. Under this system, at least one release should occur every month. Once per year, a minor release should occur which may include new features. Every minor release should at least be supported for two years with security and bug fixes, followed by at least one year of only security fixes, for a total of a three-year release process for every minor release. No new features, unless small and self-contained, are to be introduced into a minor release during the three-year release process. A 2024 RFC extended the length of the security fix only period to two years, fixed all end of life dates to 31 December, and removed the exception that allowed for \"small and self-contained\" features to be introduced in patch versions.\nPrevalence of outdated versions.\nW3Techs reports that as of \u00a02025[ [update]] (about three years since PHP\u00a07 was discontinued and 23 months after the PHP\u00a08.3 release), unsupported versions such as PHP\u00a07 are still used by well over half of PHP websites, which are outdated and known to be insecure. Those included the 9.7% of PHP websites using the even more outdated (discontinued for 7 years) and insecure PHP\u00a05, released over two decades ago.\nMascot.\nThe mascot of the PHP project is the \"elePHPant\", a blue elephant with the PHP logo on its side, designed by Vincent Pontier in 1998. \"The (PHP) letters were forming the shape of an elephant if viewed in a sideways angle.\"\nThe elePHPant is sometimes differently coloured when in plush toy form. Many variations of this physical mascot have been made over the years. Only the elePHPants based on the original design by Vincent Pontier are considered official by the community. These are collectable and some of them are extremely rare.\nSyntax.\nThe following \"Hello, World!\" program is written in PHP code embedded in an HTML document:\n&lt;!DOCTYPE html&gt;\n&lt;html&gt;\n &lt;head&gt;\n &lt;title&gt;PHP \"Hello, World!\" program&lt;/title&gt;\n &lt;/head&gt;\n &lt;body&gt;\n &lt;p&gt;&lt;?= 'Hello, World!' ?&gt;&lt;/p&gt;\n &lt;/body&gt;\n&lt;/html&gt;\nHowever, as no requirement exists for PHP code to be embedded in HTML, the simplest version of \"Hello, World!\" may be written like this, with the closing tag ?&gt; omitted as preferred in files containing pure PHP code.\n&lt;?php echo 'Hello, World!';\nThe PHP interpreter only executes PHP code within its delimiters. Anything outside of its delimiters is not processed by PHP, although the non-PHP text is still subject to control structures described in PHP code. The most common delimiters are &lt;?php to open and ?&gt; to close PHP sections. The shortened form &lt;? also exists. This short delimiter makes script files less portable since support for them can be disabled in the local PHP configuration and it is therefore discouraged. Conversely, there is no recommendation against the echo short tag &lt;?=. Prior to PHP\u00a05.4.0, this short syntax for echo only works with the codice_9 configuration setting enabled, while for PHP\u00a05.4.0 and later it is always available. The purpose of all these delimiters is to separate PHP code from non-PHP content, such as JavaScript code or HTML markup. So the shortest \"Hello, World!\" program written in PHP is:\n&lt;?='Hello, World!';\nThe first form of delimiters, &lt;?php and ?&gt;, in XHTML and other XML documents, creates correctly formed XML processing instructions. This means that the resulting mixture of PHP code and other markups in the server-side file is itself well-formed XML.\nVariables are prefixed with a dollar symbol, and a type does not need to be specified in advance. PHP\u00a05 introduced \"type declarations\" that allow functions to force their parameters to be objects of a specific class, arrays, interfaces or callback functions. However, before PHP\u00a07, type declarations could not be used with scalar types such as integers or strings.\nBelow is an example of how PHP variables are declared and initialized.\n&lt;?php\n $name = 'John'; // variable of string type being declared and initialized\n $age = 18; // variable of integer type being declared and initialized\n $height = 5.3; // variable of double type being declared and initialized\n echo $name . ' is ' . $height . \"m tall\\n\"; // concatenating variables and strings\n echo \"$name is $age years old.\"; // interpolating variables to string\nUnlike function and class names, variable names are case-sensitive. Both double-quoted (\"\") and heredoc strings provide the ability to interpolate a variable's value into the string. PHP treats newlines as whitespace in the manner of a free-form language, and statements are terminated by a semicolon. PHP has three types of comment syntax: /* */ marks block and inline comments; // or # are used for one-line comments. The codice_10 statement is one of several facilities PHP provides to output text.\nIn terms of keywords and language syntax, PHP is similar to C-style syntax. if conditions, for and while loops and function returns are similar in syntax to languages such as C, C++, C#, Java and Perl.\nData types.\nPHP is loosely typed. It stores integers in a platform-dependent range, either as a 32, 64 or 128-bit signed integer equivalent to the C-language long type. Unsigned integers are converted to signed values in certain situations, which is different behaviour to many other programming languages. Integer variables can be assigned using decimal (positive and negative), octal, hexadecimal, and binary notations.\nFloating-point numbers are also stored in a platform-specific range. They can be specified using floating-point notation, or two forms of scientific notation. PHP has a native Boolean type that is similar to the native Boolean types in Java and C++. Using the Boolean type conversion rules, non-zero values are interpreted as true and zero as false, as in Perl and C++.\nThe null data type represents a variable that has no value; codice_11 is the only allowed value for this data type.\nVariables of the \"resource\" type represent references to resources from external sources. These are typically created by functions from a particular extension, and can only be processed by functions from the same extension; examples include file, image, and database resources.\nArrays can contain elements of any type that PHP can handle, including resources, objects, and even other arrays. Order is preserved in lists of values and in hashes with both keys and values, and the two can be intermingled. PHP also supports strings, which can be used with single quotes, double quotes, nowdoc or heredoc syntax.\nThe Standard PHP Library (SPL) attempts to solve standard problems and implements efficient data access interfaces and classes.\nFunctions.\nPHP defines a large array of functions in the core language and many are also available in various extensions; these functions are well documented online https://. However, the built-in library has a wide variety of naming conventions and associated inconsistencies, as described under history above.\nCustom functions may be defined by the developer:\nfunction myAge(int $birthYear): string\n // calculate the age by subtracting the birth year from the current year.\n $yearsOld = date('Y') - $birthYear;\n // return the age in a descriptive string.\n return $yearsOld . ($yearsOld == 1 ? ' year' : ' years');\necho 'I am currently ' . myAge(1995) . ' old.';\nAs of 2025, the output of the above sample program is \"I am currently 30 years old.\"\nIn lieu of function pointers, functions in PHP can be referenced by a string containing their name. In this manner, normal PHP functions can be used, for example, as callbacks or within function tables. User-defined functions may be created at any time without being prototyped. Functions may be defined inside code blocks, permitting a run-time decision as to whether or not a function should be defined. There is a codice_12 function that determines whether a function with a given name has already been defined. Function calls must use parentheses, with the exception of zero-argument class constructor functions called with the PHP operator codice_13, in which case parentheses are optional.\nSince PHP\u00a04.0.1 codice_14, a thin wrapper around codice_15, allowed normal PHP functions to be created during program execution; it was deprecated in PHP\u00a07.2 and removed in PHP\u00a08.0 in favor of syntax for anonymous functions or \"closures\" that can capture variables from the surrounding scope, which was added in PHP\u00a05.3. Shorthand arrow syntax was added in PHP\u00a07.4:\nfunction getAdder($x) {\n return fn($y) =&gt; $x + $y;\n$adder = getAdder(8);\necho $adder(2); // prints \"10\"\nIn the example above, codice_16 function creates a closure using passed argument , which takes an additional argument , and returns the created closure to the caller. Such a function is a first-class object, meaning that it can be stored in a variable, passed as a parameter to other functions, etc.\nUnusually for a dynamically typed language, PHP supports type declarations on function parameters, which are enforced at runtime. This has been supported for classes and interfaces since PHP\u00a05.0, for arrays since PHP\u00a05.1, for \"callables\" since PHP\u00a05.4, and scalar (integer, float, string and boolean) types since PHP\u00a07.0. PHP\u00a07.0 also has type declarations for function return types, expressed by placing the type name after the list of parameters, preceded by a colon. For example, the codice_17 function from the earlier example could be annotated with types like so in PHP\u00a07:\nfunction getAdder(int $x): Closure\n return fn(int $y): int =&gt; $x + $y;\n$adder = getAdder(8);\necho $adder(2); // prints \"10\"\necho $adder(null); // throws an exception because an incorrect type was passed\n$adder = getAdder([]); // would also throw an exception\nBy default, scalar type declarations follow weak typing principles. So, for example, if a parameter's type is codice_18, PHP would allow not only integers, but also convertible numeric strings, floats or Booleans to be passed to that function, and would convert them. However, PHP\u00a07 has a \"strict typing\" mode which, when used, disallows such conversions for function calls and returns within a file.\nPHP objects.\nBasic object-oriented programming functionality was added in PHP\u00a03 and improved in PHP\u00a04. This allowed for PHP to gain further abstraction, making creative tasks easier for programmers using the language. Object handling was completely rewritten for PHP\u00a05, expanding the feature set and enhancing performance. In previous versions of PHP, objects were handled like value types. The drawback of this method was that code had to make heavy use of PHP's \"reference\" variables if it wanted to modify an object it was passed rather than creating a copy of it. In the new approach, objects are referenced by handle, and not by value.\nPHP\u00a05 introduced private and protected member variables and methods, along with abstract classes, final classes, abstract methods, and final methods. It also introduced a standard way of declaring constructors and destructors, similar to that of other object-oriented languages such as C++, and a standard exception handling model. Furthermore, PHP\u00a05 added interfaces and allowed for multiple interfaces to be implemented. There are special interfaces that allow objects to interact with the runtime system. Objects implementing ArrayAccess can be used with array syntax and objects implementing Iterator or IteratorAggregate can be used with the codice_1 language construct. There is no virtual table feature in the engine, so static variables are bound with a name instead of a reference at compile time.\nIf the developer creates a copy of an object using the reserved word codice_20, the Zend engine will check whether a codice_21 method has been defined. If not, it will call a default codice_21 which will copy the object's properties. If a codice_21 method is defined, then it will be responsible for setting the necessary properties in the created object. For convenience, the engine will supply a function that imports the properties of the source object, so the programmer can start with a by-value replica of the source object and only override properties that need to be changed.\nThe visibility of PHP properties and methods is defined using the keywords codice_24, codice_25, and codice_26. The default is public, if only var is used; codice_27 is a synonym for codice_24. Items declared codice_24 can be accessed everywhere. codice_26 limits access to inherited classes (and to the class that defines the item). codice_25 limits visibility only to the class that defines the item. Objects of the same type have access to each other's private and protected members even though they are not the same instance.\nExample.\nThe following is a basic example of object-oriented programming in PHP\u00a08:\n&lt;?php\nabstract class User\n protected string $name;\n public function __construct(string $name)\n // make first letter uppercase and the rest lowercase\n $this-&gt;name = ucfirst(strtolower($name));\n public function greet(): string\n return \"Hello, my name is \" . $this-&gt;name;\n abstract public function job(): string;\nclass Student extends User\n public function __construct(string $name, private string $course)\n parent::__construct($name);\n public function job(): string\n return \"I learn \" . $this-&gt;course;\nclass Teacher extends User\n public function __construct(string $name, private array $teachingCourses)\n parent::__construct($name);\n public function job(): string\n return \"I teach \" . implode(\", \", $this-&gt;teachingCourses);\n$students = [\n new Student(\"Alice\", \"Computer Science\"),\n new Student(\"Bob\", \"Computer Science\"),\n new Student(\"Charlie\", \"Business Studies\"),\n$teachers = [\n new Teacher(\"Dan\", [\"Computer Science\", \"Information Security\"]),\n new Teacher(\"Erin\", [\"Computer Science\", \"3D Graphics Programming\"]),\n new Teacher(\"Frankie\", [\"Online Marketing\", \"Business Studies\", \"E-commerce\"]),\nforeach ([$students, $teachers] as $users) {\n echo $users[0]::class . \"s:\\n\";\n array_walk($users, function (User $user) {\n echo \"{$user-&gt;greet()}, {$user-&gt;job()}\\n\";\nThis program outputs the following:\n&lt;samp style=\"padding-left:0.4em; padding-right:0.4em; color:var( --color-subtle, #666666); padding-left:0px; overflow-x: hidden; word-wrap: break-word;\" &gt;Students:&lt;br&gt;\nHello, my name is Alice, I learn Computer Science&lt;br&gt;\nHello, my name is Bob, I learn Computer Science&lt;br&gt;\nHello, my name is Charlie, I learn Business Studies&lt;br&gt;\nTeachers:&lt;br&gt;\nHello, my name is Dan, I teach Computer Science, Information Security&lt;br&gt;\nHello, my name is Erin, I teach Computer Science, 3D Graphics Programming&lt;br&gt;\nHello, my name is Frankie, I teach Online Marketing, Business Studies, E-commerce&lt;/samp&gt;\nImplementations.\nThe only complete PHP implementation is the original, known simply as PHP. It is the most widely used and is powered by the Zend Engine. To disambiguate it from other implementations, it is sometimes unofficially called \"Zend PHP\". The Zend Engine compiles PHP source code on-the-fly into an internal format that it can execute, thus it works as an interpreter. It is also the \"reference implementation\" of PHP, as PHP has no formal specification, and so the semantics of Zend PHP define the semantics of PHP. Due to the complex and nuanced semantics of PHP, defined by how Zend works, it is difficult for competing implementations to offer complete compatibility.\nPHP's single-request-per-script-execution model, and the fact that the Zend Engine is an interpreter, leads to inefficiency; as a result, various products have been developed to help improve PHP performance. In order to speed up execution time and not have to compile the PHP source code every time the web page is accessed, PHP scripts can also be deployed in the PHP engine's internal format by using an opcode cache, which works by caching the compiled form of a PHP script (opcodes) in shared memory to avoid the overhead of parsing and compiling the code every time the script runs. An opcode cache, Zend Opcache, is built into PHP since version 5.5. Another example of a widely used opcode cache is the Alternative PHP Cache (APC), which is available as a PECL extension.\nWhile Zend PHP is still the most popular implementation, several other implementations have been developed. Some of these are compilers or support JIT compilation, and hence offer performance benefits over Zend PHP at the expense of lacking full PHP compatibility. Alternative implementations include the following:\nLicensing.\nPHP is free software released under the PHP License, which stipulates that:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt; Products derived from this software may not be called \"PHP\", nor may \"PHP\" appear in their name, without prior written permission from group@php.net. You may indicate that your software works in conjunction with PHP by saying \"Foo for PHP\" instead of calling it \"PHP Foo\" or \"phpfoo\".\nThis restriction on the use of \"PHP\" makes the PHP License incompatible with the GNU General Public License (GPL), while the Zend License is incompatible due to an advertising clause similar to that of the original BSD license.\nDevelopment and community.\nPHP includes various free and open-source libraries in its source distribution or uses them in resulting PHP binary builds. PHP is fundamentally an Internet-aware system with built-in modules for accessing File Transfer Protocol (FTP) servers and many database servers, including PostgreSQL, MySQL, Microsoft SQL Server and SQLite (which is an embedded database), LDAP servers, and others. Numerous functions are familiar to C programmers, such as those in the stdio family, are available in standard PHP builds.\nPHP allows developers to write extensions in C to add functionality to the PHP language. PHP extensions can be compiled statically into PHP or loaded dynamically at runtime. Numerous extensions have been written to add support for the Windows API, process management on Unix-like operating systems, multibyte strings (Unicode), cURL, and several popular compression formats. Other PHP features made available through extensions include integration with Internet Relay Chat (IRC), dynamic generation of images and Adobe Flash content, \"PHP Data Objects\" (PDO) as an abstraction layer used for accessing databases, and even speech synthesis. Some of the language's core functions, such as those dealing with strings and arrays, are also implemented as extensions. The PHP Extension Community Library (PECL) project is a repository for extensions to the PHP language. Most of the community focuses on web development, and PHP running server side (though also serving JavaScript for the client side), and some exceptional uses are for e.g. standalone graphical applications (with PHP-GTK unmaintained now for over a decade), and even drone control.\nSome other projects, such as \"Zephir\", provide the ability for PHP extensions to be created in a high-level language and compiled into native PHP extensions. Such an approach, instead of writing PHP extensions directly in C, simplifies the development of extensions and reduces the time required for programming and testing.\nBy December 2018 the PHP Group consisted of ten people: Thies C. Arntzen, Stig Bakken, Shane Caraveo, Andi Gutmans, Rasmus Lerdorf, Sam Ruby, Sascha Schumann, Zeev Suraski, Jim Winstead, and Andrei Zmievski.\nZend Technologies provides a PHP Certification based on PHP\u00a08 exam (and previously based on PHP\u00a07 and 5.5) for programmers to become certified PHP developers.\nThe PHP Foundation.\nOn 26 November 2021, the JetBrains blog announced the creation of The PHP Foundation, which will sponsor the design and development of PHP.\nThe foundation hires \"Core Developers\" to work on the PHP language's core repository. Roman Pronskiy, a member of the foundation's board, said that they aim to pay \"market salaries\" to developers.\nThe response to the foundation has been largely positive, with commentators praising its role in ensuring the continued development of PHP and helping to stabilise the language's community and popularity.\nGermany's Sovereign Tech Fund provided more than 200,000 Euros to support the PHP Foundation.\nInstallation and configuration.\nThere are two primary ways for adding support for PHP to a web server\u00a0\u2013 as a native web server module, or as a CGI executable. PHP has a direct module interface called server application programming interface (SAPI), which is supported by many web servers including Apache HTTP Server, Microsoft IIS and iPlanet Web Server. Some other web servers, such as OmniHTTPd, support the Internet Server Application Programming Interface (ISAPI), which is Microsoft's web server module interface. If PHP has no module support for a web server, it can always be used as a Common Gateway Interface (CGI) or FastCGI processor; in that case, the web server is configured to use PHP's CGI executable to process all requests to PHP files.\nPHP-FPM (FastCGI Process Manager) is an alternative FastCGI implementation for PHP, bundled with the official PHP distribution since version 5.3.3. When compared to the older FastCGI implementation, it contains some additional features, mostly useful for heavily loaded web servers.\nWhen using PHP for command-line scripting, a PHP command-line interface (CLI) executable is needed. PHP supports a CLI server application programming interface (SAPI) since PHP\u00a04.3.0. The main focus of this SAPI is developing shell applications using PHP. There are quite a few differences between the CLI SAPI and other SAPIs, although they do share many of the same behaviours.\nPHP has a direct module interface called SAPI for different web servers; in case of PHP\u00a05 and Apache\u00a02.0 on Windows, it is provided in form of a DLL file called php5apache2.dll, which is a module that, among other functions, provides an interface between PHP and the web server, implemented in a form that the server understands. This form is what is known as a SAPI.\nThere are different kinds of SAPIs for various web server extensions. For example, in addition to those listed above, other SAPIs for the PHP language include the Common Gateway Interface and command-line interface.\nPHP can also be used for writing desktop graphical user interface (GUI) applications, by using the or discontinued PHP-GTK extension. PHP-GTK is not included in the official PHP distribution, and as an extension, it can be used only with PHP versions 5.1.0 and newer. The most common way of installing PHP-GTK is by compiling it from the source code.\nWhen PHP is installed and used in cloud environments, software development kits (SDKs) are provided for using cloud-specific features. For example:\nNumerous configuration options are supported, affecting both core PHP features and extensions. Configuration file codice_34 is searched for in different locations, depending on the way PHP is used. The configuration file is split into various sections, while some of the configuration options can be also set within the web server configuration.\nUse.\nPHP is a general-purpose scripting language that is especially suited to server-side web development, in which case PHP generally runs on a web server. Any PHP code in a requested file is executed by the PHP runtime, usually to create dynamic web page content or dynamic images used on websites or elsewhere. It can also be used for command-line scripting and client-side graphical user interface (GUI) applications. PHP can be deployed on most web servers, many operating systems and platforms, and can be used with many relational database management systems (RDBMS). Most web hosting providers support PHP for use by their clients. It is available free of charge, and the PHP Group provides the complete source code for users to build, customize and extend for their own use.\nOriginally designed to create dynamic web pages, PHP now focuses mainly on server-side scripting, and it is similar to other server-side scripting languages that provide dynamic content from a web server to a client, such as Python, Microsoft's ASP.NET, Sun Microsystems' JavaServer Pages, and codice_35. PHP has also attracted the development of many software frameworks that provide building blocks and a design structure to promote rapid application development (RAD). Some of these include PRADO, CakePHP, Symfony, CodeIgniter, Laravel, Yii Framework, Phalcon and Laminas, offering features similar to other web frameworks.\nThe LAMP architecture has become popular in the web industry as a way of deploying web applications. PHP is commonly used as the \"P\" in this bundle alongside Linux, Apache and MySQL, although the \"P\" may also refer to Python, Perl, or some mix of the three. Similar packages, WAMP and MAMP, are also available for Windows and macOS, with the first letter standing for the respective operating system. Although both PHP and Apache are provided as part of the macOS base install, users of these packages seek a simpler installation mechanism that can be more easily kept up to date.\nFor specific and more advanced usage scenarios, PHP offers a well-defined and documented way for writing custom extensions in C or C++. Besides extending the language itself in form of additional libraries, extensions are providing a way for improving execution speed where it is critical and there is room for improvements by using a true compiled language. PHP also offers well-defined ways for embedding itself into other software projects. That way PHP can be easily used as an internal scripting language for another project, also providing tight interfacing with the project's specific internal data structures.\nPHP received mixed reviews due to lacking support for multithreading at the core language level, though using threads is made possible by the \"pthreads\" PECL extension.\nA command line interface, php-cli, and two ActiveX Windows Script Host scripting engines for PHP have been produced.\nPopularity and usage statistics.\nPHP is used for Web content management systems including MediaWiki, WordPress, Joomla, Drupal, Moodle, eZ Publish, eZ Platform, and SilverStripe.\nAs of \u00a02013[ [update]], PHP was used in more than 240\u00a0million websites (39% of those sampled) and was installed on 2.1\u00a0million web servers.\nAs of 2025[ [update]] (six months after PHP\u00a08.4's release), PHP is used as the server-side programming language on 74.2% of websites where the language could be determined; PHP\u00a08 is the most used version of the language with 45.3% of websites using PHP being on that version, while 43.7% use PHP\u00a07, 10.9% use PHP 5 and 0.1% use PHP 4.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Stacked bar/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"&gt;PHP\u00a0845.3%\"&gt;PHP\u00a0743.7%\"&gt;PHP\u00a0510.9%\"&gt;PHP\u00a040.1%\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Pie chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\nSecurity.\nIn 2019, 11% of all vulnerabilities listed by the National Vulnerability Database were linked to PHP; historically, about 30% of all vulnerabilities listed since 1996 in this database are linked to PHP. Technical security flaws of the language itself or of its core libraries are not frequent (22 in 2009, about 1% of the total although PHP applies to about 20% of programs listed). Recognizing that programmers make mistakes, some languages include taint checking to automatically detect the lack of input validation which induces many issues. Such a feature has been proposed for PHP in the past, but either been rejected or the proposal abandoned.\nThird-party projects such as Suhosin and Snuffleupagus aim to remove or change dangerous parts of the language.\nHistorically, old versions of PHP had some configuration parameters and default values for such runtime settings that made some PHP applications prone to security issues. Among these, codice_36 and codice_37 configuration directives were the best known; the latter made any URL parameters become PHP variables, opening a path for serious security vulnerabilities by allowing an attacker to set the value of any uninitialized global variable and interfere with the execution of a PHP script. Support for \"magic quotes\" and \"register globals\" settings has been deprecated since PHP\u00a05.3.0, and removed from PHP\u00a05.4.0.\nAnother example for the potential runtime-settings vulnerability comes from failing to disable PHP execution (for example by using the codice_38 configuration directive) for the directory where uploaded files are stored; enabling it can result in the execution of malicious code embedded within the uploaded files. The best practice is to either locate the image directory outside of the document root available to the web server and serve it via an intermediary script or disable PHP execution for the directory which stores the uploaded files.\nAlso, enabling the dynamic loading of PHP extensions (via codice_39 configuration directive) in a shared web hosting environment can lead to security issues.\nImplied type conversions that result in different values being treated as equal, sometimes against the programmer's intent, can lead to security issues. For example, the result of the comparison codice_40 is codice_41, because strings that are parsable as numbers are converted to numbers; in this case, the first compared value is treated as scientific notation having the value (), which is zero. Errors like this resulted in authentication vulnerabilities in Simple Machines Forum, Typo3 and phpBB when MD5 password hashes were compared. The recommended way is to use codice_42 (for timing attack safety), codice_43 or the identity operator (codice_44), as codice_45 results in codice_46.\nIn a 2013 analysis of over 170,000 website defacements, published by Zone-H, the most frequently (53%) used technique was the exploitation of file inclusion vulnerability, mostly related to insecure usage of the PHP language constructs codice_47, codice_48, and codice_49.\nCryptographic security.\nPHP includes codice_50 and codice_51 functions which use a pseudorandom number generator, and are not cryptographically secure. As of version 8.1, the codice_52 function is included, which uses a cryptographically secure source of randomness provided by the system.\nThere are two attacks that can be performed over PHP entropy sources: \"seed attack\" and \"state recovery attack\". As of 2012, a $250 GPU can perform up to 230 MD5 calculations per second, while a $750 GPU can perform four times as many calculations at the same time. In combination with a \"birthday attack\" this can lead to serious security vulnerabilities.\nLong-term support.\nThe PHP development team provides official bug fixes for two years following release of each minor version followed by another two years where only security fixes are released. After this, the release is considered end of life and no longer officially supported.\nExtended long-term support beyond this is available from commercial providers, such as Zend and others\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "24132", "revid": "37031437", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24132", "title": "Priam", "text": "Mythological king of Troy\nIn Greek mythology, Priam (; , ) was the legendary and last king of Troy during the Trojan War. He was the son of Laomedon. His many children included notable characters such as Hector, Paris, and Cassandra.\nEtymology.\nMost scholars take the etymology of the name from the Luwian \ud808\ude7a\ud808\ude91\ud808\udc00\ud808\ude2c\ud808\udc00 (Pa-ri-a-mu-a-, or \u201cexceptionally courageous\u201d), attested as the name of a man from Zazlippa, in Kizzuwatna. A similar form is attested transcribed in Greek as \"Paramoas\" near Kaisareia in Cappadocia.\nSome have identified Priam with the historical figure of Piyama-Radu, a warlord active in the vicinity of Wilusa. However, this identification is disputed, and is highly unlikely, given that he was known in Hittite records as being an ally of the Ahhiyawa against Wilusa.\nA popular folk etymology derives the name from the Greek verb , meaning 'to buy'. This in turn gives rise to a story of Priam's sister Hesione ransoming his freedom with a veil, from Heracles, thereby 'buying' him. This story is attested in the \"Bibliotheca\" and in other influential mythographical works dated to the first and second centuries AD. These sources are, however, dated much later than the first attestations of the name Priamos or Pariya-muwas, and thus are more problematic.\nDescription.\nPriam was described by the chronicler Malalas in his account of the \"Chronography\" as \"tall for the age, big, good, ruddy-colored, light-eyed, long-nosed, eyebrows meeting, keen-eyed, gray, restrained.\" Meanwhile, in the account of Dares the Phrygian, he was illustrated as \". . .had a handsome face and a pleasant voice. He was large and swarthy.\"\n \"See List of children of Priam\"\nMarriage and children.\nPriam is said to have fathered fifty sons and many daughters, with his chief wife Hecuba, daughter of the Phrygian king Dymas and many other wives and concubines. These children include famous mythological figures such as Hector, Paris, Helenus, Cassandra, Deiphobus, Troilus, Laodice, Polyxena, Creusa, and Polydorus. Priam was killed when he was around 80 years old by Achilles' son Neoptolemus.\nLife.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nIn Book 3 of Homer's \"Iliad\", Priam tells Helen of Troy that he once helped King Mygdon of Phrygia in a battle against the Amazons.\nWhen Hector is killed by Achilles, the Greek warrior treats the body with disrespect and refuses to give it back. According to Homer in book XXIV of the \"Iliad\", Zeus sends the god Hermes to escort King Priam, Hector's father and the ruler of Troy, into the Greek camp. Priam tearfully pleads with Achilles to take pity on a father bereft of his son and return Hector's body. He invokes the memory of Achilles' own father, Peleus. Priam begs Achilles to pity him, saying \"I have endured what no one on earth has ever done before \u2013 I put my lips to the hands of the man who killed my son.\" Deeply moved, Achilles relents and returns Hector's corpse to the Trojans. Both sides agree to a temporary truce, and Achilles gives Priam leave to hold a proper funeral for Hector, complete with funeral games. He promises that no Greek will engage in combat for at least nine days, but on the twelfth day of peace, the Greeks would all stand once more and the mighty war would continue.\nPriam is killed during the Sack of Troy by Achilles' son Neoptolemus (also known as Pyrrhus). His death is graphically related in Book II of Virgil's \"Aeneid\". In Virgil's description, Neoptolemus first kills Priam's son Polites in front of his father as he seeks sanctuary on the altar of Zeus. Priam rebukes Neoptolemus, throwing a spear at him, harmlessly hitting his shield. Neoptolemus then drags Priam to the altar and there kills him too. Priam's death is alternatively depicted in some Greek vases. In this version, Neoptolemus clubs Priam to death with the corpse of the latter's baby grandson, Astyanax.\nCultural depiction.\n\"In film\"\n\"In TV series\"\n\"In theater\" \nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "24133", "revid": "13127810", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24133", "title": "Principia Mathematica", "text": "3-volume treatise on mathematics, 1910\u20131913\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nI can remember Bertrand Russell telling me of a horrible dream. He was in the top floor of the University Library, about A.D. 2100. A library assistant was going round the shelves carrying an enormous bucket, taking down books, glancing at them, restoring them to the shelves or dumping them into the bucket. At last he came to three large volumes which Russell could recognize as the last surviving copy of \"Principia Mathematica\". He took down one of the volumes, turned over a few pages, seemed puzzled for a moment by the curious symbolism, closed the volume, balanced it in his hand and hesitated...\nG. H. Hardy\n, \"A Mathematician's Apology\" (1940)\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHe [Russell] said once, after some contact with the Chinese language, that he was horrified to find that the language of \"Principia Mathematica\" was an Indo-European one.\n John Edensor Littlewood\n, \"Littlewood's Miscellany\" (1986)\nThe Principia Mathematica (often abbreviated PM) is a three-volume work on the foundations of mathematics written by the mathematician\u2013philosophers Alfred North Whitehead and Bertrand Russell and published in 1910, 1912, and 1913. In 1925\u20131927, it appeared in a second edition with an important \"Introduction to the Second Edition\", an \"Appendix A\" that replaced \u27319 with a new \"Appendix B\" and \"Appendix C\". \"PM\" was conceived as a sequel to Russell's 1903 \"The Principles of Mathematics\", but as \"PM\" states, this became an unworkable suggestion for practical and philosophical reasons: \"The present work was originally intended by us to be comprised in a second volume of \"Principles of Mathematics\" ... But as we advanced, it became increasingly evident that the subject is a very much larger one than we had supposed; moreover on many fundamental questions which had been left obscure and doubtful in the former work, we have now arrived at what we believe to be satisfactory solutions.\"\n\"PM\", according to its introduction, had three aims: (1) to analyse to the greatest possible extent the ideas and methods of mathematical logic and to minimise the number of primitive notions, axioms, and inference rules; (2) to precisely express mathematical propositions in symbolic logic using the most convenient notation that precise expression allows; (3) to solve the paradoxes that plagued logic and set theory at the turn of the 20th century, like Russell's paradox.\nThis third aim motivated the adoption of the theory of types in \"PM\". The theory of types adopts grammatical restrictions on formulas that rule out the unrestricted comprehension of classes, properties, and functions. The effect of this is that formulas such as would allow the comprehension of objects like the Russell set turn out to be ill-formed: they violate the grammatical restrictions of the system of \"PM\".\n\"PM\" sparked interest in symbolic logic and advanced the subject, popularizing it and demonstrating its power. The Modern Library placed \"PM\" 23rd in their list of the top 100 English-language nonfiction books of the twentieth century.\nScope of foundations laid.\nThe \"Principia\" covered only set theory, cardinal numbers, ordinal numbers, and real numbers. Deeper theorems from real analysis were not included, but by the end of the third volume it was clear to experts that a large amount of known mathematics could \"in principle\" be developed in the adopted formalism. It was also clear how lengthy such a development would be.\nA fourth volume on the foundations of geometry had been planned, but the authors admitted to intellectual exhaustion upon completion of the third.\nTheoretical basis.\nAs noted in the criticism of the theory by Kurt G\u00f6del (below), unlike a formalist theory, the \"logicistic\" theory of \"PM\" has no \"precise statement of the syntax of the formalism\". Furthermore in the theory, it is almost immediately observable that \"interpretations\" (in the sense of model theory) are presented in terms of \"truth-values\" for the behaviour of the symbols \"\u22a2\" (assertion of truth), \"~\" (logical not), and \"V\" (logical inclusive OR).\nTruth-values: \"PM\" embeds the notions of \"truth\" and \"falsity\" in the notion \"primitive proposition\". A raw (pure) formalist theory would not provide the meaning of the symbols that form a \"primitive proposition\"\u2014the symbols themselves could be absolutely arbitrary and unfamiliar. The theory would specify only \"how the symbols behave based on the grammar of the theory\". Then later, by \"assignment\" of \"values\", a model would specify an \"interpretation\" of what the formulas are saying. Thus in the formal Kleene symbol set below, the \"interpretation\" of what the symbols commonly mean, and by implication how they end up being used, is given in parentheses, e.g., \"\u00ac (not)\". But this is not a pure Formalist theory.\nContemporary construction of a formal theory.\nThe following formalist theory is offered as contrast to the logicistic theory of \"PM\". A contemporary formal system would be constructed as follows:\nConstruction.\nThe theory of \"PM\" has both significant similarities, and similar differences, to a contemporary formal theory. Kleene states that \"this deduction of mathematics from logic was offered as intuitive axiomatics. The axioms were intended to be believed, or at least to be accepted as plausible hypotheses concerning the world\". Indeed, unlike a Formalist theory that manipulates symbols according to rules of grammar, \"PM\" introduces the notion of \"truth-values\", i.e., truth and falsity in the \"real-world\" sense, and the \"assertion of truth\" almost immediately as the fifth and sixth elements in the structure of the theory (\"PM\" 1962:4\u201336):\nPrimitive ideas.\nCf. \"PM\" 1962:90\u201394, for the first edition:\nPrimitive propositions.\nThe \"first\" edition (see discussion relative to the second edition, below) begins with a definition of the sign \"\u2283\"\n\u27311.01. \"p\" \u2283 \"q\" .=. ~ \"p\" \u2228 \"q\". Df.\n\u27311.1. Anything implied by a true elementary proposition is true. Pp modus ponens\n\u27311.2. \u22a6: \"p\" \u2228 \"p\" .\u2283. \"p\". Pp principle of tautology\n\u27311.3. \u22a6: \"q\" .\u2283. \"p\" \u2228 \"q\". Pp principle of addition\n\u27311.4. \u22a6: \"p\" \u2228 \"q\" .\u2283. \"q\" \u2228 \"p\". Pp principle of permutation\n\u27311.5. \u22a6: \"p\" \u2228 ( \"q\" \u2228 \"r\" ) .\u2283. \"q\" \u2228 ( \"p\" \u2228 \"r\" ). Pp associative principle\n\u27311.6. \u22a6:. \"q\" \u2283 \"r\" .\u2283: \"p\" \u2228 \"q\" .\u2283. \"p\" \u2228 \"r\". Pp principle of summation\n\u27311.7. If \"p\" is an elementary proposition, ~\"p\" is an elementary proposition. Pp\n\u27311.71. If \"p\" and \"q\" are elementary propositions, \"p\" \u2228 \"q\" is an elementary proposition. Pp\n\u27311.72. If \u03c6\"p\" and \u03c8\"p\" are elementary propositional functions which take elementary propositions as arguments, \u03c6\"p\" \u2228 \u03c8\"p\" is an elementary proposition. Pp\nTogether with the \"Introduction to the Second Edition\", the second edition's Appendix A abandons the entire section \u27319. This includes six primitive propositions \u27319 through \u27319.15 together with the Axioms of reducibility.\nThe revised theory is made difficult by the introduction of the Sheffer stroke (\"|\") to symbolise \"incompatibility\" (i.e., if both elementary propositions \"p\" and \"q\" are true, their \"stroke\" \"p\" | \"q\" is false), the contemporary logical NAND (not-AND). In the revised theory, the Introduction presents the notion of \"atomic proposition\", a \"datum\" that \"belongs to the philosophical part of logic\". These have no parts that are propositions and do not contain the notions \"all\" or \"some\". For example: \"this is red\", or \"this is earlier than that\". Such things can exist \"ad finitum\", i.e., even an \"infinite enumeration\" of them to replace \"generality\" (i.e., the notion of \"for all\"). \"PM\" then \"advance[s] to molecular propositions\" that are all linked by \"the stroke\". Definitions give equivalences for \"~\", \"\u2228\", \"\u2283\", and \".\".\nThe new introduction defines \"elementary propositions\" as atomic and molecular positions together. It then replaces all the primitive propositions \u27311.2 to \u27311.72 with a single primitive proposition framed in terms of the stroke:\n \"If \"p\", \"q\", \"r\" are elementary propositions, given \"p\" and \"p\"|(\"q\"|\"r\"), we can infer \"r\". This is a primitive proposition.\"\nThe new introduction keeps the notation for \"there exists\" (now recast as \"sometimes true\") and \"for all\" (recast as \"always true\"). Appendix A strengthens the notion of \"matrix\" or \"predicative function\" (a \"primitive idea\", \"PM\" 1962:164) and presents four new Primitive propositions as \u27318.1\u2013\u27318.13.\n\u273188. Multiplicative axiom\n\u2731120. Axiom of infinity\nRamified types and the axiom of reducibility.\nIn simple type theory objects are elements of various disjoint \"types\". Types are implicitly built up as follows. If \u03c41...,\u03c4\"m\" are types then there is a type (\u03c41...,\u03c4\"m\") that can be thought of as the class of propositional functions of \u03c41...,\u03c4\"m\" (which in set theory is essentially the set of subsets of \u03c41\u00d7...\u00d7\u03c4\"m\"). In particular there is a type () of propositions, and there may be a type \u03b9 (iota) of \"individuals\" from which other types are built. Russell and Whitehead's notation for building up types from other types is rather cumbersome, and the notation here is due to Church.\nIn the ramified type theory of PM all objects are elements of various disjoint ramified types. Ramified types are implicitly built up as follows. If \u03c41...,\u03c4\"m\",\u03c31...,\u03c3\"n\" are ramified types then as in simple type theory there is a type (\u03c41...,\u03c4\"m\",\u03c31...,\u03c3\"n\") of \"predicative\" propositional functions of \u03c41...,\u03c4\"m\",\u03c31...,\u03c3\"n\". However, there are also ramified types (\u03c41...,\u03c4\"m\"|\u03c31...,\u03c3\"n\") that can be thought of as the classes of propositional functions of \u03c41...\u03c4\"m\" obtained from propositional functions of type (\u03c41...,\u03c4\"m\",\u03c31...,\u03c3\"n\") by quantifying over \u03c31...,\u03c3\"n\". When \"n\"=0 (so there are no \u03c3s) these propositional functions are called predicative functions or matrices. This can be confusing because modern mathematical practice does not distinguish between predicative and non-predicative functions, and in any case PM never defines exactly what a \"predicative function\" actually is: this is taken as a primitive notion.\nRussell and Whitehead found it impossible to develop mathematics while maintaining the difference between predicative and non-predicative functions, so they introduced the axiom of reducibility, saying that for every non-predicative function there is a predicative function taking the same values. In practice this axiom essentially means that the elements of type (\u03c41...,\u03c4\"m\"|\u03c31...,\u03c3\"n\") can be identified with the elements of type (\u03c41...,\u03c4\"m\"), which causes the hierarchy of ramified types to collapse down to simple type theory. (Strictly speaking, PM allows two propositional functions to be different even if they take the same values on all arguments; this differs from modern mathematical practice where one normally identifies two such functions.)\nIn Zermelo set theory one can model the ramified type theory of PM as follows. One picks a set \u03b9 to be the type of individuals. For example, \u03b9 might be the set of natural numbers, or the set of atoms (in a set theory with atoms) or any other set one is interested in. Then if \u03c41...,\u03c4\"m\" are types, the type (\u03c41...,\u03c4\"m\") is the power set of the product \u03c41\u00d7...\u00d7\u03c4\"m\", which can also be thought of informally as the set of (propositional predicative) functions from this product to a 2-element set {true,false}. The ramified type (\u03c41...,\u03c4\"m\"|\u03c31...,\u03c3\"n\") can be modeled\nas the product of the type (\u03c41...,\u03c4\"m\",\u03c31...,\u03c3\"n\") with the set of sequences of \"n\" quantifiers (\u2200 or \u2203) indicating which quantifier should be applied to each variable \u03c3\"i\". (One can vary this slightly by allowing the \u03c3s to be quantified in any order, or allowing them to occur before some of the \u03c4s, but this makes little difference except to the bookkeeping.)\nThe introduction to the second edition cautions:\nOne point in regard to which improvement is obviously desirable is the axiom of reducibility ... . This axiom has a purely pragmatic justification ... but it is clearly not the sort of axiom with which we can rest content. On this subject, however, it cannot be said that a satisfactory solution is yet obtainable. Dr Leon Chwistek [Theory of Constructive Types] took the heroic course of dispensing with the axiom without adopting any substitute; from his work it is clear that this course compels us to sacrifice a great deal of ordinary mathematics. There is another course, recommended by Wittgenstein\u2020 (\u2020Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus, *5.54ff) for philosophical reasons. This is to assume that functions of propositions are always truth-functions, and that a function can only occur in a proposition through its values. (...) [Working through the consequences] ... the theory of inductive cardinals and ordinals survives; but it seems that the theory of infinite Dedekindian and well-ordered series largely collapses, so that irrationals, and real numbers generally, can no longer be adequately dealt with. Also Cantor's proof that 2n &gt; n breaks down unless n is finite.\nIt might be possible to sacrifice infinite well-ordered series to logical rigour, but the theory of real numbers is an integral part of ordinary mathematics, and can hardly be the subject of reasonable doubt. We are therefore justified (sic) in supposing that some logical axioms which is true will justify it. The axiom required may be more restricted than the axiom of reducibility, but if so, it remains to be discovered.\nNotation.\nOne author observes that \"The notation in that work has been superseded by the subsequent development of logic during the 20th century, to the extent that the beginner has trouble reading PM at all\"; while much of the symbolic content can be converted to modern notation, the original notation itself is \"a subject of scholarly dispute\", and some notation \"embodies substantive logical doctrines so that it cannot simply be replaced by contemporary symbolism\".\nKurt G\u00f6del was harshly critical of the notation: \"What is missing, above all, is a precise statement of the syntax of the formalism. Syntactical considerations are omitted even in cases where they are necessary for the cogency of the proofs.\" This is reflected in the example below of the symbols \"\"p\", \"q\", \"r\"\" and \"\u2283\" that can be formed into the string \"\"p\" \u2283 \"q\" \u2283 \"r\"\". \"PM\" requires a \"definition\" of what this symbol-string means in terms of other symbols; in contemporary treatments the \"formation rules\" (syntactical rules leading to \"well formed formulas\") would have prevented the formation of this string.\nSource of the notation: Chapter I \"Preliminary Explanations of Ideas and Notations\" begins with the source of the elementary parts of the notation (the symbols =\u2283\u2261\u2212\u039bV\u03b5 and the system of dots):\n\"The notation adopted in the present work is based upon that of Peano, and the following explanations are to some extent modeled on those which he prefixes to his \"Formulario Mathematico\" [i.e., Peano 1889]. His use of dots as brackets is adopted, and so are many of his symbols\" (\"PM\" 1927:4).\nPM changed Peano's \u0186 to \u2283, and also adopted a few of Peano's later symbols, such as \u2129 and \u03b9, and Peano's practice of turning letters upside down.\n\"PM\" adopts the assertion sign \"\u22a6\" from Frege's 1879 \"Begriffsschrift\":\n\"(I)t may be read 'it is true that'\"\nThus to assert a proposition \"p\" \"PM\" writes:\n\"\u22a6. \"p\".\" (\"PM\" 1927:92)\nMost of the rest of the notation in PM was invented by Whitehead.\nAn introduction to the notation of \"Section A Mathematical Logic\" (formulas \u27311\u2013\u27315.71).\n\"PM\"'s dots are used in a manner similar to parentheses. Each dot (or multiple dot) represents either a left or right parenthesis or the logical symbol \u2227. More than one dot indicates the \"depth\" of the parentheses, for example, \".\", \":\" or \":.\", \"::\". However the position of the matching right or left parenthesis is not indicated explicitly in the notation but has to be deduced from some rules that are complex and at times ambiguous. Moreover, when the dots stand for a logical symbol \u2227 its left and right operands have to be deduced using similar rules. First one has to decide based on context whether the dots stand for a left or right parenthesis or a logical symbol. Then one has to decide how far the other corresponding parenthesis is: here one carries on until one meets either a larger number of dots, or the same number of dots next that have equal or greater \"force\", or the end of the line. Dots next to the signs \u2283, \u2261,\u2228, =Df have greater force than dots next to (\"x\"), (\u2203\"x\") and so on, which have greater force than dots indicating a logical product \u2227.\nExample 1. The line\n\u27313.4. \u22a2 : p . q . \u2283 . p \u2283 q\ncorresponds to\n\u22a2 ((p \u2227 q) \u2283 (p \u2283 q)).\nThe two dots standing together immediately following the assertion-sign indicate that what is asserted is the entire line: since there are two of them, their scope is greater than that of any of the single dots to their right. They are replaced by a left parenthesis standing where the dots are and a right parenthesis at the end of the formula, thus:\n\u22a2 (p . q . \u2283 . p \u2283 q).\n(In practice, these outermost parentheses, which enclose an entire formula, are usually suppressed.) The first of the single dots, standing between two propositional variables, represents conjunction. It belongs to the third group and has the narrowest scope. Here it is replaced by the modern symbol for conjunction \"\u2227\", thus\n\u22a2 (p \u2227 q . \u2283 . p \u2283 q).\nThe two remaining single dots pick out the main connective of the whole formula. They illustrate the utility of the dot notation in picking out those connectives which are relatively more important than the ones which surround them. The one to the left of the \"\u2283\" is replaced by a pair of parentheses, the right one goes where the dot is and the left one goes as far to the left as it can without crossing a group of dots of greater force, in this case the two dots which follow the assertion-sign, thus\n\u22a2 ((p \u2227 q) \u2283 . p \u2283 q)\nThe dot to the right of the \"\u2283\" is replaced by a left parenthesis which goes where the dot is and a right parenthesis which goes as far to the right as it can without going beyond the scope already established by a group of dots of greater force (in this case the two dots which followed the assertion-sign). So the right parenthesis which replaces the dot to the right of the \"\u2283\" is placed in front of the right parenthesis which replaced the two dots following the assertion-sign, thus\n\u22a2 ((p \u2227 q) \u2283 (p \u2283 q)).\nExample 2, with double, triple, and quadruple dots:\n\u27319.521. \u22a2 :\u2009: (\u2203x). \u03c6x . \u2283 . q : \u2283 :\u2009. (\u2203x). \u03c6x . v . r : \u2283 . q v r\nstands for\n((((\u2203x)(\u03c6x)) \u2283 (q)) \u2283 ((((\u2203x) (\u03c6x)) v (r)) \u2283 (q v r)))\nExample 3, with a double dot indicating a logical symbol (from volume 1, page 10):\n\"p\"\u2283\"q\":\"q\"\u2283\"r\".\u2283.\"p\"\u2283\"r\"\nstands for\n(\"p\"\u2283\"q\") \u2227 ((\"q\"\u2283\"r\")\u2283(\"p\"\u2283\"r\"))\nwhere the double dot represents the logical symbol \u2227 and can be viewed as having the higher priority as a non-logical single dot.\nLater in section \u273114, brackets \"[ ]\" appear, and in sections \u273120 and following, braces \"{ }\" appear. Whether these symbols have specific meanings or are just for visual clarification is unclear. Unfortunately the single dot (but also \":\", \":.\", \"::\", etc.) is also used to symbolise \"logical product\" (contemporary logical AND often symbolised by \"&amp;\" or \"\u2227\").\nLogical implication is represented by Peano's \"\u0186\" simplified to \"\u2283\", logical negation is symbolised by an elongated tilde, i.e., \"~\" (contemporary \"~\" or \"\u00ac\"), the logical OR by \"v\". The symbol \"=\" together with \"Df\" is used to indicate \"is defined as\", whereas in sections \u273113 and following, \"=\" is defined as (mathematically) \"identical with\", i.e., contemporary mathematical \"equality\" (cf. discussion in section \u273113). Logical equivalence is represented by \"\u2261\" (contemporary \"if and only if\"); \"elementary\" propositional functions are written in the customary way, e.g., \"\"f\"(\"p\")\", but later the function sign appears directly before the variable without parenthesis e.g., \"\u03c6\"x\"\", \"\u03c7\"x\"\", etc.\nExample, \"PM\" introduces the definition of \"logical product\" as follows:\n\u27313.01. \"p\" . \"q\" .=. ~(~\"p\" v ~\"q\") Df.\n where \"\"p\" . \"q\"\" is the logical product of \"p\" and \"q\".\n\u27313.02. \"p\" \u2283 \"q\" \u2283 \"r\" .=. \"p\" \u2283 \"q\" . \"q\" \u2283 \"r\" Df.\n This definition serves merely to abbreviate proofs.\nTranslation of the formulas into contemporary symbols: Various authors use alternate symbols, so no definitive translation can be given. However, because of criticisms such as that of Kurt G\u00f6del below, the best contemporary treatments will be very precise with respect to the \"formation rules\" (the syntax) of the formulas.\nThe first formula might be converted into modern symbolism as follows:\n (\"p\" &amp; \"q\") =df (~(~\"p\" v ~\"q\"))\nalternately\n (\"p\" &amp; \"q\") =df (\u00ac(\u00ac\"p\" v \u00ac\"q\"))\nalternately\n (\"p\" \u2227 \"q\") =df (\u00ac(\u00ac\"p\" v \u00ac\"q\"))\netc.\nThe second formula might be converted as follows:\n (\"p\" \u2192 \"q\" \u2192 \"r\") =df (\"p\" \u2192 \"q\") &amp; (\"q\" \u2192 \"r\")\nBut note that this is not (logically) equivalent to (\"p\" \u2192 (\"q\" \u2192 \"r\")) nor to ((\"p\" \u2192 \"q\") \u2192 \"r\"), and these two are not logically equivalent either.\nAn introduction to the notation of \"Section B Theory of Apparent Variables\" (formulas \u27318\u2013\u273114.34).\nThese sections concern what is now known as predicate logic, and predicate logic with identity (equality).\n* NB: As a result of criticism and advances, the second edition of \"PM\" (1927) replaces \u27319 with a new \u27318 (Appendix A). This new section eliminates the first edition's distinction between real and apparent variables, and it eliminates \"the primitive idea 'assertion of a propositional function'. To add to the complexity of the treatment, \u27318 introduces the notion of substituting a \"matrix\", and the Sheffer stroke:\n* Matrix: In contemporary usage, \"PM\"'s \"matrix\" is (at least for propositional functions), a truth table, i.e., \"all\" truth-values of a propositional or predicate function.\n* Sheffer stroke: Is the contemporary logical NAND (NOT-AND), i.e., \"incompatibility\", meaning:\n\"Given two propositions \"p\" and \"q\", then ' \"p\" | \"q\" ' means \"proposition \"p\" is incompatible with proposition \"q\"\", i.e., if both propositions \"p\" and \"q\" evaluate as true, then and only then \"p\" | \"q\" evaluates as false.\" After section \u27318 the Sheffer stroke sees no usage.\nSection \u273110: The existential and universal \"operators\": \"PM\" adds \"(\"x\")\" to represent the contemporary symbolism \"for all \"x\" \" i.e., \" \u2200\"x\"\", and it uses a backwards serifed E to represent \"there exists an \"x\"\", i.e., \"(\u018ex)\", i.e., the contemporary \"\u2203x\". The typical notation would be similar to the following:\n \"(\"x\") . \u03c6\"x\"\" means \"for all values of variable \"x\", function \u03c6 evaluates to true\"\n \"(\u018e\"x\") . \u03c6\"x\"\" means \"for some value of variable \"x\", function \u03c6 evaluates to true\"\nSections \u273110, \u273111, \u273112: Properties of a variable extended to all individuals: section \u273110 introduces the notion of \"a property\" of a \"variable\". \"PM\" gives the example: \u03c6 is a function that indicates \"is a Greek\", and \u03c8 indicates \"is a man\", and \u03c7 indicates \"is a mortal\" these functions then apply to a variable \"x\". \"PM\" can now write, and evaluate:\n (\"x\") . \u03c8\"x\"\nThe notation above means \"for all \"x\", \"x\" is a man\". Given a collection of individuals, one can evaluate the above formula for truth or falsity. For example, given the restricted collection of individuals { Socrates, Plato, Russell, Zeus } the above evaluates to \"true\" if we allow for Zeus to be a man. But it fails for:\n (\"x\") . \u03c6\"x\"\nbecause Russell is not Greek. And it fails for\n (\"x\") . \u03c7\"x\"\nbecause Zeus is not a mortal.\nEquipped with this notation \"PM\" can create formulas to express the following: \"If all Greeks are men and if all men are mortals then all Greeks are mortals\". (\"PM\" 1962:138)\n(\"x\") . \u03c6\"x\" \u2283 \u03c8\"x\" :(\"x\"). \u03c8\"x\" \u2283 \u03c7\"x\" :\u2283: (\"x\") . \u03c6\"x\" \u2283 \u03c7\"x\"\nAnother example: the formula:\n\u273110.01. (\u018e\"x\"). \u03c6\"x\" . = . ~(\"x\") . ~\u03c6\"x\" Df.\nmeans \"The symbols representing the assertion 'There exists at least one \"x\" that satisfies function \u03c6' is defined by the symbols representing the assertion 'It's not true that, given all values of \"x\", there are no values of \"x\" satisfying \u03c6'\".\nThe symbolisms \u2283\"x\" and \"\u2261\"x\"\" appear at \u273110.02 and \u273110.03. Both are abbreviations for universality (i.e., for all) that bind the variable \"x\" to the logical operator. Contemporary notation would have simply used parentheses outside of the equality (\"=\") sign:\n\u273110.02 \u03c6\"x\" \u2283\"x\" \u03c8\"x\" .=. (\"x\"). \u03c6\"x\" \u2283 \u03c8\"x\" Df\n Contemporary notation: \u2200\"x\"(\u03c6(\"x\") \u2192 \u03c8(\"x\")) (or a variant)\n\u273110.03 \u03c6\"x\" \u2261\"x\" \u03c8\"x\" .=. (\"x\"). \u03c6\"x\" \u2261 \u03c8\"x\" Df\n Contemporary notation: \u2200\"x\"(\u03c6(\"x\") \u2194\ufe0e \u03c8(\"x\")) (or a variant)\n\"PM\" attributes the first symbolism to Peano.\nSection \u273111 applies this symbolism to two variables. Thus the following notations: \u2283\"x\", \u2283\"y\", \u2283\"x, y\" could all appear in a single formula.\nSection \u273112 reintroduces the notion of \"matrix\" (contemporary truth table), the notion of logical types, and in particular the notions of \"first-order\" and \"second-order\" functions and propositions.\nNew symbolism \"\u03c6 ! \"x\"\" represents any value of a first-order function. If a circumflex \"^\" is placed over a variable, then this is an \"individual\" value of \"y\", meaning that \"\u0177\" indicates \"individuals\" (e.g., a row in a truth table); this distinction is necessary because of the matrix/extensional nature of propositional functions.\nNow equipped with the matrix notion, \"PM\" can assert its controversial axiom of reducibility: a function of one or two variables (two being sufficient for \"PM\"'s use) \"where all its values are given\" (i.e., in its matrix) is (logically) equivalent (\"\u2261\") to some \"predicative\" function of the same variables. The one-variable definition is given below as an illustration of the notation (\"PM\" 1962:166\u2013167):\n\u273112.1 \u22a2: (\u018e \"f\"): \u03c6\"x\" .\u2261\"x\". \"f\" ! \"x\" Pp;\n Pp is a \"Primitive proposition\" (\"Propositions assumed without proof\") (\"PM\" 1962:12, i.e., contemporary \"axioms\"), adding to the 7 defined in section \u27311 (starting with \u27311.1 modus ponens). These are to be distinguished from the \"primitive ideas\" that include the assertion sign \"\u22a2\", negation \"~\", logical OR \"V\", the notions of \"elementary proposition\" and \"elementary propositional function\"; these are as close as \"PM\" comes to rules of notational formation, i.e., syntax.\nThis means: \"We assert the truth of the following: There exists a function \"f\" with the property that: given all values of \"x\", their evaluations in function \u03c6 (i.e., resulting their matrix) is logically equivalent to some \"f\" evaluated at those same values of \"x\". (and vice versa, hence logical equivalence)\". In other words: given a matrix determined by property \u03c6 applied to variable \"x\", there exists a function \"f\" that, when applied to the \"x\" is logically equivalent to the matrix. Or: every matrix \u03c6\"x\" can be represented by a function \"f\" applied to \"x\", and vice versa.\n\u273113: The identity operator \"=\" : This is a definition that uses the sign in two different ways, as noted by the quote from \"PM\":\n\u273113.01. \"x\" = \"y\" .=: (\u03c6): \u03c6 ! \"x\" . \u2283 . \u03c6 ! \"y\" Df\nmeans:\n\"This definition states that \"x\" and \"y\" are to be called identical when every predicative function satisfied by \"x\" is also satisfied by \"y\" ... Note that the second sign of equality in the above definition is combined with \"Df\", and thus is not really the same symbol as the sign of equality which is defined\".\nThe not-equals sign \"\u2260\" makes its appearance as a definition at \u273113.02.\n\u273114: Descriptions:\n\"A \"description\" is a phrase of the form \"the term \"y\" which satisfies \u03c6\"\u0177\", where \u03c6\"\u0177\" is some function satisfied by one and only one argument.\"\nFrom this \"PM\" employs two new symbols, a forward \"E\" and an inverted iota \"\u2129\". Here is an example:\n\u273114.02. E ! ( \u2129\"y\") (\u03c6\"y\") .=: ( \u018e\"b\"):\u03c6\"y\" . \u2261\"y\" . \"y\" = \"b\" Df.\nThis has the meaning:\n \"The \"y\" satisfying \u03c6\"\u0177\" exists,\" which holds when, and only when \u03c6\"\u0177\" is satisfied by one value of \"y\" and by no other value.\" (\"PM\" 1967:173\u2013174)\nIntroduction to the notation of the theory of classes and relations.\nThe text leaps from section \u273114 directly to the foundational sections \u273120 GENERAL THEORY OF CLASSES and \u273121 GENERAL THEORY OF RELATIONS. \"Relations\" are what is known in contemporary set theory as sets of ordered pairs. Sections \u273120 and \u273122 introduce many of the symbols still in contemporary usage. These include the symbols \"\u03b5\", \"\u2282\", \"\u2229\", \"\u222a\", \"\u2013\", \"\u039b\", and \"V\": \"\u03b5\" signifies \"is an element of\" (\"PM\" 1962:188); \"\u2282\" (\u273122.01) signifies \"is contained in\", \"is a subset of\"; \"\u2229\" (\u273122.02) signifies the intersection (logical product) of classes (sets); \"\u222a\" (\u273122.03) signifies the union (logical sum) of classes (sets); \"\u2013\" (\u273122.03) signifies negation of a class (set); \"\u039b\" signifies the null class; and \"V\" signifies the universal class or universe of discourse.\nSmall Greek letters (other than \"\u03b5\", \"\u03b9\", \"\u03c0\", \"\u03c6\", \"\u03c8\", \"\u03c7\", and \"\u03b8\") represent classes (e.g., \"\u03b1\", \"\u03b2\", \"\u03b3\", \"\u03b4\", etc.) (\"PM\" 1962:188):\n \"x\" \u03b5 \u03b1\n \"The use of single letter in place of symbols such as \"\u1e91\"(\u03c6\"z\") or \"\u1e91\"(\u03c6 ! \"z\") is practically almost indispensable, since otherwise the notation rapidly becomes intolerably cumbrous. Thus ' \"x\" \u03b5 \u03b1' will mean ' \"x\" is a member of the class \u03b1'\". (\"PM\" 1962:188)\n\u03b1 \u222a \u2013\u03b1 = V\nThe union of a set and its inverse is the universal (completed) set.\n\u03b1 \u2229 \u2013\u03b1 = \u039b\nThe intersection of a set and its inverse is the null (empty) set.\nWhen applied to relations in section \u273123 CALCULUS OF RELATIONS, the symbols \"\u2282\", \"\u2229\", \"\u222a\", and \"\u2013\" acquire a dot: for example: \"\u228d\", \"\u2238\".\nThe notion, and notation, of \"a class\" (set): In the first edition \"PM\" asserts that no new primitive ideas are necessary to define what is meant by \"a class\", and only two new \"primitive propositions\" called the axioms of reducibility for classes and relations respectively (\"PM\" 1962:25). But before this notion can be defined, \"PM\" feels it necessary to create a peculiar notation \"\"\u1e91\"(\u03c6\"z\")\" that it calls a \"fictitious object\". (\"PM\" 1962:188)\n \u22a2: \"x\" \u03b5 \"\u1e91\"(\u03c6\"z\") .\u2261. (\u03c6\"x\")\n \"i.e., ' \"x\" is a member of the class determined by (\u03c6\"\u1e91\")' is [logically] equivalent to ' \"x\" satisfies (\u03c6\"\u1e91\"),' or to '(\u03c6\"x\") is true.'\". (\"PM\" 1962:25)\nAt least \"PM\" can tell the reader how these fictitious objects behave, because \"A class is wholly determinate when its membership is known, that is, there cannot be two different classes having the same membership\" (\"PM\" 1962:26). This is symbolised by the following equality (similar to \u273113.01 above:\n \"\u1e91\"(\u03c6\"z\") = \"\u1e91\"(\u03c8\"z\") . \u2261 : (\"x\"): \u03c6\"x\" .\u2261. \u03c8\"x\"\n\"This last is the distinguishing characteristic of classes, and justifies us in treating \"\u1e91\"(\u03c8\"z\") as the class determined by [the function] \u03c8\"\u1e91\".\" (\"PM\" 1962:188)\nPerhaps the above can be made clearer by the discussion of classes in \"Introduction to the Second Edition\", which disposes of the \"Axiom of Reducibility\" and replaces it with the notion: \"All functions of functions are extensional\" (\"PM\" 1962:xxxix), i.e.,\n \u03c6\"x\" \u2261\"x\" \u03c8\"x\" .\u2283. (\"x\"): \u0192(\u03c6\"\u1e91\") \u2261 \u0192(\u03c8\"\u1e91\") (\"PM\" 1962:xxxix)\nThis has the reasonable meaning that \"IF for all values of \"x\" the \"truth-values\" of the functions \u03c6 and \u03c8 of \"x\" are [logically] equivalent, THEN the function \u0192 of a given \u03c6\"\u1e91\" and \u0192 of \u03c8\"\u1e91\" are [logically] equivalent.\" \"PM\" asserts this is \"obvious\":\n \"This is obvious, since \u03c6 can only occur in \u0192(\u03c6\"\u1e91\") by the substitution of values of \u03c6 for \"p, q, r, ...\" in a [logical-] function, and, if \u03c6\"x\" \u2261 \u03c8\"x\", the substitution of \u03c6\"x\" for \"p\" in a [logical-] function gives the same truth-value to the truth-function as the substitution of \u03c8\"x\". Consequently there is no longer any reason to distinguish between functions classes, for we have, in virtue of the above,\n \u03c6\"x\" \u2261\"x\" \u03c8\"x\" .\u2283. (\"x\"). \u03c6\"\u1e91\" = . \u03c8\"\u1e91\"\".\nObserve the change to the equality \"=\" sign on the right. \"PM\" goes on to state that will continue to hang onto the notation \"\"\u1e91\"(\u03c6\"z\")\", but this is merely equivalent to \u03c6\"\u1e91\", and this is a class. (all quotes: \"PM\" 1962:xxxix).\nConsistency and criticisms.\nAccording to Carnap's \"Logicist Foundations of Mathematics\", Russell wanted a theory that could plausibly be said to derive all of mathematics from purely logical axioms. However, \"Principia Mathematica\" required, in addition to the basic axioms of type theory, three further axioms that seemed to not be true as mere matters of logic, namely the axiom of infinity, the axiom of choice, and the axiom of reducibility. Since the first two were existential axioms, Russell phrased mathematical statements depending on them as conditionals. But reducibility was required to be sure that the formal statements even properly express statements of real analysis, so that statements depending on it could not be reformulated as conditionals. Frank Ramsey tried to argue that Russell's ramification of the theory of types was unnecessary, so that reducibility could be removed, but these arguments seemed inconclusive.\nBeyond the status of the axioms as logical truths, one can ask the following questions about any system such as PM:\nPropositional logic itself was known to be consistent, but the same had not been established for \"Principia\"'s axioms of set theory. (See Hilbert's second problem.) Russell and Whitehead suspected that the system in PM is incomplete: for example, they pointed out that it does not seem powerful enough to show that the cardinal \u2135\u03c9 exists. However, one can ask if some recursively axiomatizable extension of it is complete and consistent.\nG\u00f6del 1930, 1931.\nIn 1930, G\u00f6del's completeness theorem showed that first-order predicate logic itself was complete in a much weaker sense\u2014that is, any sentence that is unprovable from a given set of axioms must actually be false in some model of the axioms. However, this is not the stronger sense of completeness desired for \"Principia Mathematica\", since a given system of axioms (such as those of \"Principia Mathematica\") may have many models, in some of which a given statement is true and in others of which that statement is false, so that the statement is left undecided by the axioms.\nG\u00f6del's incompleteness theorems cast unexpected light on these two related questions.\nG\u00f6del's first incompleteness theorem showed that no recursive extension of \"Principia\" could be both consistent and complete for arithmetic statements. (As mentioned above, Principia itself was already known to be incomplete for some non-arithmetic statements.) According to the theorem, within every sufficiently powerful recursive logical system (such as \"Principia\"), there exists a statement \"G\" that essentially reads, \"The statement \"G\" cannot be proved.\" Such a statement is a sort of Catch-22: if \"G\" is provable, then it is false, and the system is therefore inconsistent; and if \"G\" is not provable, then it is true, and the system is therefore incomplete.\nG\u00f6del's second incompleteness theorem (1931) shows that no formal system extending basic arithmetic can be used to prove its own consistency. Thus, the statement \"there are no contradictions in the \"Principia\" system\" cannot be proven in the \"Principia\" system unless there \"are\" contradictions in the system (in which case it can be proven both true and false).\nWittgenstein 1919, 1939.\nBy the second edition of \"PM\", Russell had removed his \"axiom of reducibility\" to a new axiom (although he does not state it as such). G\u00f6del 1944:126 describes it this way:\nThis new proposal resulted in a dire outcome. An \"extensional stance\" and restriction to a second-order predicate logic means that a propositional function extended to all individuals such as \"All 'x' are blue\" now has to list all of the 'x' that satisfy (are true in) the proposition, listing them in a possibly infinite conjunction: e.g. \"x1\" \u2227 \"x2\" \u2227 . . . \u2227 \"xn\" \u2227 . . .. Ironically, this change came about as the result of criticism from Ludwig Wittgenstein in his 1919 \"Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus\". As described by Russell in the Introduction to the Second Edition of \"PM\":\nIn other words, the fact that an infinite list cannot realistically be specified means that the concept of \"number\" in the infinite sense (i.e. the continuum) cannot be described by the new theory proposed in \"PM Second Edition\".\nWittgenstein in his \"Lectures on the Foundations of Mathematics, Cambridge 1939\" criticised \"Principia\" on various grounds, such as:\nWittgenstein did, however, concede that \"Principia\" may nonetheless make some aspects of everyday arithmetic clearer.\nG\u00f6del 1944.\nG\u00f6del offered a \"critical but sympathetic discussion of the logicistic order of ideas\" in his 1944 article \"Russell's Mathematical Logic\". He wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;It is to be regretted that this first comprehensive and thorough-going presentation of a mathematical logic and the derivation of mathematics from it [is] so greatly lacking in formal precision in the foundations (contained in \u27311\u2013\u273121 of \"Principia\" [i.e., sections \u27311\u2013\u27315 (propositional logic), \u27318\u201314 (predicate logic with identity/equality), \u273120 (introduction to set theory), and \u273121 (introduction to relations theory)]) that it represents in this respect a considerable step backwards as compared with Frege. What is missing, above all, is a precise statement of the syntax of the formalism. Syntactical considerations are omitted even in cases where they are necessary for the cogency of the proofs ... The matter is especially doubtful for the rule of substitution and of replacing defined symbols by their \"definiens\" ... it is chiefly the rule of substitution which would have to be proved.\nContents.\nPart I Mathematical logic. Volume I \u27311 to \u273143.\nThis section describes the propositional and predicate calculus, and gives the basic properties of classes, relations, and types.\nPart II Prolegomena to cardinal arithmetic. Volume I \u273150 to \u273197.\nThis part covers various properties of relations, especially those needed for cardinal arithmetic.\nPart III Cardinal arithmetic. Volume II \u2731100 to \u2731126.\nThis covers the definition and basic properties of cardinals. A cardinal is defined to be an equivalence class of similar classes (as opposed to ZFC, where a cardinal is a special sort of von Neumann ordinal). Each type has its own collection of cardinals associated with it, and there is a considerable amount of bookkeeping necessary for comparing cardinals of different types. PM define addition, multiplication and exponentiation of cardinals, and compare different definitions of finite and infinite cardinals. \u2731120.03 is the Axiom of infinity.\nPart IV Relation-arithmetic. Volume II \u2731150 to \u2731186.\nA \"relation-number\" is an equivalence class of isomorphic relations. PM defines analogues of addition, multiplication, and exponentiation for arbitrary relations. The addition and multiplication is similar to the usual definition of addition and multiplication of ordinals in ZFC, though the definition of exponentiation of relations in PM is not equivalent to the usual one used in ZFC.\nPart V Series. Volume II \u2731200 to \u2731234 and volume III \u2731250 to \u2731276.\nThis covers series, which is PM's term for what is now called a totally ordered set. In particular it covers complete series, continuous functions between series with the order topology (though of course they do not use this terminology), well-ordered series, and series without \"gaps\" (those with a member strictly between any two given members).\nPart VI Quantity. Volume III \u2731300 to \u2731375.\nThis section constructs the ring of integers, the fields of rational and real numbers, and \"vector-families\", which are related to what are now called torsors over abelian groups.\nComparison with set theory.\nThis section compares the system in PM with the usual mathematical foundations of ZFC. The system of PM is roughly comparable in strength with Zermelo set theory (or more precisely a version of it where the axiom of separation has all quantifiers bounded).\nDifferences between editions.\nApart from corrections of misprints, the main text of PM is unchanged between the first and second editions. The main text in Volumes 1 and 2 was reset, so that it occupies fewer pages in each. In the second edition, Volume 3 was not reset, being photographically reprinted with the same page numbering; corrections were still made. The total number of pages (excluding the endpapers) in the first edition is 1,996; in the second, 2,000. Volume 1 has five new additions:\nIn 1962, Cambridge University Press published a shortened paperback edition containing parts of the second edition of Volume 1: the new introduction (and the old), the main text up to *56, and Appendices A and C..\nEditions.\nThe first edition was reprinted in 2009 by Merchant Books, , , .\nLegacy.\nAndrew D. Irvine says that \"PM\" sparked interest in symbolic logic and advanced the subject by popularizing it; it showcased the powers and capacities of symbolic logic; and it showed how advances in philosophy of mathematics and symbolic logic could go hand-in-hand with tremendous fruitfulness. \"PM\" was in part brought about by an interest in logicism, the view on which all mathematical truths are logical truths. Though flawed, \"PM\" would be influential in several later advances in meta-logic, including G\u00f6del's incompleteness theorems.\nThe logical notation in \"PM\" was not widely adopted, possibly because its foundations are often considered a form of Zermelo\u2013Fraenkel set theory.\nScholarly, historical, and philosophical interest in \"PM\" is great and ongoing, and mathematicians continue to work with \"PM\", whether for the historical reason of understanding the text or its authors, or for furthering insight into the formalizations of math and logic.\nThe Modern Library placed \"PM\" 23rd in their list of the top 100 English-language nonfiction books of the twentieth century.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "24135", "revid": "7852030", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24135", "title": "Prime Minister of Canada", "text": "Head of government of Canada\nThe prime minister of Canada is the head of government of Canada. Under the Westminster system, the prime minister governs with the confidence of a majority of the elected House of Commons; as such, the prime minister typically sits as a member of Parliament (MP) and leads the largest party or a coalition of parties. As first minister, the prime minister selects ministers to form the Cabinet.\nNot outlined in any constitutional document, the prime minister is appointed by the monarch's representative, the governor general, and the office exists per long-established convention. Constitutionally, executive authority is vested in the monarch (who is the head of state), but the powers of the monarch and governor general are nearly always exercised on the advice of the Cabinet, which is collectively responsible to the House of Commons. Canadian prime ministers are appointed to the Privy Council and styled as the Right Honourable (), a privilege maintained for life.\nThe prime minister is supported by the Prime Minister's Office and heads the Privy Council Office. The prime minister also selects individuals for appointment as governor general, provincial lieutenant governors, territorial commissioners, as well as to the Senate of Canada, Supreme Court of Canada, other federal courts, and senior members of the military and public service.\nMark Carney is the current prime minister of Canada, taking office on March 14, 2025. Since the Confederation of Canada in 1867, 24 prime ministers have formed 30 ministries.\nOrigin of the office.\nThe position of prime minister is not outlined in any Canadian constitutional document and is mentioned only in a few sections of the \"Constitution Act, 1982\", and in the \"Letters Patent, 1947\" issued by King George VI. The office and its functions are instead governed by constitutional conventions and modelled on the same office in the United Kingdom.\nQualifications and selection.\nIn 2008, a public opinion survey showed that 51 per cent of Canadians believed they voted to directly elect the prime minister. In fact, the prime minister, along with the other ministers in Cabinet, is appointed by the governor general on behalf of the monarch. By the conventions of responsible government, the foundation of parliamentary democracy, the governor general will call to form a government the individual most likely to receive the support, or confidence, of a majority of the directly elected members of the House of Commons; as a practical matter, this is often the leader of the party, or a coalition of parties, whose members form a majority, or a very large plurality, of seats in the House of Commons. No document is needed to begin the appointment; both the invitation and acceptance are usually oral.\nA prime minister who has given intention to resign may advise the governor general on whom to appoint as the next prime minister. However, if the prime minister is resigning because he has lost the confidence of the House of Commons, the viceroy is not obligated to follow that advice. If the leader of the opposition is unable or unwilling to form a government, the governor general can consult whomever they wish.\nWhile there is no legal requirement for the prime minister to be an MP, for practical and political reasons the prime minister is expected to win a seat very promptly. However, in rare circumstances individuals who are not sitting members of the House of Commons have been appointed to the position of prime minister. Two former prime ministers\u2014John Joseph Caldwell Abbott and Mackenzie Bowell\u2014served in the 1890s while members of the Senate. Both, in their roles as government leader in the Senate, succeeded prime ministers who had died in office\u2014John A. Macdonald in 1891 and John Sparrow David Thompson in 1894.\nPrime ministers who are not MPs upon their appointment (or who lose their seats while in office) have since been expected to seek election to the House of Commons as soon as possible. For example, William Lyon Mackenzie King, after losing his seat in the 1925 federal election and again in the 1945 Canadian federal election (despite his party being elected government both times), briefly governed without a seat in the House of Commons on both occasions before winning a by-election a few weeks later. Similarly, John Turner replaced Pierre Trudeau as leader of the Liberal Party in 1984 and subsequently was appointed prime minister while not holding a seat in the House of Commons; Turner won a riding in the next election but the Liberal Party was swept from power.\nWhen a prime minister loses their seat in the legislature, or should a new prime minister be appointed without holding a seat, the typical process that follows is that a member in the governing political party will resign to allow the prime minister to run in the resulting by-election. A safe seat is usually chosen; while the Liberal and Conservative parties generally observed a practice of not running a candidate against another party's new leader in the by-election, the New Democratic Party and smaller political parties typically do not follow the same practice. However, if the governing party selects a new leader shortly before an election is due, and that new leader is not a member of the legislature, they will normally await the upcoming election before running for a seat in Parliament.\nTerm of office.\nThe prime minister serves \"at His Majesty's pleasure\", meaning the post does not have a fixed term, and once appointed and sworn in by the governor general, the prime minister remains in office until they resign, are dismissed, or die.\nWhile the lifespan of a parliament is constitutionally limited to five years, a 2007 amendment to the \"Canada Elections Act\", Section 56.1(2) limited the term of a Parliament to four years, with election day being set as the third Monday in October of the fourth calendar year after the previous polling date. The governor general may still, on the advice of the prime minister, dissolve parliament and issue the writs of election prior to the date mandated by the constitution or \"Canada Elections Act\"; the King\u2013Byng Affair was the only time since Confederation that the governor general refused the prime minister's request for a general vote.\nFollowing parliamentary dissolution, should the prime minister's party subsequently win a majority of seats in the House of Commons, it is unnecessary to re-appoint the prime minister or for the prime minister to retake the oath of office. If, however, an opposition party wins a majority of seats, the prime minister may resign or choose to meet Parliament to see if the incumbent government can win a confidence vote. Should the prime minister's party achieve a minority while an opposition party wins a plurality (i.e., more seats than any other party but less than a majority), the prime minister can attempt to maintain the confidence of the House by forming a coalition with other minority parties, which was last entertained in 1925 or by entering into a confidence-and-supply agreement, or by winning support of other parties on a vote-by-vote basis.\nRole and authority.\nBecause the prime minister is, in practice, the most politically powerful member of the Canadian government, they are sometimes erroneously thought to be Canada's head of state, when, in fact, that role belongs to the Canadian monarch, represented by the governor general. The prime minister is, instead, the head of government and is responsible for advising the Crown on how to exercise much of the royal prerogative and its executive powers, which are governed by the written constitution and constitutional conventions. However, the function of the prime minister has evolved with increasing power. Today, per the doctrines of constitutional monarchy, the advice given by the prime minister is ordinarily binding, meaning the prime minister effectively carries out those duties ascribed to the sovereign or governor general, leaving the latter to act in predominantly ceremonial fashions. As such, the prime minister, supported by the Office of the Prime Minister (PMO), controls the appointments of many key figures in Canada's system of governance, including the governor general, the Cabinet, justices of the Supreme Court, senators, heads of Crown corporations, ambassadors and high commissioners, the provincial lieutenant governors, and approximately 3,100 other positions. Further, the prime minister plays a prominent role in the legislative process\u2014with the majority of bills put before Parliament originating in the Cabinet.\nPierre Trudeau is often credited with, throughout his tenure as prime minister (1968\u201379, 1980\u201384), consolidating power in the PMO, which is itself filled by political and administrative staff selected at the prime minister's discretion and unaccountable to Parliament. At the end of the 20th century and into the 21st, analysts\u2014such as Jeffrey Simpson, Donald Savoie, Andrew Coyne, and John Gomery\u2014argued that both Parliament and the Cabinet had become eclipsed by prime ministerial power; Savoie wrote: \"The Canadian prime minister has little in the way of institutional check, at least inside government, to inhibit his ability to have his way.\" Indeed, the position has been described as undergoing a \"presidentialization\", to the point that its incumbents publicly outshine the actual head of state (and prime minister's spouses are sometimes referred to as \"First Lady of Canada\"). Former governor general Adrienne Clarkson alluded to what she saw as \"an unspoken rivalry\" that had developed between the prime minister and the Crown. It has been theorized that such is the case in Canada as its Parliament is less influential on the executive than in other countries with Westminster parliamentary systems; particularly, Canada has fewer MPs, a higher turnover rate of MPs after each election, and a US-style system for selecting political party leaders, leaving them accountable to the party membership rather than caucus (as is the case in the UK).\nThere do exist checks on the prime minister's power: the House of Commons may revoke its confidence in an incumbent prime minister and Cabinet or caucus revolts can quickly bring down a serving premier and even mere threats of such action can persuade or compel a prime minister to resign their post, as happened with Jean Chr\u00e9tien. The \"Reform Act, 2014\", codifies the process by which a caucus may trigger a party leadership review and, if necessary, chose an interim leader, thereby making a prime minister more accountable to the MPs in one's party. Caucuses may choose to follow these rules, though the decision would be made by recorded vote, thereby subjecting the party's choice to public scrutiny.\nThe Senate may delay or impede legislation put forward by the Cabinet, such as when Brian Mulroney's bill creating the Goods and Services Tax (GST) came before the Senate, and given Canada's federal nature, the jurisdiction of the federal government is limited to areas prescribed by the constitution. Further, as executive power is constitutionally vested in the monarch, meaning the royal prerogative belongs to the Crown and not to any of its ministers, the sovereign's supremacy over the prime minister in the constitutional order is thus seen as a \"rebuff to the pretensions of the elected: As it has been said, when the prime minister bows before the queen, he bows before us [the Canadian people].\" Either the sovereign or the governor general may therefore oppose the prime minister's will in extreme, crisis situations. Near the end of her time as governor general, Adrienne Clarkson stated: \"My constitutional role has lain in what are called 'reserve powers': making sure that there is a prime minister and a government in place, and exercising the right 'to encourage, to advise, and to warn'[...] Without really revealing any secrets, I can tell you that I have done all three.\"\nPrivileges.\nTwo official residences are provided to the prime minister\u201424 Sussex Drive in Ottawa and Harrington Lake, a country retreat in Gatineau Park\u2014as well an office in the Office of the Prime Minister and Privy Council building (formerly known as Langevin Block), across from Parliament Hill. \nFor transportation, the prime minister is afforded an armoured car (a car allowance of $2,000 per year) and shared use of two official aircraft\u2014a Airbus CC-330 Husky for international flights and a Bombardier CC-144 Challenger for domestic trips. The Royal Canadian Mounted Police also furnish constant personal security for the prime minister and their family. All of the aforementioned is provided through budgets approved by Parliament. \nAs of April 2024, the prime minister's annual salary is $406,200 (consisting of an MP's salary of $203,100 and the prime minister's additional salary of $203,100).\nServing or former prime ministers are accorded a state funeral, wherein their casket lies in state in the Centre Block of Parliament Hill. Bennett was the only former prime minister of Canada to die and be buried outside the country. John Thompson also died outside Canada, at Windsor Castle, where Queen Victoria permitted his lying-in-state before his body was returned to Canada for a state funeral in Halifax.\nPrior to 1919, it was traditional for the monarch to bestow a knighthood on newly appointed Canadian prime ministers. Accordingly, several carried the prefix \"Sir\" before their name; of the first eight prime ministers of Canada, only Alexander Mackenzie refused the honour of a knighthood from Queen Victoria. Following the 1919 Nickle Resolution, however, the House of Commons declared that it should be against the policy of the Canadian Sovereign (and the Canadian government advising the Monarch when such honours are not within the Monarch's personal gift) to bestow aristocratic or chivalric titles to Canadians. The Crown in right of Canada (but not the Crown in right of the United Kingdom, which has periodically bestowed such Imperial honours on such citizens) has since adopted this policy generally, such that the last prime minister to be knighted near appointment was Robert Borden, who was the prime minister at the time the Nickle Resolution was debated in the House of Commons (and was knighted before the resolution). Still, Bennett was, in 1941, six years after he stepped down as prime minister, elevated to the peerage of the United Kingdom by King George VI as Viscount Bennett, of Mickleham in the County of Surrey and of Calgary and Hopewell in Canada. No prime minister has since been titled.\nThe Canadian Heraldic Authority (CHA) grants former prime ministers an augmentation of honour on the coat of arms of those who apply for them. The heraldic badge, referred to by the CHA as the \"mark of the Prime Ministership of Canada\", consists of four red maple leaves joined at the stem on a white field (\"Argent four maple leaves conjoined in cross at the stem Gules\"); the augmentation is usually a canton or centred in the chief. Joe Clark, Pierre Trudeau, John Turner, Brian Mulroney, Kim Campbell, Jean Chr\u00e9tien and Paul Martin were granted arms with the augmentation.\nStyle of address.\nCanada continues the Westminster tradition of using the title \"Prime Minister\" when one is speaking to the federal head of government directly; the Department of Canadian Heritage advises that the term \"Mr. Prime Minister\" should not be used in official contexts. The written form of address for the prime minister should use their full parliamentary title: \"The Right Honourable [name], [post-nominal letters], Prime Minister of Canada\". However, while in the House of Commons during Question Period, other members of parliament may address the prime minister as \"the Right Honourable Member for [prime minister's riding]\" or simply \"the Right Honourable Prime Minister\". Former prime ministers retain the prefix \"the Right Honourable\" for life; should they remain sitting MPs, they may be referred as \"the Right Honourable Member for [member's riding]\", by their portfolio title (if appointed to one), as in \"the Right Honourable Minister of National Defence\", or should they become opposition leader, as \"the Right Honourable Leader of the Opposition\".\nIn the decades following Confederation, it was common practice to refer to the prime minister as \"Premier of Canada\", a custom that continued during the First World War, around the time of Robert Borden's premiership. While contemporary sources will still speak of early prime ministers of Canada as \"premier\", the modern practice is to refer to the federal head of government almost exclusively as the \"prime minister\", while the provincial and territorial heads of government are termed \"premiers\" (in French, premiers are addressed as ).\nActivities post-premiership.\nAfter exiting office, former prime ministers of Canada have engaged in various pursuits. Some remained in politics: Bowell continued as a senator, and Bennett moved to the United Kingdom after being elevated to the House of Lords. A number were leaders of the Official Opposition: John A. Macdonald, Arthur Meighen, Mackenzie King, and Pierre Trudeau, all before being re-appointed as prime minister (Mackenzie King twice); Alexander Mackenzie and John Diefenbaker, both prior to sitting as regular Members of Parliament until their deaths; Wilfrid Laurier dying while still in the post; and Charles Tupper, Louis St. Laurent, and John Turner, each before they returned to private business. Meighen was also appointed to the Senate following his second period as prime minister, but resigned his seat to seek re-election and moved to private enterprise after failing to win a riding. Also returning to civilian life were: Robert Borden, who was Chancellor of Queen's and McGill Universities, as well as working in the financial sector; Lester B. Pearson, who was Chancellor of Carleton University; Joe Clark and Kim Campbell, who were university lecturers, Clark also consultant and Campbell working in international diplomacy and as the director of private companies and chairperson of interest groups; while Pierre Trudeau and Jean Chr\u00e9tien returned to legal practice. Former prime ministers also commonly penned autobiographies\u2014Tupper, for example\u2014or published their memoirs\u2014such as Diefenbaker and Paul Martin.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "24136", "revid": "114797", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24136", "title": "Process theology", "text": "Type of theology\nProcess theology is a type of theology developed from Alfred North Whitehead's (1861\u20131947) process philosophy, but most notably by Charles Hartshorne (1897\u20132000), John B. Cobb (1925\u20132024), and Eugene H. Peters (1929\u20131983). Process theology and process philosophy are collectively referred to as \"process thought\".\nFor both Whitehead and Hartshorne, it is an essential attribute of God to affect and be affected by temporal processes, contrary to the forms of theism that hold God to be in all respects non-temporal (eternal), unchanging (immutable), and unaffected by the world (impassible). Process theology does not deny that God is in some respects eternal (will never die), immutable (in the sense that God is unchangingly good), and impassible (in the sense that God's eternal aspect is unaffected by actuality), but it contradicts the classical view by insisting that God is in some respects temporal, mutable, and passible.\nAccording to Cobb, \"process theology may refer to all forms of theology that emphasize event, occurrence, or becoming over substance. In this sense theology influenced by G. W. F. Hegel is process theology just as much as that influenced by Whitehead. This use of the term calls attention to affinities between these otherwise quite different traditions.\" Also Pierre Teilhard de Chardin can be included among process theologians, even if they are generally understood as referring to the Whiteheadian/Hartshornean school, where there continue to be ongoing debates within the field on the nature of God, the relationship of God and the world, and immortality.\nHistory.\nVarious theological and philosophical aspects have been expanded and developed by Charles Hartshorne (1897\u20132000), John B. Cobb, Eugene H. Peters, and David Ray Griffin. A characteristic of process theology each of these thinkers shared was a rejection of metaphysics that privilege existence over becoming, particularly those of Aristotle and Thomas Aquinas. Hartshorne was deeply influenced by French philosopher Jules Lequier and by Swiss philosopher Charles Secr\u00e9tan who were probably the first ones to claim that in God liberty of becoming is above his substantiality.\nProcess theology soon influenced a number of Rabbinic Jewish theologians, including rabbis Max Kadushin, Milton Steinberg, Levi Olan, Harry Slominsky, and, to a lesser degree, Abraham Joshua Heschel. Contemporary Jewish theologians who advocate some form of process theology include Bradley Shavit Artson, Lawrence A. Englander, William E. Kaufman, Harold Kushner, Anson Laytner, Michael Lerner, Sandra Lubarsky, Gilbert S. Rosenthal, Lawrence Troster, Donald B. Rossoff, Burton Mindick, and Nahum Ward-Lev.\nAlan Anderson and Deb Whitehouse applied process theology to the New Thought movement in Christianity.\nGod and the World relationship.\nWhitehead's classical statement is a set of antithetical statements that attempt to avoid self-contradiction by shifting them from a set of oppositions into a contrast:\nRelationship to liberation theology.\nHenry Young combines black theology and process theology in his book \"Hope in Process\". Young seeks a model for American society that goes beyond the alternatives of integration of blacks into white society and black separateness. He finds useful the process model of the many becoming one. Here the one is a new reality that emerges from the discrete contributions of the many, not the assimilation of the many to an already established one.\nMonica Coleman has combined womanist theology and process theology in her book \"Making a Way Out of No Way\". In it, she argues that 'making a way out of no way' and 'creative transformation' are complementary insights from the respective theological traditions. She is one of many theologians who identify both as a process theologian and feminist/womanist/ecofeminist theologian, which includes persons such as Sallie McFague, Rosemary Radford Ruether, Catherine Keller, and Marjorie Hewitt Suchocki.\nC. Robert Mesle, in his book \"Process Theology\", outlines three aspects of a process theology of liberation:\nRelationship to pluralism.\nProcess theology affirms that God is working in all persons to actualize potentialities. In that sense each religious manifestation is the Divine working in a unique way to bring out the beautiful and the good. Additionally, scripture and religion represent human interpretations of the divine. In this sense pluralism is the expression of the diversity of cultural backgrounds and assumptions that people use to approach the Divine.\nRelationship to the doctrine of the incarnation.\nContrary to Christian orthodoxy, the Christ of mainstream process theology is not the mystical and historically unique union of divine and human natures in one hypostasis, the eternal Logos of God incarnated and identifiable as the man Jesus. Rather, God is incarnate in the lives of all people when they act according to a call from God. Jesus fully and in every way responded to God's call; thus, the person of Jesus is theologically understood as \"the divine Word in human form.\" Jesus is not singularly or essentially God, but he was perfectly in sync with God at all moments of his life. \nCobb expressed the Incarnation in process terms that link it to his understanding of actualization of human potential: \"'Christ' refers to the Logos as incarnate hence as the process of creative transformation in and of the world\".\nDebate about process theology's conception of God\u2019s power.\nA criticism of process theology is that it offers a too severely diminished conception of God\u2019s power. Process theologians argue that God does not have unilateral, coercive control over everything in the universe. In process theology, God cannot override a person\u2019s freedom, nor perform miracles that violate the laws of nature, nor perform physical actions such as causing or halting a flood or an avalanche. Critics argue that this conception diminishes divine power to such a degree that God is no longer worshipful.\nThe process theology response to this criticism is that the traditional Christian conception of God is actually \"not\" worshipful as it stands, and that the traditional notion of God\u2019s omnipotence fails to make sense.\nFirst, power is a relational concept. It is not exerted in a vacuum, but always by some entity \"A\" over some other entity \"B\". As such, power requires analysis of both the being exerting power, and the being that power is being exerted upon. To suppose that an entity \"A\" (in this case, God), can always successfully control any other entity \"B\" is to say, in effect, that \"B\" does not exist as a free and individual being in any meaningful sense, since there is no possibility of its resisting \"A\" if \"A\" should decide to press the issue.\nMindful of this, process theology makes several important distinctions between different kinds of power. The first distinction is between \"coercive\" power and \"persuasive\" power. Coercive power is the kind that is exerted by one physical body over another, such as one billiard ball hitting another, or one arm twisting another. Lifeless bodies (such as the billiard balls) cannot resist such applications of physical force at all, and even living bodies (like arms) can only resist so far, and can be coercively overpowered. While finite, physical creatures can exert coercive power over one another in this way, God\u2014lacking a physical body\u2014\"cannot\" (not merely \"will\" not) exert coercive control over the world.\nBut process theologians argue that coercive power is actually a secondary or derivative form of power, while persuasion is the primary form. Even the act of self-motion (of an arm, for instance) is an instance of persuasive power. The arm may not perform in the way a person wishes it to\u2014it may be broken, or asleep, or otherwise unable to perform the desired action. It is only after the persuasive act of self-motion is successful that an entity can even \"begin\" to exercise coercive control over other finite physical bodies. But no amount of coercive control can alter the free decisions of other entities; only persuasion can do so.\nFor example, a child is told by his parent that he must go to bed. The child, as a self-conscious, decision-making individual, can always make the decision to \"not\" go to bed. The parent may then respond by picking up the child bodily and carrying him to his room, but nothing can force the child to alter his decision to resist the parent's directive. It is only the \"body\" of the child that can be coercively controlled by the body of the physically stronger parent; the child's free will remains intact. While process theologians argue that God does not have coercive power, they also argue that God has \"supreme persuasive power\", that God is always influencing/persuading us to choose the good.\nOne classic exchange over the issue of divine power is between philosophers Frederick Sontag and John K. Roth and process theologian David Ray Griffin. Sontag and Roth argued that the process God\u2019s inability to, for instance, stop the genocide at Auschwitz meant that God was not worthy of worship, since there is no point in worshipping a God that cannot save us from such atrocities. Griffin's response was as follows:\nOne of the stronger complaints from Sontag and Roth is that, given the enormity of evil in the world, a deity that is [merely] doing its best is not worthy of worship. The implication is that a deity that is \"not\" doing its best \"is\" worthy of worship. For example, in reference to Auschwitz, Roth mocks my God with the statement that \u201cthe best that God could possibly do was to permit 10,000 Jews a day to go up in smoke.\u201d Roth prefers a God who had the power to prevent this Holocaust but did not do it! This illustrates how much people can differ in what they consider worthy of worship. For Roth, it is clearly brute \"power\" that evokes worship. The question is: is this what \"should\" evoke worship? To refer back to the point about revelation: is this kind of power worship consistent with the Christian claim that divinity is decisively revealed in Jesus? Roth finds my God too small to evoke worship; I find his too gross.\nThe process argument, then, is that those who cling to the idea of God's coercive omnipotence are defending power for power's sake, which would seem to be inconsistent with the life of Jesus, who Christians believe died for humanity's sins rather than overthrow the Roman empire. Griffin argues that it is actually the God whose omnipotence is defined in the \"traditional\" way that is not worshipful.\nOne other distinction process theologians make is between the idea of \"unilateral\" power versus \"relational\" power. Unilateral power is the power of a king (or more accurately, a tyrant) who wishes to exert control over his subjects \"without\" being affected \"by\" them. However, most people would agree that a ruler who is not changed or affected by the joys and sorrows of his subjects is actually a despicable ruler and a psychopath. Process theologians thus stress that God\u2019s power is relational; rather than being unaffected and unchanged by the world, God is the being \"most\" affected by every other being in the universe. As process theologian C. Robert Mesle puts it:\nRelational power takes great strength. In stark contrast to unilateral power, the radical manifestations of relational power are found in people like Martin Luther King Jr., Mahatma Gandhi, and Jesus. It requires the willingness to endure tremendous suffering while refusing to hate. It demands that we keep our hearts open to those who wish to slam them shut. It means offering to open up a relationship with people who hate us, despise us, and wish to destroy us.\nIn summation, then, process theologians argue that their conception of God\u2019s power does not diminish God, but just the opposite. Rather than see God as one who unilaterally coerces other beings, judges and punishes them, and is completely unaffected by the joys and sorrows of others, process theologians see God as the one who persuades the universe to love and peace, is supremely affected by even the tiniest of joys and the smallest of sorrows, and is able to love all beings despite the most heinous acts they may commit. God is, as Whitehead says, \"the fellow sufferer who understands.\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "24138", "revid": "50666884", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24138", "title": "Proton decay", "text": "Hypothetical particle decay process of a proton\nProton decay is the hypothetical decay of a proton into lighter subatomic particles, such as a neutral pion and a positron. The proton decay hypothesis was first formulated by Andrei Sakharov in 1967. Despite significant experimental effort, proton decay has never been observed. If it does decay via a positron, the proton's half-life is constrained to be at least .\nAccording to the Standard Model, the proton, a type of baryon, is stable because baryon number (quark number) is conserved (under normal circumstances; see \"Chiral anomaly\" for an exception). Therefore, protons will not decay into other particles on their own, because they are the lightest (and therefore least energetic) baryon. Positron emission and electron capture\u2014forms of radioactive decay in which a proton becomes a neutron\u2014are not proton decay, since the proton interacts with other particles within the atom.\nSome beyond-the-Standard-Model grand unified theories (GUTs) explicitly break the baryon number symmetry, allowing protons to decay via the Higgs particle, magnetic monopoles, or new X bosons with a half-life of 1031 to 1036 years. For comparison, the universe is roughly ( billion) years old. To date, all attempts to observe new phenomena predicted by GUTs (like proton decay or the existence of magnetic monopoles) have failed.\nQuantum gravity (via virtual black holes and Hawking radiation) may also provide a venue of proton decay at magnitudes or lifetimes well beyond the GUT scale decay range above, as well as extra dimensions in supersymmetry.&lt;ref name=\"urlProton Decay, Black Holes, and Large Extra Dimensions - NASA/ADS\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;\nThere are theoretical methods of baryon violation other than proton decay including interactions with changes of baryon and/or lepton number other than 1 (as required in proton decay). These included \"B\" and/or \"L\" violations of 2, 3, or other numbers, or \"B\"\u00a0\u2212\u00a0\"L\" violation. Such examples include neutron oscillations and the electroweak sphaleron anomaly at high energies and temperatures that can result between the collision of protons into antileptons or vice versa (a key factor in leptogenesis and non-GUT baryogenesis).\nBaryogenesis.\nOne of the outstanding problems in modern physics is the predominance of matter over antimatter in the universe. The universe, as a whole, seems to have a nonzero positive baryon number density \u2013 that is, there is more matter than antimatter. Since it is assumed in cosmology that the particles we see were created using the same physics we measure today, it would normally be expected that the overall baryon number should be zero, as matter and antimatter should have been created in equal amounts. This has led to a number of proposed mechanisms for symmetry breaking that favour the creation of normal matter (as opposed to antimatter) under certain conditions. This imbalance would have been exceptionally small, on the order of 1 in every 1010 particles a small fraction of a second after the Big Bang, but after most of the matter and antimatter annihilated, what was left over was all the baryonic matter in the current universe, along with a much greater number of bosons.\nMost grand unified theories explicitly break the baryon number symmetry, which would account for this discrepancy, typically invoking reactions mediated by very massive X bosons () or massive Higgs bosons (). The rate at which these events occur is governed largely by the mass of the intermediate or particles, so by assuming these reactions are responsible for the majority of the baryon number seen today, a maximum mass can be calculated above which the rate would be too slow to explain the presence of matter today. These estimates predict that a large volume of material will occasionally exhibit a spontaneous proton decay.\nExperimental evidence.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Unsolved/styles.css\" /&gt;\nUnsolved problem in physics\nDo protons decay? If so, then what is the half-life? Can nuclear binding energy affect this?\nMore unsolved problems in physics\nProton decay is one of the key predictions of the various grand unified theories (GUTs) proposed in the 1970s, another major one being the existence of magnetic monopoles. Both concepts have been the focus of major experimental physics efforts since the early 1980s. To date, all attempts to observe these events have failed; however, these experiments have been able to establish lower bounds on the half-life of the proton. Experiments at the Super-Kamiokande detector in Japan gave lower limits for proton mean lifetime of for decay to an antimuon and a neutral pion, and for decay to a positron and a neutral pion, close to a supersymmetry (SUSY) prediction of 1034\u20131036\u00a0years. An upgraded version, Hyper-Kamiokande, probably will have sensitivity 5\u201310 times better than Super-Kamiokande.\nTheoretical motivation.\nDespite the lack of observational evidence for proton decay, some grand unification theories, such as the SU(5) Georgi\u2013Glashow model and SO(10), along with their supersymmetric variants, require it. According to such theories, the proton has a half-life of about 1031~1036\u00a0years and decays into a positron and a neutral pion that itself immediately decays into two gamma ray photons:\nformula_1\nSince a positron is an antilepton this decay preserves number, which is conserved in most GUTs.\nAdditional decay modes are available (e.g.: ), both directly and when catalyzed via interaction with GUT-predicted magnetic monopoles. Though this process has not been observed experimentally, it is within the realm of experimental testability for future planned very large-scale detectors on the megaton scale. Such detectors include the Hyper-Kamiokande.\nEarly grand unification theories (GUTs) such as the Georgi\u2013Glashow model, which were the first consistent theories to suggest proton decay, postulated that the proton's half-life would be at least . As further experiments and calculations were performed in the 1990s, it became clear that the proton half-life could not lie below . Many books from that period refer to this figure for the possible decay time for baryonic matter. More recent findings have pushed the minimum proton half-life to at least 1034\u20131035\u00a0years, ruling out the simpler GUTs (including minimal SU(5) / Georgi\u2013Glashow) and most non-SUSY models. The maximum upper limit on proton lifetime (if unstable), is calculated at , a bound applicable to SUSY models, with a maximum for (minimal) non-SUSY GUTs at .(part\u00a05.6)\nAlthough the phenomenon is referred to as \"proton decay\", the effect would also be seen in neutrons bound inside atomic nuclei. Free neutrons\u2014those not inside an atomic nucleus\u2014are already known to decay into protons (and an electron and an antineutrino) in a process called beta decay. Free neutrons have a half-life of 10\u00a0minutes () due to the weak interaction. Neutrons bound inside a nucleus have an immensely longer half-life \u2013 apparently as great as that of the proton.\nProjected proton lifetimes.\nThe lifetime of the proton in vanilla SU(5) can be naively estimated as formula_2. Supersymmetric GUTs with reunification scales around \u00b5 ~\u00a0 yield a lifetime of around , roughly the current experimental lower bound.\nDecay operators.\nDimension-6 proton decay operators.\nThe dimension-6 proton decay operators are formula_3 formula_4 formula_5 and formula_6 where formula_7 is the cutoff scale for the Standard Model. All of these operators violate both baryon number (B) and lepton number (L) conservation but not the combination B\u00a0\u2212\u00a0L.\nIn GUT models, the exchange of an X or Y\u00a0boson with the mass \u039bGUT can lead to the last two operators suppressed by formula_8. The exchange of a triplet Higgs with mass M can lead to all of the operators suppressed by formula_9. See \"Doublet\u2013triplet splitting problem\".\nDimension-5 proton decay operators.\nIn supersymmetric extensions (such as the MSSM), we can also have dimension-5 operators involving two fermions and two sfermions caused by the exchange of a tripletino of mass M. The sfermions will then exchange a gaugino or Higgsino or gravitino leaving two fermions. The overall Feynman diagram has a loop (and other complications due to strong interaction physics). This decay rate is suppressed by formula_10 where \"M\"SUSY is the mass scale of the superpartners.\nDimension-4 proton decay operators.\nIn the absence of matter parity, supersymmetric extensions of the Standard Model can give rise to the last operator suppressed by the inverse square of sdown quark mass. This is due to the dimension-4 operators c and ccc.\nThe proton decay rate is only suppressed by formula_11 which is far too fast unless the couplings are very small.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "24140", "revid": "48643156", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24140", "title": "Paul the Apostle", "text": "Christian apostle and missionary (c. 5 \u2013 c. 64/65)\nPaul, also named Saul of Tarsus, commonly known as Paul the Apostle or Saint Paul, was a Christian apostle (c.\u20095\u00a0\u2013 c.\u200964/65 AD) who spread the teachings of Jesus in the first-century AD. For his contributions towards the New Testament, he is generally regarded as one of the most important figures of the Apostolic Age, and he also founded several Christian communities in Asia Minor and Europe from the mid-40s to the mid-50s AD.\nThe main sources of information on Paul's life and works are Paul's letters and the Acts of the Apostles in the New Testament. Approximately half of its content documents his travels, preaching, and miracles. Paul was not one of the Twelve Apostles, and he did not know Jesus during his lifetime. Nonetheless, Paul was a contemporary of Jesus and personally knew eyewitnesses of Jesus such as his closest disciples (Peter and John) and brother James since the mid 30s AD, within a few years of the crucifixion (ca. 30\u201333 AD). He had knowledge of the life of Jesus and his teachings. According to the Acts, Paul lived as a Pharisee and participated in the persecution of early disciples of Jesus before his conversion. On his way to arrest Christians in Damascus, Paul saw a bright light, heard Christ speak, was blinded, and later healed by Ananias. After these events, Paul was baptized, beginning immediately to proclaim that Jesus of Nazareth was the Jewish messiah and the Son of God. He made three missionary journeys to spread the Christian message to non-Jewish communities.\nFourteen of the 27 books in the New Testament have traditionally been attributed to Paul. Seven of the Pauline epistles are undisputed by scholars as being authentic. Of the other six, Ephesians, 1 and 2 Timothy, and Titus are generally considered pseudepigraphical, while Colossians and 2 Thessalonians are debated. Pauline authorship of the Epistle to the Hebrews is almost universally rejected by scholars. The other six are believed by some scholars to have come from followers writing in his name, using material from Paul's surviving letters and letters written by him that no longer survive.\nToday, Paul's epistles continue to be vital roots of the theology, worship, and pastoral life in the Latin and Protestant traditions of the West, as well as the Eastern Catholic and Orthodox traditions of the East. Paul's influence on Christian thought and practice is pervasive in scope and profound in impact. Christians, notably in the Lutheran tradition, have read Paul as advocating a law-free Gospel against Judaism. He has been accused of corrupting or hijacking Christianity, often by introducing pagan or Hellenistic themes to the early church. There has recently been increasing acceptance of Paul as a fundamentally Jewish figure in line with the original disciples in Jerusalem over past interpretations, manifested through movements like \"Paul Within Judaism\".\nNames.\nPaul's Jewish name was \"Saul\" (Hebrew: , \u00a0, \u00a0), perhaps after the biblical King Saul, the first king of Israel and, like Paul, a member of the Tribe of Benjamin; the Latin name Paulus, meaning small, was not a result of his conversion as is commonly believed but a second name for use in communicating with a Greco-Roman audience.\nAccording to the Acts of the Apostles, he was a Roman citizen. As such, he bore the Latin name , which is transliterated in biblical Greek as (). It was not uncommon for the Jews of that time to have two names: one Hebrew, the other Latin or Greek.\nJesus called him \"Saul, Saul\" in \"the Hebrew tongue\" in the Acts of the Apostles, when he had the vision which led to his conversion on the road to Damascus. Later, in a vision to Ananias of Damascus, \"the Lord\" referred to him as \"Saul, of Tarsus\". When Ananias came to restore his sight, he called him \"Brother Saul\".\nIn , Saul is called \"Paul\" for the first time on the island of Cyprus, much later than the time of his conversion. The author of Luke\u2013Acts indicates that the names were interchangeable: \"Saul, who also is called Paul.\" He refers to him as Paul through the remainder of Acts, except in the accounts of the events that occurred on his way to Damascus, where it is reported that the voice from heaven, and, later, Ananias of Damascus, called him \u03a3\u03b1\u03bf\u03cd\u03bb, a Greek transliteration of the Hebrew name (Acts 9:4, 17; 22:7, 13; 26:14). Paul was apparently Paul's own preference, since he always refers to himself as Paul in his letters (18 times in the letters generally regarded as written by Paul himself, and 10 more times in the other \u201cPauline\u201d letters). Adopting his Roman name was typical of Paul's missionary style. His method was to put people at ease and approach them with his message in a language and style that was relatable to them, as he did in 1 Corinthians 9.\nIf Saul/Paul was born a Roman citizen, as is claimed in Acts 22:25-29, his parents, and perhaps their ancestors, must have been Roman citizens as well. Hence, he would probably have been given a full Roman name at birth, the \"tria nomina\" of \"praenomen, nomen,\" and \"cognomen\", with \"Paulus\" as his \"cognomen.\" There is no information about the Roman patron of Paul's ancestors, or the ruler at the time of their enfranchisement, but if Paul's ancestors had been granted Roman citizenship under the auspices of Gaius Julius Caesar, for example, Paul\u2019s full name may have been \u0393\u03ac\u03ca\u03bf\u03c2 \u1f38\u03bf\u03cd\u03bb\u03b9\u03bf\u03c2 \u03a0\u03b1\u1fe6\u03bb\u03bf\u03c2 \u1f41 \u03ba\u03b1\u1f76 \u03a3\u03b1\u03bf\u03cd\u03bb, when expressed in Greek, and \"C. Julius Paulus qui est Saoul\", when expressed in Latin.\nAvailable sources.\nThe main source for information about Paul's life is the material found in his epistles and in the Acts of the Apostles. However, the epistles contain little information about Paul's pre-conversion past. The Acts of the Apostles recounts more information but leaves several parts of Paul's life out of its narrative, such as his probable but undocumented execution in Rome. The Acts of the Apostles also appear to contradict Paul's epistles on multiple matters, in particular concerning the frequency of Paul's visits to the church in Jerusalem, though recent scholarship has challenged the idea that the Paul of Acts and the letters share little resemblance.\nSources outside the New Testament that mention Paul (or at least his writings) include:\nLife and career.\nEarly life.\nThe two main sources of information that give access to the earliest segments of Paul's career are the Acts of the Apostles and the autobiographical elements of Paul's letters to the early Christian communities. Paul was likely born between the years of 5\u00a0BC and 5\u00a0AD. The Acts of the Apostles indicates that Paul was a Roman citizen by birth, but Helmut Koester took issue with the evidence presented by the text. Some have suggested that Paul's ancestors may have been freedmen from among the thousands of Jews whom Pompey took as slaves in 63\u00a0BC, which would explain how he was born into Roman citizenship, as slaves of Roman citizens gained citizenship upon emancipation.\nHe was from a devout Jewish family based in the city of Tarsus, which was part of the Roman province of Cilicia. Tarsus was one of the larger centers of trade on the Mediterranean coast and renowned for its academy. It had been among the most influential cities in Asia Minor since the time of Alexander the Great, who died in 323\u00a0BC.\nPaul referred to himself as being \"of the stock of Israel, of the tribe of Benjamin, a Hebrew of the Hebrews; as touching the law, a Pharisee\". The Bible reveals very little about Paul's family. Acts quotes Paul referring to his family by saying he was \"a Pharisee, born of Pharisees\". Paul's nephew, his sister's son, is mentioned in Acts 23:16.\nThe family had a history of religious piety. Apparently, the family lineage had been very attached to Pharisaic traditions and observances for generations. Acts says that he was an artisan involved in the leather crafting or tent-making profession. This was to become an initial connection with Priscilla and Aquila, with whom he would partner in tent-making and later become very important teammates as fellow missionaries.\nWhile he was still fairly young, he was sent to Jerusalem to receive his education at the school of Gamaliel, one of the most noted teachers of Jewish law in history. Although modern scholarship accepts that Paul was educated under the supervision of Gamaliel in Jerusalem, he was not preparing to become a scholar of Jewish law, and probably never had any contact with the Hillelite school. Some of his family may have resided in Jerusalem since later the son of one of his sisters saved his life there. Nothing more is known of his biography until he takes an active part in the martyrdom of Stephen, a Hellenised diaspora Jew.\nSome modern scholarship argues that while Paul was fluent in Koine Greek, the language he used to write his letters, his first language was probably Aramaic. In his letters, Paul drew heavily on his knowledge of Stoic philosophy, using Stoic terms and metaphors to assist his new Gentile converts in their understanding of the Gospel and to explain his Christology.\nPersecutor of early Christians.\nPaul says that before his conversion, he persecuted early Christians \"beyond measure\", more specifically Hellenised diaspora Jewish members who had returned to the area of Jerusalem. Paul does not describe explicitly what form this persecution took. According to James Dunn, the Jerusalem community consisted of \"Hebrews\", Jews speaking both Aramaic and Greek, and \"Hellenists\", Jews speaking only Greek, possibly diaspora Jews who had resettled in Jerusalem. Paul's initial persecution of Christians probably was directed against these Greek-speaking \"Hellenists\" due to their anti-Temple attitude. Within the early Jewish Christian community, this also set them apart from the \"Hebrews\" and their continuing participation in the Temple cult.\nConversion.\nPaul's conversion to the movement of followers of Jesus has been dated to 31\u201336 AD by his reference to it in one of his letters. In Galatians 1:16, Paul writes that God \"was pleased to reveal his son to me.\" In 1 Corinthians 15:8, as he lists the order in which Jesus appeared to his disciples after his resurrection, Paul writes, \"last of all, as to one untimely born, He appeared to me also,\" without an explicit description of how long after.\nAccording to the account in the Acts of the Apostles, it took place on the road to Damascus, where he reported having experienced a vision of the ascended Jesus. The account says that \"He fell to the ground and heard a voice saying to him, 'Saul, Saul, why do you persecute me?' He asked, 'Who are you, Lord?' The reply came, 'I am Jesus, whom you are persecuting'.\"\nAccording to the account in Acts 9:1\u201322, he was blinded for three days and had to be led into Damascus by the hand. During these three days, Saul took no food or water and spent his time in prayer to God. When Ananias of Damascus arrived, he laid his hands on him and said: \"Brother Saul, the Lord, \"[even]\" Jesus, that appeared unto thee in the way as thou camest, hath sent me, that thou mightest receive thy sight, and be filled with the Holy Ghost.\" His sight was restored, he got up and was baptized. This story occurs only in Acts, not in the Pauline epistles.\nThe author of the Acts of the Apostles may have learned of Paul's conversion from the church in Jerusalem, or from the church in Antioch, or possibly from Paul himself.\nAccording to Timo Eskola, early Christian theology and discourse was influenced by the Jewish Merkabah tradition. John Bowker, Alan Segal and Daniel Boyarin have variously argued that Paul's accounts of his conversion experience and his ascent to the heavens (in 2 Corinthians 12) are the earliest first-person accounts that are extant of a Merkabah mystic in Jewish or Christian literature. Conversely, Timothy Churchill has argued that Paul's Damascus road encounter does not fit the pattern of Merkabah.\nPost-conversion.\nAccording to Acts:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;And immediately he proclaimed Jesus in the synagogues, saying, \"He is the Son of God.\" And all who heard him were amazed and said, \"Is not this the man who made havoc in Jerusalem of those who called upon this name? And has he not come here for this purpose, to bring them bound before the chief priests?\" But Saul increased all the more in strength, and confounded the Jews who lived in Damascus by proving that Jesus was the Christ.\u2014\u200a\nEarly ministry.\nAfter his conversion, Paul went to Damascus, where Acts 9 states he was healed of his blindness and baptized by Ananias of Damascus. Paul says that it was in Damascus that he barely escaped death. Paul also says that he then went first to Arabia, and then came back to Damascus. Paul's trip to Arabia is not mentioned anywhere else in the Bible, although it has been theorized that he traveled to Mount Sinai for meditations in the desert. He describes in Galatians how three years after his conversion he went to Jerusalem. There he met James and stayed with Simon Peter for 15 days starting around 35 or 36\u00a0AD. Paul located Mount Sinai in Arabia in Galatians 4:24\u201325.\nPaul asserted that he received the Gospel not from man, but directly by \"the revelation of Jesus Christ\". He claimed almost total independence from the Jerusalem community (possibly in the Cenacle), but agreed with it on the nature and content of the gospel. He appeared eager to bring material support to Jerusalem from the various growing Gentile churches that he started. In his writings, Paul used the persecutions he endured to avow proximity and union with Jesus and as a validation of his teaching.\nPaul's narrative in Galatians states that 14 years after his conversion he went again to Jerusalem. It is not known what happened during this time, but both Acts and Galatians provide some details. At the end of this time, Barnabas went to find Paul and brought him to Antioch. The Christian community at Antioch had been established by Hellenised diaspora Jews living in Jerusalem, who played an important role in reaching a Gentile, Greek audience, notably at Antioch, which had a large Jewish community and significant numbers of Gentile \"God-fearers.\" From Antioch the mission to the Gentiles started, which would fundamentally change the character of the early Christian movement, eventually turning it into a new, Gentile religion.\nWhen a famine occurred in Judea, around 45\u201346, Paul and Barnabas journeyed to Jerusalem to deliver financial support from the Antioch community. According to Acts, Antioch had become an alternative center for Christians following the dispersion of the believers after the death of Stephen. It was in Antioch that the followers of Jesus were first called \"Christians\".\nFirst missionary journey.\nIt has been estimated that the apostle Paul traveled over 12,000 kilometres by land and over 8,000 kilometres by sea just on the journeys that he made in the latter half of his life that happen to be recorded in the \"Acts of the Apostles\".\nThe author of Acts arranges Paul's missionary journeys into three separate accounts. The first journey, for which Paul and Barnabas were commissioned by the Antioch community, and led initially by Barnabas, took Barnabas and Paul from Antioch to Cyprus then into southern Asia Minor, and finally returning to Antioch. In Cyprus, Paul rebukes and blinds Elymas the magician who was criticizing their teachings.\nThey sailed to Perga in Pamphylia. John Mark left them and returned to Jerusalem. Paul and Barnabas went on to Pisidian Antioch. On Sabbath they went to the synagogue. The leaders invited them to speak. Paul reviewed Israelite history from life in Egypt to King David. He introduced Jesus as a descendant of David brought to Israel by God. He said that his group had come to bring the message of salvation. He recounted the story of Jesus' death and resurrection. He quoted from the Septuagint to assert that Jesus was the promised Christos who brought them forgiveness for their sins. Both the Jews and the \"God-fearing\" Gentiles invited them to talk more next Sabbath. At that time almost the whole city gathered. This upset some influential Jews who spoke against them. Paul used the occasion to announce a change in his mission which from then on would be to the Gentiles.\nAntioch served as a major Christian home base for Paul's early missionary activities, and he remained there for \"a long time with the disciples\" at the conclusion of his first journey. The exact duration of Paul's stay in Antioch is unknown, with estimates ranging from nine months to as long as eight years.\nIn Raymond E. Brown's \"An Introduction to the New Testament\", published in 1997, a chronology of events in Paul's life is presented, illustrated from later 20th-century writings of biblical scholars. The first missionary journey of Paul is assigned a \"traditional\" (and majority) dating of 46\u201349 AD, compared to a \"revisionist\" (and minority) dating of after 37\u00a0AD.\nCouncil of Jerusalem.\nA vital meeting between Paul and the Jerusalem church took place in the year AD 49 by traditional (and majority) dating, compared to a revisionist (and minority) dating of AD 47 or 51. The meeting is described in Acts 15:2 and usually seen as the same event mentioned by Paul in Galatians The key question raised was whether Gentile converts needed to be circumcised. At this meeting, Peter, James, and John, who Paul calls Pillars of the Church, accepted Paul's mission to the Gentiles.\nThe Jerusalem meetings are mentioned in Acts, and also in Paul's letters. For example, the Jerusalem visit for famine relief apparently corresponds to the \"first visit\" (to Peter and James only). F. F. Bruce suggested that the \"fourteen years\" could be from Paul's conversion rather than from his first visit to Jerusalem.\nIncident at Antioch.\nDespite the agreement achieved at the Council of Jerusalem, Paul recounts how he later publicly confronted Peter in a dispute sometimes called the \"Incident at Antioch\", over Peter's reluctance to share a meal with Gentile Christians in Antioch because they did not strictly adhere to Jewish customs.\nWriting later of the incident, Paul recounts, \"I opposed [Peter] to his face, because he was clearly in the wrong\", and says he told Peter, \"You are a Jew, yet you live like a Gentile and not like a Jew. How is it, then, that you force Gentiles to follow Jewish customs?\" Paul also mentions that even Barnabas, his traveling companion and fellow apostle until that time, sided with Peter.\nThe outcome of the incident remains uncertain. The \"Catholic Encyclopedia\" suggests that Paul won the argument, because \"Paul's account of the incident leaves no doubt that Peter saw the justice of the rebuke\". However, Paul himself never mentions a victory, and L. Michael White's \"From Jesus to Christianity\" draws the opposite conclusion: \"The blowup with Peter was a total failure of political bravado, and Paul soon left Antioch as \"persona non grata\", never again to return\".\nThe primary source account of the incident at Antioch is Paul's letter to the Galatians.\nSecond missionary journey.\nPaul left for his second missionary journey from Jerusalem, in late Autumn 49\u00a0AD, after the meeting of the Council of Jerusalem where the circumcision question was debated. On their trip around the Mediterranean Sea, Paul and his companion Barnabas stopped in Antioch where they had a sharp argument about taking John Mark with them on their trips. The Acts of the Apostles said that John Mark had left them in a previous trip and gone home. Unable to resolve the dispute, Paul and Barnabas decided to separate; Barnabas took John Mark with him, while Silas joined Paul.\nPaul and Silas initially visited Tarsus (Paul's birthplace), Derbe and Lystra. In Lystra, they met Timothy, a disciple who was spoken well of, and decided to take him with them. Paul and his companions, Silas and Timothy, had plans to journey to the southwest portion of Asia Minor to preach the gospel but during the night, Paul had a vision of a man of Macedonia standing and begging him to go to Macedonia to help them. After seeing the vision, Paul and his companions left for Macedonia to preach the gospel to them. The Church kept growing, adding believers, and strengthening in faith daily.\nIn Philippi, Paul cast a spirit of divination out of a servant girl, whose masters were then unhappy about the loss of income her soothsaying provided. They seized Paul and Silas and dragged them into the marketplace before the authorities and Paul and Silas were put in jail. After a miraculous earthquake, the gates of the prison fell apart and Paul and Silas could have escaped but remained; this event led to the conversion of the jailor. They continued traveling, going by Berea and then to Athens, where Paul preached to the Jews and God-fearing Greeks in the synagogue and to the Greek intellectuals in the Areopagus. Paul continued from Athens to Corinth.\nInterval in Corinth.\nAround 50\u201352 AD, Paul spent 18 months in Corinth. The reference in Acts to Proconsul Gallio helps ascertain this date (cf. Gallio Inscription). In Corinth, Paul met Priscilla and Aquila, who became faithful believers and helped Paul through his other missionary journeys. The couple followed Paul and his companions to Ephesus and stayed there to start one of the strongest and most faithful churches at that time.\nIn 52, departing from Corinth, Paul stopped at the nearby village of Cenchreae to have his hair cut off, because of a vow he had earlier taken. It is possible this was to be a final haircut before fulfilling his vow to become a Nazirite for a defined period of time. With Priscilla and Aquila, the missionaries then sailed to Ephesus and then Paul alone went on to Caesarea to greet the Church there. He then traveled north to Antioch, where he stayed for some time (). Some New Testament texts suggest that he also visited Jerusalem during this period for one of the Jewish feasts, possibly Pentecost. Textual critic Henry Alford and others consider the reference to a Jerusalem visit to be genuine and it accords with Acts 21:29, according to which Paul and Trophimus the Ephesian had previously been seen in Jerusalem.\nThird missionary journey.\nAccording to Acts, Paul began his third missionary journey by traveling all around the region of Galatia and Phrygia to strengthen, teach and rebuke the believers. Paul then traveled to Ephesus, an important center of early Christianity, and stayed there for almost three years, probably working there as a tent maker, as he had done when he stayed in Corinth. He is said to have performed numerous miracles, healing people and casting out demons, and he apparently organized missionary activity in other regions. Paul left Ephesus after an attack from a local silversmith resulted in a pro-Artemis riot involving most of the city. During his stay in Ephesus, Paul wrote four letters to the church in Corinth. The letter to the church in Philippi is generally thought to have been written from Ephesus, though a minority view considers it may have been penned while he was imprisoned in Rome.\nPaul went through Macedonia into Achaea and stayed in Greece, probably Corinth, for three months during 56\u201357 AD. Commentators generally agree that Paul dictated his Epistle to the Romans during this period. He then made ready to continue on to Syria, but he changed his plans and traveled back through Macedonia, putatively because certain Jews had made a plot against him. In Romans 15:19, Paul wrote that he visited Illyricum, but he may have meant what would now be called Illyria Graeca, which was at that time a division of the Roman province of Macedonia. On their way back to Jerusalem, Paul and his companions visited other cities such as Philippi, Troas, Miletus, Rhodes, and Tyre. Paul finished his trip with a stop in Caesarea, where he and his companions stayed with Philip the Evangelist before finally arriving in Jerusalem.\nConjectured journey from Rome to Spain.\nAmong the writings of the early Christians, Pope Clement I said that Paul was \"Herald (of the Gospel of Christ) in the West\", and that \"he had gone to the extremity of the west\".\nWhere Lightfoot's translation has \"had preached\" below (in the \"Church tradition\" section), the Hoole translation has \"having become a herald\". John Chrysostom indicated that Paul preached in Spain: \"For after he had been in Rome, he returned to Spain, but whether he came thence again into these parts, we know not\". Cyril of Jerusalem said that Paul, \"fully preached the Gospel, and instructed even imperial Rome, and carried the earnestness of his preaching as far as Spain, undergoing conflicts innumerable, and performing Signs and wonders\". The Muratorian fragment mentions \"the departure of Paul from the city [of Rome] [5a] (39) when he journeyed to Spain\".\nVisits to Jerusalem in Acts and the epistles.\nThe following table is adapted from the book \"From Jesus to Christianity\" by Biblical scholar L. Michael White, matching Paul's travels as documented in the Acts and the travels in his Epistles but not agreed upon fully by all Biblical scholars.\nLast visit to Jerusalem and arrest.\nIn 57\u00a0AD, upon completion of his third missionary journey, Paul arrived in Jerusalem for his fifth and final visit with a collection of money for the local community. The Acts of the Apostles reports that initially he was warmly received. However, Acts goes on to recount how Paul was warned by James and the elders that he was gaining a reputation for being against the Law, saying, \"they have been told about you that you teach all the Jews living among the Gentiles to forsake Moses, and that you tell them not to circumcise their children or observe the customs.\" Paul underwent a purification ritual so that \"all will know that there is nothing in what they have been told about you, but that you yourself observe and guard the law.\"\nWhen the seven days of the purification ritual were almost completed, some \"Jews from Asia\" (most likely from Roman Asia) accused Paul of defiling the temple by bringing gentiles into it. He was seized and dragged out of the temple by an angry mob. When the tribune heard of the uproar, he and some centurions and soldiers rushed to the area. Unable to determine his identity and the cause of the uproar, they placed him in chains. He was about to be taken into the barracks when he asked to speak to the people. He was given permission by the Romans and proceeded to tell his story. After a while, the crowd responded. \"Up to this point they listened to him, but then they shouted, 'Away with such a fellow from the earth! For he should not be allowed to live.'\" The tribune ordered that Paul be brought into the barracks and interrogated under flogging. Paul asserted his Roman citizenship, which would prevent his flogging. The tribune \"wanted to find out what Paul was being accused of by the angry Jerusalemites, the next day he released him and ordered the chief priests and the entire council to meet\". Paul spoke before the council and caused a disagreement between the Pharisees and the Sadducees. When this threatened to turn violent, the tribune ordered his soldiers to take Paul by force and return him to the barracks.\nThe next morning, 40 Jews \"bound themselves by an oath neither to eat nor drink until they had killed Paul\", but the son of Paul's sister heard of the plot and notified Paul, who notified the tribune that the conspiracists were going to ambush him. The tribune ordered two centurions to \"Get ready to leave by nine o'clock tonight for Caesarea with two hundred soldiers, seventy horsemen, and two hundred spearmen. Also provide mounts for Paul to ride, and take him safely to Felix the governor.\"\nPaul was taken to Caesarea, where the governor ordered that he be kept under guard in Herod's headquarters. \"Five days later the high priest Ananias came down with some elders and an attorney, a certain Tertullus, and they reported their case against Paul to the governor.\" Both Paul and the Jewish authorities gave a statement \"But Felix, who was rather well informed about the Way, adjourned the hearing with the comment, \"When Lysias the tribune comes down, I will decide your case.\" Tradition identifies a vaulted cellar near the ruins of Caesaria's Crusader cathedral as the location of Paul's imprisonment.\nMarcus Antonius Felix then ordered the centurion to keep Paul in custody, but to \"let him have some liberty and not to prevent any of his friends from taking care of his needs.\" He was held there for two years by Felix, until a new governor, Porcius Festus, was appointed. The \"chief priests and the leaders of the Jews\" requested that Festus return Paul to Jerusalem. After Festus had stayed in Jerusalem \"not more than eight or ten days, he went down to Caesarea; the next day he took his seat on the tribunal and ordered Paul to be brought.\" When Festus suggested that he be sent back to Jerusalem for further trial, Paul exercised his right as a Roman citizen to \"appeal unto Caesar\". Finally, Paul and his companions sailed for Rome where Paul was to stand trial for his alleged crimes.\nActs recounts that on the way to Rome for his appeal as a Roman citizen to Caesar, Paul was shipwrecked on Melita, which is present-day Malta, where the islanders showed him \"unusual kindness.\" Paul's traveling companion and author of Acts of the Apostles, Luke, recorded that the islanders \"built a fire and welcomed us all because it was raining and cold.\u00a0Paul gathered a pile of brushwood and, as he put it on the fire, a poisonous snake, driven out by the heat, fastened itself on his hand.\u00a0When the islanders saw the snake hanging from his hand, they said to each other, 'This man must be a murderer; for though he escaped from the sea, the goddess Justice has not allowed him to live.'\u201d\u00a0But Paul shook the snake off into the fire and suffered no ill effects.\" After this, Paul was met by Publius. From Malta, he travelled to Rome via Syracuse, Rhegium, and Puteoli.\nTwo years in Rome.\nPaul finally arrived in Rome c.\u200960\u00a0AD, where he spent another two years under house arrest, according to the traditional account. The narrative of Acts ends with Paul preaching in Rome for two years from his rented home while awaiting trial.\nIrenaeus wrote in the 2nd century that Peter and Paul had been the founders of the church in Rome and had appointed Linus as succeeding bishop. However, Acts makes no mention of Paul being a bishop of Rome. Paul only played a supporting part in the life of the church in Rome.\nDeath.\nPaul's death is believed to have occurred after the Great Fire of Rome in July 64\u00a0AD, but before the last year of Nero's reign, in 68\u00a0AD. Acts 28 concludes with Paul living and preaching in Rome but does not mention his death. Despite Acts mentioning the martyrdoms of James and Stephen, New Testament scholar Eric Franklin sees this as the author's \"omission.\"\nPope Clement I writes in his Epistle to the Corinthians that after Paul \"had borne his testimony before the rulers\", he \"departed from the world and went unto the holy place, having been found a notable pattern of patient endurance.\" Ignatius of Antioch writes in his Epistle to the Ephesians that Paul was \"martyred\", without giving any further information. Tertullian writes that Paul was \"crowned with an exit like John\" (\"Paulus Ioannis exitu coronatur\"), although it is unclear which John he meant.\nEusebius states that Paul was killed during the Neronian Persecution and, quoting from Dionysius of Corinth, argues that Peter and Paul were martyred \"at the same time\". This is also reported by Sulpicius Severus, who claimed Peter was crucified while Paul was beheaded. John Chrysostom provides an account of Nero imprisoning Paul, but not of his execution, and no mention of Peter. Lactantius only mentioned '[It was Nero] who first persecuted the servants of God; he crucified Peter, and slew Paul' (\"Paulum interfecit\").\nBased on the letters attributed to Paul, Jerome claims Paul was imprisoned by Nero in 'the twenty-fifth year after our Lord's passion' (\"post passionem Domini vicesimo quinto anno\"), 'that is the second of Nero' (\"id est, secundo Neronis\"), 'at the time when Festus Procurator of Judea succeeded Felix, he was sent bound to Rome, (...) remaining for two years in free custody'. Jerome interpreted the Second Epistle to Timothy to indicate that 'Paul was dismissed by Nero' (\"Paulum a Nerone dimissum\") 'that the gospel of Christ might be preached also in the West'; but 'in the fourteenth year of Nero' (\"quarto decimo Neronis anno\") 'on the same day with Peter, [Paul] was beheaded at Rome for Christ's sake and was buried in the Ostian way, the thirty-seventh year after our Lord's passion' (\"anno post passionem Domini tricesimo septimo\").\nA legend later developed that his martyrdom occurred at the Aquae Salviae, on the Via Laurentina. According to this legend, after Paul was decapitated, his severed head bounced three times, giving rise to a source of water each time that it touched the ground, which is how the place earned the name \"San Paolo alle Tre Fontane\" (\"St Paul at the Three Fountains\"). The apocryphal Acts of Paul also describe the martyrdom and the burial of Paul.\nRemains.\nAccording to the , Paul's body was buried outside the walls of Rome, at the second mile on the Via Ostiensis, on the estate owned by a Christian woman named Lucina. It was here, in the fourth century, that the Emperor Constantine the Great built a first church. Then, between the fourth and fifth centuries, it was considerably enlarged by the Emperors Valentinian I, Valentinian II, Theodosius I, and Arcadius. The present-day Basilica of Saint Paul Outside the Walls was built there in the early 19th century.\nCaius in his \"Disputation Against Proclus\" (198\u00a0AD) mentions this of the places in which the remains of the apostles Peter and Paul were deposited: \"I can point out the trophies of the apostles. For if you are willing to go to the Vatican or to the Ostian Way, you will find the trophies of those who founded this Church\".\nWriting on Paul's biography, Jerome in his in 392\u00a0AD mentions that \"Paul was buried in the Ostian Way at Rome\".\nIn 2002, an -long marble sarcophagus, inscribed with the words , which translates as \"Paul apostle martyr\", was discovered during excavations around the Basilica of Saint Paul Outside the Walls on the Via Ostiensis. Vatican archaeologists declared this to be the tomb of Paul the Apostle in December 2006, the excavation having been completed in November. In the early 2000s, Vatican archaeologists conducted excavations to make the tomb more accessible to pilgrims. These excavations confirmed the presence of a white marble sarcophagus beneath the altar. The sarcophagus was not removed, but a window was created to allow visitors to view it.\nIn 2009, Pope Benedict XVI announced that radiocarbon dating of bone fragments found in the sarcophagus indicated they were from the 1st or 2nd century, aligning with the traditional timeline of Paul's life. The Pope argued that this discovery, along with other artifacts such as a piece of purple linen laminated with pure gold, grains of incense, and blue textiles with linen filaments, all support the hypothesis that the remains are indeed those of Saint Paul. However, Ulderico Santamaria, the head of the Vatican Museums' diagnostics laboratory and a Professor with expertise in Analytical Chemistry and Materials Engineering at Tuscia University, urged caution, noting that the dating neither confirms nor invalidates the relics' traditional assignment to St. Paul.\nThe Vatican also confirmed that it had discovered and restored the earliest known image of Saint Paul, dating to the early 4th century AD, in the Catacomb of Saint Thekla, close to the Basilica of St Paul Outside the Walls in Rome. In 2010 it was revealed that this icon, painted on the ceiling of a catacomb, was adjacent to the oldest known depictions of Saint Peter, Saint John, and Saint Andrew, surrounding an image of Christ as the Good Shepherd.\nChurch tradition.\nVarious Christian writers have suggested more details about Paul's life:\n1 Clement, a letter written by the Roman bishop Clement of Rome around the year 90, reports this about Paul:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;By reason of jealousy and strife Paul by his example pointed out the prize of patient endurance. After that he had been seven times in bonds, had been driven into exile, had been stoned, had preached in the East and in the West, he won the noble renown which was the reward of his faith, having taught righteousness unto the whole world and having reached the farthest bounds of the West; and when he had borne his testimony before the rulers, so he departed from the world and went unto the holy place, having been found a notable pattern of patient endurance.\nCommenting on this passage, Raymond Brown writes that while it \"does not explicitly say\" that Paul was martyred in Rome, \"such a martyrdom is the most reasonable interpretation\". Eusebius of Caesarea, who wrote in the 4th century, states that Paul was beheaded in the reign of the Roman Emperor Nero. This event has been dated either to the year 64\u00a0AD, when Rome was devastated by a fire, or a few years later, to 67\u00a0AD. According to one tradition, the church of San Paolo alle Tre Fontane marks the place of Paul's execution. A Roman Catholic liturgical solemnity of Peter and Paul, celebrated on 29 June, commemorates his martyrdom, and reflects a tradition (preserved by Eusebius) that Peter and Paul were martyred at the same time. The Roman liturgical calendar for the following day now remembers all Christians martyred in these early persecutions; formerly, 30 June was the feast day for St. Paul. Persons or religious orders with a special affinity for St. Paul can still celebrate their patron on 30 June.\nThe apocryphal Acts of Paul and the apocryphal Acts of Peter suggest that Paul survived Rome and traveled further west. Some think that Paul could have revisited Greece and Asia Minor after his trip to Spain, and might then have been arrested in Troas, and taken to Rome and executed. A tradition holds that Paul was interred with Saint Peter by the via Appia until moved to what is now the Basilica of Saint Paul Outside the Walls in Rome. Bede, in his \"Ecclesiastical History\", writes that Pope Vitalian in 665 gave Paul's relics (including a cross made from his prison chains) from the crypts of Lucina to King Oswy of Northumbria, northern Britain. The skull of Saint Paul is claimed to reside in the Archbasilica of Saint John Lateran since at least the ninth century, alongside the skull of Saint Peter.\nThe Feast of the Conversion of Saint Paul is celebrated on 25 January.\nFeast days.\nRoman Catholicism.\nThe Roman Martyrology commemorates Paul with a feast celebrating his conversion on 25 January. The Roman Martyrology also commemorates Paul and Peter with a solemnity on 29 June.\nEastern Orthodoxy.\nThe Eastern Orthodox Church has several fixed days for the commemoration of Paul:\nThe Eastern Orthodox Church also has numerous non-fixed days for the veneration of Paul:\nThe Church of England.\nThe Church of England celebrates the Conversion of Saint Paul on 25 January as a Festival. Furthermore, along with Saint Peter, Paul is remembered by the Church of England with a Festival on 29 June.\nLutheran Church Missouri Synod.\nThe Lutheran Church Missouri Synod has two festivals for Saint Paul, the first being his conversion on 25 January, and the second being for Saints Peter and Paul on 29 June.\nPatronage.\nPaul is the patron saint of several locations. He is the patron saint of the island of Malta, which celebrates Paul's arrival to the island via shipwreck on 10 February. This day is a public holiday on the island. Paul is also considered to be the patron saint of the city of London.\nPhysical appearance.\nThe New Testament offers little if any information about the physical appearance of Paul, but several descriptions can be found in apocryphal texts. In the Acts of Paul he is described as \"A man of small stature, with a bald head and crooked legs, in a good state of body, with eyebrows meeting and nose somewhat hooked\". In the Latin version of the Acts of Paul and Thecla it is added that he had a red, florid face.\nIn \"The History of the Contending of Saint Paul\", his countenance is described as \"ruddy with the ruddiness of the skin of the pomegranate\". The Acts of Saint Peter confirms that Paul had a bald and shining head, with red hair.\nAs summarised by Barnes, Chrysostom records that Paul's stature was low, his body crooked and his head bald. Lucian, in his \"Philopatris\", describes Paul as (\"he was small, contracted, crooked, of three cubits, or four feet six\").\nNicephorus claims that Paul was a little man, crooked, and almost bent like a bow, with a pale countenance, long and wrinkled, and a bald head. Pseudo-Chrysostom echoes Lucian's height of Paul, referring to him as \"the man of three cubits\".\nWritings.\nOf the 27 books in the New Testament, 13 identify Paul as the author; seven of these are widely considered authentic and Paul's own, while the authorship of the other six is disputed. The undisputed letters are considered the most important sources since they contain what is widely agreed to be Paul's own statements about his life and thoughts. Theologian Mark Powell writes that Paul directed these seven letters to specific occasions at particular churches. As an example, if the Corinthian church had not experienced problems concerning its celebration of the Lord's Supper, today it would not be known that Paul even believed in that observance or had any opinions about it one way or the other. Powell comments that there may be other matters in the early church that have since gone unnoticed simply because no crises arose that prompted Paul to comment on them.\nIn Paul's writings, he provides the first written account of what it is to be a Christian and thus a description of Christian spirituality. His letters have been characterized as being the most influential books of the New Testament after the Gospels of Matthew and John.\nDate.\nPaul's authentic letters are roughly dated to the years surrounding the mid-1st century. Placing Paul in this time period is done on the basis of his reported conflicts with other early contemporary figures in the Jesus movement including James and Peter, the references to Paul and his letters by Clement of Rome writing in the late 1st century, his reported issues in Damascus from 2 Corinthians 11:32 which he says took place while King Aretas IV was in power, a possible reference to Erastus of Corinth in Romans 16:23, his reference to preaching in the region of Illyricum (which had been reorganized by AD 10 into the provinces of Dalmatia and Pannonia), the lack of any references to the Gospels indicating a pre-war time period, the chronology in the Acts of the Apostles placing Paul in this time, and the dependence on Paul's letters by other 1st-century pseudo-Pauline epistles.\nAuthorship.\nSeven of the 13 letters that bear Paul's name, Romans, 1 Corinthians, 2 Corinthians, Galatians, Philippians, 1 Thessalonians and Philemon, are almost universally accepted as being entirely authentic and dictated by Paul himself. They are considered the best source of information on Paul's life and especially his thought.\nFour of the letters (Ephesians, 1 and 2 Timothy and Titus) are widely considered pseudepigraphical, while the authorship of the other two is subject to debate. Colossians and 2 Thessalonians are possibly \"Deutero-Pauline\" meaning they may have been written by Paul's followers after his death. Similarly, 1 Timothy, 2 Timothy, and Titus may be \"Trito-Pauline\" meaning they may have been written by members of the Pauline school a generation after his death. According to their theories, these disputed letters may have come from followers writing in Paul's name, often using material from his surviving letters. These scribes also may have had access to letters written by Paul that no longer survive.\nThe authenticity of Colossians has been questioned on the grounds that it contains an otherwise unparalleled description (among his writings) of Jesus as \"the image of the invisible God\", a Christology found elsewhere only in the Gospel of John.\nActs.\nAlthough approximately half of the Acts of the Apostles deals with Paul's life and works, Acts does not refer to Paul writing letters. Charles Williams believes that the author of Acts did not have access to any of Paul's letters. He claims that one piece of evidence suggesting this is that Acts never directly quotes from the Pauline epistles. Further, discrepancies between the Pauline epistles and Acts could also support this conclusion. The scholarly consensus was indeed that the author of Acts did not know the Pauline epistles, but such consensus got superseded.\nBritish Jewish scholar Hyam Maccoby contended that Paul, as described in the Acts of the Apostles, is quite different from the view of Paul gleaned from his own writings. Some difficulties have been noted in the account of his life. Paul as described in the Acts of the Apostles is much more interested in factual history, less in theology; ideas such as justification by faith are absent as are references to the Spirit, according to Maccoby. He also pointed out that there are no references to John the Baptist in the Pauline Epistles, although Paul mentions him several times in the Acts of the Apostles.\nOthers have objected that the language of the speeches is too Lukan in style to reflect anyone else's words. Moreover, George Shillington writes that the author of Acts most likely created the speeches accordingly and they bear his literary and theological marks. Conversely, Howard Marshall writes that the speeches were not entirely the inventions of the author and while they may not be accurate word-for-word, the author nevertheless records the general idea of them.\nF. C. Baur (1792\u20131860), professor of theology at T\u00fcbingen in Germany, the first scholar to critique Acts and the Pauline Epistles, and founder of the T\u00fcbingen School of theology, argued that Paul, as the \"Apostle to the Gentiles\", was in violent opposition to the original 12 Apostles. Baur considers the Acts of the Apostles were late and unreliable. This debate has continued ever since, with Adolf Deissmann (1866\u20131937) and Richard Reitzenstein (1861\u20131931) emphasising Paul's Greek inheritance and Albert Schweitzer stressing his dependence on Judaism.\nViews.\nSelf-view.\nIn the opening verses of Romans 1, Paul provides a litany of his own apostolic appointment to preach among the Gentiles and his post-conversion convictions about the risen Christ. Paul described himself as set apart for the gospel of God and called to be an apostle and a servant of Jesus Christ. Jesus had revealed himself to Paul, just as he had appeared to Peter, to James, and to the twelve disciples after his resurrection. Paul experienced this as an unforeseen, sudden, startling change, due to all-powerful grace, not as the fruit of his reasoning or thoughts.\nPaul also describes himself as afflicted with \"a thorn in the flesh\"; the nature of this \"thorn\" is unknown.\nThere are debates as to whether Paul understood himself as commissioned to take the gospel to the gentiles at the moment of his conversion. Before his conversion he believed his persecution of the church to be an indication of his zeal for his religion; after his conversion he believed Jewish hostility toward the church was sinful opposition, that would incur God's wrath. Paul believed he was halted by Christ, when his fury was at its height. It was \"through zeal\" that he persecuted the Church, and he obtained mercy because he had \"acted ignorantly in unbelief\".\nUnderstanding of Jesus Christ.\nThroughout his letters, Paul shows awareness of biographical information about the life of Jesus and his teachings. Paul's writings emphasized the crucifixion, Christ's resurrection and the Parousia or second coming of Christ. Paul saw Jesus as Lord (), the true messiah and the Son of God, who was promised by God beforehand, through his prophets in the Holy Scriptures. While being a biological descendant from David (\"according to the flesh\"), he was declared to be the Son of God by his resurrection from the dead.\nAccording to E. P. Sanders, Paul \"preached the death, resurrection, and lordship of Jesus Christ, and he proclaimed that faith in Jesus guarantees a share in his life.\" In Paul's view, \"Jesus' death was not a defeat but was for the believers' benefit\", a sacrifice which substitutes for the lives of others, and frees them from the bondage of sin. Believers participate in Christ's death and resurrection by their baptism. The resurrection of Jesus was of primary importance to Paul, bringing the promise of salvation to believers. Paul taught that, when Christ returned, \"those who died in Christ would be raised when he returned\", while those still alive would be \"caught up in the clouds together with them to meet the Lord in the air\".\nSanders concludes that Paul's writings reveal what he calls the essence of the Christian message: \"(1) God sent his Son; (2) the Son was crucified and resurrected for the benefit of humanity; (3) the Son would soon return; and (4) those who belonged to the Son would live with him forever. Paul's gospel, like those of others, also included (5) the admonition to live by the highest moral standard: \"May your spirit and soul and body be kept sound and blameless at the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ\".\"\nIn Paul's writings, the public, corporate devotional patterns towards Jesus in the early Christian community are reflective of Paul's perspective on the divine status of Jesus in what scholars have termed a \"binitarian\" pattern of devotion. For Paul, Jesus receives prayer, the presence of Jesus is confessionally invoked by believers, people are baptized in Jesus' name, Jesus is the reference in Christian fellowship for a religious ritual meal (the Lord's Supper; in pagan cults, the reference for ritual meals is always to a deity), and Jesus is the source of continuing prophetic oracles to believers.\nAtonement.\nPaul taught that Christians are redeemed from sin by Jesus' death and resurrection. His death was an expiation as well as a propitiation, and by Christ's blood peace is made between God and man. By grace, through faith, a Christian shares in Jesus' death and in his victory over death, gaining as a free gift a new, justified status of sonship.\nAccording to Krister Stendahl, the main concern of Paul's writings on Jesus' role, and salvation by faith, is not the individual conscience of human sinners, and their doubts about being chosen by God or not, but the problem of the inclusion of gentile (Greek) Torah observers into God's covenant. \"Dying for our sins\" refers to the problem of gentile Torah-observers, who, despite their faithfulness, cannot fully observe commandments, including circumcision, and are therefore 'sinners', excluded from God's covenant. Jesus' death and resurrection solved this problem of the exclusion of the gentiles from God's covenant, as indicated by Romans 3:21\u201326.\nPaul's conversion fundamentally changed his basic beliefs regarding God's covenant and the inclusion of Gentiles into this covenant. Paul believed Jesus' death was a voluntary sacrifice, that reconciled sinners with God. The law only reveals the extent of people's enslavement to the power of sin\u2014a power that must be broken by Christ. Before his conversion Paul believed Gentiles were outside the covenant that God made with Israel; after his conversion, he believed Gentiles and Jews were united as the people of God in Christ. Before his conversion he believed circumcision was the rite through which males became part of Israel, an exclusive community of God's chosen people; after his conversion he believed that neither circumcision nor uncircumcision means anything, but that the new creation is what counts in the sight of God, and that this new creation is a work of Christ in the life of believers, making them part of the church, an inclusive community of Jews and Gentiles reconciled with God through faith.\nAccording to E. P. Sanders, who initiated the New Perspective on Paul with his 1977 publication \"Paul and Palestinian Judaism\", Paul saw the faithful redeemed by participation in Jesus' death and rising. Though \"Jesus' death substituted for that of others and thereby freed believers from sin and guilt\", a metaphor derived from \"ancient sacrificial theology\", the essence of Paul's writing is not in the \"legal terms\" regarding the expiation of sin, but the act of \"participation in Christ through dying and rising with him.\" According to Sanders, \"those who are baptized into Christ are baptized into his death, and thus they escape the power of sin[...] he died so that the believers may die with him and consequently live with him.\" By this participation in Christ's death and rising, \"one receives forgiveness for past offences, is liberated from the powers of sin, and receives the Spirit.\"\nRelationship with Judaism.\nSome scholars see Paul as completely in line with 1st-century Judaism (a Pharisee and student of Gamaliel as presented by Acts), others see him as opposed to 1st-century Judaism (see Marcionism), while the majority see him as somewhere in between these two extremes, opposed to insistence on keeping the \"Ritual Laws\" (for example the circumcision controversy in early Christianity) as necessary for entrance into God's New Covenant, but in full agreement on \"Divine Law\". These views of Paul are paralleled by the views of Biblical law in Christianity.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n Paul redefined the people of Israel, those he calls the \"true Israel\" and the \"true circumcision\" as those who had faith in the heavenly Christ, thus excluding those he called \"Israel after the flesh\" from his new covenant. He also held the view that the Torah given to Moses was valid \"until Christ came,\" so that even Jews are no longer \"under the Torah,\" nor obligated to follow the commandments or mitzvot as given to Moses.\nPaul is critical both theologically and empirically of claims of moral or lineal superiority of Jews while conversely strongly sustaining the notion of a special place for the Children of Israel. Paul's theology of the gospel accelerated the separation of the messianic sect of Christians from Judaism, a development contrary to Paul's own intent. He wrote that faith in Christ was alone decisive in salvation for Jews and Gentiles alike, making the schism between the followers of Christ and mainstream Jews inevitable and permanent. He argued that Gentile converts did not need to become Jews, get circumcised, follow Jewish dietary restrictions, or otherwise observe Mosaic laws to be saved.\nAccording to Paula Fredriksen, Paul's opposition to male circumcision for Gentiles is in line with Old Testament predictions that \"in the last days the gentile nations would come to the God of Israel, as gentiles (e.g., Zechariah 8:20\u201323), not as proselytes to Israel.\" For Paul, Gentile male circumcision was therefore an affront to God's intentions. According to Hurtado, \"Paul saw himself as what Munck called a salvation-historical figure in his own right,\" who was \"personally and singularly deputized by God to bring about the predicted ingathering (the \"fullness\") of the nations.\"\nAccording to Sanders, Paul insists that salvation is received by the grace of God; according to Sanders, this insistence is in line with Judaism of c.\u2009200 BC until 200\u00a0AD, which saw God's covenant with Israel as an act of grace of God. Observance of the Law is needed to maintain the covenant, but the covenant is not earned by observing the Law, but by the grace of God.\nSanders' publications have since been taken up by Professor James Dunn who coined the phrase \"The New Perspective on Paul\". N.T. Wright, the Anglican Bishop of Durham, notes a difference in emphasis between Galatians and Romans, the latter being much more positive about the continuing covenant between God and his ancient people than the former. Wright also contends that performing Christian works is not insignificant but rather proof of having attained the redemption of Jesus Christ by grace (free gift received by faith). He concludes that Paul distinguishes between performing Christian works which are signs of ethnic identity and others which are a sign of obedience to Christ.\nWorld to come.\nAccording to Bart Ehrman, Paul believed that Jesus would return within his lifetime. N. T. Wright argues that Paul's eschatology did not remain static however, developing in his later epistles the idea that he would probably not see the Second Coming in his lifetime. Wright also argues that this shift was due to perspective and not belief. Paul expected that Christians who had died in the meantime would be resurrected to share in God's kingdom, and he believed that the saved would be transformed, assuming heavenly, imperishable bodies.\nPaul's teaching about the end of the world is expressed most clearly in his first and second letters to the Christian community of Thessalonica. He assures them that the dead will rise first and be followed by those left alive. This suggests an imminent end but he is unspecific about times and seasons and encourages his hearers to expect a delay. The form of the end will be a battle between Jesus and the man of lawlessness whose conclusion is the triumph of Christ.\nBefore his conversion he believed God's messiah would put an end to the old age of evil, and initiate a new age of righteousness; after his conversion, he believed this would happen in stages that had begun with the resurrection of Jesus, but the old age would continue until Jesus returns.\nRole of women.\nThe second chapter of the first letter to Timothy\u2014one of the six disputed letters\u2014is used by many churches to deny women a vote in church affairs, reject women from serving as teachers of adult Bible classes, prevent them from serving as missionaries, and generally disenfranchise women from the duties and privileges of church leadership.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\u2014\u200a\nThe King James Bible (Authorised Version) translation of this passage taken literally says that women in the churches are to have no leadership roles vis-\u00e0-vis men.\nFuller Seminary theologian J. R. Daniel Kirk finds evidence in Paul's letters of a much more inclusive view of women. He writes that Romans 16 is a tremendously important witness to the important role of women in the early church. Paul praises Phoebe for her work as a deaconess and Junia who is described by Paul in Scripture as being respected among the Apostles. It is Kirk's observation that recent studies suggest that the passage in 1 Corinthians 14 ordering women to \"be silent\" during worship was a later addition, apparently by a different author, and not part of Paul's original letter to the Corinthians.\nOther scholars, such as Giancarlo Biguzzi, believe that Paul's restriction on women speaking in 1 Corinthians 14 is genuine to Paul but applies to a particular case where there were local problems of women, who were not allowed in that culture to become educated, asking questions or chatting during worship services. He does not believe it to be a general prohibition on any woman speaking in worship settings since in 1 Corinthians Paul affirms the right (responsibility) of women to prophesy.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Biblical prophecy is more than \"fore-telling\": two-thirds of its inscripturated form involves \"forth-telling\", that is, setting the truth, justice, mercy, and righteousness of God against the backdrop of every form of denial of the same. Thus, to speak prophetically was to speak boldly against every form of moral, ethical, political, economic, and religious disenfranchisement observed in a culture that was intent on building its own pyramid of values vis-a-vis God's established system of truth and ethics.\u2014\u200a\nThere were women prophets in the highly patriarchal times throughout the Old Testament. The most common term for \"prophet\" in the Old Testament is in the masculine form, and in the Hebrew feminine form, is used six times of women who performed the same task of receiving and proclaiming the message given by God. These women include Miriam, Aaron and Moses' sister, Deborah, the prophet Isaiah's wife, and Huldah, the one who interpreted the Book of the Law discovered in the temple during the days of Josiah. There were false prophetesses just as there were false prophets. The prophetess Noadiah was among those who tried to intimidate Nehemiah. Apparently, they held equal rank in prophesying right along with Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Moses, Elisha, Aaron, and Samuel.\nKirk's third example of a more inclusive view is Galatians 3:28:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;There is neither Jew nor Gentile, neither slave nor free, nor is there male and female, for you are all one in Christ Jesus.\u2014\u200a\nIn pronouncing an end within the church to the divisions which are common in the world around it, he concludes by highlighting the fact that \"there were New Testament women who taught and had authority in the early churches, that this teaching and authority was sanctioned by Paul, and that Paul himself offers a theological paradigm within which overcoming the subjugation of women is an anticipated outcome\".\nClassicist Evelyn Stagg and theologian Frank Stagg believe that Paul was attempting to \"Christianize\" the societal household or domestic codes that significantly oppressed women and empowered men as the head of the household. The Staggs present a serious study of what has been termed the New Testament domestic code, also known as the \"Haustafel\". The two main passages that explain these \"household duties\" are Paul's letters to the Ephesians and to the Colossians. An underlying Household Code is also reflected in four additional Pauline letters and 1 Peter: 1 Timothy 2:1ff, 8ff; 3:1ff, 8ff; 5:17ff; 6:1f; Titus 2:1\u201310 and 1 Peter. Biblical scholars have typically treated the \"Haustafel\" in Ephesians as a resource in the debate over the role of women in ministry and in the home. Margaret MacDonald argues that the \"Haustafel\", particularly as it appears in Ephesians, was aimed at \"reducing the tension between community members and outsiders\".\nE. P. Sanders has labeled Paul's remark in 1 Corinthians about women not making any sound during worship as \"Paul's intemperate outburst that women should be silent in the churches\". Women, in fact, played a very significant part in Paul's missionary endeavors:\nBeth Allison Barr believes that Paul's beliefs on women were progressive for the time period. Barr notes that medieval theologians rarely quoted him to support their patriarchal views and that Pope John Paul II believed that using these passages to support the inferiority of women would be akin to justifying slavery, due to the historical context of the household codes. Wives, like slaves, were considered to be under male authority in Roman law. Barr believes that Paul's intended message was to counter these ideals: he addresses women first and places Jesus as the ultimate authority that everyone was meant to submit to. She also notes that Paul did not believe that women were \"deformed men\" like his Roman contemporaries and used maternal language most frequently, often using such metaphors to describe himself as a woman. Barr believes that Roman authorities thought that early Christians were \"gender deviants\" precisely because they did not enforce the household codes as intended. She also believes that Paul was quoting Cicero when saying that women should be silent, before going on to counter this reasoning, and that this is more obvious when the verses are read aloud.\nViews on homosexuality.\nMost Christian traditions say Paul clearly portrays homosexuality as sinful in two specific locations: Romans 1:26\u201327, and 1 Corinthians 6:9\u201310. Another passage, 1 Timothy 1:8\u201311, addresses the topic more obliquely. Since the 19th century, however, most scholars have concluded that 1 Timothy (along with 2 Timothy and Titus) is not original to Paul, but rather an unknown Christian writing in Paul's name some time in the late-1st to mid-2nd century.\nInfluence.\nPaul's influence on Christian thinking arguably has been more significant than any other New Testament author. Paul declared that \"Christ is the end of the law\", exalted the Christian church as the body of Christ, and depicted the world outside the Church as under judgment. Paul's writings include the earliest reference to the \"Lord's Supper\", a rite traditionally identified as the Christian communion or Eucharist. In the East, church fathers attributed the element of election in Romans 9 to divine foreknowledge. The themes of predestination found in Western Christianity do not appear in Eastern theology.\nPauline Christianity.\nPaul had a strong influence on early Christianity. Hurtado notes that Paul regarded his own Christological views and those of his predecessors and that of the Jerusalem Church as essentially similar. According to Hurtado, this \"work[s] against the claims by some scholars that Pauline Christianity represents a sharp departure from the religiousness of Judean 'Jesus movements'.\"\nMarcion.\nMarcionism, regarded as heresy by contemporary mainstream Christianity, was an Early Christian dualist belief system that originated in the teachings of Marcion of Sinope at Rome around the year 144. Marcion asserted that Paul was the only apostle who had rightly understood the new message of salvation as delivered by Christ.\nMarcion believed Jesus was the savior sent by God, and Paul the Apostle was his chief apostle, but he rejected the Hebrew Bible and the God of Israel. Marcionists believed that the wrathful Hebrew God was a separate and lower entity than the all-forgiving God of the New Testament.\nAugustine.\nIn his account of his conversion experience, Augustine of Hippo gave his life to Christ after reading Romans 13. Augustine's foundational work on the gospel as a gift (grace), on morality as life in the Spirit, on predestination, and on original sin all derives from Paul, especially Romans.\nReformation.\nIn his account of his conversion Martin Luther wrote about righteousness in Romans 1 praising Romans as the perfect gospel, in which the Reformation was birthed. Martin Luther's interpretation of Paul's writings influenced Luther's doctrine of \"sola fide\".\nJohn Calvin.\nJohn Calvin said the Book of Romans opens to anyone an understanding of the whole Scripture.\nModern theology.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n Visit any church service, Roman Catholic, Protestant or Greek Orthodox, and it is the apostle Paul and his ideas that are central \u2013 in the hymns, the creeds, the sermons, the invocation and benediction, and of course, the rituals of baptism and the Holy Communion or Mass. Whether birth, baptism, confirmation, marriage or death, it is predominantly Paul who is evoked to express meaning and significance.\nProfessor James D. Tabor for the \"Huffington Post\"\nIn his commentary \"The Epistle to the Romans\" (; particularly in the thoroughly re-written second edition of 1922), Karl Barth argued that the God who is revealed in the cross of Jesus challenges and overthrows any attempt to ally God with human cultures, achievements, or possessions.\nIn addition to the many questions about the true origins of some of Paul's teachings posed by historical figures as noted above, some modern theologians also hold that the teachings of Paul differ markedly from those of Jesus as found in the Gospels. Barrie Wilson states that Paul differs from Jesus in terms of the origin of his message, his teachings and his practices. Some have even gone so far as to claim that, due to these apparent differences in teachings, that Paul was no less than the \"second founder\" of Christianity (Jesus being its first).\nAs in the Eastern tradition in general, Western humanists interpret the reference to election in Romans 9 as reflecting divine foreknowledge.\nViews on Paul.\nIn Judaism.\nJewish interest in Paul is a recent phenomenon. Before the positive historical reevaluations of Jesus by some Jewish thinkers in the 18th and 19th centuries, he had hardly featured in the popular Jewish imagination, and little had been written about him by the religious leaders and scholars. Arguably, he is absent from the Talmud and rabbinical literature, although he makes an appearance in some variants of the medieval polemic Toledot Yeshu (as a particularly effective spy for the rabbis). The Karaite scholar Jacob Qirqisani also believed that Paul created Christianity by introducing the doctrine of Trinitarianism.\nHowever, with Jesus no longer regarded as the paradigm of gentile Christianity, Paul's position became more important in Jewish historical reconstructions of their religion's relationship with Christianity. He has featured as the key to building barriers (e.g. Heinrich Graetz and Martin Buber) or bridges (e.g. Isaac Mayer Wise and Claude G. Montefiore) in interfaith relations, as part of an intra-Jewish debate about what constitutes Jewish authenticity (e.g. Joseph Klausner and Hans Joachim Schoeps), and on occasion as a dialogical partner (e.g. Richard L. Rubenstein and Daniel Boyarin). Boyarin in particular reads Paul as a 'Jewish thinker', one who 'lived and died convinced he was a Jew living out Judaism.'\nHe features in an oratorio (by Felix Mendelssohn), a painting (by Ludwig Meidner) and a play (by Franz Werfel), and there have been several novels about Paul (by Shalom Asch and Samuel Sandmel). Jewish philosophers (including Baruch Spinoza, Leo Shestov, and Jacob Taubes) and Jewish psychoanalysts (including Sigmund Freud and Hanns Sachs) have engaged with the apostle as one of the most influential figures in Western thought. Scholarly surveys of Jewish interest in Paul include those by , , , and .\nIn Gnosticism.\nIn the 2nd (and possibly late 1st) century, Gnosticism was a competing religious tradition to Christianity which shared some elements of theology.\nElaine Pagels concentrated on how the Gnostics interpreted Paul's letters and how evidence from gnostic sources may challenge the assumption that Paul wrote his letters to combat \"gnostic opponents\" and to repudiate their statement that they possess secret wisdom. In her reading, the Gnostics considered Paul as one of their own.\nIn Islam.\nMuslim views of Paul () have ranged from critical to interpretive across history. Early Muslim writers generally depicted him as a figure who altered the original revealed teachings of Jesus, while later scholars developed these assessments into more structured theological and philosophical critiques. According to some perspectives, Paul is said to have introduced foreign elements into Christian doctrine\u2014including pagan influences, the formulation of Christianity as a theology of the cross, and the doctrines of original sin and vicarious redemption\u2014all of which are viewed in Islamic theology as incompatible with the concept of pure monotheism ().\nEarly period.\nIn early Islamic historiography, Paul is occasionally mentioned in relation to Christian history, though not recognized as a disciple. Ibn Ishaq (d. 767), as cited by al-Tabari and al-Qurtubi, records a narrative in which Paul is sent alongside Peter to Rome, though he clarifies that Paul was not a disciple (\"\u1e25aw\u0101r\u012b\") but a later follower. Some tafs\u012br literature, including works by Al-Baghawi and Ibn Kathir, link Paul to verses such as Surah Ya-Sin 36:14, though these interpretations\u2014derived from Isra'iliyyat traditions\u2014are not universally accepted. Ali ibn Ibrahim al-Qummi (d. 919) listed Paul as a theological opponent of Jesus, grouping him with heretical figures like Marcion and Barzatiq, stating that each prophet had an adversary and that Paul was the one sent against Jesus.\nClassical period.\nIn theological critique, al-Qadi Abd al-Jabbar (d. 1025) asserted that Paul altered the Gospel, abolished the Mosaic law, and promoted permissiveness, declaring circumcision and Sabbath observance no longer required and wine permissible. Al-Shahrastani (d. 1153) accused Paul of distorting divine knowledge by mixing it with philosophical speculations, stating he corrupted Peter's message through Greek metaphysics.\nIn polemical literature, Paul plays a role analogous to that of the later figure Abdullah ibn Saba', who is alleged to have attempted to undermine Islam from within. Scholars such as Ibn Taymiyya (d. 1328) argued that while Paul succeeded in corrupting Christianity, Ibn Saba' failed in his efforts against Islam. He wrote that Paul \"entered the religion of the Christians and corrupted it to mislead them.\" Sayf ibn Umar (d. \u00b1786\u2013809) claimed that certain rabbis persuaded Paul to deliberately misguide early Christians by introducing what Ibn Hazm (d. 1064) viewed as objectionable doctrines into Christianity. Ibn Hazm repeated Sayf's claims and regarded Paul as the principal figure responsible for introducing theological innovations inconsistent with Islamic monotheism. Ibn Hazm likewise claimed that the Jews even admitted to Paul's subversive role.\nModern era.\nIn the modern era, Paul has been the subject of renewed criticism by a range of Muslim scholars. Syed Muhammad Naquib al-Attas argued that Paul was chiefly responsible for distorting the original message of Jesus by introducing foreign philosophical concepts and shifting the focus of the religion away from its Semitic, prophetic origins. Rashid Rida accused Paul of introducing (polytheism) into Christianity. Mohammad Ali Jouhar quoted Adolf von Harnack's critical writings on Paul. Reza Aslan wrote that Paul redefined Jesus into a new theological construct unrecognizable to Judaism: \"Christ\u00a0... seems almost wholly of his [Paul's] own making.\"\nIsmail al-Faruqi offered one of the most systematic Muslim critiques of Pauline theology. He argued that Paul introduced doctrines absent from Jesus\u2019 original teachings, stating that \"what Jesus did not furnish, Paul was ready to offer to Christianity,\" including the ideas of incarnation, crucifixion, and salvation through atonement. He identified Paul\u2019s ambiguous formulations as the source of key dogmas such as original sin (\"peccatism\") and vicarious redemption (\"saviourism\"), rather than anything traceable to Jesus himself. Al-Faruqi further noted that Pauline theology retained structural ties to Greco-Roman mystery religions, particularly in its use of sacramental and incarnational motifs, which he regarded as incompatible with the Islamic emphasis on divine transcendence.\nBy contrast, others have offered more charitable or literary appraisals. Shabbir Akhtar, in his study of Paul\u2019s epistles, described him as a \"prophet \"manqu\u00e9\"\"\u2014a man of spiritual ambition who failed to attain true prophethood. Akhtar wrote: \"If Muhammad was the last prophet, Paul was the lost prophet. That is the most charitable Islamic verdict on the man Muslims see as the founder of Christianity.\" Mustafa Akyol, a Turkish journalist and public intellectual, likewise rejects polemical portrayals of Paul as a conspirator and instead offers a more historically grounded evaluation. He writes: \"At the end of the day, it seems astonishing how the vision of Paul, a man who had never seen or heard Jesus with his earthly eyes and ears, defined the Christ to the world and built the foundation of the greatest religion that has ever existed.\" Akyol concludes: \"If there can be any informed Islamic critique of Paul, it can be that he parted ways with Judaism too much.\"\nOther views.\nOther critics of Paul the Apostle include United States president Thomas Jefferson, a Deist who wrote that Paul was the \"first corrupter of the doctrines of Jesus.\" Christian anarchists, Leo Tolstoy and Ammon Hennacy, as well as German philosopher Friedrich Nietzsche held similar views.\nDiscussions in Bah\u00e1'\u00ed scholarship have focused on whether Paul changed the original message of Christ or delivered the true gospel, there being proponents of both positions.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\nNotes.\nLanguage notes\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nGeneral notes\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "24141", "revid": "15920874", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24141", "title": "Postal system", "text": ""}
